=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr Phil Valentine- The Wounded Womb.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 702
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:04.348349
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The suppressed truths behind the anatomy, metaphysics, 
politics and economics of women's diseases!
Phillip Valentine
HSD;CND; MpD


--- PAGE 2 ---
(cont'd from back cover)
Such knowledge would cause a 
traumatic, albeit positive shift 
towards bio-spiritual balance in  
the collective social psyche, 
especially where it concerns the 
gender equation and its connection 
to  our perceptions of reality itself!
O ur fem inized society m ust u n d erg o  
a  “gender reality re-think”  in  order 
to  reverse the pathogenic conditions 
that have resulted in  the ongoing 
tragedy of The Wounded Womb. 
Matter-of-fact concepts and mores 
currently associated with the 
“equality agenda”  would then be 
exposed as primary  instigators 
(and perpetuators) o f th e  reproductive 
plagues suffered by a  majority of 
women today.
However, with such a social 
re-awakening, literally trillions of  
dollars in  revenuewould be lost to  
the m ega-pharm aceutical, 
political and sports conglomerates 
that profit handsomely from the 
self-ignorance, stress and related 
pathologies afflicting the new 
90s-millenneum “super-woman.”  
A nd th a t beloved sisters a n d  b ro th ers, 
ain’t good for business!
-Author


--- PAGE 3 ---
w oundedWomB


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Re-genesis Chronicles
A definitive guide to the physical, mental and spiritual resurrection of melanated 
people in the Cosmic Diaspora...
BOOK IV
THE
WOUNDED
WOMB
The Suppressed Truth behind the 
Anatomy, Metaphysics, Politics and 
Economics of Women's Diseases...
(A Dissertation / Commentary / Exposition)
by
Phillip Valentine
HSD; CND; MpD
Hry Snw Djhuty Sa Akhw-Ra Mhtp El  
(Hm Ntchr, Nb Hr Ssht, Npu Ndjty Sbk)


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Re-genesis Chronicles, Book 4:
The Wounded Womb: The Suppressed Truth Behind the Anatomy,
Metaphysics, Politics and Economics of Women's Diseases... Parts 1 and 2
Copyright © 1998 by Phillip Valentine
First printing, 1994
First independent publishing, 1995-6
Second printing, 2008
Cover concept: Dr. Phillip Valentine
Cover art: Junior Coggins
Back cover photo: Vernon J. Burton
Published by: Temple of the Healing Spirit / University of Kemetian Sciences 
Printed and bound in the United States of America. All rights reserved. No part 
of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical 
means including information storage and retrieval systems without permission in 
writing from the author or publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief 
passages in a review.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Valentine, Phillip
The Re-genesis Chronicles, Book 4
The Wounded Womb: The Suppressed Truth Behind the Anatomy, 
Metaphysics, Politics and Economics of Women's Disease... Parts 1 and 2
by Phillip Valentine 
710 pages
1. Women's Health 2. Spiritual 3. Metaphysics 4. Politics 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number TXu 846-249 
Date of Registration - March 16th, 1998


--- PAGE 6 ---
Book I:
Book II:
Book III:
Book V: 
Book VI:
Other Books  
of the Re-genesis Chronicles
The Metaphysical Velocities of Being:
Overstanding the Science of Ascension and  
The Macrocosmic Nature of Terrestrial Man
Melanalysis -The Protophysics of Dark  
Matter Consciousness: Unlocking the 
Metaphysical Mysteries of Melanin
Metaphysical Hygienics - The Secrets of Life, 
and the Arcane Sciences of Heal th, Healing and 
Bio-Spiritual Transcendence
The Epicene Enigma; 'Hie Dissolution of Gender 
and The Pathogenesis of Homosexuality
The Ebers Unveiled
Book VII: Path of the Hidden Light
Undertaking the Odyssey of The Virtuous Way


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
The Re-genesis Chronicles 
(Books 1-7) 
are lovingly consecrated to...
My Parents:  Calvin and Edla Valentine...
Without whose love, guidance, teachings, cooperative effort, 
support and patience " I could not have been." Thank you 
for tolerating this nut" for as long as you did. I love you 
both immensely... Rest in Peace...


--- PAGE 9 ---
My Sister: 
Rosalind Valentine
Concentrated, ever-radiating, effervescent love: you're the little 
sister every sibling wished they had, or could be. Hope you'll be 
my little sister in the next life... Nam Myoho Renge Kyol!
My First Wife:  Sharlene Warthen
Thank you for the 19 years, the joys, and "Those Summer 
Days." But most of all, thank you for blessing me with the 
overwhelming joys that became our two beautiful children —  
Shemika-Mylene and Amen-Ra


--- PAGE 10 ---
My Children:  Shemika and Amen-Ra
My priceless treasures: you are probably the only existing evidence 
that I did something good, pure and worthwhile with my entire 
mundane life. I love you both beyond words...
My Precious Grands...  
(Love's Gift to Our Future)
MOTTsTTty'
: u T t t t a H
Tsahai Asr


--- PAGE 11 ---
The light in my Spiritual life  
N Seshep m Ankh - ee Ntr
Dr. Nalani St Nty Ra
Sshy Hm-t Ntchr, Npu Sbk Sshta
My Spiritual Mate; Soul-Ra Wife ; 
Hem-tee Akhu; Hem-tee Ra;  
Creative Inspiration...
Ir
... You are the epitome of cultural elegance and poise; a fantastic teacher 
of language and a remarkable student of life...You continue to be an 
awakening light dedicated to the path of self-illumination and spiritual 
upliftment. You have that special gift for finding the joy in virtually 
everything you do. Thank you for your love, your touch, your inspiration, 
your unconditional support and your peace...
Snw


--- PAGE 12 ---
..The joyous and loving memory of..
NATURAL'-' 
liv in g  
EDUCATION 
CENTER
Dr. Valentine Queen Afua
The Original Heal Thyself:
- The Urban Archetype...
- The State of the Art...
- The One and Only...
- Like no other then ... or since
Rest in Peace .


--- PAGE 13 ---
The ( Respectfu[ 'Memory 
o f...
My God-Brother:
Reggie Segars (the Maestro)
Gone but never forgotten. The only man I knew who could turn on 
"the light in a sound"; I only "heard" music before I met you big bro. 
Now, I savor it. Thank you. (Rest in Peace)...
Dr. John E. Moore
Master Teacher; Urban Icon; Hobo Herbologist


--- PAGE 14 ---
Extra-special Thanks , Love 
and Gratitude to My 
Extended Family...
(From present to distant past)
Kai Terron (Valentine) Crosby - My beloved son; you were out of sight 
but never out of mind; the circle of time has brought us back to a new 
beginning; Hey; it's "Valentine's" day...\
Cleo Phillips - former Administrative Director, Self-Healing Education 
Temple; Nurse; Mid-wife; Colon Therapist - Possibly one of the hardest 
working women I've ever known —  next to my mother; Creator bless you...
Gail Neube ... without whose love, dedication, perseverance, patience 
and intelligent insight, this work could never have been. Your teaching-skills 
are incredible, your computer skills unmatched and your creative 
contributions were invaluable. You are without question a quiet angel of 
purpose and a wondrous worker of miracles. Thank you for everything...
Mut, Meri, Imani and Ptah  - My wonderful family; thanks for all of your 
love, support and concern throughout the lean and formative early years; 
Grow strong and wise Ptah; the world needs your quiet, nurturing Light...
Princess Little Flower  - Cosmic companion; co-time traveler; my Light- 
Walker sister; bless you for your many gifts of feminine counsel and wisdom
— especially Lana Cantrel's book...
Bro. Hem Bey  - Warrior; "Star"child; Master Astrologer; seeker — 
blessed thanks for everything - especially for being there in the trenches 
when it counted; if I got it.. .it's yours...
Queen Sista Gharmain Renata  - Relentless love (USH), ever-radiant; 
thank you for all the self-less work you've done on my behalf, and all the 
exceptional work you continue to do for the upliftment of the planet - 
Creator bless you...
Brandi Norwood  - Beloved Spiritual God-daughter; a Star-child adrift 
in alternating realities; love's own heartbeat; live your light and shine; but 
above all sweetheart, be happy...
Dr. Ann Brown, PhD.  - My technical advisor, loving friend, a being of 
uncanny insight into the bio-chemical wonders of corporeal life; congrats' on 
the publishing of your great work V\Hvy Darkness Matters...
Sis. Myra Scott El-  Our Queen-master of the Maatian Sciences of Law; 
Master Astro-Therapist and teacher; the "Muur" with the "most"; much love


--- PAGE 15 ---
and appreciation to you for your vital work and all the help you've given to 
me, and especially to the upliftment of the people ...
Nathan George - The Craft's master; conjurer of emotions; warrior; master 
teacher; adept of the theatrical arts; much love and thanks for your steadfast 
friendship and your implacable wisdom...
Sis. Miriam House  - Light worker; spiritual help-mate — bless you for all 
you have done for me in the past to help make this message possible...
Sis. Medina Renee Sprauve  - Thank you for being there... Sweet Light- 
Worker extraordinaire; cyber-soldier; my eyes and ears into the worlds of 
virtual reality... Luv ya!
Sis. Rosanna Lewis and Bro Israel Ojose - Bless you both beloved 
lights, for all your tireless efforts to keep the star-fires burning and the 
light-codes shining in the hearts and minds of our brothers and sisters 
across the big pond in London-town...
Bro. Leon Benjamin-El  - Bonified genius; true student of the master's 
path; thanks for all the technical guidance; mucho glad you're on our side...
Hladini Shakti Das - My light-brother and spiritual advisor; herald of the 
"Perfect Bliss"; beloved friend - Hari Krishna!
Aquiah Maat - My loving Leo; "wife from another life"; a quester after 
truth and happiness. Bless you for all your love, prayers and unconditional 
support...
Puma LaGuitana  - Aho! Yata He! Medicine mother; Spirit-sister; thank 
you for your tireless support. May the Great Spirit guide and bless your 
earthly journey; Mitakuye Oyasin!
Bro. fatnaal Gore, Bro. Keidi Obe Owadu and Spirit Halima - Thank you 
for extending your hearts and your precious time to help us forward the 
work and our University. You are all invaluable assets of power and truth to 
our grass-roots cultural healing community across the diaspora, and our 
people are fortunate and blessed because of your dedicated commitment to 
the struggle...Aleuta Continual
Tassili Mata Atma Maat  - The "Sensual Seer"; tantric afro-mantic; talents 
unsurpassed; cultural creatrix; gifted counselor and beloved friend...
Dr George X. Love  - Master of Oriental Medicine, exceptional teacher and 
pioneer of Nature-healing consciousness in our community; Creator 
continue to guide and bless your vital work...
Sis. Regina Crump - A  butterfly of light seeking fields of blossoming 
dreams; stay true to the love that guides you ... Luv u and my god-son 
Nakai...
Sis. Danyel Jones  - Eloquence with a touch of mischief; you are a joy. 
Thank you for your precious friendship, your love and unwavering 
support...


--- PAGE 16 ---
Sen Khafra Ndongo Hapi Ra and Nana Hapi - My Khmt-ic mentor; 
warrior on the Light Path; dua to you and Queen-Mut Hapi for your 
Ankh-shaping work with my son Amen, and your invaluable technical 
assistance in the Kemetian Sciences. Hotep! Enj Hrk Amn Ra!
Bros. Black Dot; Chris Wilford and Rich of the MU Brotherhood  
(Productions); and Ahmed Rashid - Special agents, Department, of Higher 
Knowledge, Office of Supreme Intelligence...Thank you for carrying the 
torch of Truth forward. Bless you all for seeing the vision and acting on it. 
Much honor, much love, much respect...
Brother Nkosi and Sister Mecca-  Spiritual God-son and God-daughter; 
Alchemists weaving exquisite tinctures of sound and universal love; stay 
strong, stay together, stay always in the Light; We love you...
Sen Ausar Ptah Tat-f and Sent Nut Nefer Ast n Aut  - Dua for the beautiful 
Saa (impeccable workmanship); your technical assistance and your tireless 
work in the Khmt Khm-unity ...Shm m Htp!
Bro. Rabbi, Sis. Dora and Family - Pure love, unwavering purpose; bless 
you and your children in your quests toward Light. Remember, keep always 
to the Path to leads you both back to each other...
Kanya McGee  - "Keeper of the Tree"; thanks for initiating me unto the 
Light Path; may the seeds of "The Tree" take root once more, be ever-fruitful 
and never out of season...
Bro. Nkosi Kimaathi - Warrior-healer; adept; a metaphysician of 
remarkable insight; may you prosper on the Light Path...
Bro. John Harris - A true light-bearer of the Healing Word who now 
walks with the Ancestors —  much love, respect and special thanks for 
everything you taught me... (Rest in Peace beloved)...
Cousin Carol, Notnmo, Anthony and Aunt Lorraine - Love and Light; 
Family forever! Thank you for all your support throughout the growth years 
of the "Gathering of the Masters..."
Mother Amibelle Olatunji-  My Godess-mother/Spirit-nurturer; 
counselor; griot; cultural icon; much love and blessings to you for your 
loving guidance and support...
...And last but most certainly not least...
Ronald (Set/) Edmonds (R.I.P.), Robert Batista and Julio (lake) Guevara  
Bless you my beloved brothers. You guys made my boyhood one long gut- 
wrenching, breath-gasping belly-laugh, and every now and then I find 
myself suffering from severe relapses. Thank you for all of my wonderful 
"medicinal memories" —Long Live 'The Crew'!


--- PAGE 17 ---
To Our Guardian Angels.
VERNON J. & GERELYN BURTON
A master of insight wielding sophisticated weapons of reason 
punctuated by undeniably accurate words of wisdom; my elder 
brother on the Light Path; All hail the (true) Mayor of Lake Helen, 
Florida! Bless you and Gerelyn for always being there for Nalani 
and me. When it comes to showing kindness and honoring their 
word, many only talk a good game —you simply lock and load. We 
thank you beloved brother and sister, not just for ourselves, but for 
all those you continue to help and give much-need hope and 
inspiration to. All due praises and recognition to your steadfast 
friendship, leadership, community service and love.
No 'bout-a-doubt it'; your places are assured...
-Phil and Nalani


--- PAGE 18 ---
Sincerest Thanks and Gratitude 
to Our Friend and Benefactor...
BROTHER MAHIR EL
Many are they who mistake kindness for weakness, blinded by the 
selfishness and cynicism so common in today's world. Few are they 
who recognize a personification of such kindness as the true 
measure of an evolved soul. We give both recognition and thanks to 
you beloved brother for your kind contributions, your positive 
vision and steadfast purpose. May you be blessed to find perpetual 
joy and ever-mounting successes in your journey upon the Path.
- Bro. Phil and Sis. Nalani


--- PAGE 19 ---
Special Recognition 
and Thanks to...
LANA CANTRELL
Thank you Lana for your inspirational words during the times we 
spoke together by phone. Thank you as well for the Herculean effort 
that resulted in the manifestation of your awesome book The Greatest 
Story Never Told.  It was gracious of you to allow me the use of the 
many and diverse pearls of knowledge presented therein. Your work 
has been an information repository of incalculable wealth to me, and 
although we agreed to disagree on one or two points, I still 
enthusiastically recommend it and hope that one day the world will 
awaken to reap of its bounty as I have.
- Dr. Valentine


--- PAGE 20 ---
Much Appreciation 
and Thanks to...
BRO. JUNIOR COGGINS
Heart of a true Master; gifted and humble; bless you for your 
enormous talent, your forbearance and your steadfast commitment 
over these many months to the completion of this work.
And...
SISTER AMAADI DANA COLEMAN
Queen Sista —you literally came out of nowhere, rescued this project 
from inertia and helped move it forward to its ultimate completion. 
Without your technical assistance and saint-like patience it would 
have remained stranded in the archives of "what could have been." 
Thank you (and your family) for your valued time and expertise.
- Dr. Valentine


--- PAGE 21 ---
Literary Act of Contrition
To my Beloved Mothers, Sisters, Daughters,
Aunts, Wives, would-be Wives, Lovers 
and Friends...
?
If at any time during the course of our material existence and 
experiences together, I have angered, embarrassed, violated, 
abandoned, betrayed, criticized, castigated or lied to you, I plead 
guilty as charged and offer you all my sincerest apology, presenting 
this work as proof of a life-lesson learned...
If... on the other hand, you feel that I have also inflicted joy, hope, 
support, self-awakening, self-healing, ecstasy, passion, laughter and 
the sweetest memories; well then—it is with inexplicable pride and 
unrepentant delight that I once again humbly plead —guilty as 
charged!
- Author


--- PAGE 22 ---
A Word to the Seeker
1 have written this work and other books of the Re-genesis 
Chronicles for visionaries, future leaders, teachers, aspiring adepts 
and progressive free-thinkers. The essence of this thesis will never be 
fully appreciated by the pessimist, racist, academic bigot or
intractable skeptic. Nor by the deaf, dumb and blind who consciously 
or unconsciously support the oppressive tenets of despotic
orthodoxies; those who are ruled through their fears and ignorance
by 'westernized' versions of philosophy, medicine, science, politics, 
psychology, religion or indoctrinative education.
I will no doubt be criticized, ridiculed and even vilified for the 
words I offer herein—likened by feminists and their supporters to the 
Neanderthal, the dinosaur, or even worse yet, a 'right wing
Fundamentalist'; just another misogynist throwback promoting an 
obsolete repertoire of facts based on chauvinist myths, old wives' 
tales, culture-based empiricism and pseudo-scientific conjecture.
But you know what beloved...?
Just like archaeologists now dig and forage for evidence of past 
truths about those dinosaurs and Neanderthals—in the final days, so 
too will our great great-grandchildren frantically dig and forage thru 
vast acres of the written word for works such as this, in their 
desperate attempts to unearth and resurrect precious remnants of the 
truth, reason and sanity... after all else has failed !
In anticipation of this time, I dedicate these words for guidance 
and encouragement to fellow light-workers everywhere —  to those 
special agents of ascendence assigned by the Galactic Council to 
magnify the love-signatures of redemption throughout our planetary 
home; to those of us traveling the path to a higher consciousness- 
index; to those of us who do not live in "this" today; to those of us 
just visiting Earth (temporarily) from "another" tomorrow.


--- PAGE 23 ---



--- PAGE 24 ---
Dedicated to the Vanishing Remnants of  
Family and True Manhood ...
c ? - 9
This work is written for women but dedicated to all men—  
specifically the Sa-Khm, or Earth's autochthonous "black" man —  
who over the last 48 years of Amazonian feminism has distressed  
and puzzled over the systematic erosion of, and calculated attacks  
against—his archetypal masculine nature, his archetypal family  
structure, and his archetypal relationship with his beloved  
archetypal queen —the mother of all human life—the archetypal  
Hmt-Khm — Earth's autochthonous "black" woman...
-Author


--- PAGE 25 ---



--- PAGE 26 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
INTRODUCTION
My Beloved Sisters...
(and Brothers)
The Wounded Womb is rated "triple R" for Raw, Real and 
Relevant to the times. It is not your ordinary run-of-the-mill new age 
book for on-the-go '90s-millennium' career-women. In fact, I’d 
venture to say that you might never read another quite like it for 
some time. If ever.
It is not a how-to book of quick-fix formula based solutions. God 
knows there are more than enough of these in circulation. Women are 
bombarded relentlessly by 'celebrity specialists' pushing "pop-up 
miracles" for the 'inadequate' body and mind; the majority of them 
eventually found to be superficial, inane, or completely worthless.
The Wounded Womb is — a candid exposition specifically written 
to enable the seeker to recognize and address the many subtle 
conditions and behaviorisms that inevitably lead to disease; in this 
case —female diseases. In your hands you now hold a valuable key to 
many lost or hidden treasures of immutable truth. You are about to 
gain access to a vault of higher knowledge based on advanced 
scientific and metaphysical principles of Cosmic Intelligence and 
Natural Law; principles purposefully suppressed or ignored by the 
elitists of Amazonian feminism, western research "science", the 
medical/pharmaceutical church, and an interconnected priesthood of 
doctors, lawyers, educators, industrialists and political pundits who 
artfully administer their opiates to the blissfully ignorant.
Your choice to read, overstand and (hopefully) share a work of this 
type will demand great courage, patience and persistence on your 
part. Its contents are sure to challenge and maybe even offend every 
last one of the sacred traditions, concepts, beliefs and doctrines of 
"self" you now hold dear. Only those ready to suspend their 
artificial concepts of time; to filter out the cacophonous nonsense of 
the media; to purge themselves of the mind-distorting pablum called


--- PAGE 27 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"pubic dead-ucation" and to consecrate their lives to the 
manifestation of truth to the exclusion of any and all distractions, will 
inner-stand and appreciate the sincere intention of this work.
This dissertation/commentary/exposition was written for the 
specific purpose of de-constructing the reader's emotional, 
psychological, theological, academic, cultural and socio-political 
comfort zones; to help the seeker to "think outside of the box."
Earlier test presentations of The Wounded Womb caused quite a 
stir. Many women asked what possessed me to write it in the first 
place. Some expressed concerns over the way I conveyed its inherent 
messages and the words chosen to present them. They got the 
impression that my subject matter (and my 'tone') was inspired by a 
sub-conscious anger or deep-seated hatred of women.
Not so!
In fact, it's the exact opposite. As a doctor of Classical (non- 
traditional) Naturopathy and Hygienic Science, I have always been 
deeply troubled and genuinely concerned about the terrible state of 
gynecological health suffered by our sisters today. My dedication 
to exposing the hidden truths behind these ongoing reproductive 
epidemics is already well known in the grass-roots wholistic health 
community, where my style of teaching in this endeavor has always 
been known to be (in a word) passionate and intense!
And this is precisely how I teach, lecture, counsel and write; with 
passion and intensity! So although my work seems to ask no quarter 
and gives none, and the so-called 'tone' of my thesis often appears 
somewhat coarse, disrespectful, unyielding and puritanical (or as a 
feminist would say, misogynistic and misanthropic), the facts still 
remain and they will stand on their own merits no matter how they 
are presented, or by whom. The seeker will discover that the 
evidence contained herein literally screams as it speaks for itself.
I pray your attention will be as equally intense and passionate as 
you explore what is conveyed in the following pages. In the end of 
course, it is for you the seeker to decide.


--- PAGE 28 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Having said all this, it is my sincerest wish that the seeker critiques 
this work based on its provable content regardless of how bizarre or 
strange the subject matter may sometimes appear. Occasionally, my 
attempts to explain topics from a deeper more metaphysical 
perspective will render the subject-matter somewhat difficult for the 
average reader to comprehend. This was unavoidable because 
unraveling the tangled web of lies and misconceptions surrounding 
the issue of women's health, was often as difficult to write about as it 
will be to read. I beg the reader's indulgence on this and recommend 
having a dictionary or thesaurus close by to aid in the process.
Also, all topics presented herein are based on documented facts;  
facts that I have re-interpreted through ideas, concepts and 
perspectives seldom made available to the general public; "neo­
visions" I hope will inspire the seeker towards continued research, 
progressive thinking, creative dialogue and sustainable solutions.
I'll make no apologies for what I have written, nor will I make 
concessions with the truth in an attempt to appear 'politically 
correct' or socially expedient. Least of all am I fearful of scornful 
responses. If I am wrong and someone more knowledgeable on this 
subject can prove that I am wrong, I have no problem submitting to 
that revelation. This work is a quest for truth on the subject of 
women's health and diseases, and everything else (ego, scholastic 
elitism, religious beliefs, political affiliations, sexual orientation, 
race, money and fame) is subordinate to this endeavor.
I do not claim to be in the possession of any break-through 
scientific knowledge or to have been enlightened by 'divinely 
channeled guardian angels'. I have never pretended to be the sole 
possessor of the 'one and only truth' regarding this subject. I simply 
claim that the prevailing medical "wisdom" and socio-political 
"isms", along with certain 'new age' philosophies surrounding the 
issue of health and diseases in women today, are all (to one extent 
or another) inadequate, incomplete or tragically flawed.
Also; without apologies I declare that I am totally un-impressed by 
"qualified specialists" and "lettered experts" flaunting state-


--- PAGE 29 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
sanctioned 19th century German credentials who unilaterally 
dismiss such findings as are presented herein. Fact is beloved, such 
experts and specialists are themselves the victims of a 'syndrome' 
that has afflicted the Euro-centric models of education for centuries; a 
syndrome I call intellectual obsoletism.  Graduates of this 'system' are 
taught to parrot the popular scientific 'truth-of-the-day'— which (as 
it always turns out) is destined for obsolescence at some not-too- 
distant point in the future. And this is especially true where it 
concerns the "science" of medicine.
The sad reality is that orthodox medical credentials are earned 
primarily through the study of temporary effects —not immutable 
causes. Over the centuries, this modus operandi has resulted in the 
formulation of 'sanctified standards' of treatment regulated by the 
intractable ecclesiasticisms of a "church of medical orthodoxy."
Under such standards, scientific truisms are continuously invented 
and discarded every 3 to 5 years! What they claim to be the "newest 
most fantastic scientific break-through" today, is just as suddenly 
discovered to be wrong in 5 years, then just as suddenly classified —  
obsolete! And the media, along with our political and educational 
systems are willful accomplices in this pretentious circus of pseudo­
scientific advancement and achievement. They never question the 
redundant mea-culpas offered up by well-scripted personalities 
ordained in this church, who confess each year to their defective 
concepts of man, medicine and the mechanisms of life.
They simply call this ongoing roll of the medical dice— progress'.
Worst yet, the media never confronts the appalling arrogance of 
this pernicious priesthood, especially those in their cabal who self- 
righteously condemn parents to jail, or have their children kidnapped 
by the State for daring to question their divine authority on such 
things as the "sacrament" of vaccination. They never question or hold 
accountable a priesthood that iatrogenicly kills an estimated 700,000 
people each year, practicing a "science" that descended from the same 
inquisitional systems of learning where their Christian ancestors 
would have automatically tortured or burned you at the stake —  
simply for daring to teach that their world was not flat!


--- PAGE 30 ---
V
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Is it any wonder that humanity, starved of its true sense of 
intuitive reasoning, logic and cosmic insight, continues to wallow 
and suffer in the quagmire of such sanctified egotism and idiocy?
Beloved; The Wounded Womb dares to talk about what is now 
considered politically incorrect and scientifically infeasible. It is 
candid in its treatment of facts concerning the suffering incurred by 
women due to our society's present perception of the gender 
equation. It contains a vast menu of neglected issues crucial to 
exposing the subtle recipes of deceit served up by the necro- 
merchants of medical science, the media and Amazonian feminism. 
It reveals why these partners-in-crime will never admit to having the 
true solutions to women's diseases — even if they did find it. Fear 
(the prime motivator of profit) prevents the conscious members of 
such organizations from saying what needs to be said —  particularly 
on this tragic issue.
Me? I have no such ax to grind. 1 pull no punches and make no 
concessions with what I have discovered to be the truth.
As a result The Wounded Womb may anger, embarrass, frustrate 
or even cause dismay in the seeker. On the other hand it could very 
well enlighten, inspire, and otherwise uplift the seeker as well.
I especially offer this work as a gift to all devout card-carrying 
feminists (and their supporters) to help "liberate" you from your 
prison of artificially manufactured ignorance; an ignorance nurtured 
and propagated by those who market conceptual lies and perceptual 
illusions to the general public; those who control "the matrix"that 
manages and manipulates the synthetic synchronicity we've come to 
collectively accept as our matter-of-fact, day-to-day reality.
The Wounded Womb is presented from spiritual, metaphysical, 
meta-historic, scientific and empirical perspectives never before 
attempted by most contemporary grass-roots authors. And no matter 
how 'odd' or 'far-fetched' its content often appears, they are the 
bv-products of serious research into forgotten or ignored tenets of 
cosmic, scientific and ancient arcane laws seldom considered by the


--- PAGE 31 ---
v i
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"experts" and "specialists" of present-day new age scholarship.
Also; despite its obvious title this work is highly recommended  
for, and dedicated to all men —specifically the Sa-Khem, or "black"  
man—who over the last 48 years of neo-feminism has puzzled over  
the systematic erosion of, and calculated attacks against— his
archetypal masculinity, his archetypal family and his archetypal  
relationship with his cherished Hmt-Khem — the "black" woman.
[FY1 - The so-called "meta-historic" or "meta-chronological" category 
is based on my personal interpretation of the mythic experience. It 
represents the spiritual and metaphysical insights left behind by 
Earth's autochthonous peoples documented in stone and parchment 
throughout the ages. To me, myth is the purest most accurate 
accounting of Man's corporeal journey as told by the inner voice of 
the Spirit. It is therefore an extreemly valuable repository of ancestral 
memory to reference and explore in order to draw more wholistic 
conclusions about historical subjects uniquely concerning ms.]
As to the matter of "Race" and the "New Age"...
What I have chosen to write concerning the unpopular subject of 
'race' (particularly where it concerns the collective histories of the 
Anglo-Saxon/Nordic-European, or so-called Aryan/Caucasian 
"white" race; their present actions and the consequences such actions 
continue to inflict upon Earth's animal life, autochthonous peoples 
and the planet's ecological future in general) —has nothing 
what-so-ever to do with "reverse race-ism", or any other 'selective 
semantics' used by dyed-in-the-wool racists to deflect attention from 
themselves and the real issues. My analysis of this subject and its 
ongoing effects throughout the current world-paradigm is inclusive 
of the nature, but more specifically, the behavior of the genus Varietas 
Caucasia who claim to have had their origins in Southwestern Asia by 
way of the Caucasus, and those who collectively inhabit geographical 
areas now absurdly designated... the "continent" of Europe.


--- PAGE 32 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The history of Europe has been one of unceasing warfare between 
tribes comprising the Varietas Caucasia, but for our purposes we will 
be examining the physical, psycho-spiritual, cultural and economic 
consequences of their collectively coordinated efforts for power and 
wealth thru resource control, which led to the conquest and genocide 
of the lands and peoples of Africa and the so-called Americas, and 
how this joint enterprise of greed and carnage continues to affect the 
very fabric of evolutionary consciousness around the globe today.
Presently, these tribes are comprised of many ethnicities all falling 
under the rubrics of three major religions; Christianity, Judaism and 
Islam. Each has worked in opposition as well as in tandem with one 
another to bring about the utter devastation of Africa's and America's 
ancient high civilizations. With the spread of their influence through 
military conquest and forced acculturation, these "mother religions" 
diversified into mutated variables of the same pathological 
ecclesiasticism, primarily in accordance with geography and ethnic 
compositions. Today, the so-called 'Northern Tribes' associated with 
the Germanic Jesuit princes now commanding the Roman State 
Church, in a coordinated partnership with Zionism masked as 
Talmudic Judaism, exert what appear to be the greatest influence 
upon the political, educational and economic affairs of our world.
At this very moment in time however, there also appears to be a 
vicious life and death struggle being waged between splinter tribal 
factions of the white Protestant Christian elite, the Vatican 
Catholic/Talmudic (Zionist) elite and the orthodox Ishmaeli/ Islamic 
elite for ultimate control of the Earth into the 21st century. I say 
"appears" because in light of all the available evidence, it appears as if 
the Jesuit general behind the Papal throne rules over and coordinates 
the affairs and interactions of all three!
That said, my observations and analyses will be based on the past 
and ongoing patterns of behavior demonstrated by these 'theo- 
pathic' orders of faith as documented by the European himself; 
behavior that has remained consistent with their violent histories for 
centuries. Such behavior has been reflected in the overall physical, 
social, environmental and psychological traumas experienced by the 
overwhelming majority of black and brown indigenous peoples


--- PAGE 33 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
living on Earth today. In fact, it's also been instrumental in the 
persecution, subjugation and brutal enslavement of member tribes 
from their own phenotype; eg. the 'Slavs' and 'Romas' of eastern 
Europe, the Huguenots of France and the Erainn of Northern Ireland 
and Scottland).
All told, their world presence in the last 1000 years of human 
activity has so contaminated and infected the planet's collective 
global consciousness, that many present-day indigenous populations 
of the Earth have now joined in to perpetuate the same psychotic and 
loathsome behavior upon each other; sadly in some cases to an even 
more exaggerated and heinous degree. (See related movies such as 
Lord of War,  with Nicolas Cage; Tears of the Sun,  with Bruce Willis; 
Blood Diamond with Leonardo DiCaprio and Trade with Kevin Kline).
In light of the above however, I do not wish to be seen as 
painting our collective condition as a humanity simply in terms of it 
being a "black" or "white" issue, particularly since the 'parasitic 
elite' of the European world leadership has historically profited 
from promoting this divide and conquer paradigm for centuries. 
(See The Infamous Speech of Willie Lynch in part 2).
All data used in this thesis to support the premise of racism's 
direct connection to spiritual corruption, physical disease, social 
degradation, environmental destruction and cultural fragmentation, 
are based on historic and present-day facts germane to the subjects 
being discussed. Such data had to be included in order to provide 
the necessary intellectual depth for a more precise and personal 
understanding of our collective and individual experiences as 
autochthonous people—especially here in Amexum-America.
Racism is (and has always been) a paramount part of our disease- 
paradigm as a contemporary humanity. The accompanying historic, 
meta-historic and empirical evidence of its deleterious effects are 
made apparent simply by studying the collective pathological 
symptoms the entire planet suffers from today—especially as it 
concerns the health and well-being of our beloved sisters.
Again, such evidence could not be excluded from the basic 
premise and overall investigative goals of this work.


--- PAGE 34 ---
ix
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
One blatant example of the many forms that racism has taken in 
our society is seen in what I call the "cultural morphallaxis" of 
African history and spiritual world view. This is where European 
"scholars", when defining their ancestors' alleged contributions to the 
creation of Earth's original far-ancient high civilizations, grow 
hybridized versions of the truth from the ruins and debris of our 
stolen legacies, then present their exaggerated, white-washed, 
mutated versions to the world as their own "new age."
It is a subtle form of 'racism-as-neo-theft' expressed through the 
passive/aggressive promotion of Aryanized versions of Man's ascent 
from ancient African origins and superior achievements to the 
present day —a soft-peddled revisionist social experiment they 
vaingloriously refer to as their "new age movement." (See Race 
Differences in Intelligence: An Evolutionary Approach,  by Richard Lynn, 
2006)
However, when the substance of this "new age" is viewed 
through the eyes of indigenous peoples, it is clearly seen that the 
foundational concepts, ideologies and language are being framed and 
articulated with the ancient spiritual, cosmological and philosophical 
treasures left by our black and brown ancestries. An example of this 
can be seen in how the powerful Rosicrucian Order depicts the 
likeness of the Pharaoh Akhenaton—pale white with blue eyes.
Another example may be viewed in the ridiculous assertions of a 
pontificating jack-ass named Dr. Zahi Hawass, an Arab Egyptologist 
obviously on the payroll of the Illuminati. This embarrassment to 
integrity, morality, science and history is regularly seen on The 
History Channel or PBS's Nova series standing in front of the 
monuments of Kemet intimating to the world that these magnificent 
super-structures were the achievements of HIS Arab ancestors!
And then there is John Anthony West, a student of the works of A. 
Schwaller DuLubitz who wrote an excellent book entitled The Serpent 
in the Sky. Throughout his work, West praises the Khemetyu as being 
unparalleled in their achievements, standing head and shoulders 
above any other civilization past and present, particularly in the


--- PAGE 35 ---
X
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
fields of architecture, geometry, cosmology, esoteric biology, botany 
and mathematics; but...not before prefacing his accolades with a 
subtle racist reference to their 'white' genealogy —a point made with 
the obvious intent of "certifying the superiority" of the people and 
culture he so admires.
What was particularly insidious about his subtle emphasis of this 
point was that he made the reader believe his racist references were 
somehow inferred by the original Kemites themselves!
Both West and Hawass have obviously overlooked or chosen to 
ignore the writings of such authors as Sir Godfrey Higgins, Count 
C.F. Volney and Dr. Martin Bernal, as well as the monumental and 
history-defining works of the late great master physicist and 
anthropologist Dr. Cheikh Anta Diop, who proved conclusively that 
the true archetypal 'race' and ethnicities of the ancient Kemetyu 
(Egyptian) people, were 'Africoid' blacks.
These facts alone give rise to a legitimate question of ethics (and 
the apparent lack of it) concerning how such policies of deceit are 
tacitly tolerated by the global academia and the so-called "evolved" 
members of this 'movement' —particularly in their failure to depict 
the true racial origins of historically famous ancient characters in 
their books, tapes and other marketed paraphernalia.
Quite frankly, the odor of this so-called 'new-age movement' is an 
all-too familiar stench. It reeks with the foul stink of Manifest Destiny 
as it carries on its continuing campaign of psycho-spiritual 
domination, colonization and cultural genocide!
Its deja vu for peoples of color all over again.
Dr. Dorothy Blake Fardan, Ph.D, in her book Message To The White 
Man and Woman in America  (pg. 14), corroborates the above quite 
eloquently by defining true Caucasian history as being "trapped in a 
vacuum" like...
"....a chunk of time which has been severed from its origin point and reconstructed 
in terms of fabricated accounts and false documents. Such an historical and truncated


--- PAGE 36 ---
x i
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
worldview has allowed the illusion of white supremacy to become not only a general 
mindset, but an insidious underlying strategy which informs and constitutes every 
institution within American society (or the dominant white society anywhere in the 
universe)... .This mindset, which has no grounding in the origins of the human 
presence, no recognized connection to the first civilizations of human being nor the 
wisdom accumulated in those civilizations (except for what was stolen and/or re­
thought and rewritten), is a mindset trapped..."
Dr. Fardan goes on to say....
"...Trapped history is history without a navel chord to its very being, absent the 
mother of its inception. That is the foundation of white supremacy...While the 
Europeans took what they needed and wanted from the original people in Africa to 
form the foundations of western civilization, they simultaneously denied and rejected 
that very source. What occurred was a deliberate effort to cover up, conceal and alter 
the true origins of human life, in order to establish a supremacist worldview and 
eventually a civilization which recognized no liability for, or answerability to the 
laws of nature imbedded in the universe as well as in human nature. In no way is this 
better illustrated than the European's calculations to sever the connection to the true 
ancient source by using (misusing) scripture to back up their false claims..."
Dr. Dorothy Blake Fardan, Ph.D., is a Caucasian woman.
Another example of the latent psycho-social effects of inaccurately 
portraying peoples of color in history by the western education 
system and entertainment industry, was reflected in the atrocities 
committed by certain white soldiers (both male and female) at the 
Abu Gharib concentration camp in war-torn Iraq, which acted as a 
vivid reminder of the underlying hypocrisy in our society concerning 
the matter of 'race', 'freedom', and 'liberation' in America.
A number of these criminals were correction officers who worked 
right here in the good ole' U.S. of A. where the vast majority of 
inmates are peoples of color. One wonders; did their tour of duty in 
a foreign country allow them to use the "law of war" to openly act 
on their deeply rooted racist feelings towards people of color? There 
is documented evidence that large numbers of men and women 
from white supremist organizations are joining the military to fight


--- PAGE 37 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
in the Middle East, in order to gain combat experience to train 
members in the United States once they've returned. This fact was 
reported in all the major newspapers across our country.
In effect, the evidence speaks for itself. To myopically deny or 
conveniently overlook the mechanisms of racism, while at the same 
time purposefully minimizing or excluding Earth's autochthonous 
peoples from the historical data used to promote and legitimize this 
"new age" —  especially at a critical time when humanity is supposed 
to be collectively taking the next quantum leap into the 4th and 5th 
densities of universal enlightenment and cosmic awareness —is 
morally corrupt and above all counter-productive to the intended 
goals of the newly awakening consciousness-paradigm.
It's an exercise in psycho-spiritual sabotage. Truth be told 
beloved, you cannot have a legitimate 'new age' movement without 
recognition, penitence and reparation for the sins of the old one.
Period!
And that goes for 'black' and 'white' slave reparations!
(My brother and sister Muurs know what I mean by this.)
Again, unknown to most (black or white), the enslavement of 
whites in the past by certain factions of the Umayyad (Ayyubid) or 
so-called "Barbary Black-a-Moors", working in conjunction with 
Vikings and the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II (who led the 6th 
Crusade in 1228), traded in the chattel slavery of the 'white refuse' 
of Europe. Frederick II, Pope Honorius III and later Pope Gregory 
IX offered thousands of kidnapped white Slavic children to the 
Ayyubid in exchange for Jerusalem and adjacent territories.
In fact, the very first slaves (Slavs) shipped to the North 
American continent and Barbados were Irish. White historians have 
conveniently left this tid-bit of memorabilia out of current history 
books, because it was decided by the Vatican during the so-called 
"Reconstruction period" of America to erase forever all traces of the 
black "mound builders" as the ancient founders of high civilization 
in the western hemisphere. So instead of calling them slaves, white 
historians still refer to their ancestors as "indentured servants."


--- PAGE 38 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
In the 17th century for example, just before Africans were 
kidnapped en masse because it was deemed that the Asiatic strains 
of Native Americans did not have the 'physical constitution' (or the 
willingness) to do the back-breaking plantation work, impoverished 
whites (made this way under the 'Elizabethian Enclosure Acts' that 
forcibly stripped the yeomanry, or average citizenry of their private 
lands), were shipped in chains to British colonies in America and 
the West Indies on some of the same ships that later brought the Africans!  
They toiled unto death, not for the 7 years alluded to in present 
history books as the tenure of so-called "indentured servents." In 
fact, the present states of Georgia and Virginia were recorded as the 
dumping grounds for England's white 'indentured refuse', where 
they constituted the majority number of slaves at that time.
So in the end beloved seeker, racism to me is not just the 
vacuous hatred of blacks by whites or of whites by blacks. Racism 
today (to para-phrase the great teacher Dr. Neely Fuller) is the 
exertion of self-serving despotic power over the lives and fates of 
one genetic sub-grouping of humanity by another; in this case —  
using the artificial classifications of Eurocentric pseudo-science as 
the litmus for defining hominoid superiority. At this time "whites" 
exert said force and power (white supremacy) over the lives and 
fates of the so-called black, brown and yellow peoples of this planet.
In Summary: Beloved Queen Sisters...
When all is said and done, you will find that The Wounded  
Womb has catered to no exclusive group, special interest or popular 
ideology. Everyone is benevolently trashed whether 'white', 'black', 
male, female, straight, 'bi' or totally gay. I have challenged 
everything and everyone — including (I hope) — myself.
Also, in my quest to discover truth-as-reality (and vice versa), I 
have come to learn the following. Evil has no race, ethnicity or 
gender features as it pertains to the human equation. Evil reveals 
itself in two ways; through individual choice or as a collective 
pathological mind-set that thrives in an atmosphere of myopic, self-


--- PAGE 39 ---
xiv
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
deluding ignorance. It is a psycho-spiritual virus of the mind and 
heart that can only infect "the susceptible." If you find this hard to 
believe my brothers and sisters, explain the likes of Mobutu, 
Savimbi, the Shah of Iran, Pol Pot, Poppa Doc, Baby Doc or the Hutu 
and (Wa) Tutsi tragedy of Rwanda!
Beloved; the message contained herein is truly unique but far from 
original. It only appears to be new because you have strayed so far 
from your archetypal path of balanced thought and righteous 
behavior. Though at times it will appear to be the case, this work was 
not written to ridicule or unfairly chastise you. It's more like a benign 
attempt at 'wholistic shock therapy'; a tough-love wake up call to 
startle you back to your original state of cosmic self-awareness.
My beloved sisters; in order to save and ensure the future life, 
genetic health and overall psycho-spiritual well-being of our sons, 
daughters, grandsons and granddaughters, you must revive and 
resurrect your sacred feminine womb-consciousness! By doing this 
you reclaim and re-take possession of your abdicated throne —the 
throne of the Triple-Black Mother Goddess of Creation whose 
infinite power and potential are your divine feminine legacies.
One more thing. A humble word of caution.
Please do not pre-judge or react to certain words and phrases 
taking them out of context. Should you decide to read this work in its 
entirety, do so from the front to the back.  Try to avoid thumbing 
through it picking out random topics to browse because the key 
issues and subjects are written in set sequences to be understood as 
whole concepts, not intellectual vignettes.
Keep this uppermost in mind and you will come to inner-stand 
that these words were written for you to delight, contemplate and fall 
in love with your own true precious womanhood once again .
Shm-m-Htp; Shm-n-Ra


--- PAGE 40 ---
XV
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Quotes excerpted from "The Greatest Story Never Told"- L. Cantrell)
?
Of woman I am fame, fortune, fine speech, intelligence, patience and 
stead-fastness..."
- Lord Krishna
from The Bhagavad Gita
Physicians know of no medicine in all sorrows that equals a good wife
—  this I tell is the truth ..."
- The Vedas
Worthy of honor, noble, holy and ornamental, women are the treasures 
of a house..."
- The Vedas
Generally speaking, it is the man who engages in farming, both to feed 
himself and to provide others with food to keep them from starving. 
The woman, on the other hand, weaves clothing not only for herself, but 
also to enable others to keep warm. Although these may seem to be 
menial chores, they are the very foundation of human existence ..."
- The Japanese Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns


--- PAGE 41 ---



--- PAGE 42 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Part I
The Anatomy and Metaphysics of  
Women's Diseases...


--- PAGE 43 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Table of Contents 
W ounded W om b - Part I
Title Page
Instinct 1
The Metaphysical Anatomy of Instinct... 7
The Original " Bone-Head"... 11
The "Glitch"... 19
I'm from Missouri: I'll Show You 26
Workshop-itis... 28
The Gynic Woman and her Instincts ... (God's gift to humanity) 30
Eco-biosis... 32
Estrogen: Elixir of the Gynic Woman... 34
Metaphysics of the Primal Mother-Matter-Essence ... 42
And they knew that they were naked ..." Gen.3:7 47
The Almighty Skirt: Power-clothing of the Gynic Woman ... 61
Mini-skirt — Maximum troubles ... 64
The Concentric Circle of Female Power ... 66
Mixing apples and oranges ... 67
The making of a Gynander ... 68
Stress and the Mal(e)-functioning of the Female Anatomy ... 71
Anxiety and the Male-function of the Female Anatomy ... 75
Rise of the Olympic Gynander: (Little Girls are now made of 
"Snakes and Snails and Puppy Dogs' Tails . 80
The Truth Hurts: (literally)... 91
Double-Speak and the Tragedy of Feminized Sports Medicine 96
Sandra's Secret... 102
Gay in the WNBA? No Way... 103
Testosterone Pathway Toxicity (TPT) 106
Fragile —  Handle with Care ... 113
And the suffering continues ... (A Summary) 114
"... The Sins of the Mother ..." 115
Onanism: The untold consequences of clitoral masturbation... 116
Use it... Lose it... 119
Enfeebling "fun"... 126
Spasmosis: The "Epileptic Joy" of Female Ejaculation ... 127
A Look Back at the Female Ejac... 129
Location, Location, Location... 130
PSA You Say... 132
The Kanda Kardia 135


--- PAGE 44 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
- The Virgin Mar-y 136
- Everybody is a Star—Literally... 139
- Dr. Block-Head... 141
- Quest for The Cosmic Pleasure Principle... 142
- Do The Bio-Chemical Math 146
- The Clitoris ... 150
- Stress, Gynandry and Osteoporosis ... 152
- The Uterus 155
- The Great Pyramid; Dimensional Capacitor as Resurrecting Womb ... 157
- Sick Sex... 170
- Forced Adoption: The Growing Phenomenon of 'Parasitic Parenting'... 172
- Ovulation 176
- Ovulation and the Eye of the Beholder ... 182
- Purdah; The Veil of Ast/Isis ... 187
- Menstruation: The Phenomenon of Complacent Pathology ... 193
- A Personal Observation of the Moon-Time Celebration ... 195
- Ritual as Science: The Methodologies of Myth ... 197
- De-mystifying the "Blood Sacrifice"... 206
- "The Issue of Blood ..." 210
- Menstruation, Emotion, and the monthly loss of Primal:
Creative Power (A Metaphysical Overview)... 218
- The Crystal Essence ... 220
- To Bleed .. Or not to Read: That is the answer ... 222
- Pre-Pubescent Puberty ... 227
- Offending Immutable Law; The Cosmic Penalties.... 233
- The Griot Girls ... 235
- Solution: Something to think about... 238
- Sacrificial blood ... 239
- The Mechanisms of the Menstrual Cycle ... 241
- Menses and the Superior Child ... 245
- Eroticism... 246
- No rest for the weary ... 250
- Pathology and Nu-Age Nonchalance ... 252
- Leucorrhea: Leaking Life ... 254
- The Moon and the Menses ... 256
- Spotting: Show-through bleeding ... 261
- The Tampon 262
- T.S.S. Toxic Shock Syndrome ... 266
- Menopause (The "Pause" that Depresses) 269
- Peri-Menopause 271
- Once Again; Don't Say We Didn't Tell You... 273


--- PAGE 45 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
- Fibroids: Medical Merchantilism and the quick fix ... 279
- Thought, Bio-chemistry and the Fibroid Tomb-er ... 282
- Equality: The Fall into Gender Purgatory ... 286
- Insulted? Don't be sisters: 288
- "... As ye Sow, so shall ye Weep ..." 290
- The Artificial Appetite Entity ... 291
- Junk Foods: Your emotional "Guilt Quilt"... 293
- Candida albicans yeast... 295
- Candida Test... 298
- Breast Cancer ... 301
- Pandering to Ignorance ... 306
- A Mammogram's a Mamma Jamma 308
- The Homosexual Factor ... 310
- Environmental attack ... 312
- Abortion 315
- The Melatonin Factor 318
- Forgotten Words of "The Messenger"... 322
- The Pathological Effects of Man-Made Electro-Magnetic Fields ... 331
- How Extremely Low Frequencies (ELF) and Ultra Low
Frequencies (ULF) affect Humans ... 335
- The Bra ... 336
- The Crying Shame ... 338
- The Grim Weeper ... 341
- Tears and Prolactin ... 344
- Exercise - Exertion - Excitement: Exhaustion by any other name ... 345
- The Pathogenic Principles of Accommodation ... 348
- Running - Jogging - Dying ... 351
- "Beware of Greeks bearing gifts ..." 357
- The Commercialization of Female hostility ... 358
- Psyche of the Female Body builder; or The Emperor's New Clothes 361
- Penis envy: To the extreme ... 367
- "Homo-Anomalous"; He-She-Shim,or The Odd and the Fabulous 373
- Ignorance = Consequence ... 381
- Abdominals of Steel —  Abominable for Women ... 383
- Woe-menopause and the History of Eternal Youth Therapy (HRT) 386
- Unopposed Estrogen Therapy ... 388
- Side Effects of Analogue Estrogen Therapies (HRT) ... 390
- Progesterone: Pro and Con ... 391
- Please pay close attention to the following... 393
- "Alien" Estrogen ... 395
- Nature's Progesterone ... 397


--- PAGE 46 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Prologue
To better comprehend the various scientific, metaphysical and 
meta-historic perspectives that have helped me to draw the 
conclusions featured throughout this work, I ask the seeker to 
contemplate the following.
If certain subjects appear to be too far-fetched to be believable, 
please remember that every fabric of your ancestral being was 
psychologically plundered, traumatized and disfigured by 465 years 
of behavior modification and mind control. As a tragic result, we 
the autochthones peoples of Earth suffer from a severe case of 
'psycho-genetic amnesia.1  We have forgotten our celestial origins 
and the miracles we performed as our own illustrious ancestors.
Because of this it is recommended that you carefully read the 
contents of this thesis with an open heart, as well as an open mind. 
This will greatly assist you in overriding the programming.
Beloved seeker; scientists today are studying the inner workings of 
a human anatomical model that was forced to adapt to extremely 
severe pathological environmental circumstances over the past 
100 millennia; circumstances like those events that led to "The Fall" —  
and just recently—western civilization.
As a result few aspects of the original human biological model have 
survived. The various parts that now make up the cellular 
infrastructures of the human body-temple today, are actually the 
mutated results of obligatory changes in atomic, molecular and 
genetic consciousness-pattems away from their original 
programming. Our higher genetic functions degenerated as we were 
forced to adjust and adapt ourselves to the physical, mental and 
psycho-spiritual traumas caused by cataclysmic ecological events 
taking place over the last 175,000 years, along with the devastation


--- PAGE 47 ---
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
caused by many ancient atomic wars fought by our progenitor 
ancestors over the past 75 to 100 millennia.
Ergo, the present behavioral patterns of the atom, the melanin 
molecule, DNA, the blood cells, genes, chromosomes, corpuscles 
and hormones —in fact the very thought processing mechanisms of 
the brain itself (even its present convolutions) —  a 11 represent 
degenerative perversions of adaptation  due to the many pathological 
environments ancient humanity had to conform to.
This has resulted in the degeneration or atrophy of several key 
'consciousness-triangulating' organs critical to man's ultimate 
redemption from the "cellular damnation" of his present body- 
temple. Consequently, the study of the human body and human 
health by medical science today, is merely the bio-historic study of a 
higher organism in "adaptive crisis." Add to this the current 
environmental conditions created by western civilization, which has 
further perverted the bio-chemistries of modern humanity so 
severely, and we find that what science now calls "health" is in fact 
pathology posing as health. Medical scientists now catalogue the 
different stages of bio-chemical perversion and mutation according to 
modulating degrees of 'biolysis-as-homeostasis'; constantly 
re-arranging, re-categorizing and setting new "standards" of health, 
as each successive generation of humanity —  de-generates.
Therefore, what is called "health science" today should more 
accurately be termed "the study of pathological accommodation", 
based on the tenets of scientific research and pharmacology now 
practiced by western medicine. What was once considered sickness 
yesterday becomes a type of modified "state-sanctioned wellness" 
tomorrow. They have simply learned to update and redefine their 
descriptions of health according to the body's ever-changing  
parameters of accommodation to tolerate increasing levels of  
pathological stress and degenerative disease!
And this sad commentary is especially true where it applies to that 
increasingly illusive state of 'health' so desperately pursued by the 
so-called modem, liberated woman of the 21st century.


--- PAGE 48 ---
BOOK IV  
Parti


--- PAGE 49 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
PARTI
The Anatomy and Metaphysics  
of Women's Diseases
$
Instinct...
"... I have made virtue and vice to be distinguished by instinct..."
- Ast (Isis)
What are the actual causes of human dis-ease? What are the 
prevailing conditions that precipitate the many expressions of 
physical or psychological disorder? What (in particular) are those 
conditions that undermine the integrity of female anatomical health 
and psychological well being?
These questions are no doubt fundamental. They go directly to 
the heart of the matter. But as you will see, attempting to reveal the 
whole truth behind what constitutes health and disease today —  
particularly in women —often touches upon issues considered too 
sensitive to explore in today's highly feminized, politically correct 
social climate; especially where it concerns the inclusion of ancient 
re-interpreted cultural perspectives like those I intend to introduce. 
In fact, I intend to show the sister-seeker that most of the pain and 
suffering modern women continue to endure today, are due in large 
parts to their deliberate or unconscious adoption of the Euro-


--- PAGE 50 ---
2
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
feminist's blueprint for personal fulfillment and success; a blueprint 
made up of political and philosophical schematics that 
fundamentally undermine or disqualify the principles of their 
higher feminine birthright.
With this in mind I ask the seeker to contemplate and consider the 
following...
...To recognize and expose the processes that lead to the manifestation of female  
diseases, we must explore and investigate those principles that orchestrate the  
manifestation of all diseases. We must first and foremost recognize and overstand  
the workings of Law —  Divine Immutable Law.
In other words, a true and precise evaluation of the causes of 
disease cannot be achieved if we fragment this principle into 
convenient little diagnostic capsules the way medical science does, 
in order to prescribe their latest 'pill of the week.' This practice 
constitutes pseudo-science, or more accurately, the study of effects.
Dis-ease must be studied and understood at the causal levels, for 
disease (in and of itself) is actually a reaction of health;  a conclusive 
effect that is the body's own response to a total and undeniable 
movement of cause.
In reality, as the seeker draws nearer to the truth of Cosmic Law, 
she or he finds that disease (as an entity and a concept) is actually an 
illusion! What we have come to call 'disease' is actually the artificial 
classification of a bio-chemically modified end-product; a medical 
menu of codified abstracts organized into convenient diagnostic 
categories primarily for the assignment of pharmaceutical protocols.
Bottom line; what we call "diseases" are simply a medical 
catalogue of copyrighted names given to a few of the near infinite 
symptoms a body may experience during bad health. They are all 
merely the physical evidence of a self-limiting process resulting from 
the body's reaction to unnatural acts based in thought and its related 
deeds.
And under the dictates of Divine Immutable Law, it cannot be otherwise!


--- PAGE 51 ---
3
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
In fact, what are defined as 'diseases' throughout the length and 
breath of this work are done solely for the sake of expediency, simply 
because we are all indoctrinated to believe the same lies taught to us 
by the medical church; namely —that diseases are biological 'curses' 
caused by modern-day 'gremlins' called viruses and germs.
But the seeker will come to know that within the Ineffable 
Apparatus of Divine Immutable Law, 'diseases' —as distinct, 
fragmented, isolated realities — do not exist!
Throughout the entire series of my Re-genesis Chronicles the seeker 
will find one consistent theme; namely, that there are only two 
physiological variables experienced by the human body during life —  
good health and bad health!
Once the above principles are thoroughly overstood, what follows 
will become all the more clearer in determining what is real and what 
is hype concerning health and disease in modern women.
Now; on to the subject of instinct and the role it plays in matters 
of health and well-being—especially for women.
I have noticed that women who retain the greater part of their 
higher feminine instincts have a much harder time acclimating to the 
pathological pace set forth by the neo-feminists and their 'equality' 
agenda. Women with gynic1 instincts show the noticeable wear and 
tear of this pace in their sensitive temperaments and physiologies. 
Andric2 or testosterone-dominant women also show some overt signs 
of distress, but with nowhere near the physical and psychological 
impact experienced by the truly gynic woman.
Andric women seem to thrive on the hustle and bustle, stresses 
and strains of this society's relentless pace, and any anatomical
1 Gynic - pronounced "jai-nik" or "guy-nik"; from the French gyne, and the Greek 
gyn, meaning woman, or female reproductive organ; ovary. In this case, the word 
gynic is used as coined by Lana Cantrell to define the woman that has retained the 
greater portion of her archetypal feminine instincts and behavior.
2 Andric - from the prefix "andro" meaning male or masculine.


--- PAGE 52 ---
4
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
problems arising as a result, are often dismissed as a 'female 
problem' that can be alleviated by adding even more stress with 
aerobics, medication, "therapy" or a jogging regiment.
Gynic women do not normally feel the overwhelming desire to 
pursue stress-related endeavors by choice. By and large she is a 
woman who prefers to remain sedentary, being at home to raise her 
children and care for her mate. Superior food preparation as Cantrell 
states, takes superior instincts, which only gynics possess. She knows 
that by her actions in the home and the kitchen, she holds the power 
of life, health and death  over her family. The science of proper 
nutrition through orthobiotic food preparation is the highest art form 
of a civilized society, and it was the gynic woman (through her 
nature-healing instincts) who historically used this science as part of 
her sacred repertoire of healing arts —ancient healing arts that have 
become known today as "preventative medicine."
Whatever pursuits of personal enrichment a gynic woman 
embarks upon are not far removed from her community, her home 
and her family. Such a woman does not respond to the lure of 
equality propaganda, career chasing, gossip, or the material 
addictions of luxury. She is therefore less susceptible to the myriad 
of plagues that have befallen her gynandro-morphic sisters.
I give all praises and the highest most exalted honor and respect to 
those women who have refused to fall for the gender-degrading 
philosophies propagated by and through the ultra-fascist agendas of 
Amazonian feminism, (see part II).
Now. For such an example of gynic womanhood to exist, a truly 
andric and wholistic man must be around to help create the loving 
and secure environments needed to encourage and support her true 
nature. But men such as these are very difficult to find now-a-days.
This I believe is primarily due to the ongoing despotic behavior of 
present-day world governments and the corporate parasites who 
control them. They continue to erode and degrade the quality-of-life 
conditions that good, decent men and women must have in order to 
thrive. Through their greed, avarice and decadence, they have


--- PAGE 53 ---
5
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
perverted or completely destroyed ancient culture-based traditions 
that have supported humanity's instinctive behavioral integrity for 
countless millennia. This has forced good people to adopt depraved, 
degenerative and un-natural patterns of behavior just to survive, 
which has led to the near complete destruction of present humanity's 
innate archetypal instincts.
These instincts are the primordial elemental components of higher 
Cosmic Consciousness, which have always nurtured and sustained 
that precious human equation known as the family.
I decided to include the principle of instinct as a primary factor in 
the study of women's diseases, as a result of receiving counsel from 
my mother, elder godmothers, aunts, grandmothers and grandaunts. 
I have compared their words of wisdom on the ancient ways to what 
hard-core feminists espouse today, and the distortions of logic and 
reasoning by the latter are all-too pathetically obvious. It became 
clear to me that those who uphold and propagate the ultra-feminist 
agenda haven't the faintest clue of what a real woman is, much less 
what she should be doing!
Again, do not misconstrue the meaning of the previous statement. 
I do not de-value or dismiss the profound contributions that women 
have made to the outer society, and what they still continue to 
contribute today under such perverse conditions. Sometimes by the 
style, tenor or flavor in which I impart my information, seekers 
misinterpret my words and think that I am advocating a paradigm of 
enslavement for women by men.
This would be counter-productive lunacy!
My contention is however with the gross negligence and 
subjective hostility shown by a majority of today's feminist 
leadership, towards women who are making dedicated efforts to 
resurrect and restore the classic infrastructures of our once thriving 
inner society; that being —the wifely arts; e.g., home making and 
caring for family [with husband as the head], child-rearing, 
nurturing, healing, home education, female rites of passage, home 
birthing, etc. Their failure to openly embrace and passionately


--- PAGE 54 ---
6
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
support these vital principles as the primary foundational structures 
of a healthy society, has contributed to the steady decline in overall 
health and well-being suffered by present-day humanity, particularly 
over the past 5 or more generations.
Feminists and their supporters have failed to realize that with the 
re-definition of women's gender-status away from the traditional 
roles they themselves created and developed for the inner society, 
came an end to whatever hopes we had of restoring equilibrium and 
sanity to our present-day overall society. Even suffragette-feminist 
leader and Unitarian minister Anne Garlin Spencer, in her work 
Woman's Share in Social Culture  (1913), hinted at the incomparable role 
that the true gynic plays in the health, well-being, life and death of the 
archetypal family unit in human society. She said...
"...No book has yet been written in praise of a woman who let her husband 
and children starve or suffer while she invented even the most useful things, 
or wrote books, or expressed herself in art, or evolved philosophic 
systems..."
Consequently, under the forty-five year influence and 
predominance of gender-feminism, the archetypal instincts and 
sensibilities of the gynic woman have all but disappeared. As a 
result, we have become a physically and psychologically declining 
society suffering from a rampant proliferation of reproductive 
diseases, breast cancer, drug abuse, teen pregnancies, divorce, gang 
formulations and related violence, more black and Latino males in 
prison than in college, the lack of respect or recognition of the male 
principle as a necessity for a healthy family; the lack of respect for the 
female principle in the traditional roles of wife, mother and nation 
builder; the lack of respect for our elders; rape, child molestation, the 
erosion of social stability —  and the epidemic rise of psychological 
pathologies based on fear and hopelessness the likes of which would 
have put to shame even the worst elements of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Am I saying that women are the only ones to blame for every 
societal ailment noted above? Be serious!
Our sisters constitute only one-half of this pathological equation. 
What I am trying to show is just how powerful an effect one-half of


--- PAGE 55 ---
7
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
this equation can have on the entire "whole"—no matter which half 
we decide to examine.
The Metaphysical Anatomy of Instinct:
So Cold the Western Mind...
•
Most European scientists (e.g. biologists, anthropologists and 
behavioral psychologists, etc.) fall short in their evaluation of the true 
nature of instinct —  particularly where it pertains to its function and 
purpose in a physically healthy and spiritually evolved humanity. 
They work entirely from the premise that the human mind, soul and 
instincts are nothing more than 'psycho-chemical bio-chips' 
containing only externally programmed learned behavioral patterns, 
with predictable functions much like a computer part. This myopic 
concept began as the brain-child of one Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt, 
the so-called "father of Experimental Psychology."
From a reductionist perspective of science the above appears to be 
true. But these capabilities of instinct reveal only the surface 
mechanics of its nature and function, and those seeking to control the 
human mind by studying its behavioral responses to external stimuli, 
focus on manipulating these lesser aspects to their advantage.
To better overstand why present-day western science is so bereft 
of spiritual depth and metaphysical insight, we must first review 
some pertinent points relative to the psycho-cultural history of the 
people who originated it.
Before the so-called 'European Renaissance', early scholars and 
intellectuals (those professed to have inspired western scientific 
academia) were already psycho-spiritually crippled living under the 
ruler ship of a perversely theocratic culture-centrism—one dictated 
by the hubris and savagery of the Roman Catholic Church and its 
infamous Inquisition. This horrific event in their collective history 
impeded all access to true knowledge and learning for centuries. It 
repressed the open exercise of critical thought and individual insight, 
thereby stultifying the development of the higher cognitive,


--- PAGE 56 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
spiritually intuitive faculties within the vast majority of Europeans 
for over 200 generations!
And this is a documented fact of history.
Very few early European scholars flourished intellectually under 
fealty to the Roman church, but those who did were known to have 
belonged to secret societies dedicated to the study and mastery of the 
higher degrees of 'Oriental Philosophy and Science'; men like Nicolas 
Copernicus and Leonardo DiVinci —the latter having been tutored by 
Andrea Del Verrochio, an avowed student of the eastern high 
sciences and mysticism; translation —"black majic" or "Al-Khem-y."
The inability of early Europe's scholars and scientists to 
intellectually venture beyond the stated guidelines of biblical fable 
and dogma for over a thousand years,  is again a well-known fact of 
history. They (along with the average citizenry) were severely 
restricted in their learning, teaching or expression of progressive 
thought —  inspired by the stake, the rack and the thumbscrew.
And it remained this way for over 10 centuries until broken by 
the so-called 'reformist' Martin Luther. As a result, western 
historians report that under the heel of the Roman State Church, the 
common people of early European societies were reduced to the 
mental status of "functional idiots", with their scholars and 
scientists faring slightly better.
Intuition and instinct, the primordial polarities of intellect and 
reason were considered tools of witchcraft for "communicating with 
the devil." Anyone who pointed to them to explain ideas not in line 
with Roman Church doctrine risked the ultimate penalty.
Case in point.
In 1633, one Galileo de Galilei (1564 - 1642) a scholar, scientist and 
secretly an ardent student of the forbidden "Mystery System", was a 
prominent and well-known astronomer of his time. Although a very 
close friend of then Pope Urban the 8th, Galileo was nevertheless 
accused of heresy and witchcraft by Father Tommaso Caccini and 
threatened with Inquisitional torture and slow death by head 
Cardinal Roberto Bellasmini.
The charges?


--- PAGE 57 ---
9
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
He had the audacity to agree with Copernicus that the Earth  
orbited the Sun; that the Sun and not the Earth was the center of  
our solar system!
When he appealed to his close friend the pope, to no one's surprise 
Urban turned his back on him. So to save his life, this seeker of truth 
and wisdom who wanted to enlighten the blind, was forced to recant 
scientific facts; namely—that the Sun was the center of our solar system 
and the Earth actually moved around the Sun.
Galileo (much to his discredit as a scientist) was an avid follower of 
Roman Church doctrine and sincerely believed in eternal damnation, 
the fires of hell, and the dreaded stigma of excommunication. So he 
went to the Grand High Council of Cardinals, prostrated himself 
before them and formally retracted, rejected and condemned the notion 
that the Earth was not the center of the universe.
And then there was Hypatia, daughter of Theron the 
Minoen/Greek philosopher and mathematician around 410-415 A.D.
Theron was a master of ancient Kemetic sciences who taught his 
daughter the many branches of academic learning—including 
geometry, astronomy and philosophy. Hypatia went on to finish her 
studies at an advanced school in Athens where she earned the 
coveted laural wreath, which is given only to the most adept of its 
pupils. Her beauty, popularity, modesty and virtue were the subjects 
of many written accounts in her day.
Hypatia became a gifted teacher and acquired a great reputation 
for her opinions in philosophy, whereupon she succeeded her father 
as one of the prime lecturers in Alexandria. She became head of his 
academy, which was then a popular meeting place for the leading 
minds of the east and the west.
Around 412 A.D. a man named Cyril was appointed archbishop of 
Alexandria. This Christian "prelate nullius" frequently passed by the 
lecture hall of the academy and reported back to his superiors in 
Rome of the many horses and chariots parked outside —  attesting to 
the numbers of people that came to hear Hypatia speak. After 
submitting a series of similar ongoing reports, Rome finally declared


--- PAGE 58 ---
10
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
that Hypatia was "taking away the homage that rightfully and 
naturally belonged to Jesus."
Orders were issued.
Early one morning Cyril (now known as "saint" Cyril) together 
with a band of hooded monks, ambushed Hypatia outside her 
academy and dragged her by her hair through the streets to the 
Caesareum, a Christian church. There (it was documented) they 
demanded that she kiss the cross, become a Christian and join a 
nunnery.
When she refused "saint" Cyril's chief lieutenant Peter the Reader 
stripped her naked, and there before the cross and altar of Christ 
clubbed her to death. Afterwards, her body was ritualistically cut to 
pieces with potsherds and oyster shells and thrown into a pit of fire.
History states that "saint" Cyril made a reputation for his violence 
and fanatic zeal against pagans, heretics and Israelites alike. When he 
assumed office by order of Rome he promptly closed all the churches 
of the Novatians and seized their precious ecclesiastical artifacts as 
booty. He attacked synagogues with an armed force driving 
Israelites by the thousands from the city, exposing their homes and 
property to pillage.
The above are but two of the thousands of examples of 
persecution that knowledge and truth endured during the rise to 
prominence of the Roman/Christian/European world paradigm. In 
fact, the first book-burners of history were members of the pious 
priesthood of European Christendom.
Even more preposterous is the fact that the decision rendered 
against Galileo (in 1633) was upheld by the Catholic Church until 1992  
when Pope John Paul II, in his "Encyclical of Repentance", finally 
admitted that the Catholic Church was in error!
But the psychological legacy of inquisitional church policy still 
lingers. Every prominent European institution of academics 
functioning in the world today, is fundamentally structured on a 
cultural psyche that descends from European/Greco-Roman theo-


--- PAGE 59 ---
11
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
centrism.
And this fact is especially evident in their "science of medicine" 
and its protocols concerning life and human health.
The Original 'Bone-Head'...
•
Now. With all of the above in mind, here's a subject you'll 
probably never see in their mainstream textbooks or hear discussed 
in open academic forums. Never-the-less, its premise is scientifically 
sound and based on a growing number of facts that European 
scientists themselves continue to discover, research and write about.
Figure 1. Calcified Pineal Glands (white areas, center)
What follows may appear spurious and unrelated to the topic of 
women's health and its connection to higher cosmic instincts. But the 
research data used in the following analysis contains relevant 
material of bio-historic significance that had to be included, in order 
that the seeker may gain a more indepth overstanding of the inherent 
psychology fueling the present European world paradigm, and how 
it functions to sustain the super-structures of modern-day diseases.
Simply put; the founders of western academia suffered from 
severely calcified pineal (epiphysis) glands, predicated on their 
consciousness-evolution in a hostile glacial environment; a fact 
substantiated today by anthropological forensic science. This may not 
appear to be important historically, and may even be considered 
ludicrous as a point of sound scientific analysis, but those in the


--- PAGE 60 ---
12
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
orthodox scientific community —  particularly in the field of 
endocrinology —  know precisely what a calcified pineal and 
dysfunctional endocrine system has meant to the history of their 
collective phenotype; namely —the stultification of spiritual 
evolution, ineffectual instincts and a disconnection from the sublime 
energies and intuitional operations of Nature.
In effect, total consciousness dis-orientation. (See books entitled 
Yorugu, by Dr. Marimba Ani; The Iceman Inheritance, by Prof. Michael 
Bradley; Blacked Out By Whitewash,  by Dr. Suzar Epps, The Greatest 
Story Never Told,  by Lana Cantrel; and especially A Phylogenetic 
Fantasy, by Sigmund Freud).
A 1976 report in the British Journal of Radiology,  volume 49, issue 
583, published by the British Institute of Radiology entitled "Pineal 
Gland Calcification (PGC) in Ugandans; A Radiological Study of 200 
Isolated Pineal Glands", substantiates the above by revealing that in 
poor populations, severe pineal calcifications "impaired the sense of 
direction, and caused poor memory and sleep patterns." And this is 
just a recent study of Africans suffering under 500 or more years of 
European and Arab colonialism.
Now imagine genetic-recessive, highly susceptible Caucasians 
living under a thousand years and more of inquisitional Roman theo- 
politics. Then imagine these findings as they relate to centuries of 
psychologically processing these experiences and projecting them 
back onto Nature through a consciousness-matrix suffering from an 
"impaired sense of direction", "poor memory and sleep patterns."
No wonder Columbus kept getting lost.
The technical terminology for calcification of the epiphysis is 
"pernicious pinealoma", which primarily affects Caucasians in 
varying degrees starting very early in life. Along with poverty, 
unsanitary conditions and perpetual disease, such an affliction would 
also have contributed to the shortened life-spans in early Europe (28 
to 40 years) and to the under-development of their synergistic 
"nerve-to-soul interface", which over time severely limitated their 
natural empathetic abilities to interface with the subtler harmonics


--- PAGE 61 ---
13
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
and frequencies of Nature and Cosmic Intelligence. Such frequencies 
were normally accessible to the spiritual antennas (blood-serum 
melanin) of advanced old-world human races, and all other healthy 
animal life-forms on the planet for that matter.
The reason for this is because bio-chemically, calcification of the 
epiphysis gland disrupts and distorts our sub-cellular 
electrotonic/electrovalent connection to the Omniscient Intelligence 
of the hydrogen atom. Hydrogen is the 'proto-intelligence-unit' of 
being; the foundational atomic element comprising the melanin that 
organizes the infrastructures of all living tissue; in fact —  all that exists 
in Creation!
Melanin is the expressed intelligence of the hydrogen atom.  Human life- 
forms with a predominance of it and the ability to synthesize it 
efficiently in all its various forms throughout the temple-network, 
would have to be more attuned to the consciousness frequencies of 
the hydrogen atom as it operates through the 'astral aura1 , and thus 
the Cosmic Intelligence framework of the planet. Instincts and 
intuition would be highly developed, since the hydrogen atoms of the 
Earth's auric field would automatically be in resonance and affinity 
with the hydrogen atoms of a highly melanated human possessing a 
healthy consciousness-triangulating organ; that being—the pineal.
Once considered a waste by-product of metabolism by western 
science (one that "served no useful function"), the 'intelligence' of the 
melanin molecule is now considered to be responsible for 
maintaining the 'fiber-optic' micro-circuitries of the pineal, through 
which the pinealocyte mitochrondria and chromosomes synthesize 
invisible cosmic light spectrums into the consciousness-variables of 
higher perception, dimension and color.
'Consciousness-as-color' is the fundamental property of being and 
perception within all that is created in Nature, by Nature. The 
consciousness-synthesizing process is accomplished through 
derivatives such as melatonin, serotonin, tryptamine and indolamine, 
all qualified end-products of the 'chemicalizing alchemies' of atomic 
intelligence. Melanin also happens to be a potent anti-oxidant.


--- PAGE 62 ---
14
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Nordic Caucasians are said to create melanoids in the sun, not true 
melanin. Melanoids are mutated pigments of the melanin-molecular- 
complex resulting from melanosis. Whites are incapable of properly 
converting it into chemically balanced end-products such as integrus 
serotonin and melatonin, which may be one of many reasons why 
hypo-melanated humans are so susceptible to pineal calcification. 
Such individuals are more susceptible to sun radiation damage that 
leads to a skin cancer called melanoma.
Melatonin is the vital neuro-hormone secreted by the pineal which 
regulates sleep cycles and other circadian rhythms, and is said to be 
the hormone that regulates the proper functioning of all the organs of 
the endocrine system as well. When secreted in healthy balanced 
proportions by the pineal, melatonin allows for the harmonious 
functioning of the endocrine glands —  particularly the adrenals. It 
helps to maintain a mellow and balanced countenance in the 
individual by allowing for more restful sleep, and thus more efficient 
cellular repair and recuperation.
But because of their genetic pre-disposition to pinealoma, most 
whites do not secrete the proper balance of integrus melatonin, 
causing them to be hyperactive and systemically stressed by nature; 
which may explain their propensity for persistent warmongering and 
consistent alcohol consumption (a pre-occupation with beer and 
lunch-time martinis) as a means of instinctively counter-acting the 
effects of this condition.
The vast majority of the melatonin-based drugs consumed in 
western society are consumed by whites 25 years of age and over.
Dr. Richard King, author of such ground-breaking works on this 
subject as Melanin: A Key to Freedom and The African Origin of Biological 
Psychiatry, showed that blond and red-headed Nordics possess 
genetically mutated melanocytes, melanosomes and mast cells, which 
cause them to suffer deficiencies in chemical reactivity, catalytic 
concentrations and/or proper electrical conduction. His works also 
revealed that as a human genus, the majority of whites (primarily 
Nordic) produce insufficient levels of integrus or true melanin


--- PAGE 63 ---
15
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
within the various melanin centers throughout their bodies.
Calcification of the pineal gland, scientifically broken down into 
racial percentage statistics reveal the truth quite clearly;
Africans..............5 to 15%
Asians................15 to 25%
Caucasians ........60 to 80%
In the meta-chronicles of our ancestors, 'melanin/ or the 
"blackness" of their skins, was considered the "wetness" that 
remained after the archetypal individuated Spirit of Man bathed in 
the triple-black Waters of Nu.
FYI. What is called the atom today was once called the Atum!
Quantum physicists have discovered that hydrogen protons 
surrounding the planet actually align themselves to the Earth's geo­
magnetic field. Higher instincts and intuition (that is, how the 
epiphysis aligns with the Cosmic Intelligence of the hydrogen atom 
to interface with the sublime frequencies of our planet), would 
therefore be most prevalent in those retaining the greatest density of 
healthy melanin-rich neuro-fibers comprising the pineal organ.
Melanin is a highly magnetic polymer. Since the higher magnetic 
polarities of the body are primarily at the top of the head and around 
our reproductive organs (as well as in our extremities —  arms, legs, 
fingers, toes), geo-centric energies would more readily be picked up 
by the skull, ribs, spine, pelvis and long bones —or precisely where 
red and white blood cells are formed using the exact minerals 
conducive to attracting electro-magnetic radiation. This would allow 
for a keener connection between the consciousness of the Earth and 
the higher instinctive-intuitional faculties of Man —all through the 
operative intelligence of the hydrogen atom—the rudimentary 
expression of Cosmic Intelligence.
However, when a pineal gland becomes "calcified" it is not dense 
or hardened like bone, but flaccid, spongy  and limp like putty or a 
half-cooked noodle surrounded by a white sticky mucus-like oxide. 
People thus afflicted would be poor bio-electrical conductors; that


--- PAGE 64 ---
16
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
is —weak broadcasters and inefficient receivers virtually 
disconnected from the higher more subtle frequencies of the Cosmic 
Intelligence that operates our world.
Higher instincts and intuition, psycho-spiritual by-products of the 
synergy between melanin and the electro-magnetic, hydrogen-based 
frequencies of the planet, would become dormant to non-existent.
The human skeletal system like the rest of our anatomy is based 
on carbon (melanin) — the residual material essence of the triple­
black Waters of Nu. Metaphysically, this osseous infrastructure is 
actually an acoustic sensoring device attuned to the higher 
wavebands of planetary frequencies. In other words, our skeletal 
frame is actually an organic antenna made up of dense calcified and 
phosphorus material keeping us both upright and connected 
electronically to our environment.
Caucasian scholar/scientists who now include new-age myth- 
decoding enthusiasts like Joseph Campbell and William Irwin 
Thompson, are all-too aware that nothing spiritual ever originated in  
Europe! They inevitably found that every celebrated achievement of 
humanity attributed to their "Greek ancestors", "renaissance 
scholars" and so-called "ascended masters" show, that they 
themselves were once students of the science and philosophies of the 
black and brown cultures of ancient Earth. That from these "pagan 
savages" their ancestors derived every scintilla of sophisticated 
esoteric knowledge, science, mathematics and cosmology they claim 
to have "discovered" or created today.
To help verify this fact we need only read the words of Count 
Constantin Francois de Chasseboeuf, aka. Count C.F. Volney —the 
eminent French philosopher, historian, orientalist and friend to 
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson.
From his work entitled The Ruins of Empires (which was alleged to 
have been secretly translated into English by Jefferson himself), the 
following words were edited out by order of the Vatican and at the 
insistence of the racist slave-holding "founding fathers" before 
distribution here in America.


--- PAGE 65 ---
17
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Count Volney wrote;
"...There are a people, now forgotten, who discovered while 
others were yet barbarians, the elements of the arts and 
sciences. The black man (who) is rejected now for their 
black skin and wooly hair, founded on the study of the 
laws of Nature, those civil and religious systems which 
still govern the universe; ...This race of black men, is the 
very race to which we owe our arts, our sciences, and 
even the use of speech..."
Thus we find that historically, the very essence and sophistication 
of intellectual methods now use to articulate man's higher spirituality 
and critical thinking, were first organized into scientific tenets and 
codices by Earth's archetypal humans; the pineal scientist—the 
"black" man!
No wonder Jefferson didn't want it known that he was the 
translator of this work, especially since he was the son of a "half- 
breed" mother and "mullato" father being considered a candidate for 
the presidency at that time. It may also explain his 'quaint' and 
'exotic' taste for melanated women —like his controversial 
relationships with his slave-concubine Sally Heming and his later 
marriage to her half-sister Martha. (See Black People and their Place in  
World History, by Dr. Leroy Vaughn; MD, MBA)
Back to Pinealoma, or Calcified Pineals...
Biologists claim to have discovered two predominant factors that 
weaken the epiphysis, both of which are said to set up negative 
feed-back loops that enhance its susceptibility to calcification. The 
first is genetic predisposition,  which contemporary science suggests is 
acted upon by "viral infection" — one related to cyto-megalovirus, 
herpes, Epstein-Barr and toxoplasma. The second blame falls to a 
germ called nanobacteria sanguineum,  purported to be an "extra-slow


--- PAGE 66 ---
18
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
growing bacteria" (discovered by Drs. O. Kajander and N. 
Ciftuoglu) that houses and defends itself by building a calcium-like 
shell. It is said to be also responsible for the plaque that accumulates 
in arterial walls, gall stones and polycystic kidney diseases.
This all sounds feasible. But again, we must remember that it is 
the myopic protocol of western medical science to look for causes in 
the surface effects of a purifying body. As Classical Naturopaths 
versed in the Hygienic Sciences we know that bacteria could never be 
"a cause", only "the enforcers" of Immutable Cosmic Intelligence that 
expresses Its therapeutic work on the surface to our senses as a 
symptom or "effect"; what the medical church labels "a dis-ease."
Another problem with severe hypo-melanation is that it causes 
those afflicted to have poor iron absorption, which impedes oxygen 
transfer to the cells and hence to the brain. Thus, (as Cantrell so 
elegantly points out) it doesn't matter how advanced European 
technology becomes, they could never develop it in relationship to 
their natural surroundings. This is borne out by the fact that most if 
not all of their so-called 'advancements' in science, over relatively 
short periods of time after their introduction, become toxic and 
highly detrimental to our planet and its inhabitants.
Now. Let me be clear at this point lest our brothers and sisters 
reading the previous sections misinterpret what is being said.
All so-called "races" occupying this planet today, whether 
identified as black, brown, red, yellow or white, are suffering from 
the varying degrees and stages of bio-chemical pathology related to 
mutations in the melanin-molecular-complex. This has made all of us 
physically and psycho-spiritually damaged and impaired to one 
degree or another.
So-called "whites" however, have been proven by endocrine 
research science to be the racial sub-class of humanity most severely 
afflicted; again, due to their hypo-melanated condition and the poor 
electrical conduction and solar mineral absorption related to it.


--- PAGE 67 ---
19
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The earliest Europeans found it difficult to interface with Spirit 
through Nature organically; were prevented by the Inquisition from 
learning to interface intellectually; so subsequently evolved to 
interface with present-day Earth-life technologically!
Thus technology (as it uniquely functions today) represents the 
European's psychogenic attempts to evolve in consciousness by 
synthetically interfacing with Nature, and subsequently —  the Spirit. 
This analogy is consistently being played out in Hollywood movie 
themes and the vast numbers of virtual reality video games being 
marketed to our young people today. They all symbolize the 
European's psycho-genetic trauma at being spiritually disfigured by 
pineal-calcification, which has disconnected them from the nurturing 
frequencies of the Cosmic Mind and conscious Mother Earth.
Movies and highly sophisticated video games have given access, 
virtual substance and vicarious expression to his deepest pains of 
genetic mutation and alienation —a compelling reason why The 
Matrix, Terminator  and Star Wars  (together) constitute the largest 
grossing box-office franchises in the entire history of his so-called 
'entertainment industry.' They all presented a future 'techno-pathic' 
vision for humanity that uniquely reflected the psycho-spiritual 
distortions of a "calcified pineal" and the related mentologies that 
emanate from it. By way of implication through violent symbolism, 
video games accurately reflect (thru vicarious role play) the levels of 
psychological damage sustained by the European's traumatized 
consciousness, while evolving his humanity within a cold, hostile 
glacial environment, (see A Phylogenetic Phantasy by Sigmund Freud)
The "Glitch"...
•
The on-going quest of the Nordic scientist to define the European's 
'place' within the genetic schematics of the human family tree, was 
best exemplified by his creation of the Human Genome Project. From 
this has come invaluable information related to the cosmic enigma 
called the Human "race." But what he has found thus far, and 
continues to discover, does not bode well for his fragile ego.


--- PAGE 68 ---
20
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
For example, Science magazine December, 2005 reported that Dr. 
Keith Cheng, lead research scientist on genetics at Penn State 
University, announced the discovery of what they referred to as the 
"glitch" in human genes that causes "white-ness." Interesting that 
these scientists should call what they discovered a "glitch", since the 
definition of a glitch according to the American Heritage Dictionary 
is "...a minor mal-function, mishap or technical problem."
This mal-function in the gene that causes 'white-ness' has been 
identified as "slc24a5", which is said to be responsible for 1/3 of the 
pigment loss that made black skin white, the other "mal-functions" 
being caused by "...as-yet-unidentified mutated genes."
It's also interesting to note that in reporting these facts to the 
general public, reporters Rick Weiss of the Washington Post and 
Nicholas Wade of the New York Times seemed to have gone out of 
their way to stress the point that this mutation of natural melanated 
skin was just fine, and spread so rapidly because (as Weiss puts it)...
".. .scientists 'suspect' that white skin's rise to genetic 
dominance may also be the product of "sexual 
selection", a phenomenon of evolutionary biology 
in which almost any new or showey trait in a "healthy 
individual" can become highly prized by those seeking 
mates, perhaps because it provides evidence of genetic 
innovativeness ..." [Emphasis mine]
"Rise to genetic dominance?" "Healthy individual?" "Highly 
prized by those seeking mates?" These self-ingratiating buzz-words 
and phrases were obviously written in to mask the psychological 
impact of such an ego-deflating revelation. How does a "glitch", ie —  
a "mal-function", a "mishap", or a "bio-technical problem" suddenly 
become "dominant", "healthy" and "highly prized?"
Through white supremacy's spin machine —  that's how. If this 
scenario were placed into any other context for scientific analysis, the 
press would be talking about the discovery of yet another genetic 
mal-function (or "glitch") causing what would obviously be defined 
medically as a genetically transmitted hereditary disease!


--- PAGE 69 ---
21
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
It is becoming increasingly clearer by the near-daily revelations 
of their own scientists, that the European parasitic-elite live within 
an exclusively self-ingratiating, pathologically myopic, 'circum- 
centric' delusion of their own creation.
It's called Manifest Destiny.
Over the past one thousand years, Germanic "white" 
consciousness has fragmented and polarized the world utilizing 
self-serving objectives based on the 'religious tenets' of Manifest 
Destiny. Through slavery, mass murder, pollution, unbridled 
weapons technology, resource rape and the practice of 
environmental abandonment (all the while justifying the ecological 
devastation as tithes for the blessings bestowed by their god 
"progress") white supremacy now surveys the aftermath of its own 
carnage, and in typically psychotic examples of "projection", blames 
the victimized peoples of the so-called 'developing countries" for 
their own current socio-economic conditions —  defining it as "...the 
dysgenic deterioiation of the black human sub-strain."
And having sunk ever-further into the pseudo-spiritualism of 
their own techno-centric euphoria, they've now emerged from their 
ivory towers (in the Human Genome Project) to form neo-eugenic 
organizations such as Transtopia and The Prometheans ...all in what 
appear to be desperate attempts to escape their responsibilities by 
salvaging a techno-utopic future for themselves and their "kind", 
out of the tragic wreckage they've left of global humanity.
Transtopia, for example, describes itself as a "...virtual citadel of 
radically progressive thought" where their philosophy focuses on 
apocalyptic futurism, atheism, "child-free-ness" (physically birthing 
no children), cryonics, hedonism and political incorrectness. Not 
surprisingly, their mottos are Ex Machina Libertas  or "technology 
will set you free" and Eritis Sicut DU— "we shall be gods."
The Prometheans similarly embrace the philosophy of 
"conscious evolution" and state that their immediate goal is to 
create "...a neo-eugenically enhanced race via neo-eugenics" —  
through human cloning, germ-line engineering, gene therapy and


--- PAGE 70 ---
22
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
genetic engineering. They also intend to utilize what are refered to 
as "...trans-human technologies;" ie. nanotechnology, mind 
uploading, artificial intelligence (AI), and other such variations of 
"ultra exo-tech" for none other than the "ultra-rich."
In other words family, they aspire to become "the Borg" of Star 
Trek fame.
Again, such plans and thinking reflect the historically typical 
mentologies and related behaviorisms of the pineally-challenged 
Nordic humanoid; that is —to be predacious and parasitic of the 
physical, intellectual, creative and psycho-spiritual resources of 
genetically dominant humans and the environment, then to move 
on to the next arena of exploitation after both have been pillaged, 
devastated and exhausted.
Such is the legacy of a world imagined, created, orchestrated and 
governed by the spiritual short-comings of a calcified pineal gland.
More about the bio-chemical pathologies afflicting all 'colors' of 
the humanoid 'spectrum,' is covered in book 2 of my thesis The 
Metaphysics ofDark-Matter Consciousness.
Beloved, I have presented the above to lend validity and 
substance to the underlying premise of the presiding topic; that 
being —higher cosmic instincts and spiritual intuition are drastically 
affected by chronic pineal calcification, which in turn severely 
impacts the psychological health, behavior and overall well-being of 
a humanity thus afflicted. And in keeping with the focus and intent 
of this thesis to expose all conditions and actions detrimental to the 
feminine principle, it is only fitting that the above information be 
allowed to dovetail into the specific affects that pinealoma has on 
women.
Briefly, women are said to suffer more from the affects of pineal 
calcification than men. This is because by comparison, men have 
less complicated hormonal circuitries than women.
For example, when puberty activates the hormonal clocks in men, 
it does not sound their alarms as frequently, as oppressively, or as 
consistently as it does in women. Men are not anatomically


--- PAGE 71 ---
23
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
subjected to the cyclic tyrannies and idiocyncracies of the lunar 
month, the weather or sudden variations in atmospheric pressure or 
temperature. But, the effects may be more intense and concentrated 
in hypo-menanated men depending on endocrine integrity.
For men, the procreative process and all dynamics related to it 
are pretty academic —a 'simple' biological function that is usually 
over and done within the hour. But for a woman, the procreative 
process is a traumatically life-changing, life-sobering experience. 
During this incredible time the massive surges in serotonin and 
melatonin production alone are literally "off the meter"—  a 
thousand times that of men! Now imagine if her pineal gland were 
severely calcified. How would this affect melatonin production and 
distribution? How would this impact on her thoughts and 
behavior? How would it affect her health and the health of her 
developing fetus? It's safe to say that given the extreme 
complexities of a woman's hormonal system and the relative ease 
with which it can be adversely affected, pineal calcification could 
create huge cascades of pathological distortion and disruption 
within the endocrine circuitries of the female body-temple, which 
the male body-temple would be far less susceptible to experiencing.
It's unfortunate as well that a malady that has predominantly 
affected the Caucasian population, is now seen rapidly rising in the 
melanated populations of the world.
All the above being said, it's also safe to conjecture that modem 
European academia is (and always has been) the offspring of a 
tradition of learning founded on the despotic tenets of the Spanish 
Inquisition —all tempered psychologically by their early scholars' 
bio-chemical (pineal) limitations. And throughout the 200-year 
history of their rise to industrial and economic power (especially 
here in America), they have always judged the idiosyncrasies of 
melanated peoples and Nature through the lens of said tenets and 
bio-chemical limitations. The ongoing catalogue of scientific 
blunders, theo-political wars and ecological carnage are vivid 
testimonies to this. They have behaved as if Nature and Man are


--- PAGE 72 ---
24
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
dead, soul-less, fragmented "things"; things to be conquered3 and 
exploited; things that exist apart from themselves —  much like 
everyone and everything they've encountered over the past 2,500 
years. (Again; see Sigmund Freud's A Phylogenetic Phantasy  and 
Professor Michael Bradley's The Iceman's Inheritance)
In fact, the manifestation of this twisted conceptual construct 
found its most perverse and egregious expression in the late 1800s, 
under the new 'Prussian education system' founded on the theories 
of Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt's "Experimental Psychology."
Today, Earth's animal life and its autochthonous inhabitants 
suffer tremendously from the consequences of such blind, racist, 
self-centered arrogance.
On the other hand (not discounting their own human hangups 
and historical calamities), overall, our melanated ancestors chose to 
shun the types of technologies the European chose to consistently 
embrace and irresponsibly develop in his bloody rise to global- 
industrial dominance. Written and oral meta-chronicles recall why 
they did, based on their own tragic experiences with the mistakes and 
abuses of such knowledge, as we shall see further on.
Those attuned to the higher harmonics of the Earth can clearly see 
that the very presence of today's Euro-centric technologies within our 
present operational fabric of space-time, is grossly offensive to life 
itself For over 200 years they have interrupted and distorted the 
psycho-spiritual lines of communication between Man, and the 
ethereal worlds of Cosmic Intelligence existing within and around 
him.
By way of the epiphysis (pineal), these etheric lines interface 
through sublime levels of higher perception and intelligence we call 
instinct and intuition. Disconnect from these etheric lines and we 
disconnect from our higher fields of astral perception. Disconnect 
from our higher fields of astral perception and we disconnect from
3 Manifest Destiny.


--- PAGE 73 ---
25
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Nature and Spirit —  and thus from the quintessential fabric of our true 
and divine selves.
Beloved; having evolved intuition and instincts actually means 
that the body is in possession of its total and complete compliment of 
healthfully functioning melanin, cells, nerves and soul-force energies. 
The combination, arrangement and sensitivity of these component 
parts are unique in type and structure to the particular species in 
question. Man, the crown of all created life, is supposed to be in 
possession of the greatest complement of universal instincts. Yet to 
see the way the Earth fares today and the way we humans suffer the 
ravages of racism, disease, pestilence, hatred, greed and lawlessness, 
one has to wonder who truly possesses the higher instincts —  us, or 
the "lower" animals.
Author Nancy Levant, a suffragette and frustrated feminist wrote 
a most revealing book articulating the decline and fall of instincts and 
intuition in women. Titled The Cultural Devastation of American  
Women: The Strange and Frightening Decline of the American Female (and  
her dreadfid timing)",  I highly recommend this work—if for no other 
reason than as a guide to understanding the bitter crisis besetting the 
present-day mindset of gynic white women; who say they were 
betrayed and abandoned by the political hype and philosophical 
hoopla of European gender feminism.
My beloved brothers and sisters; morality and truth are the 
inevitable by-products of sound instincts maintained by higher 
intuition and sustained by an orthobiotic way of life. Lana Cantrell 
spoke truthfully to me when she said that once our higher cosmic 
instincts have degenerated, humanity would write despotic "laws" in 
futile attempts to control itself.
Has anyone taken the time to read the Patriot Act(s) lately?
?


--- PAGE 74 ---
26
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"... I'm from Missouri - I'll Show You ..!"
•
The human brain is actually a composite of several mini-brains, all 
interacting to respond to the many and varied situations posed by 
life. These "brains-within-a-brain" must all act together in what Carl 
Jung calls synchronicity, so that sound judgment and keen instincts 
can exist.
Historically, the culture of western science has never trusted the 
psycho-spiritual components of instinct or intuition. Western 
scientific standards relied instead on Plato's philosophical ideal of 
"impositional analysis", or the concept applied; a system of calculation 
based on the principle of "reductionism" where the activity of human 
thought fragments, categorizes and then dictates the ultimate reality 
it 'logically' believes it observes. This eventually led to the political 
imposition of concepts by elitists who sought and gained power by 
creating a "hierarchy of sacred assumptions", which they vigorously 
defended to the exclusion of all other teachings.
Socrates was put on trial by the cultural sentinals of this myopic 
system when he attempted to teach a higher form of analysis to the 
Greeks; that is, the Kemetic philosophy of "intuitional synthesis"—a 
system of analysis and calculation utilizing the intelligence- 
component of human perception, which suspends thought and the 
imposition of the personal ego-mind, allowing the observed 
phenomenon to (in affect) "describe itself."
Needless to say he was eventually found guilty of sedition for 
teaching an "alien philosophy" that undermined the authority of the 
state, and was ultimately forced to take his own life by drinking from 
the poisoned cup.
Lana Cantrell, new-agers, and other European scientists alike 
have confided to me that historically, their "race" seems to have been 
positioned at the very bottom of the intuitional scale of human 
perception. This, Cantrel claims, has led to their seemingly callous 
approach to the interconnected systems of Nature, and their historic 
lack of appreciation for the many subtle diversities in humanity and 
life.


--- PAGE 75 ---
27
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
In his ground-breaking book entitled The Iceman Inheritance, Prof.
Michael Bradley states emphatically at the very beginning;
"... We attribute various threats to our survival as "man's " 
folly.. .but this is a conscious and self-protecting 
euphemism... Nuclear war, environmental pollution, 
resource rape.. .are all primary threats to our survival, 
and all are the result of peculiarly Caucasoid behavior,
Caucasoid values, Caucasoid psychology...There is no 
way to avoid the truth. The problem with the world is 
white men ..."
Professor Bradley is a gentleman of the Caucasian pesuasion.
Cantrell —an endocrinologist and European of Scottish and 
Native American descent —  stated to me that whites (as a biological 
collective) are more bio-chemically disoriented than any other racial 
or specie-type on this planet. She explained that the modus 
operandi of the western scientist, is in many ways indicative of how 
spiritually and psychologically insecure the collective Caucasian race 
functions as a "unique" biological entity within Nature.
Consequently, western "science" has evolved to become the 
representative by-product of inefficient and fragmented
observational skills, rooted in the study of material surfaces  for the 
purpose of ego-centric gain, rather than spiritual substance  for the 
upliftment of our collective humanity.
The far-ancient Kemetic, Nubian and Adivasis (Dravidian), or 
ancient eastern scientists on the other hand, were far more 
bio-chemically sound (even after the fallout of wars and the great 
cataclysms) so their instincts and intuition were automatically tuned 
to the subtler resonances of our Earth Mother. They relied first on 
imagination, intuition and instinct to develop their higher
technologies, realizing that these components of consciousness
worked as operational links between the human mind and its
ultimate Creator — Omniscient Intelligence.


--- PAGE 76 ---
28
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
They relied on the dictates of the higher heart4 to lead them in their 
calculations and problem solving, which guided them to design their 
technologies within cosmic parameters of balance and harmony with 
the forces of the elemental worlds.
But as we shall see later on, they too fell victim to the psycho- 
spiritually degenerating perversities of irresponsible, ego-based 
power. This they documented as being the result of environmental 
cataclysms coupled with the horrific consequences of radiation from 
their atomic wars —both of which totally devastated the fabric of 
their natural environments, and with them, the homeostasis that 
sustained their higher bio-spiritual connections to the subtle dictates 
of Cosmic Intelligence; and thus —  to their overall sanity.
Workshop-itis...
•
Today it seems that everyone needs a workshop to tell them what 
they should already instinctively know, particularly about the basic 
principles of health and well-being. Thousands of therapists and 
"experts" now exist to keep us from being stupid, but with each 
passing year the ranks of the stupid only seem to grow ... and grow!
And just who are "the stupid?" Why — us!! You and me. John 
and Jane Q. Public; all who are made to feel that we are useless, inept 
and clueless without the help of some 'specialist' fronting a state- 
certified diploma.
With the near complete disappearance of our once vibrant higher 
instincts, as well as our cultural traditions (which were once the 
outgrowths of these vanishing instincts), women now find that they 
have to take workshops for just about everything... from child- 
birthing, child-caring, breast feeding, zen cooking, womb- 
consciousness, to God knows what else she can be coerced into 
spending her money on.
4 The ab-ur; or, the cerebellum and its connection to the pineal, the thymus and the 
"solar" plexus.


--- PAGE 77 ---
29
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Modern women are so chronically out of touch with their own 
archetypal instincts and feminine intuition (especially the career- 
aggressive, sports-active, stimulant-seeking female), that they may be 
seduced into trying any and every new form of ridiculous "state of 
the art" cure-all self-improvement program perpetrated by so-called 
'experts' of the new age.
This has happened because the modem woman's mind and body 
no longer instinctively "think" and "feel" as they once did. Add to 
this the loss of our rites of passage rituals where age-old customs and 
sacred principles associated with womanhood were once passed on 
by venerated elders, and you get a pretty good idea of what our 
sister-queens are suffering through today.
Beloved Sistars, think attentively on the following.
The Divine Temple of Woman is a complicated network of 
interconnecting bio-spiritual circuitries processing holographic bits of 
cosmic data at the speeds of light and thought. Every nerve-conduit 
and individual cell of your body channels vital light-encoded 
information to and from your "many" and "one" brain(s).
No machine yet created by Man's ingenuity can perfectly duplicate 
the potential workings of a human mind or a living body. So you can 
well imagine what might happen if a single component of this 
awesome but fragile machinery becomes afflicted with disease —  
especially where the subject of instinct is concerned.
In other words, due to the delicate precision workmanship and 
complexities of the human body-temple, the more damage done to 
the cells or neural networks the less archetypal intelligence is 
processed into higher consciousness and behavior by the total 
organism. Instinct and intuition are the subtle activities of Cosmic 
Intelligence and cannot be properly expressed if a body's neuro- 
cellular mechanisms are crippled or dysfunctional.
If aberrant behavior is continuous over successive generations for 
example, the operation of higher instincts and intuition in the 
offspring invariably diminishes through genetic deterioration. This 
renders an organism more susceptible to chronic diseases and/or 
pathogenic mutations, with eventual extinction as the ultimate result.


--- PAGE 78 ---
30
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Genetic extinction is Nature's way of removing organic 
abnormalities. She creates balance by enhancing their addictive 
appetites, allowing organisms thus afflicted to "self-extinct" through 
their own dysfunctional behavior.
If you do not strive to live within a gynic wholistic mindset 
beloved sister, no matter how scientific you claim to be (or how many 
workshops you take) you will be unable to discern the essence of this 
precious life, because you will be unable to discern what is essential 
within yourself.
Instinct + intuition = "knowing" without interference from the 
judgmental, thought-addicted, ego-centric body- mind.
The Gynic Woman and Her Instincts...
(God's gift to humanity)
•
A pure gynic woman on a healthful, nutritionally life-enhancing 
regiment, living her life in a stress-free natural environment, is vastly 
superior in intelligence and anatomical integrity than her gynandro- 
morphic sister because she is far more aware and in tune with her 
natural instincts. The primary reason for this is because the essential 
ingredients that constitute a gynic's blood are qualitatively different.
First —  she has less blood cells per cubic centimeter of blood than a 
man or a testosterone-poisoned woman. Because of this she is more 
susceptible to disorientation from such things as heights, hot to cold 
temperature fluctuations, changes in air pressure and upcoming 
weather patterns, as well as to the geo-magnetic (north pole-south 
pole) orientations of the Earth.
Secondly —  since a gynic woman's blood requires more pull from 
gravity to ground and center her, her internal systems are more 
oriented to the Earth and its geocentric forces, and are therefore more 
stabilized. This is why a true gynic woman has the natural instinct to 
be more sedentary than the male!
In other words, a gynic woman naturally engenders the nesting  
instinct!


--- PAGE 79 ---
31
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
This instinct (or higher awareness) is a precious gift of Universal 
Intelligence to insure a healthy continuity for humanity. The fragile 
ova a woman carries throughout her life requires that she be strictly 
stable in thought and deed. As a result, the strong gravitational pull 
of the Earth along with other geo-magnetic forces, act together as a 
collective foundational "pulse" of consciousness-encoded 
instructions that guide a gynic woman's overall instincts and 
behavior.
The archetypal instinct for nesting and socialization rests 
specifically with the gynic woman. Her proto-genetic circuitry has 
been programmed for such behavior, and believe it or not, western 
science(?) has been quietly conducting research in order to 
substantiate this.
British scientists found that girls with Turner Syndrome, a disease 
where the female is missing one of her X chromosomes, showed a 
definite genetic link to social dysfunctionality. Those without it were 
found to have greater difficulties conforming to a sharing, interactive 
environment. The "double X" or gynic females on the other hand, 
exhibited the more natural mother-wit instincts where they adapted 
quickly and more readily to communal activities, figuring out social 
situations based on behavioral cues.
Isn't it interesting that such "scientific discoveries" never seem to 
make it to Nova or the 6 o'clock news?
Unfortunately, the gynic instinct seems to be eroding with each 
passing generation, supplanted by the yang-oriented, aggressive, 
de-sensitized tendencies of the new testosterone-toxic gynandrous 
woman of today.
?


--- PAGE 80 ---
32
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Eco-biosis...
Eco - ".. .ecology; the relationships between organisms and
their environments.
Biosis - "...a way of living; a way of life..." - Amer. Heritage Diet.
A gynic woman's body-temple needs an environment that 
provides for her a greater level of eco-biosis and homeostasis than is 
required for a man. For example, even the slightest height variations 
will upset a true gynic, because the electro-magnetic synergism 
between her fragile eggs and the Earth's auric field dictate that she be 
more cautious. Thus, heights may "frighten" her.
Her eggs normally give off a positive surface charge or polarity, 
which is why she is so closely oriented to the negative or magnetic 
charges of the Moon and the Earth. The andric male's sperm is of a 
negative surface charge, which is why he is oriented to the positive or 
electrical energies of the sun or "outer cosmos." Both surface 
polarities are grounded by the 'passive-active' charges inherent 
within their respective gender-circuitries.
Metaphysically, this is symbolized in the Too where the yang is a 
passive-active charge within the yin, and the yin is passive-active 
charge within the yang <3. The passive-active charges within both 
become de-emphasized when the forces of attraction (instigated by 
the cosmic mandate to "...be fruitful and multiply...") compel them 
to interact for the purpose of procreation.
The gynic woman must also maintain a sufficiently stable flow of 
oxygen and nutrient-rich blood to keep her eggs healthy, and should 
she become pregnant, her overall instincts become 95% keener ! She also 
has a smaller heart in relationship to her body mass, and as Cantrell 
suggests, is most likely to suffer from silent heart attacks or to die 
during surgery.
The skin of a gynic woman is firm yet soft and yielding. The skin 
communicates with the autonomic nervous system to register 
temperature fluctuations and humidity. It also conducts electricity 
over, around and through the body. In a healthy melanated woman,


--- PAGE 81 ---
33
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
this bio-electrical charge is higher due to the greater density of 
ferro-magnetic and copper materials located in the epithelial levels 
of her skin and her hair, respectively.
This gives her greater attunement to the ebb and flow of Nature's 
forces — again, if she is healthy. Electrical conduction is also 
important between a male and female, and vital to sensory 
communication between a mother and child. The gynic woman has 
smoother more sensitive skin to allow for proper maternal (magnetic) 
stimulation, so as to produce and raise healthier babies.
The gynic woman must also maintain hydrostatic5 equilibrium. 
This means that the fluids in a woman's body, coupled with the 
atmospheric or barometric pressure of the environment, must 
coincide with a balance of gravity and pressure-centric forces to keep 
her psychologically in tune as well as physically in balance.
Water is the elemental medium symbolically equated with the 
phenomenon called emotion, and is one of the two feminine 
elementals of the four foundational archetypes of cosmic existence, 
the other being earth. Water (hydro) and earth (static) are the "yang" 
and "yin" dynamics within the feminine nature, which is why it is so 
important that the gynic woman maintains earth-water balance for 
the good of herself and her baby. A gynic woman is extremely 
sensitive to the magnetic pull and flux of the planet, and actually 
enjoys being cloistered because her body is instinctively 
apprehensive of that which is unpredictable; unlike the andric man 
(or gynandrous woman) who seeks to "conquer the unknown" —an 
outgrowth of his testosterone-inspired provider/protector instincts.
A gynic is sometimes leery of being in the company of certain 
strangers as well. Although she is communal by nature she is often 
un-easy in large crowds, having a healthy fear of cacophonous 
environments. Such conditions disorient her spatial relationships and 
equilibrium, thus distorting her bio-psychic connection to her eggs.
3 Hydro - from the Greek hudor, meaning water.
Static - "at rest having no movement; quiescent..." - Amer. Herit. Diet.


--- PAGE 82 ---
34
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
But don't be mistaken. This is not like the disease called 
agoraphobia6 where a person has a morbid fear of even stepping 
outside of the house. No. These are the natural healthy expressions of 
true feminine instincts, which guide and compel the innate 
dispositions of the precious gyne-centric woman..
Estrogen:
Elixir of the Gynic Woman...
•
Estrogen is quite truly the core-essence of the integrus gynic 
woman. Along with the balanced production of progesterone, it is 
the bio-chemical tincture that maintains the precarious integrity of 
the feminine principle within the yin and yang polarities of 
manifested life. Without it, the purest representation of God-as- 
woman could not exist.
Estrogen deficit and perversion syndromes are becoming more 
and more prevelant today. Such syndromes are most commonly 
suffered by the so-called modern-day kick-ass corporate woman, 
who has become the new cultural phenotype that young girls now 
mimic into the 21st century. Her new "en vogue" attitudes and 
behavioral signatures not only include aggression and callousness, 
but obstinacy, coldness, vindictiveness, machismo, and sometimes 
downright hatefulness (see the movie Mean Girls, and the women of 
TV series CSI, etc.) —all the so-called "normal masculine 
behaviorisms" once condemned by feminists as "sexist" and 
"misanthropic".
In fact, very few women (or men for that matter) know what true 
estrogen looks like, sounds like, tastes like, feels like or even smells 
like in a genuine woman anymore.
6 Agoraphobia - taken from the word agora, which meant "a marketplace in Greece 
used as a place of popular assembly hence the meaning "... abnormal fear of 
open spaces ..." - Amer. Herit Diet.


--- PAGE 83 ---
35
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The regulation of this bio-elixir begins with the hypothalamus 
gland. Neurohumors (translucent nerve fluids) are dispatched from 
it to the pituitary gland. F.S.H. or follicle-stimulating hormones  (see 
figure 2) are in turn sent forth by the pituitary to the ovaries.
There are 3 regulating hormones released by the pituitary —  
luteinizing hormone, ACTH (or adrenocorticotrophic hormone) and 
follicle-stimulating hormone. The ovaries, which produce the major 
portions of the body's estrogen, secrete an additional hormone called 
progesterone.
Progesterone (C 21H30O2) is a steroid secreted primarily by the 
corpus luteum7 of the ovary prior to implantation of a fertilized 
ovum. It influences and determines the regularity or timing of the 
menstrual cycle, as well as helps in the process of conception and the 
prevention of miscarriages. It also influences the quality and quantity 
of estrogen that is manufactured.
Progesterone is manufactured as the derivative of a hormone 
called pregnenolone, the steroid material manufactured by the 
mitochondria of the cell that is said to be the precursor to just about 
all other steroids including DHEA, cortisol, aldosterone, 
androstenedione, testosterone and other androgens that the body 
produces. Pregnenolone is found in many organs and tissues that 
formulate steroid hormones including the adrenals, liver, skin, 
testicles and ovaries (the gonads).
All steroids are produced by the mitochondria.
A steroid is said to be any naturally occurring fat soluble organic 
compound having a 17-carbon atom ring as its basis. Another 
definition states that the chemical construct has 4-carbon ring 
structures attached to each other. Which-ever the more accurate 
definition, it is most likely the reason why DHEA, cortisol, 
pregnenolone, testosterone, progesterone and estrogen all appear to 
look alike—particularly testosterone and progesterone.
7 Corpus Luteum - a yellow mass of endocrine cells in a ruptured mature Graafian 
follicle of the ovary, formed after the release of an ovum.


--- PAGE 84 ---
36
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Steroids are also made by the brain, which are called neurosteroids. 
To date there are over 150 steroid hormones made by the body and 
the brain that have been identified by medical science. But the 
fundamental precursor material from which all steroid hormones are 
ultimately derived, is cholesterol.
The American Heritage Dictionary defines cholesterol as "...a 
glistening white crystalline substance (C 27H 45O H ); the most common 
animal sterol...; a universal tissue constituent occurring noticeably in 
bile, the brain, blood cells, plasma and seeds."
The amount of steroids produced depends upon the demands 
made on the body, which in turn depends upon how much 
cholesterol is made available to the mitochondria. Cholesterol floats 
within the cellular fluids as minute chain globules, and when the 
need for a steroid arises, electrical signals from the hypothalamus 
marshal the cholesterol to the mitochondria, which then break off a 
few links of the chain to create the steroid.
The estrogen steroid is the primary chemical influencing the 
mental functions of the gynic woman. Its essential components act to 
literally shape or sculpt the gynic female's brain while yet in her 
earliest stages of development in utero. There are approximately 
300 tissue locations in and around the female body—from the brain, 
to the hair, the liver and even the bones, which function as estrogen 
receptor sites—all of which respond to the presence of estrogen in 
one way or another.
Estrogen (more precisely, estriol, estrone and estradiol; etc.) works 
as a tincture of progesterone that influences and sustains the yin 
orientation of female brain functioning. It dictates the specific 
"consciousness-charge" that links the left and right hemispheric 
circuitries of female thought, by way of a cerebral interface called the 
colostrum. It also enhances the interface of nerve cells in another area 
of the brain called the hippocampus (the memory center), by acting 
as the "photographic solution" that synthesizes experience into the 
atomic imprints of chemical memory. It manages the production of


--- PAGE 85 ---
37
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
acetylcholine as well, the chemical secreted by the brain when it 
wishes to recall that experience.
Thus, in the overall scheme of a woman's physical and 
psychological health, it is super-vital that estrogen remains integrus 
and in balance within the female body, because if it is not, the female 
body "forgets" that it is female!
The pituitary gland monitors and stabilizes the levels of estrogen 
(in fact, all the hormones) in a woman's body. The adrenal cortex and 
other parts of the body also produce estrogen, but not enough to 
significantly maintain a young female's body functions. They do 
however play a crucial part in sustaining estrogen levels after 
menopause.
Estrogen is also responsible for maintaining the cellular instincts of 
the gynic woman, as well as her sexual characteristics, breast 
development and her feminine hourglass figure. The growth and 
development of the female genitalia, the pubic and auxiliary hair are 
also attributed to its functions. Estrogen stimulates the female 
reproductive system in the following ways:
1. It provides automatic checks and balances to the output of 
gonadotropin8 from the pituitary...
2. It directly stimulates the structural growth and function of body 
parts other than just the ovaries - those parts generally and 
specifically associated with the female gender...
3. It arouses ovulation...
4. It exerts a psychological effect and influence on conduct.
Ovarian estrogen and progestin stimulate the growth of the 
endometrium (the lining of the uterus) in preparation for 
fertilization. Estrogen precipitates the growth of endometrial 
tissue, and progesterone facilitates the preparation of the secretory 
lining of the uterus so the fertilized egg can implant itself 
successfully.
Gonadotropin - a gonadotropic substance (that is) "... that which acts on or 
stimulates the gonads as a hormone ..." - Amer. Herit. Diet.


--- PAGE 86 ---
38
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
As I alluded to earlier, the word estrogen is actually the generic 
term for a grouping of female sex hormones that include estradiol, 
estriol and estrone. The above-mentioned effects are each stimulated 
by these derivative components in the following manner.
Estradiol - is the major estrogen derivative. It is secreted 
throughout puberty and is responsible for changes in body 
appearance, the rate of growth and the accumulation and regulation 
of body fat. It is made primarily in the ovary as well as the placenta, 
adrenals, medulla and even in the male testes. Overproduction of this 
component is said to act as a precursor to breast and ovarian cancers.
Estriol - is a weaker version of the estrogen complex, and is 
secreted primarily during pregnancy by the placenta. Its levels are 
raised ten-fold by the time the pregnancy is in the third trimester. 
Estriol accounts for nearly 90% of the estrogens excreted in the 
mother's urine. Clinically, these levels are used to gauge the health of 
the placenta.
Estrone - is highest in the blood of post-menopausal women, and 
is formed by the conversion of a weak androgenic component called 
androstenedione. In fact, so is estradiol. It is secreted primarily by the 
adrenal cortex. This component of the estrogen complex may be the 
subtle evidence of Man's latent hermaphrodite characteristics that 
become enhanced in women after they have succumbed to hormonal 
entropy. It is one of the many by-products of a back-up system that 
kicks in to substitute for depleted estrogen levels at the onset of 
menopause. The integrity of this back-up system depends largely on 
how the woman has cared for herself before the so-called "change of 
life".
Today, artificial derivatives are now marketed due to the 
overwhelming increase of female gender degradation, all of which 
are now implicated as one of the major causes of breast cancer, 
fibroid tumors, endometriosis, and pre-mature menopause.
These synthetic types are not only suspected of causing breast and 
ovarian cancers, but have also been found to cause nausea, cramps, 
yeast infections, irregular bleeding, blurred vision, heart and kidney


--- PAGE 87 ---
39
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
disease, depression, decreased libido, increased appetite due to the 
appearance of symptoms mimicking the state of pregnancy, and 
bloating due to fluid retention and localized fat deposits, particularly 
in the hips, heart, liver, breasts and thighs.
One such analogue estrogen manufactured by the Wyeth-Ayerst 
Company and used by nearly 80% of American women, is an equine or 
horse estrogen marketed under the name Premarin. (See figure 3.) 
Premarin (PMU) stands for "pregnant mares urine", or (pre)gnant 
(ma)res ur(in)e. These conjugated estrogens obtained from pregnant 
mares, are marketed in the forms of pills, creams, injections, patches 
and vaginal rings. Concerned members from groups such as People for 
the Ethical Treatment of Animals  (PETA) and the U.S. Equine Sanctuary  
and Rescue (USESR) organizations are outraged by the cruel methods 
used to extract it.
PETA and USESR report that tens of thousands of pregnant mares 
are forced into tight confining stalls where they are tied and refused 
free access to water. This is done to make sure that their urine will 
become more concentrated. They are also denied the necessary 
exercise and veterinary care needed to insure adequate health, and in 
the end are sold to the slaughterhouses when no longer fertile.
The use of synthetic or analogue estrogens is detrimental to 
humans, because a woman's body will not recognize and fully 
accept their molecules' 'gyro-atomic' configurations. This is so 
because such chemicals are not the by-products of that individual 
woman's own bloodstream. Artificial chemicals may temporarily 
trick the body into a specific response due to their similar molecular 
configurations, but when the body's atomic intelligence finally 
recognizes them, they are rejected. If they are not rejected the body 
mutates its functions to adapt to the analogues, but invariably 
degenerates more rapidly in the long run.
As a result, the cost in bio-kinetic life force energy is high because 
the depletion is a cumulative and virtually irreversible one. The 
more a woman uses these analogue hormones, the more life force is 
sacrificed by the body in its effort to reject them as irritants, for 
where the body is made to believe it is being provided proper


--- PAGE 88 ---
40
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Female Homonal Cycle
-PITUITARY
" T R O P H I C ”  H O R M O N E S  
rs q u la tin q  a ll o th e r  
e n d o c rin e  g ia n d i;
including th e
G O N A D O T R O P H I C  
<H O R M O N E S
S tim u latin g  L v t c in is in g
o xyto cin  -  m a t a  u te ru s
contract 
n som essw  -  rahts  W o o d  
presiuns 
a n t id iv r c t ic -  reduc es
u rin a ry o utput
N o  c o n ce ptio n  ■
F i g u r e  2


--- PAGE 89 ---
41
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
PRESCRIPTION ONLY MEDICINE 
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
M
Premarin
c«fst®iSHl l,g*
g g t t i  f m m m - 
si nZ.W'%. s-'Wmvgm* m |&t#
mm '
Figure 3
nutritional elements, it gives up its precious life force to a laborious 
synthesizing process. If it is constantly subjected to false alarms by 
noxious irritants, the body becomes exhausted of its vital life forces 
and is unable to resist or fight back.
You see, even though medical scientists can identify and 
artificially duplicate many components of the estrogen steroid, these 
artificial types are of an intrinsic nature that is based on the 
bio-electrical/atomic chemistry of the animal it was extracted from. 
The blood-energy of the organism that made the steroid product is of 
a lower animal DNA and RNA harmonic signature, and therefore 
incompatible in resonance, vibration and frequency to human DNA 
and RNA. A healthy human body would automatically defend itself 
against any alien animal byproduct introduced into its blood stream, 
because it does not recognize the substance as being a product of its 
own genetic resonance and construct.
By comparison, the best example would be the salt-water 
constitution of the sea. A scientist can come close to chemically 
reproducing the exact same ingredients comprising ocean water in 
his laboratory, but this artificial environment cannot and will not 
sustain the greater majority of sea-life.


--- PAGE 90 ---
42
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
These analogue estrogens are not only made from the extracted 
hormones of horses, but from cows, pigs and other such laboratory 
and domesticated farm animals as well.
More can be read about hormonal replacement therapies (HRT) in 
the section entitled Wo-menopause and the History of Eternal Youth  
Therapy. Stay tuned.
Metaphysics of the 
Primal Mother-Matter Essence;
The Atomic Determination of Gender...
•
Metaphysically—the  properties identified by western science as 
"estrogen" and "testosterone" are actually the end-products of an 
astral/etheric precursor-essence that is non-specific by nature. This 
"proto-esse" (or first formed parent substance) may be defined as 
unsubstantiated aether-a  distillation of cosmic "black matter" taken 
into the body by way of the breath, whose end-product is formulated 
by the hydrogen-based intelligence of melanin.
'Proto-esse' (or "meta-matter") in its purest organic form, is 
centralized in the female as the semi-transparent fluid material 
contained within her ovum, or egg. This nano-crystalline fluid is the 
final stage of titration for the primordial "mother-matter-essence" (or 
waters of Nu), which the fructiferous "Light-Seed" of the Galactic 
Father (Divine Intention) specializes into one or another of its polar 
qualities; that is —into the yin or yang dynamics we call gender.
Primal mother-esse, or proto-esse, is "neutronic" or neutral in its 
atomic nature, and passes that quality on through an enzyme that 
western science calls HMGCoA Reductase9—  the precursor material 
responsible for making the cholesterol molecule. The cholesterol 
molecule is the neutral element from which all hormones or steroids 
like estrogen and testosterone are made in the body. It is specialized 
or codified in the egg at conception by the dominant intention (or 
'charge') programmed into the sperm by the will and "emotional
HMGCoA Reductase = 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarl coenzyme A Reductase
9


--- PAGE 91 ---
43
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
resonance" of the biological father —the primary factor in the 
determination of gender. This dominant charge or "intent" becomes 
the template-grid "signature" that guides the organizing intelligence 
of melanin to construct the molecular foundations of gender.
Primal mother-esse' is the neutral etheric substance that acts as 
the material bridge between Cosmic Mind and the "Djhuti Seh Shmet 
Aaa", or thrice-great Djehuti's 7th Principle of Existence —  Gender. It is 
the proverbial "clay" out of which Man is said to have been formed.
In the ovum, the non-specific quality of the primal mother-essence 
is specialized into a masculine bio-programming at conception. The 
sperm is programmed by the father when he resonates and maintains 
the mental frequencies experienced as "desire" for a period of at least 
three to seven days —up to and during the act of sexual intercourse 
itself. Desire thus becomes the determining "charge" or emotional 
resonance qualifying the cerebro-spinal/seminal essences, causing 
the so-called "Y" chromosome's signature frequency in the genetics 
of the sperm to become "switched on" (or charged), and the "X" 
chromosome signatures to remain dormant.
Emotion-as-intention is the primary qualifier or programmer of 
the cerebro-spinal fluid in the body. Among other vital functions, this 
fluid provides the male with the titrated etheric materials that 
emotion activates to become the essential properties of polarity in the 
sperm.
It is the father's desire signature taking the form of a qualified 
'protonic charge' (or atomic spin orientation within the sperm) that 
centralizes and individualizes a yang polarity out of the 'neutronic' 
mother essence of the egg. Once a sperm cell penetrates thru the 
outer layers or zona pelucida of the egg working its way to the center, 
it ultimately creates an "atomic fusion reaction"10 leading to a mini 
"big-bang" at the egg's pressure-centered "nuclear core." What was 
once unqualified neutral proto-esse within the ovum, becomes nuked
10 Fusion reaction - "In physics, a nuclear reaction in which nuclei combine to 
form more massive nuclei with the simultaneous release of energy ..."
-Amer. Her. Dictionary


--- PAGE 92 ---
44
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
or "protonically charged" at the moment of conception with the 
atomic spin dictated by the "desire" resonance of the father's psycho­
spiritual intention. This eventually causes testosterone precursor 
template energies to predominate, codifying and fixing the gender of 
the developing baby. From these molecular/atomic precursor 
materials (organized by melanin) are manufactured all other 
testosterone derivatives thru the brain and neural pathways that will 
establish and sustain a masculine orientation within the developing 
baby.
In similar fashion, when "feeling" is the signature frequency 
dominating the emotional body of the father at the time of 
intercourse, an 'electron' charge is seeded as the qualifying intent- 
programming of the spermatozoa during conception. This establishes 
a "yin-spin" or "X" orientation in the father's cerebro-spinal/seminal 
fluids, which then anchors a qualified magnetic charge at the moment 
of conception's "big bang", commencing a feminine molecular 
orientation in the newly developing baby.
Geo-centric forces and polar orientations are also relevant in 
determining gender as well.
Another thing. The popular notion that we all start out in the 
womb as 'female' is a gross misrepresentation of the facts. What 
appears to be the initial formation of female genitalia for both sexes in 
the primary stages of fetal growth, is nothing more than proto- 
morphic "buds" growing on the stem of the micro-cosmic tree of life. 
At this stage, the buds represent the neutral gender-templates that 
appear just before the qualifying "charge" of the father's intention 
has identified itself on the surface as masculine or feminine.
As development of the fetus progresses, the 'gender charge' kicks 
in and begins to cause the migration of the buds. If female, the charge 
causes a retention of the buds creating "corkscrew" spirals that 
migrate horizontally along the stem, orienting the buds to become 
ovaries and a vaginal orifice. If male, the gender charge causes the 
buds to migrate laterally to the stem, orienting them downward to 
become testicles and a penis.


--- PAGE 93 ---
45
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
In the case of in-vitro fertilization, the freezing or storage of eggs 
and sperm in a non-biologic environment for extended periods of 
time, may cause the 'charge-of-intention' program of the sperm to 
wane and the organizational qualities of the primal mother-esse to 
significantly diminish. This leads to the unfortunate creation of 
children who are weak in their individual capacity to express the 
harmonics and frequencies of higher cosmic intention and gender.
An example of this may be seen in the case of Louise Brown.
In 1978, Louise Brown became one of the first donors to a scientific 
experiment called in-vitro fertilization. Mrs. Brown contributed her 
eggs to the process, one of which was fertilized in a petrie dish then 
implanted in the womb of a surrogate mother, who subsequently 
gave birth to a baby girl. Trouble is, twenty years later the child was 
found by scientists to be incapable of procreating naturally—just like 
her mother.
You really can't fool Mother Nature.
And so beloved, metaphysically speaking, the qualifying dynamic 
of gender at conception is based primarily on the spin-orientation 
displayed by the atom, as it is influenced through the resonance of 
the father's e-motional body for a cycle or period of up to 7 days. In 
other words, dad affects the protons and electrons in his cerebro­
spinal fluid by way of his predominant feelings or desires. This in 
turn qualifies the atomic nature of the spermatozoa in his seminal 
fluids. The fluid becomes a charged elixir wherein the sperm that is 
"specialized" or potentized with a predominance of either "X" or "Y" 
chromosome signature frequencies for up to 7 days, which results in 
gender-specification at conception.
As mentioned earlier, the phenomenon of gender is also 
influenced by the North Pole / South pole geocentric forces of the 
planet; more precisely —  the direction that a man and woman are 
facing at the time of coitus. This can be seen as an instinctive practice 
by herd animals in the wild. If the herd has a shortage of males, the 
female instinctively orients herself to face south during mating, 
maximizing the electrical/Y-chromosome resonance of the sperm,


--- PAGE 94 ---
46
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
and enhancing the odds that the calf will be male. To conceive 
females, she orients herself to the source of Earth's primary magnetic 
resonance —  north.
Metaphysically, if the body and mind experience great emotional 
trauma resulting in prolonged psychological effects, "intention" (in 
this case, as manifested by the female) becomes unbalanced and 
disoriented, causing the cellular-atomic charge to respond in kind.
Take for example, breast cancer.
The cancer-causing properties that medical science attributes to the 
complex of molecules called estrogen, are due (in the primary stages) 
to a severe perversion of the "qualifying process" that takes place in 
the pathways leading from the cholesterol molecule to the 
mitochondria, and finally to a fully formed hormone. This is where a 
component of the estrogen complex (for example, estradiol) is 
damaged by fall-out from mental energies that are based in deep 
emotional trauma and pain —a qualitative difference between stress 
and dis-tress. These painful signature energies directly affect the 
pituitary and hypothalamus leading to the creation of mutant 
hormonal material that contaminate the cells, affecting their genetics 
at the point of division and thereby enhancing the disease-signatures 
of cancer over time.
Of course there is also the damage done by environmental 
pollution, poor diet and prolonged stress-related work habits —all of 
which further aid in the perversion process.
When the pituitary's charge becomes distorted severely perverting 
endocrine function and estrogen chemistries, it can induce the female 
body into manufacturing stress-related, testosterone-like, free-radical 
materials. For the non-qualified, 'neutronic1  nature of the primal 
mother-essence within the ovum to remain 'neutral' in order to 
properly established the gender of a healthy baby, a woman's overall 
"gender-charge" must also be kept stable and integrus.
A balanced gender-charge is maintained primarily by a woman's 
gynic temperament, disposition, diet, environment and behavior!  This 
greatly affects the nature of the primal mother-esse in the ovum. If it 
is not maintained in this manner, estrogen becomes toxic and thus


--- PAGE 95 ---
47
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
poisonous to the female body—just as un-used corticosteroids like 
adrenalin become toxic after having been secreted into the 
bloodstream during a fight or flight situation. If the qualified 
corticosteroid is not discharged by perspiration or urination, that is, 
utilized by the purpose for which it was created (fight or flight), and 
by such actions eliminated, it becomes toxic if retained by the body.
Thus estradiol becomes a toxic, cancer-causing agent because the 
woman does not utilize this qualified steroid in the manner for which 
it was manufactured by her body; i.e. to form and maintain the 
archetypal female body, to assist in the development of babies and 
nursing, and to assist in the creation and refinement of vital brain 
tinctures necessary for accessing a woman's higher spirituality; that 
being—her "Triple-Black Mother Goddess-Hood".
Gender anomalies may also arise due to the pathological 
hormonal orientations of a gynandromorphic mother or androgynic 
father. Elevated levels of endogenous androgenic material in the 
mother's bloodstream during pregnancy, can greatly destabilize the 
gender-orientation of both a male and female child.
More will be offered on this topic in book 5 of the Regenesis 
Chronicles entitled The Epicene Enigma.
"... And they knew that they were naked ..."
- Genesis 3:7
Many would argue that our original (Edenic) humanity had little 
or no need for clothing—and they'd be absolutely right.
“In the Beginning..." (Genesis 1:1) archetypal humanity was seeded 
in, and nurtured by an environment harmonious to all biological life 
forms, making clothing (as we know them today) unnecessary.
The harmony of Earth's 'primal Eden' translates here to mean 
atmospheric, environmental, thermo-dynamic, electro-magnetic, 
spiritual, mental and physical equilibrium. The density of the 
compressed hydrogen atmosphere that once surrounded our world 
(before the "great flood") kept life-conditions for archetypal 
humanity harmonious; that is—nurturing and supportive. It


--- PAGE 96 ---
48
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
maintained an eco-biosis and homeostasis conducive to optimum 
health, well-being and incredibly long life (see Genesis 5:4-31).
The Greek philosopher Plato described a paradise of pristine 
living conditions on 'Edenic Earth' (as told to him by the high priests 
of Kham) with the following words...
"... When God was shepherd there were no political constitutions 
and no taking of wives and begetting of children. For all men 
rose up anew into life out of the earth, having no memory of 
the former things. Instead they had fruits without stint from 
trees and bushes; these needed no cultivation but sprang up 
of themselves out of the ground without man's toil. For the 
most part they disported themselves in the open, needing neither 
clothing nor couch, for the seasons were blended evenly so as to 
work them no hurt, and the grass which sprang up out of the 
earth in abundance made a soft bed for them..."
But then, it is written — 'war' was visited upon paradise!
About 150,000 years ago, it is narrated in Earth's ancient occult 
histories that the so-called "Creator gods" (Neteru, Ennead, Elohim, 
Nefilim, etc.) caused the near total destruction of our original planet 
casting us adrift into the lower harmonics of the third dimension, 
now called 'three-space' or 3rd density. The destruction allegedly 
occurred due to our ancestors' wanton abuse of cosmic forces while 
they existed on higher harmonic planes within our seed-hologram 
universe, or galactic consciousness matrix. We were "cast down" into 
a realm where we had to be genetically altered to survive. We 
became creatures of somatic or "body-addicted" consciousness.
The story of Adam and Eve discovering that they were "naked" is 
a veiled metaphysical reference to the hue-man bio-spiritual 
archetype losing its original cosmic texture and chromaticity; its 
psycho-reactive pigmentation, or what I refer to as "prismatic 
melanin."
(See The Isis Papers, by Frances Cress-Welsing, The Greatest Story Never 
Told, by Lana Cantrell and The Keys of Enoch, by J.J. Hurtak)


--- PAGE 97 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Humanity's original body vehicle was semi-etheric in substance 
and texture, making it hypersensitive to the affects of lower 
density/lower frequency energy fields. Its original design matched 
the resonances of the higher harmonic series of fundamental etheric 
matter from which it was derived. It therefore had to be acclimated, 
condensed or "devolved" to protect it from the environmental 
dissonance of the denser material planes. (See The Secret Doctrine, by 
H.P. Blavatsky; The Vedas and The Mahabarata)
This is also inferred in chapter two of the Biblical Genesis, by what 
appears to be a 'second creation.' Here we see Man being made this 
time "from the dust of the ground" —  instead of "the image and 
likeness of God." The "dust" is a metaphysical analogy for the 
grosser elements of matter.
Notice too that the chapter detailing the 'second creation' is also 
the point in the story where the process of "The Fall of Man" begins. 
Co-incidence? Not to the metaphysical and meta-historic scientist. 
This "Fall" is actually an allusion to the cosmic condensation 
process we call "creation", which recalibrated the temple of Man 
from a quintessential principle of Spirit into a creature comprised of 
the lower elemental properties of matter. The wave-length 
frequencies and harmonics of our higher etheric-composite forms, 
were re-adjusted to a lower harmonic spectrum in order to survive 
the dissonance or pressures of third density (like a deep-sea diver 
needs the proper suit to survive the enormous pressures of the 
water's depths).
Herodotus, the noted Greek historian, also gave a report about one 
of the many tragic catastrophes that had befallen ancient Earth when 
he wrote;
".. .Thus in the period of eleven thousand and forty years 
they said that there had arisen no god in human form; 
nor even before that time or afterwards among the 
remaining kings who arose in Egypt (Kemet), did they 
report that anything of that kind had come to pass. In


--- PAGE 98 ---
50
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 1
this time they said that the sun had moved four times  
from his accustomed place of rising, and in the place  
from whence he now rises, he had twice had his setting
and in the meantime nothing in Egypt had been changed 
from its usual state, neither that which comes from the 
earth nor that which comes to them from the river nor 
that which concerns diseases or deaths..." (Emphasis mine)
The above reference by Herodotus to the fact that "...there had  
arisen no god in human form , nor even among the remaining kings of  
Egypt"; that the sun was literally "rising in the west and setting in the 
east" —was the dramatic eyewitness account by ancient Kemites of a 
Polar shift and temporary reversal of the spin-direction of our planet; 
one which resulted in traumatic physiological changes to the 
archetypal genetics of our ancestors' god-like anatomies. The time of 
the "gods in human form" had tragically ended due to a drastic shift 
in cosmological stability.
But Herodotus also makes mention of the fact that the black 
peoples of ancient Kemet (even during his life-time) still managed to 
thrive within the scientifically structured environmental conditions 
they had created, where "nothing in Egypt had been changed from its  
usual state", allowing them to retain a certain measure of their once 
higher, superior god-like physiologies.
This was also substantiated by Martin Bernal in volume two of his 
revolutionary work Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical  
Civilization, Volume II.  In chapter 7 "The Thera Eruption", he writes 
that Plato was told first-hand by the Egyptian priests...
"...history was punctuated by catastrophies, which destroyed 
not only the civilizations but the historical memories of all 
countries  except Egypt, which was saved by the constancy 
and life-giving power of the Nile..."
Researcher and master scholar Horace Butler, in his little known 
but exceptional work titled When Rocks Cry Out,  attributes 
Herodotus' apparent contradictions above, i.e. "no gods in human 
form rising among the kings"; yet "nothing in Egypt had been 
changed from its usual state" — to the fact that historically, there were


--- PAGE 99 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
actually two Kemets; the one the world is familiar with in north­
eastern Africa, the other in the Yucatan Peninsula, and maybe even a 
third in an area off the southeastern coast of South America.
There is also evidence of a Kemetic civilization in the Grand 
Canyon areas of Colorado. Fact is, there was never a time when the 
Kemet we know was ever without their gods, even during the times 
of the wigged-out philosopher-king Ankhenaton.
You may read some of the resulting details of this allegorical 
tragedy in Zechariah Sitchin's The 12th Planet, Lana Cantrell's The 
Greatest Story Never Told and The Nag Hammadi Library.
The release and mis-use of cosmic forces by our insane celestial 
and terrestrial ancestors, destroyed the protective dimensional 
integrity of our original home-world while destabilizing the astral 
halo and compressed hydrogen canopy (e.g. within the ionosphere, 
stratosphere) that once surrounded, nurtured and protected it.
The destruction of this protective canopy was documented in 
ancient writings as having fallen to Earth "for forty days and forty 
nights."
The ancient gods were said to have had weapons with the ability 
to destroy whole planets. Their battles were documented in ancient 
meta-historic texts such as The Mahabharata (mentioned in the Bible 
as The Book of the Wars of the Lord  -Numbers, 21:14); The Rig Veda; The  
Bhagavad Gita; The Necronomicon; The Egyptian Text oflpuwer ; 11 (2300- 
2050 B.C.); The Nag Hammadi Library, The Pseudopidographicas  and 
even The Bible itself. But other than the Bible, these works are yet to 
be given the proper respect, attention, interpretation and translation 
by the so-called "accerdited experts" of Christian scholarship.
The ancient Adivasian (Dravidian) epic called The Mahabarata,  
said to represent one million years of documented history detailing 
the conflicts waged between the progenitor gods, describes specific 
battle scenes with weapons that could only be understood today 
because of our society's present level of technological sophistication.
11 See the book entitled Die Neu: Babylonischen Konigsinshriftan, by Stephen 
Langdon -1912


--- PAGE 100 ---
52
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
As to the alleged time-frame given by the Brahmins of the age of 
the texts, a more conservative estimate would be from 250 to 275, 000 
years.
From this great arcane work we read of the horrible fates that 
befell our ancestors in an ancient version of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 
when an ancient pilot named Gurkha dropped a nuclear bomb called 
a Brahmastra from his ancient aircraft, a 'fighter-jet' called a Vimana...;
".. .Gurkha, flying a swift and powerful vimana hurled a 
single projectile charged with all the power of the 
Universe. A column of smoke and flame as bright 
as a thousand suns rose in all its splendor.. .A 
perpendicular explosion with its billowing smoke clouds... 
the cloud of smoke rising after its first explosion formed 
into expanding round circles like the opening of giant 
parasols.. .it was an unknown weapon, an iron thunderbolt, 
a gigantic messenger of death, which reduced to ashes 
the entire races of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas... the 
dead were so burned as to be unrecognizable. The hair 
and nails fell out; pottery broke without apparent cause, 
and the birds turned white. After a time, all foods were 
uneatable... to escape from this unnatural fire the soldiers 
threw themselves into streams to wash themselves and 
their equipment..."
The above is an eyewitness accounting of the deployment of an 
ancient thermo-nuclear device, and the subsequent physiological 
and ecological consequences that resulted during a pre-historic "hi- 
tech" atomic conflict. This, along with periodic solar-galactic and 
related geological cataclysms (comet and meteor impacts; polar 
shifts), caused paradise to be devastated. Small pockets of sanctuary 
called "I-dins" (Edens?) were quickly erected by certain benevolent 
gods known as the Neteru/Ennead to house the survivors during 
these catastrophic times. Everything had changed, especially our 
genetics and the natural harmonious environments that once


--- PAGE 101 ---
53
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
supported our specie's health and well being. Again, referring to the 
magnetic polar shifting of the planet, Plato reports...
"... And the gods of the provinces, who had ruled under the 
greatest god, knew at once what was happening and re­
linquished the oversight of their regions. A shutter passed 
through the world at the reversing of its rotation, checked 
as it was between the old control and the new impulse 
which had turned end into beginning for it, and beginning 
into end. This shock set a great quaking, which caused - in 
this crisis of the world just as in the former one - destruction 
of living creatures of all kinds..." (Emphasis mine)
Plato's documentation of events, as told to him by the Kemetic 
priests of his time, may be compared to us experiencing 10 tsunamis 
of the kind that devastated the island of Sumatra.
Consequently, Neters or "gods" like Wsr (Osiris), Ptah, Ast (Isis), 
Jhwty (Thoth), and Hru (Horus)12 had to teach the Edenic refugees 
the basic skills needed to erect protective eco-structures in order to 
survive these harsh conditions; skills such as the science of extracting 
the medicinal properties of herbs, surgery, the science of government, 
astronomy, farming, architecture, animal husbandry, tool making 
and the weaving of fabrics to make protective clothing—skills 
formally unnecessary for existing in the original Edenic climate.
With specific focus on the skill of weaving; the Neteru also gave 
the surviving humanity a knowledge of precious minerals and their 
protective properties, and taught us how to incorporate them into 
special clothing and medicinals. These sciences helped provide 
Earth's ancient refugees with more efficient protection from the harsh 
and sometimes dangerous environments that frequently became 
erratic and unstable. The perversion of the environment (and thus the 
elementals) created erratic weather changes that finally settled into 
the "atmospheric temperaments" we now call the four seasons 
(Spring-water; Summer-fire; Fall-air; Winter-earth).
12 The names "Ast," "Djhuti" and "Heru" were not the gods themselves, but titles and 
offices of power held by select elevated beings. - Author


--- PAGE 102 ---
54
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The biological carnage that befell humanity, and the resulting 
symptoms suffered by those who were genetically altered (but 
survived), is also articulated in the thirteenth chapter of the Book of 
Leviticus.
Item: The above accounting is but one of many interpretations concerning the so-  
called Creation / Edenic story. For example, one teaches of the principle of the  
Involutionary Mind of Cosmic Intelligence (40 Nights), which led to the  
Evolutionary existence of Man (40 Days). Another tells of the explosion of our  
original home planet in the "5th Harmonic Universe", casting us down ("The Fall")  
into the 2nd and 3rd Harmonic Universes, where we remain genetically trapped  
today—the Earth being a remnant of that cataclysm. And there are many others—  
all meta-chronologies from the ancient civilizations of Man depicting a time in our  
collective memory as a specie when we suffered severe trials and changes to our  
archetypal god-like bodies, our environment, and our orthobiotic ways of life. The  
differences in content and interpretation of these events are simply individual  
cultural interpretations of the same genetic memory.
And so clothing became a crucial part of humanity's survival 
because the Edenic environment that once supported archetypal life 
on our original planet was totally devastated. The bio-stasis and 
homeostasis of the human body temple degenerated to the point 
where we needed to be outfitted with protective clothing designed 
with these specific "environmental temperaments" (or seasons) in 
mind.
Of course, as the atmospheric chaos from nuclear wars, polar 
shifts (et.al) eventually subsided, and with the erecting of pyramids 
at strategic locations around the planet to help stabilize its orbital 
spin, vector and trajectory around the sun once again (coupled with 
the transplantation of trees and animal life from other planets to our 
world by the Neteru), many areas of the Earth once again became 
somewhat reminiscent of our former Edenic environment, and the 
need for elaborate protective clothing gradually decreased.
Plato continues...
"...Then, after the interval needed for its (the Earth's) 
recovery, it gained relief at last from its clamor and


--- PAGE 103 ---
55
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
confusion, and attaining quiet after great upheaval 
it returned to its ordered course and continued in it, 
having control and government of itself and of all 
within it..."
However, within the past 40 centuries of human activity and the 
return of wanton atmospheric destruction (this time by way of the 
European's technocratic, Nature-destroying culture), even the most 
Earth-conscious old world civilizations living in completely 
"natural" environments once again have need for the protection of 
clothing.
With added coercion from psychotically puritanical Judeo- 
Christian and Islamic interpretations of 'decency' and 'morality', 
indigenous first world peoples from such places as the rain forests of 
the Americas, as well as the earth's oldest human representatives of 
Africa and Australia, are once again forced to wear clothing as a 
shield against the perverted, rapidly deteriorating elements that once 
nurtured and sustained their ancestors. Even the sun has become 
debilitative and inhospitable to many of the old world peoples of 
Earth, due to the dense halo of atmospheric pollution that now 
surrounds and engulfs us.
Which is why it is so important that in the midst of this present- 
day technological onslaught against humanity and Nature, both men 
and women wear the proper clothing specific to their gender—  
especially women. This is necessary to offset the body-mutating 
energies propagated and sustained by the perverse ideologies and 
technologies of western civilization.
The following gallery of gynic women are beautifully adorned in 
the habiliments best suited for sustaining, nurturing and protecting 
the finely tuned higher cosmic instincts that Universal Intelligence 
has gifted to the archetypal temple of woman.


--- PAGE 104 ---
56
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 4
Figure 4-4 (c). Examples of the pure, gynic female in the clothing and ornaments designed by 
her great ancestral mothers to protect her genetic and hormonal integrity.


--- PAGE 105 ---
57
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 4(a)


--- PAGE 106 ---
58
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 4(b)


--- PAGE 107 ---
59
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 4(c)


--- PAGE 108 ---
60
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 4(d)
Even this Russian orthodox nun from the Tolga Convent, keeps the tradition alive


--- PAGE 109 ---
61
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Almighty Skirt:
Power-clothing of the Gynic Woman...
•
A prominent indicator of the impact that pollution has had on us 
as it relates to our society's physiological decline (referred to as 
"adverse environmental feedback"), is our specie's progressive 
descent into hermaphroditism, and nowhere is this sickness more in 
evidence than in the preference for wearing pants by so-called 
'liberated women' today. Throughout past millennia healthy women 
have always been cognizant of the orthobiotic benefits of the skirt.
Our ancient mothers (while in their healthy prime) would have 
literally fainted if they saw what women are putting on their bodies 
today. Anyone who has even a brief knowledge of the ways and 
customs of our ancestral mothers know that women who wore pants 
were considered by them to be "freaks of nature"; just as instinctively 
healthy people today would naturally view a man who wears a sun 
dress, a blouse, a bra, panties and make up to socialize or to his place 
of business, as being mentally perverse and just plain ridiculous.
Certain types of clothing will automatically irritate a gynic 
woman's body causing adverse stimulation to her erogenous zones, 
even if she can no longer feel it. Such irritation eventually causes a 
portion of her cellular network to become damaged or destroyed.
Remember I stated earlier that healthy cells were vital to the 
maintenance of higher consciousness and instincts in the human 
body? Well, ancient women were intuitively cognizant of this fact 
and wore the appropriate clothing to prevent adverse cell-destroying 
stimulation. Today however, most women have lost their finely 
tuned feminine sensibilities, to the point where they can no longer 
feel the irritation that male-designed clothing causes to their delicate 
bodies.
In fact, due to their de-sensitized states, many women might 
sub-consciously be enjoying such perverse stimulation because their 
brains have become more andric (or masculine) in nature, and can no 
longer distinguish healthy bio-chemical activity from un-healthy 
ones.


--- PAGE 110 ---
62
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Whereas men are not generally susceptible to the effects of such 
stimulation on the whole, inappropriately dressed women will 
repeatedly experience random adverse stimulation from masculine 
clothing. And since their gynandrous bio-chemistries numb their 
sensitivities to that of a man's, women who consistently dress in this 
manner are generally unable to acknowledge it. You may see an 
example of this on women who wear very tight jeans, where the 
crotch-seams of the pants have actually separated the lips of the 
vagina causing direct simulation to the clitoris—and the women 
appear to feel nothing.
As warm-blooded creatures go, both men and women need to 
maintain a steady flow and distribution of bodily warmth for the 
proper functioning and comfort of the organism. This is true of both 
warm and cold climates where specific types of clothing were 
designed and worn to retain warmth, as well as to dispel heat.
Thermal heat in the body is generated by the lungs and the 
stomach (the chi center), and because a woman's lungs are smaller 
than a man's by design, she generates less heat. This is one reason 
why the pure gynic woman can feel even the slightest changes in 
weather and temperature patterns. Puffed sleeves, shoulder pads and 
shoulder garments (as seen in figure 4 and 4a - bottom) also trap heat 
lost from the adipose tissue in these areas.
The testosterone and estrogen complexes are the two most vital 
ingredients assigned by the hypothalamus and pituitary glands to 
manage and maintain thermal bio-stasis. But each does its part in a 
slightly different manner as related to gender.
Testosterone for example, cannot tolerate too much internal heat, 
which is why (by design) the scrotum housing the testicles (which in 
turn houses and manufacturers the sperm) hangs outside of the male 
body to keep the sperm cool—as opposed to the female reproductive 
apparatus whose eggs are cloistered within her body to maintain 
their warmth.13 A man is much more adaptable to shifting climates
13 Design denotes function. - Author


--- PAGE 111 ---
63
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
and their sudden changes because his larger lungs can help generate 
substantial amounts of body heat with a little help from clothing. The 
natural preference for him in this case would be more fitted clothing, 
as this would help to dissipate the extra load of thermal heat he 
naturally produces—clothing like pants.
Estrogen on the other hand needs a little help generating heat, 
which would dictate the need for looser, layered clothing. In the cold, 
layered clothing traps heat within the separate folds creating more 
efficient insulation for a woman's body. The layering of heavier 
cotton skirts in cold weather helps the adipose tissue in a woman's 
thighs and buttocks to hold in heat more efficiently.
There are two types of adipose (fatty) tissue — the brown type and 
the yellow type. Natural low-fat diets do not create the brown type 
but instead produce mostly the yellow type, which is much better at 
opposing adverse radiation than the brown fat, but not very efficient 
at helping to generate heat. A healthy nutritional regiment would 
help to maintain a strong estrogen balance in the gynic woman, but 
would naturally create mostly yellow fat. This is why it is essential 
that a gynic wears the proper clothing in winter so as to compensate 
for her lower thermal output. Such clothing more efficiently traps 
and maintains the precious little heat generated by her body type.
Long skirts are extremely beneficial for women because they hold 
as well as dissipate heat very efficiently according to their design. 
The fan blouse is another feminine style that surrounds the breast 
area while at the same time circulating air —which pants and tight  
sweaters cannot do!  It also helps to keep adverse bacteria from 
multiplying causing yeast infections to form.
Some of the better examples of gynic clothing can be seen in the 
Ghanaian puffed sleeve design with layered wrapped skirts, and the 
Indigenous American / Mexican flair skirts with puffed sleeves and 
tassels. Tassels were designed to disperse static electricity. (See figures 
4 through 4(d).
And finally, certain old style European clothing from the 1850's 
called the Gibson girl blouses and fan bodices were also efficient 
heat-holders.


--- PAGE 112 ---
64
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Many types of cysts and breast cancers have erupted in recent 
times due in part to tight sweaters, tank-tops and tight 'booster' bras. 
These types of clothing cut the natural flow of oxygen to the cells 
located in the mammary glands.
It's interesting to note that severe gynecological disorders began to 
suddenly appear as far back as the 1920s, and just after feminist 
Hollywood superstars like Katherine Hepburn and Claudette Colbert 
pioneered the new "power-image-chic" with women wearing pants. 
But unknown to the majority of women then and today, pants became 
huge contributors to the generational rise in pelvic inflammations, 
infections and cancers.
On the other hand, men (throughout history) who preferred 
flowing robes and skirts ( early Greeks, Romans, early Christians and 
Hebrews) were without a doubt suffering from severe endocrine 
perversions to their bio-chemistries as well, just as it was for even 
more ancient melanated civilizations like those of Kemet or India 
during their final days after the great nuclear/environmental 
holocausts.
Although they hated to do it, these ancient men were compelled to 
wear strategically designed 'skirts'—even facial make up, wigs and 
heavy ornaments, in their desperate attempts to deflect the high 
levels of adverse radiation generated primarily by nuclear fallout, as 
well as the deadly rays of the sun filtering through a de-stabilized 
ion-polluted atmosphere.
According to meta-historic accounts, this is how the ancient 
civilizations of Mars were alleged to have been destroyed.
Mini-skirt — Maximum troubles ...
Gynandry has become rampant today, and evidence of this is all 
around us. Most women from the turn of the 20th century to the 
present have abandoned the skirt and feminine behavior, to wearing 
pants and adopting masculine behavior. The true gynic feminine 
(mother-wit) instincts of most modern-day women have literally been 
rendered comatose!


--- PAGE 113 ---
65
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
We need only look at the vast array of styles that were worn over 
the previous decades to see this —from the 1920s when the little boyish 
look first became "chic", to its revival in the 60s with Twiggy, and its 
return once again in the new millennium with the aggressive 
Hollywood promotion of mal-nourished, emaciated stick-figures 
called "high fashion models."
The mini-skirt is a true indication of just how dysgenic some 
women of today have really become. Here again the feminist 
propaganda of "women's lib" takes on a perverse and paradoxical 
twist. Arguments about "respect for women" fly out of the window 
because every female from grammar school to the executive 
boardroom knows full-well that the wearing of such apparel is done to 
get optimum "below-the-belt" attention from the male; to strategically 
divert and manipulate a man's visual, intellectual and psychological 
attention with sights specifically designed to enlist a sexual response.
Now. When a disrespectful display of the female anatomy is in turn 
met with a disrespectful response (even rape in extreme circumstances), 
the cry of "women as sex objects" or the "misogynist objectification of 
the female body" can be heard by gender-perverted feminists actually 
defending a female's right to sexually pollute and disrespect the visual 
environment of the male!
Women who feel the need to wear skirts that cut just below the 
crack of their behinds or their pubic hairs, are almost certainly 
hormonally deranged. On the other hand, it may be argued that 
certain styles are click-oriented, meaning that young teens don't have 
to be hormonally imbalanced to choose such clothing. Peer-pressure 
almost always dictates the teen-age fashion-code, which is yet another 
sad indication of the gradual generational loss of natural instincts in 
our de-generating society.
When instincts die beloved, humanity loses contact with the 
natural world. Gynandrous and androgynous behavior represent the 
clearest evidence of humanity's perverted and dying instincts.


--- PAGE 114 ---
66
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Concentric Circle  
of Female Power
•
Many gynic women from Eastern cultures who came to America 
attempting to "fit in", and couldn't wait to put on the uniform of the 
feminist (pants, suit jacket and mini-shirts), quickly came back to 
their senses after discovering the consequences of such behavior. 
They found out that in the long run, such clothing are extremely 
uncomfortable (that is, if they were truly gynics).
Pants not only upset the electro-magnetic, thermal and hormonal 
equilibrium of the female body, but also rub and chafe against the 
upper thighs and legs, and a true gynic woman cannot tolerate this 
form of stimulus for very long.
Today, our Europeanized society glamorizes the "no-hipped" 
pants-wearing woman because gynandry has become so rampant. 
Pseudo-masculine, under-developed body-types are common on 
many women considered "glamorous" today, as are seen on the so- 
called 'elite models' within the highly publicized world of fashion. So 
much so that such anatomies have now become sexually arousing to 
the degenerated sensibilities of the androgynous-oriented male.
In other words, the feminized psyche of the modern male now 
prefers the narrow masculine hips of the "modem" female. Levi's 
men's jeans on a woman with hips like a boy now represents the new 
tum-on for that "millennium-kind-of-guy."
Sadly, a majority of our sister-queens seem to have abandoned 
the concentric circle of female power as their main mode of dress, 
and unfortunately, only the fickled cycles of fashion seem to cause 
them to reconsider wearing it—and not their feminine instincts.
The circle itself is the feminine symbol of continuity, rebirth, cyclic 
periodicity and the incubation and nurturing of corporeal life. My 
queen, the skirt is the symbol of the circle.  Within it you maintain your 
gynic instincts and integrity, along with the continued assurance of a 
strong healthy womb giving birth to a strong and healthy humanity.
Without it, you may very well be dooming our collective future as 
a species.


--- PAGE 115 ---
67
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Mixing Apples and Oranges...
•
Metaphysically, men and women are made to be the bi-polar 
complements of one another. Therefore a true gynic woman and a 
true andric man are, by nature —  complete opposites!  They both 
understand and totally accept this truth instinctively, and such 
acceptance nurtures and enriches the purest attraction and 
relationship. They are "complements" of one another, not "equals" —  
where that which was two remains two —  but acts as one!!
Androgynous "equals" (or mono-polar couples) on the other 
hand, fight continuously because their internally similar polarities 
cause gender-perverted orientations that constantly antagonize one 
another.
This happens especially if one of the partners is gynandrous or 
androgynous; that is —if the woman has masculine tendencies 
(gynandrous) and is coupled with a true masculine andric male; or 
the man has feminine tendencies (androgynous) and is coupled with 
a true feminine gynic female. Like the similar poles of two magnets 
facing one another, they "repel."
The gender-perverted member of the couple is blind or numb to 
the differences or opposing polarities that their partner is supposed 
to represent, and can only see, feel and react to the similarities within 
their own distorted selves. The "gynic man" (feminized) is therefore 
repulsed and repelled by the "natural nature" of a feminine gynic 
woman, just as the "andric woman" (masculinized) is repulsed and 
repelled by the "natural nature" of the masculine andric man. Instead 
of compatibility in relationships, it becomes competition because they 
each try to occupy the same "gender-oriented space."
Metaphysically, it is where apples have orange seeds or oranges 
have apple seeds.
The mono-polar couple has been the growing norm in our society 
for at least seven to ten generations, and like their orientations they 
cause terminal relationships. They are a failure in Nature even before 
they take their first wedding vows. And as the ancients have told us


--- PAGE 116 ---
68
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
since time immemorial, they represent the end-time cycle and 
impending doom for any civilization thus afflicted.
The Making of a Gynander...
Gynandrous "...from the Greek, meaning of doubtful sex..."
Gynandromorph "...from the French gyne meaning woman, and andr meaning 
man; an abnormal individual (in this case, a woman) 
exhibiting characteristics of the opposite sex in various 
parts of the body; intersexual condition of a female in 
which the genitalia simulates those of a man..."
- Webster
Before you think to ridicule or dismiss what you've been reading 
thus far, take a good look at the statistical health data concerning the 
highly active, career-oriented, stressed out 90's-millennium woman.
If, as it is postulated by gender-feminist propaganda, such women 
are enjoying longer healthier lives than at any other time in history, 
how do they explain the unprecedented statistical rise of chronic and 
terminal diseases currently being suffered by modern-day women —  
particularly reproductive-related diseases?
For example, on the "Notebook" page of the July 1, 1996 issue of 
Time magazine, there appeared in the Health Report  side bar this 
curious paragraph...
"...Women are living longer but not necessarily healthier lives  than men. A  
government report shows that female life expectancy is seven years greater than  
(the) male, but women suffer more from chronic painful conditions  such as arthritis  
and osteoporosis..."
This little piece of news is a conservative under-statement to those 
who know the whole truth. In fact, statistics show that the United 
States ranks 16th in the world in female life expectancy! And there are 
current figures from the National Center for Health Statistics


--- PAGE 117 ---
69
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
showing that U.S. women are dying in childbirth  in numbers that 
constitute the highest rate in decades!
An article entitled "Childbirth Death Rate Raises in U.S." by Mike 
Stobbe of Associated Press,  dated August 8th, 2007, revealed that 
America's maternal mortality rose to 13 deaths per 100,000 live births 
in 2004, up from 12 per 100,000 in 2003 —  the first time it rose above 10 
since 1977—or approximately 10 or so years after gender-feminism 
began infecting our society with the ideologies of "women's 
liberation."
But the true tragedy is buried in the collective counting process, 
because these statistics hide the fact that black women die in 
childbirth at 3X the rate of white women. If my math is any good, this 
means that of the 12 to 13 per 100,000 women who died in childbirth 
from 2003 to 2008, nearly three-forths must have been women of 
African descent. This is even more disheartening when we take into 
account that blacks supposedly constitute only one-third of the U.S.  
population!
Excessive bleeding is cited as a leading cause of pregnancy-related 
deaths due to the cavalier practice of caesarean section,  and black 
women are routinely targeted for this procedure at 50X the rate of 
white women! Obesity is also tabbed as a causative factor, since such 
women are usually prone to diabetes and other complications; like 
having excess tissue and larger babies making vaginal deliveries 
extremely difficult. This of course leaves the doctor with his only 
recourse—caesarean section.
Stobbe ends his article with the story of Elizabeth Davis who died 
a day after giving childbirth. I've decided to include Ms. Davis' tragic 
circumstances in this thesis, because it dove-tails perfectly into a topic 
that most modern women (and men) either patently refuse to accept 
concerning the limitations of the female anatomy, or are just ignorant 
of.
Ms. Davis was said to have died of a heart attack after massive 
blood loss. Doctors claim that it was unclear what caused the severe 
bleeding, and conveniently, no autopsy was performed.


--- PAGE 118 ---
70
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Ms. Davis' husband Tim stated that 2 previous births had gone 
well. He went on to say that "...Nothing led us to believe that 
anything was wrong with this pregnancy. She was like a picture of 
health. She had been a YMCA fitness instructor!!"  [Emphasis mine]
Ah sooo! There it is! A subtle but highly relevant clue as to why 
Ms. Davis may have experienced such severe complications, 
especially for a woman said to represent the very "picture of health."
Since the majority of my work is already dedicated to decloaking 
the metaphysical and meta-historic gender-related reasons behind 
feminine pathologies, I would like to pose a few relevant questions 
pertinant to what may have precipitated the unfortunate demise of 
Ms. Davis.
As fitness instructors go, most females in this business have little 
to no body fat. Sufficient ortho-biotic fat, as was mentioned earlier, is 
a vital component in the proper maintenance and production of 
estrogen. Proper estrogen production in a woman is essential to all of 
her vital bodily functions —  like blood clotting for example.
What were Ms. Davis' fat to muscle content and blood estrogen 
levels during her pregnancy and at the time of her last delivery?
Also, most female fitness instructors today work hard to achieve 
hyper-developed transversus, rectus, and oblique abdominal 
muscles—  like those of the men in their business. This would have 
thickened or increased muscle cell density in the area, greatly limiting 
the flexibility, oxygen and blood-nutrient diffusion capabilities of the 
fascia surrounding the muscles.
But even more importantly, hyper-developed abdominal muscles 
in a woman could significantly affect her breathing. It causes the 
emphasis of the breathing process to be centered above the waist, 
instead of rightfully in the abdomen. It constricts the inferior and 
superior vena cava veins preventing proper blood-flow to her head 
and heart, while greatly limiting the ability of the heart and the lungs 
to process de-oxygenated blood.
This would automatically make the heart work harder  placing the 
overall system at greater risk from the added stress.


--- PAGE 119 ---
71
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Finally, how much exercising did Ms. Davis do in the first and 
second tri-mesters of her pregnancies, or before she even knew she 
was pregnant the third time? Were they yang-based exercises like 
'strength building' through powerlifting? What was the state of her 
womb before the final pregnancy as a result of such activity?
Most women who follow the behavioral trends made popular by 
today's Amazonian feminism, unknowingly travel a path that 
inevitably leads to cellular mutation, transforming them into the kind 
of female that in ancient times represented the 'end of days' for a 
civilization —  the kind identified as a gynandromorph!
But then maybe everything previously said was just fanciful un­
scientific conjucture; nothing more than "metaphysical hypothetics" 
and she actually died of gross incompetence at the hands of her 
doctors.
Sound more comfortably feasible? Who knows?
One thing's for certain; women should be aware of what yang- 
related exercising does to the female anatomy, paying closer attention 
to the gender-related danger signals that are usually ignored or go 
unrecognized.
Which brings us to that popular buzz-word western medicine 
introduced into the colloquial lexicon of today's society —  stress!
Stress and the Mal(e)-function of  
the Female Anatomy...
Design denotes function!
•
Stress (whether physical or psychological) forces the body to 
interrupt its natural internal harmony to adapt to 
unnatural/abnormal external conditions. The body of a man and the 
body of a woman are qualitatively different, and are thus capable of 
handling stress in ways specifically suited to their structural designs.
Which brings us to that all-important question when analyzing the 
effects of stress; namely—do the intricacies of design denote the 
mechanisms of function?
The answer of course, is a resounding— yes!!


--- PAGE 120 ---
72
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
A study of the anatomical designs of the andric or hormonally 
healthy male show that his body is made to withstand greater levels 
of physiological and environmental stress, since on average the 
composition of his denser muscle mass, his larger lung capacity and 
high testosterone levels, give him the organically designed ability to do 
so.
On the other hand, a study of the anatomical designs of the gynic 
or hormonally healthy female show that her physical texture, muscle 
density, lung size, overall tissue mass and reproductive construction, 
were made to tolerate levels of overt physiological and 
environmental stress that are no where near that of the andric male.
This vital fact is no longer given the validity it once had, due in 
large part to the rising number of female athletes and exercise gurus 
who exhibit gender-perverted behaviorisms that are now accepted 
and promoted in all sectors of our society. It has created a perverse 
sense of "normalcy" and acceptance for such aberrant behavior.
Feminist propaganda, which claims that a woman is 'by nature 
anatomically stronger than a man' because her body was built to 
tolerate greater levels of pain and stress for bearing children, shows 
how asinine and outlandish the age-old 'battle of the sexes' has 
become, especially where it concerns the so-called 'superiority' of one 
gender over the other. A painful pregnancy and delivery is not— 
repeat not the measure of a superior organism. It is in fact a vivid 
indicator of the overall degenerated condition of the mother.
Example. When a doe or a lioness are about to give birth, there's 
no panic or distress besieging these mothers; nor are there fifteen 
hours or more of excrutiatingly painful labor accompanied by blood­
curdling screams and obscenities directed toward their mates—as is 
the popular depiction of Hollywood.14 These mammals (in fact 
virtually all animals) simply find a secluded area, lie down and 
effortlessly bring forth their young.
14 See the movie entitled "Nine Months." - Author


--- PAGE 121 ---
73
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Women (and doctors) don't seem to realize how severely 
damaging to the birth experience such stressful, life-depleting and 
cell destroying behavior the above represents and what a heavy toll it 
exacts upon the mother and the child. Adrenalin, epinephrine, 
cortisones and other such stress-related hormones flood into a 
mother's bloodstream during long and difficult childbirths, seriously 
affecting the baby's physical and psychological development in later 
years.
Item: If the 'lowly' animals can quietly and effortlessly bring forth life, what has 
happened to the human female (one half of the cosmic equation representing God 
in the flesh) that she no longer can?
Given the above comparisons as a basic premise from which to 
proceed, logic and wisdom should dictate that if a gynic woman is 
forced to tolerate continuous levels of stress that far exceed the 
capacities of her original design, her body would have to eventually 
change (or mutate) to meet the demands imposed by such 
circumstances.
And what would such changes look like?
Simple. When physiological (or psychological) stress has reached 
a level where the cellular intelligence of the gynic body instinctively 
recognizes a danger to its healthy functioning, it will immediately 
implement fail-safe measures. Why?
First and foremost —to protect itself. And —secondly (if given no 
other choice) to adapt to the given circumstances. To adapt in this case, 
means to alter internal functions that are natural and supportive of 
endocrine well-being, in order to cope with systemic demands that far 
exceed the body's inherent capabilities to healthfully adjust.
The more oppressive the stress the more the internal functions are 
altered, as defensive counter-measures are taken by the organism. The 
more defensive counter-measures taken, the more stress-related 
elements are manufactured (that is, sacrificed) by the blood, 
progressively mutating the cellular network and exhausting the 
overall vitality of the organism.


--- PAGE 122 ---
74
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"Exotic" chemical changes are implemented by the blood to 
compensate and meet the body's stress-based demands. This results in 
the blood producing more stress-related hormones such as adrenalin, 
cortisone and testosterone. There are of course a great many other 
chemical and anatomical changes taking place (changes which have a 
myriad of medical names too numerous to identify here), but for our 
purposes this section will focus primarily on the metaphysical 
idiosyncrasies of androsterone, testosterone, progesterone and 
estrogen.
Beloved; the more stress a body is exposed to the more testosterone 
or testosterone-frle steroids are produced by the mitochondria of the 
cells to be distributed throughout the muscles and bloodstream. This is 
done to aid in the chemical needs of the body in order to match or 
compensate for the stress.
The hormone testosterone is a crystalline androgenic hydroxy 
steroid (C 19H28O2). The operative word here is andro-genic, a word 
derived from the noun androgen, which Webster defines as...
"...A substance (as a sex hormone) tending to stimulate
the development of secondary sex characteristics in the male..."
[italics mine]
In the male beloved! It does not say in the female!  This being the 
case, what does the above definition logically imply?
Logic concludes that due to the unnatural abnormally high levels of 
stress suffered by average women today, the female body has had to 
compensate (i.e. mutate) by producing more and more androgenic 
testosterone-like stress chemicals, in order to bring it to a level of 
competent performance adequate enough to meet and deal with such 
stress.
Logic also concludes that Nature would have designed "pressure 
thresholds" into the archetypal female anatomy to set certain 
biological safety limits; limits set to maintain the organism's 
structural integrity. These intrinsic safety limits would have to be 
forcibly overridden  in order for the female body to operate at levels of 
stress specifically earmarked for the physiological design of the male!


--- PAGE 123 ---
75
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
For years the adverse effects of such chemical and cellular 
mutations may go quietly unnoticed, with perhaps a few indications 
of trouble such as severe cramps during menses, accompanied by 
heavy and excessive bleeding (or no bleeding at all), along with 
pronounced symptoms now referred to as P.M.S. (symptoms similar 
to senile dementia). A woman may also exhibit signs of manic 
depression, loss of memory, sleeplessness and moodiness, or a 
noticeable depreciation in her ability to concentrate, sit still, or be 
patient with children. She even has a difficult time staying at home, 
constantly seeking large crowds to party and socialize.
Anxiety and the Mal(e)-function of  
the Female Anatomy
•
A stress-related symptom known as anxiety has been found to 
have crippling physiological effects on women, especially on young 
girls. Nezvsweek magazine (June 24, 1996) carried a side bar article on 
page 71 about growth disorders and worry in growing girls entitled 
"Does Worrying Stunt Girls' Growth?"15
The study, conducted by Dr. Daniel Pine, a child psychiatrist at the 
New York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia University (along 
with two colleagues), followed approximately 716 children ages 9 
through 18 over a period of nine years. The results, which were 
published in the June issue of Pediatrics Journal,  found that girls 
diagnosed with either of two anxiety disorders grew to be at least 
two inches shorter than girls leading worry-free lives. They were 
twice as likely to attain an adult height of less than 5 feet 2 inches.
Now here's the kicker. Quoting directly from the article itself we 
read:
"...Interestingly, the study found no association between
15 It's interesting to note that this side-bar appears on the same page as a story about 
"ab-trainers." The picture insert shows a woman using one of the newest contraptions 
accompanied by the words "Search for the ultimate crunch ..." As a 90s -millennium woman,
I guess heavy stress is okay if you pay to do it in a health club. - Author


--- PAGE 124 ---
76
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
height and anxiety in boys, suggesting that bays and 
girls may have different biological reactions to stress ..."
How does the "equality" agenda explain this? Dr. Pine's results 
were said to be consistent with other such research findings showing 
growth hormone abnormalities in female adults with emotional 
disorders. Of course, they also stated that "further investigation was 
needed" to see how childhood anxiety translates to hormonal 
abnormalities that invariably affect growth. This research and its 
results may finally provide an explanation as to why a great many 
female gymnasts remain so small in stature. My friend George Silos, 
author of the book Dear Brothers and Sisters: Gender and its  
Responsibilities, wrote to Newsweek in response to this article saying...
"... Testosterone is the steroid that God made to handle high 
amounts of stress. Those who were made to carry this 
steroid have testes. They are called men. When females are 
put into stressful situations that were naturally made to be 
handled by males, after prolonged levels of exposure, their 
testosterone production rises to such levels as to cancel the 
harmonizing affects of estrogen. This results in a multitude 
of deleterious effects to their bodies. The First Amendment 
can't change that..."
Another significant research project studying stress and its 
related affects on young girls, was conducted by Drs. Vincent 
Capaldi II, Laura Stroud and Raymond Niaura, all from Brown 
Medical School in Providence, Rhode Island. Their research was 
performed under the direction of Dr. Jeanne Brooks-Gunn of 
Columbia University in New York. The findings were presented in 
March of 2002 at the 60th annual meeting of the American 
Psychosomatic Society.
The study centered on the ability of 138 young girls to cope with 
stressors based on sleep habits. It was found that little girls who 
went to bed at or before 8:00 P.M. were better able to cope with 3


--- PAGE 125 ---
77
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
stressful tasks: block designs, placing cold towels on their 
foreheads for a specific length of time, and mother-daughter 
disagreements. Those who went to bed after 8:00 P.M. were found 
to be less able to cope with these stressor-stimuli.
But what did this research actually prove? That earlier bedtimes 
helped little girls cope better with home, school and social stressors?
No. What this research actually proved was that the stressors little 
girls are now forced to endure in this gender-perverted society, are 
caused by feminized cultural imperatives inherently pathological to 
the well being of little girls; that as a consequence of this, young adult 
females are now experiencing inexplicable health anomalies due to 
their exposure to earlier gender-related, socializing abuses.
What it also proved is that scientific research teams are now paid 
millions of our tax dollars to investigate third graders to see why so 
many adult women are suffering with clinical depression, suicidal 
tendencies, infertility, pre-menopausal symptoms, migraines, and a 
host of other ailments yet to reveal themselves — all as a result of 
consequences incurred because of this culture's pathological 
feminist agenda.
And then there is an article by Jeoffrey Lean reporting on yet 
another form of stress affecting the developmental integrity of our 
children; chemical-related  stress.
In a publication called The Independent,  Mr. Lean states that 
Michael Meacher, the Environmental Minister of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain, was extremely disturbed by research 
results concerning "gender-bending" chemicals showing up in the 
environment and the food supply.
It seems that a study done by doctors and scientists at Erasmus 
University in Rotterdam revealed startling evidence that so-called 
'normal levels' of certain toxic chemicals are having drastic affects 
on human beings. This research was the follow-up to a series of 
preliminary studies, which gave evidence that chemicals defined as


--- PAGE 126 ---
78
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"gender-benders" were turning wildlife species (seagulls, otters, 
frogs, alligators, fish, polar bears, and turtles) ... into hermaphrodites!
But what of their affects on our children?
The study found that the chemicals caused little girls to play with 
guns and pretend to be soldiers,  while they caused little boys to play 
with dolls, tea sets, and dress up in female clothes!
Amazing.
The research itself was published in a scientific journal called 
Environmental Health Perspectives,  which was part of a long-time 
study into the affects of Dioxin and PCB's on children. It measured 
levels of these chemicals in...
1 - The blood of 207 mothers in their final month of pregnancy...
2 - The umbilical blood at birth... and;
3 - The breast milk 2 weeks after birth, to determine the
level of exposure in the womb...
More on environmental poisons and their affects on the human 
endocrine system in a subsequent section.
Of course there are many more subtle physical and mental 
disorders that begin to appear as a result of hormonal degradation, 
particularly as a mature woman grows older. She may begin to notice 
new growths of hair in places where she never had hair growth 
before, e.g., on her face as sideburns, over her lip and chin, along 
with an uncharacteristic deepening of her voice.
I personally believe that the continual presence of stress-related 
androgenic chemicals in a woman's body, coupled with the vast array 
of environmental poisons, thought pollution, radiation and poor 
dietary habits, are the true causes of the breast cancer epidemic now 
suffered by women.
Women today have adopted most if not all of the temperaments, 
behavior, mannerisms, and physical traits attributed to men, and 
with them, most of the diseases formally attributed to men as well.


--- PAGE 127 ---
79
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
As she grows older and no longer participates in as many stress- 
related activities, the "liberated" woman's body finally begins to 
show distinct signs of what her career-motivated levels of stress was 
doing to her all along—slowly strangling her delicate feminine 
proclivities to death.
Doing the 'work7  and playing the 'games' of men inevitably turns 
a woman into a biologically dysfunctional, menopausal 
gynandromorph.
Another thing of paramout importance for the seeker to overstand, 
is the fact that there is a qualitative difference between what I have 
termed stress, and distress. The former is based on reactions of the 
body to pressures and difficulties that primarily affect it from 
external sources, while the latter is related to our emotional responses 
to such pressures; that is—how the mind and thoughts utilize such 
interpretations to affect the body from within.
2


--- PAGE 128 ---
80
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Rise of the Olympic Gynander:  
Little Girls are now made of "Snakes and  
Snails and Puppy Dogs' Tails ..."
The commercial media now promotes 
gynandrous female athletes as the new role 
models for little girls, and the 1996 Olympics 
was a major launch-point for the worldwide 
introduction and social acceptance of the 21st 
century Amazon, (see figures 5, 6, 7,8 and 8).
"Women's" gymnastics for example, 
purported to be one of the most prestigious 
athletic events in Olympic competition, is in 
reality a most abominable display of state- 
sanctioned child abuse masked as world-class 
'sport." Yet it is applauded.
Where pray-tell are the feminist watchdogs 
to yelp their disapproval at this all-too- 
obvious exploitation of little girls?
You see the trouble with this child-labor 
circus called "women's" gymnastics, is that it 
is not about women's gymnastics at all. Most 
of these "women athletes" are just little girls!
While watching the 1996 Olympics, the 
world witnessed first hand what happens to 
these 'special' little girls when they make a mistake while doing their 
dangerous, potentially crippling routines. Little Dominique 
Morceanu landed squarely on her head and neck  while attempting four 
sequential back-flips on a balance beam "... no wider than a 
videotape cassette...", as commentator John Tesh observed. 
Incredibly, she held on and wasn't seriously hurt. But then we don't 
know what her future will reveal, do we?
Interesting to note as well was the reaction of John Tesh to the 
replay of this mishap. It amounted to being something like a"verbal 
grimace", accompanied by an empathic pain he must have felt as he
Figure 5 
Olympic Gynander  
Gwen Torrance
from Time Magazine


--- PAGE 129 ---
81
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
reviewed and commented on the incident. Mr. Tesh's reaction may 
have truly been heart-felt and sincere, but has it ever occurred to any 
of the other jello-brained idiots who announce this "sport" that the 
little girls performing before them were not bom doing these 
dangerous routines? Did they (or the world for that matter) ever ask 
themselves how many times these innocents may have severely
bruised, broken or tom their little 
bodies before they achieved their 
present levels of expertise?
Another child-casualty of the 
'96 games was little Kerri Strug 
(see figure 6) who severely 
injured her ankle during a
routine, but was still allowed to 
compete in other events. There's 
no telling what type of
irreparable damage Olympic
officials may have caused by
such an irresponsible decision. In 
fact, an article appearing in 
Sunday's New York Daily News 
revealed that Miss Strug was still 
limping and no closer to being 
completely healed of her injury, 
and the article in question was 
released in February of 1997 —  
a full 7 months after this tragic 
even t took place!
Figure 6 - Kerri Strug  
Performing with fractured ankle
I wonder if the countries that sponsor such abuse-as-sport ever 
stopped to think about the toll these little girls exact upon their 
undeveloped bodies—especially the hormonal and gynecological 
problems that eventually show up after they've reached puberty, and


--- PAGE 130 ---
82
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
what the children they may later birth from their wombs will also 
have to suffer.
These little girls already exhibited the perverse evidence of 
physiological mutation, by showing what happens when heavy stress 
causes perversions of the estrogen pathways creating abnormal 
influxes of masculine-like steroids. It has molded their bodies into 
mannish physiological features like those of Gwen Torrance (see 
figures 5) and little Kerri Strug (see figure 6).
If a parent were to inflict the types of punishment, bruises and 
consistent pain these child-athletes suffer daily when practicing or 
performing these stunts, they'd lawfully be convicted of child abuse 
and thrown under the jail. And rightfully so.
Another thing.
These pre-pubescent Olympians constitute the best their countries 
had to offer. The critical question is; how many thousands of little 
girls around the world will be seduced into participating in such 
body-perverting activities, simply by virtue of the profuse attention 
and lavish praise bestowed upon these "special" little girls by the 
feminized media? You may be sure that "officials" will find no need 
to answer questions like these, since gynandric athletics and feminist 
reporters the world over are sure to give high praises to what they 
do. Like gold medalist tennis player Lindsay Davenport, who 
proudly stated;
"... These Olympics, probably more than any before, are 
showing a lot of little girls it's OK to sweat, it's OK to 
play hard, it's OK to be an athlete..."
Oh really! We'll see about that in the following sections.
Donna Lopiano, Executive Director of the Women's Sports 
Foundation, mentioned that the startling increase of women 
represented at the 1996 Olympics (3,779 - or 37% of all athletes) had 
more to do with "...a marked shift in cultural attitudes16 toward
16 Translation —  the gender-feminization of the world. - Author


--- PAGE 131 ---
83
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
women in sports; ...it also has to do with an ever-growing number of 
little girls who now are playing sports at a younger age." This 
created what Lopiano calls ".. .a critical mass of participants."
The most revealing part of this New 
York Daily News  article entitled 
"Women: Hear Them Roar - Olympic 
triumphs reflect coming of age"—was 
the line that said ...
"...The more that women began to play and play 
well, the more a market began to develop.
Corporations saw the upward attendance curve. Tliey  
saw a chance to reach female consumers who were not  
only playing, hit watching too..."  {Emphasis mine]
It's evident that this society has fallen 
into a self-induced perceptual coma.
Natural instincts have to be at an all-time 
low if people can't see the future tragedy 
built into this feminist obsession for 
females to "represent" in male-inspired 
physical activities. The dire consequences to impressionable young 
gynic girls who are coerced or goaded into participating (just to "fit 
in"), will surely be reaped in subsequent generations.
Case in point.
New York Daily News - Thursday, September 5th, 2002. In a side 
bar article entitled Sportswire located on the very last page of the 
sports section, there appeared the heading ... "Girl 10 dies of Football 
blow."
The tragedy was reported as follows...
".. .Tailor Davidson, a 10 year old girl scout and 
horseback rider from suburban Chicago, who 
was good in math and science and the only girl 
on her football team...left  practice with a headache


--- PAGE 132 ---
84
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
and collapsed as she walked off the field with 
her coach. Three days later she was dead. Medical 
examiners say Taylor died Monday of a blow to the 
head that led to a blood clot on the right side of her 
brain, possibly caused by a tackle at a full-contact 
'practice three days before her collapse..."
(Emphasis mine)
This little girl's short life and tragic death was reduced to a paultry 
6 sentences—a  mere footnote in the annals of feminist insanity; an 
incidental sacrifice on the altars of equality; an "acceptable loss" in 
the on-going battle to show that girls are no different from boys —  that 
"women can do whatever men can do (and better)."
In fact, based on the way this story was covered (that is, the blatant 
criminal cowardice of the paper not to make it front page news) we 
are left with the impression that this tragic event was simply an 
"occupational hazard" that could have happened to anyone.
A shameful and criminal de-emphasis of the truth.
With the passage of feminist sponsored legislation like Title IX in 
1972, which demanded men’s and women's sports be treated equally, 
the race to acquire scholarships for girls to play sports created an 
outlet of expression for hormonally mutated females who now 
represent a rapidly-growing segment of our degenerating humanity.
But as of 2003, just twenty-one years after its passage, serious 
questions have arisen concerning the damage this legislation has done 
to males in the arena of school related sports. It has now come to the 
attention of the nation's school administrators that statistically, girls 
are not predisposed to joining sports related activities during college 
or high school in the same numbers that boys normally would. With 
the number of girls seeking to participate in legitimate school sports 
so low, the boys have suffered dearly because the Title IX legislation 
states that male and female representation in school related sports 
must be of equal numbers!


--- PAGE 133 ---
85
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
So what was the feminists' response to this stunning bit of 
revelation? Simple. Elevate cheerleading to the rank and status of a 
legitimate college sport (like football and basketball-) in order to 
manipulate the numbers to give credibility to this specious policy!!
Item: When speaking to the matter of the growing number of gynandrous women  
and their hormonal imbalances, it is not my intent to be insensitive or mean-  
spirited. My criticisms are primarily directed toward gender feminists, the  
feminized media, and the corporate parasites who intend to capitalize financially  
on women who suffer from hormonal abnormalities. Not only that, I especially  
take issue with the ivay these women are being promoted as prime examples of the  
"new elite" of the female gender; just your " normal, everyday all-American girls."  
They are not! Virtually all of them are hormonally imbalanced and gamatically  
deformed. (See figures 5 through 9.) Even if they are going to see a "big payday"  
and have a wonderful career entertaining people in the arenas of sport, it does not  
change the fact that the majority of these poor sisters are hormonal oddities of  
gender.
A May 2,1996 news article appearing in the New York Voice gave 
some interesting hints to support my contention that this society is 
masculinizing its female population, while at the same time 
feminizing its males. The article was entitled "Health Problems of  
Young Women Athletes " by Dr. Frederic D. Frigoletto Jr., then 
president of the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. Without actually coming right out and stating it, the 
article nevertheless showed that young girls should not be 
performing male-inspired exercises and sports. In essence, the article 
was not so much about what the good doctor said, but what he did 
not, or could not say.
Dr. Frigoletto began his article by stating "... when it comes to 
exercise, too much of a good thing can be harmful." In the very next 
line he seems to purposely lump the sexes together as 'equal' by 
saying "... all athletes in training sometimes go overboard, leading to 
injuries and other health problems." What was not made clear by this 
comment is just what constitutes "overboard" for a man, and 
"overboard" for a woman.


--- PAGE 134 ---
86
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
He goes on to mention that girl athletes have experienced delayed 
menstrual cycles to beyond sixteen years (called primary 
amenorrhea) while menstruating women athletes skip regular cycles 
for up to six months at a time (secondary amenorrhea).
His next line held a valuable clue; "... both of these conditions are 
of potential concern because they could signal estrogen deficiency." 
Again he failed to bring a thought to its logical conclusion, for if 
strenuous exercise leads to estrogen deficiency, what's next except to 
logically assume that the consequences of this — are excess levels of  
androsterone and testosterone!
For this he recommends an immediate decrease in activity levels. 
Good call. But then he screws it all up by also recommending 
"supplemental estrogen."
Curious. This article was written in 2996! If I'm not mistaken, 
weren't there breakthrough research reports already circulated 
worldwide to every physician demonstrating the direct link of 
estrogen replacement therapies to a myriad of pernicious female 
diseases (the worst being breast and cervical cancer)? And he 
suggested this therapy for children?! Hmmm ....
The most interesting part of this article dealt with the 
psychological erosion of girl athletes. Eating disorders were said to 
be common, with anorexia nervosa topping the list. This disease 
involves self-imposed starvation that results from a girl's attempt to 
conform to the so-called "ideal" body image —like the slender, 
no-hipped, no-breast, muscle-cut gymnast or dancer. Crash dieting 
and bulimia are common practices to achieve or maintain the 
desired weight limits.
Another psychological anomaly concerns the trauma young 
women athletes experience as their bodies undergo the changes of 
puberty. Not only are the girls stunted and physiologically 
perverted by the grueling practice regiments they must endure, but 
also, they are almost never prepared psychologically by their 
parents, trainers or supervising adults for the biological limitations 
their bodies automatically undergo when they become adults.


--- PAGE 135 ---
87
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 8
But even with the above evidence in tow, Dr. Frigoletto still fell 
woefully short of condemning or even criticizing this practice. 
Instead, he encouraged coaches and parents to accommodate it by 
managing the abuse more efficiently, telling the adults to allow 
"time off" for "emotional and social development" of their 
athletically active female children.
Item: At the time of this re-write (2007-8) there are 29 1/1 million girls playing some  
kind of sport throughout this country—between seven and ten thousand young  
girls are playing organized football  nationwide, and the number is expected to  
quadruple by the year 2010. This is because many feminized corporations are  
pushing incentives for girls to play sports, having already geared up to sponsor  
professional female sports leagues like the already functioning WNBA (Women's  
National Basketball Association)—a professional women's hockey league; a  
professional women's baseball league; a women's boxing association; a women's  
weight lifting team, and an experimental draft for a minor league semi-pro  
women's football league. As of 1996 to the present, in Arlington Texas, the  
American Civil Liberties Union continues to seek to reverse a court ban that  
prevents girls from wrestling boys in high school and college competition. It is  
expected to happen.


--- PAGE 136 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 9
These bloodied and bruised Amazon women shown boxing in the above picture,  
are just one example of what the degenerate appetites of certain sports fans expect  
to feast upon in the future world of "equal-opportunity sports entertainment"...
With reference to the female boxers shown in figure 9 for example; 
the pursuit of male-related sports activities by today's bored and 
restless female population, is a clearer indication of what feminists 
hate to admit; to wit— that the male is the natural leader and innovator in  
virtually all aspects and activities of the outer society—and that women  
naturally follow that lead in their everyday workings of the inner (and outer)  
society. Statistical proof of this is seen in the fact that today, even with 
the last 2 to 3 generations of so-called "equal opportunity" for 
scientific and technical skills education here in America, at least 98% 
of all innovative technical inventions and designs are still being 
submitted for copyright and patenting by men!


--- PAGE 137 ---
89
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Imperfect though this cosmic equation may have been represented 
throughout countless ages of human civilizations here on Earth, the 
fact still remains that the masculine principle is genetically hardwired 
by Cosmic Intelligence to be society's direct authority—the  natural 
leaders and innovators, while the feminine principle is hardwired to 
be representative of society's indirect authority— the natural 
supporters, perfecters and refiners. This equation deeply irks the 
feminized female and her hormonally unbalanced psyche', which is 
mostly masculinized and thus aggressively competitive in nature 
anyway—no matter what race, religion or social standing she hails 
from. Everyday we are manipulated by their propoganda to 
sympathize and support feminism's insane pursuit for the unilateral 
acceptance of gender parity, especially on the battlefields of sport.
This fact is monotonously played out in their Hollywood themes 
where they aggressively promote "gutsy-female-conquers-life- 
through-perfecting-the-skills-of-men-in-a-male-dominated-world" 
scenarios, over and over and over again.
For example, in an all too obvious cloning of the Rocky Balboa 
underdog theme (this time featuring "Rocky-na"), the manufactured 
needs of the American feminist psyche to "conquer and feel 
empowered" continued to be exploited after Hillary Swank won the 
2005 best actress award for portraying a female boxer in the film 
Million Dollar Baby.  For weeks after this Oscar event, boxing gyms 
and other exercise centers all over the country were overrun with 
young girls asking male boxing instructors to teach them to box.
Why? Because Hillary was "such an inspiration."
A Sunday March 6th 2005 Daily News article by Jonathan Lemire 
entitled " Movie's Girl Ka-Power; 'Baby' fuels female interest in Boxing",  
with a sidebar that read " ...Warning Guys! Women are adopting boxing  
as a form of exercise and emotional release" —shows the extent to which 
young women in America have virtually no creative/innovative 
feminine activities in the outer society; none created by women or 
directly related to women, except those already accepted activities 
dealing with dance and other such categories of the fine arts. At the 
very end of this article, a 23-year-old young woman named Michelle 
French was quoted as saying...


--- PAGE 138 ---
90
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
"... It was either this or step aerobics;... but you can't beat the crap out 
of anyone in step aerobics ..."
And believe it or not beloved, these very words became the 
prophetic harbingers of disaster. Just 30 days after the above article 
was published, the New York Post reported that a female boxer—one 
Becky Zerlentes...
".. .in an eerie echo of (the movie) Million Dollar Baby... was killed in the 
ring during a match .. .sanctioned by the USA Boxing Commission."
The preliminary report stated that she died from a "...blunt force 
trauma to the head." This despite the fact that site was wearing protective  
headgear! The article went on to say that in June of 2003, another 
woman —a Florida mother named Stacy Young, also died after being 
beaten into a coma during a "Toughman" boxing competition that 
she entered "on an impulse."
How many more fatalities must occur (or already has occurred but 
never reported), before our sisters see that in arenas such as these, 
'imitation is the inevitable escort of tragedy?'
Has our society sunk so low in its perverted tastes for something 
new, bizarre and more stimulating, that we now look forward to 
seeing women being beaten and bloodied in the squared circle?
It seems that public blood-letting of females by females is the new 
fashion statement now being paraded down western society's 
terminal genetic runway.
Item: In keeping with the twisted western propensity for life imitating art, the  
Daily News (April 26, 2005) reported that anabolic steroids have become the new  
drug of choice for young girls as young as 9 years of age! The News article, written  
by Corky Seimaszko entitled "Roids all the Rage-for Girls", stated that up to 5% of  
high school girls and 7% of middle school girls surveyed admitted to trying  
anabolic steroids. The opening paragraphs gave the reasons for girls using these  
deadly drugs as "...the desire for Hillary Swank's six-pack abs and Madonna's cut  
quadriceps." In the closing paragraph, a professor Lloyd Johnston stated quite  
ominously that parents need to pierce the shameful secrecy surrounding steroid  
abuse by girls. "Other than pedophilia," he continued, "this is the most secret  
behavior I've ever encountered."


--- PAGE 139 ---
91
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Truth Hurts: (literally)
Under-stating the Obvious...
•
Yes family; the psychotic gender-feminist obsession to 
masculinize young girls in this country and around the westernized 
world, has created an ongoing history of pathological consequence 
and disaster.
But you'd never know it with all the smoke and hype.
Case in point; "feminist reporters who hedge the obvious."
Its mind boggling to think that someone granted the privilege of 
writing for a major daily newspaper, would actually be allowed to 
submit such inane diatribe as is represented in the following. The 
lack of fair and balanced (much less intelligent) reporting on this 
issue borders on the criminal. But with Amazonian feminism, I've 
learned to expect anything.
A New York Daily News  article dated Monday, September 11,1997, 
appearing in the 'Now Health' section, spoke volumes to how 
infectious the equality virus has become in our society. Author Susan 
Ferraro, writing what could only be construed as a sanitized, spin- 
doctored article entitled "... Tearing Up The Court... And Their Knees ; 
Women hoopsters 4 times more likely than men to run afoul of ligament  
injuries ...", should have been taken out and publicly flogged for her 
cowardly lack of guts in failing to state the obvious. Throughout her 
article, Ms. Ferraro says everything but what should have been said 
while relating her topic; namely— women should not be playing men's  
sports — period!
When studied for content, this article is exposed as yet another 
sham in a series of spurious reports written to off-set the impact of 
any truth that proves damnable to feminism's quest for gender-parity 
in sports. "Sports scientists", begins Ms. Ferraro, "...say young 
female basketball players are four times more likely than men to 
pop or rip the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)—a tough, fibrous, 
slightly elastic tissue that ties the knee and the leg bone together."


--- PAGE 140 ---
92
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Ms. Ferraro continues...
"... Most women's ACL injuries are non-contact. They happen 
when the knee gives away as it twists and turns ..."
And why is that? She answers...
"... Everything you read about this says 'We don't know—  
and we don't', says Dr. Susan Craig Scott, head team 
physician for the New York Liberty, the city's entry in 
the fledgling Women's National Basketball Association
... There are now 23 million girls participating in high 
school sports, and 20 years ago, there were 20,000, 
says Scott..."
We don't Know?! How clueless can this woman truly be.
Or better yet—how clueless does she think everyone else is when 
she (and the author) knows full well that virtually all of these and 
other related injuries, occur in girls and women who participate in 
historically male-related sports activities?!
The last sentence of the latter paragraph is obviously evasive, and 
of no logical sequence to the admitted ignorance confessed to in the 
previous sentence. How is it that a "head team physician" like 
Dr. Susan Craig Scott (purportedly trained at a top accredited 
university in the working dynamics of the athletic body), can 
display such glaring stupidity (and get away with it) when asked to 
consider why women athletes are suffering so much injury playing 
men's sports?
Because her words represent yet another classic example of the 
Orwellian/feminist double-speak that pollutes the psycho-social 
fabric of the modern western world. In the same article under the 
sub-title "(A) Slew of Reasons", Ms. Ferraro goes on to say ...
"...Purely physical reasons for the (ACL) injuries include 
the fact that women are more limber than men, which 
means their joints bend more ..."
Another "expert" comment that makes no sense what-so-ever. 
The word limber is defined by the American Heritage Dictionary as...
"... bending or flexing readily; supple; contorting easily; pliable..."


--- PAGE 141 ---
93
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Thus according to the above defination, it is the men who should 
suffer more often from such an injury, since on average they are not 
as "limber" as women. If in fact a woman is "more limber" than a 
man, would it not stand to reason that she could more easily bend or 
stretch to accommodate the angles of stress being blamed for these 
injuries?
Let's be real my sisters. In feminist double-think and double-speak 
jargon, the phrase "more limber" (when placed in its proper socio­
political context) is actually a cryptic interpolation of the word 
"weaker." But the feminist ego wouldn't dare admit to this.
However Dr. Elizabeth Arendt of the University of Minnesota, 
who tabulates sports related injuries among college women around 
the country does admit to it. She verifies that...
".. .The angle of the pelvic bone and weaker hamstrings
(in women) may be factors leading to less knee stability ..."
Holy hip-joints Batgirl! Do our eyes deceive us?
This last statement by Dr. Arendt is a monumental admission of 
handicap by virtue of physiological design! In other words the angle 
of the pelvic bones, wider hips and their proximities to the knees 
and hamstrings (by design), preclude a woman from executing 
certain stressful peripheral movements that the male athlete (by 
virtue of his physiological design) is more suited to execute. As a 
result, ACL injuries are far more prevalent in female athletes playing 
men's games because of the greater laxity (or weakness) in their 
joints.
This is based entirely on design and the circulation of female 
hormones. In women, the anterior cruciate ligaments have estrogen 
receptor cells that encourage laxity and pliability! This design of the 
female anatomy, in part allows a mother to nurse her baby more 
comfortably while kneeling, because kneeling slows the flow of 
blood to the heart allowing for a smoother more unimpeded flow of 
milk from the breast. But it becomes a liability that makes the tissue 
more susceptible to tearing if she insists on participating in male


--- PAGE 142 ---
94
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
sports-related activities.
Ergo. The feminist pursuit of gender-parity in sports for women 
will continue to be frustrated, not by men— but by Nature Mother and  
Cosmic design!  In the arenas of college and professional sports, a 
woman is not a man. There is no such thing as "performance parity" 
in high school, college or professional sports, regardless of the 
insane proposals of Title IX. A woman is not "equal" to this task. 
She can imitate, but she cannot be or do as a man and remain 
healthy. If she continues in her attempts to match the physical 
prowess of alpha males, she will invariably continue to suffer—as 
will her unborn children.
This is not chauvinism. This is Immutable Cosmic Law!
An article such as this is simply fantastic as an investigative 
resource for the serious seeker who wishes to fathom the psycho­
politics of feminism. It's a lesson in "between-the-lines" 
comprehension and code breaking.
According to Ms. Ferraro's article, Dr. Arendt admits that ACL 
injuries in women athletes may have something to do with 
fluctuating hormones! But here's where the double-think gets even 
more inane...
"...The hormone relaxin allows the pelvis to widen for 
labor. Most school athletes are not pregnant, but 
Dr. Arendt thinks it is at least possible that ligaments 
react to hormonal changes ..."
Hold the phone! Did you catch that?
"Most school athletes are not pregnant?" What in God's name does 
this mean? Are these "experts" saying that it is common in their 
profession to tell young women that it is all right to participate in 
male sports while they are pregnant ?
And the article continues to under-state the obvious, as Ms. Ferraro 
and the "professionals" being interviewed offer up these following 
tid-bits of genius:


--- PAGE 143 ---
95
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Ms. Ferraro...
?
"... Regular training exercises for men may have to be modified to work 
for women..."
Dr. Craig-Scott...
9
"... The message here has to be that when young women get hurt we need to 
pay attention and think about what causes injuries ..." (Duhhhh...)
Dr. Elizabeth Arendt...
?
"... Most ACL injuries in young women occur when they 'plant and cut'— 
planting their feet and cutting right or left in a fast twisting motion. But a 
three step stop with flexed knees reduced ACL injuries among college 
basketball players by 89% over several years ..."
Incredible! I wonder if the seeker sees by the above quotes what I 
mean by the downright retarded reasoning displayed by these 
"professional" feminist "experts." And these are direct quotes!
To simply say "... when young women get hurt we need to pay 
attention and think about what causes injuries ..." and not make it 
clear why young women are physically pre-disposed or susceptible to 
these types of injuries, is criminally negligent and just plain sick.
How much longer must we read such statements by feminized 
experts like "... regular training for men may have to be modified to 
work for women..." or "... a three step stop with flexed knees 
reduced ACL injuries 89%over several years ..." before we realize that 
any significant modifications to the rules of a sport historically 
played by men, in order to accommodate the physiologies of 
women —  is no longer the same sport!
The above article represents a guarded admission by these experts 
that the notion of gender-parity and the pursuit of sports equality by 
feminism on behalf of millions of young women and little girls, is a 
pathogenically dangerous, albeit psychotically unattainable delusion. 
Just because we read on the sports pages that the first ever female


--- PAGE 144 ---
96
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
high school senior won the 2004 McDonald's slam-dunk contest over 
the boys (in what could easily be seen as a staged, politically correct 
decision by McDonald's to bolster waning support for female school 
athletics), does not mean that the vast and overwhelming majority of 
gyne-centric girls are meant to follow suit.
This insanity invites even greater ramifications for our genetic 
future as a species. Long before the April 2005 report by Corky 
Seimaszko revealing the abuse of anabolic steroids by girls as young 
as 9 years of age, a December 1997 report by the American Pediatrics 
Journal stated that over 175,000 young women active in sports were  
hooked on anabolic steroids!
Given the momentum of this and other such Amazonian trends, 
one can only imagine to what levels these alarming numbers will 
grow as this new millennium matures.
Double-Speak and the Tragedy  
of Feminized Sports Medicine...
•
In what could only be described as a feeble attempt to maintain 
credibility when confronted by overwhelming evidence of their 
insanity, feminist sports doctors (of late) appear to be modifying their 
equality propaganda and their "women can do whatever a man can 
do" rhetoric.
Case in point: "... Women's bodies may not be able to withstand  
football - we're physiologically different... and you have to understand that  
if you want to participate or coach."
So says Dr. Lisa R. Callahan, director of the Women's Sports 
Medicine Center located in New York City.
From an article appearing in Newsday dated July 14, 1998 entitled 
Healthy, But Hurting  (a glaring oxymoron), we read Dr. Callahan's 
attempt to cover her dubious professional tracks, by using spin and 
contradiction to qualify such Orwellian statements as...
"... Yes women's injuries are increasing. But we're also 
going to see young women grow up healthier because 
they're participating in sports ..."


--- PAGE 145 ---
97
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Un-believable! And this same "educated" professional burrows to 
even greater depths of absurdity by attempting to rationalize the 
belief that women's sports injuries are caused by "... poor coaching, 
training, and equipment", rather than inappropriately dangerous 
gender-conduct!
Question: How does one properly train a woman to protect herself 
in order to play a sport that was originally developed for men, to be 
played by men? The good doctor even attempts to support her 
ridiculous contentions, by citing research studies which concluded 
that female basketball players (get this)...
"... don’t generate as much squeaking noises on the court as 
the men do..."
You read that right, seeker. Our tax dollars were appropriated to 
study squeaks on a basketball court!!
But wait. Dr. Callahan actually explains this ground-breaking 
research;
"...This may mean nothing. But it could be because how 
a woman moves ... is d-i-f-f-e-r-e-n-t!!"  [Emphasis mine]
Again ... LZN-believable!
Ironically, it is at the very beginning of this article that the authors 
(from API Los Angeles) appear to have already concluded in summary 
their investigations into the horrendous state of women's sports and 
health, stating that...
"... Women are getting hurt more, and appear more vulnerable to certain 
kinds of sports injuries. Moreover, there is scant (to no) knowledge, not 
only on how to help women prevent injuries, but how and why they 
occur...!"
Incredible! And even with this clear confession of abject ignorance, 
Dr. Callahan still has the nerve to "...caution people against reaching 
any unwarranted conclusions...", based on all the evidence now 
coming to light. With gall the size of Rhode Island, Dr. Callahan then 
fixes her face to say that evidence connected to the rampant epidemic 
of women's sports injuries...
"... should not convey the idea that their (women's) bodies 
weren't made for such endeavors(?);  that... there are


--- PAGE 146 ---
98
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
'studies' which show women achieving 80% of men’s 
muscle strength when taking into account body size ..."
My God, sisters! How much longer will you tolerate such 
Orwellian diatribe? How could anyone in their right mind read such 
cock and bull, and not smell the acrid stench of feminist double-speak 
assailing the very crux of their common sense—let alone their 
nostrils?!
But just when you thought you'd heard the worst of it, along 
comes another educated expert (complete with 'credentials') to push 
the envelope even further. Moving forward in the same article we 
reach the words of one Dr. Carol Frey, who (believe it or not) is an 
expert on women's shoes and feet  at the University of Southern 
California!
(They actually give degrees for studying women's feet  ??!)
This would all be laughable if it weren't so tragic. Dr. Frey 
complains:
"... Manufacturers still do not make a specific women's 
shoe for track and field. They take a man's shoe and 
scale it down. But a woman's foot is not shaped like a 
man's foot. Since 1994, females have been buying 
more athletic shoes than men. Yet (manufacturers) 
still do not generally make shoes for the female foot..."
And these learned "experts" actually get paid good money for 
promoting such trash. As if equipment specifically designed for 
women's feet, are going to help them to safely do what their bodies 
were never designed to do in the first place. It's ludicrous!
The fact that a woman's foot "... is not shaped like a man's foot" 
logically means that a sport, which men developed over the centuries 
(based on a man's feet) was never meant to be played by feet whose 
archetypal designs were not designed and structured like his!
Consequently, if present-day sports equipment for female athletes 
are genuinely contributing to more and greater injuries, then (believe


--- PAGE 147 ---
99
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
it or not) these injuries may actually be heaven-sent; a vital warning 
to intelligent sisters that sports (as they are currently pursued and 
played by gynandrous females) were never meant to be played by 
any woman!
In fact, if people were aware of the true origins of Greco-Roman 
(western) sports, they would realize that it was never meant to be 
played by average men either!
My sisters. Changing a woman's sports equipment does not 
change her delicate biological design; that is —her archetypal 
infrastructure. Making it easier for her to imitate the athletic prowess 
of alpha males, will only cause her to take frequent and ever-more 
dangerous chances with her fragile body. To foster the notion that 
better equipment and proper training for women brings occupational 
safety and performance-parity to men, is nothing more than perverse 
feminist propaganda posing as science to support their preposterous 
contention that in sports, little girls (with proper training and 
equipment) can truly "do whatever a boy can do."
But as I mentioned earlier beloved — girls cannot "do" whatever 
boys do...only what they see boys do. And until some other 
convenient feminist 'ism', axiom or excuse comes along to explain 
away your next levels of pain and suffering for imitating men, we are 
now being conditioned to believe that female athletes are suffering 
epidemic injuries—not from their perverse gender conduct —but 
from wearing the wrong clothes, having the wrong training and using 
the wrong equipment
Funny thing though. What are we (the public) to believe about the 
serious injuries suffered by Jackie Joyner Kersee, Flo-Jo (Amen rest 
her soul), Kerri Strug, Gwen Torrance, Lisa Leslie, or Sandra Farmer- 
Patrick?
These are Olympic champions!  Who dressed them? Who trained 
them? Who equipped them? You'd better believe that in every 
category, they had the very best that money could buy and still they 
all suffered near crippling and career-ending injuries!


--- PAGE 148 ---
100
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Women imitating men in arenas of combat for the sake of sport 
(arenas created by men for the hyper-stimulating activities of men), 
over the long-run will do no less than inflict the most disastrous 
genetic consequences upon our following generations.
The more women insist on playing men's sports at the levels of 
intensity dictated by the physiological abilities of men, the more 
they will suffer. And so will our children—and our children's 
children.
Item: If the statistics of suffering stated above were being caused by
"preventable" diseases or sociological conditions that proved to be distinct health 
hazards or dangers to average women, the feminist watch-dogs of the media 
would have had a veritable field-day. Like sharks in a bloody feeding frenzy, 
they would have attacked the "insensitivity of a male-dominated social order" as 
the cause. So why are they so curiously silent in the face of such overwhelming 
evidence about the anatomical consequences of women playing male-oriented 
sports? In truth, it appears as if the feminists are being criminally  silent in order 
to bring less attention to the gender-parity issue (Title IX; 1972), because as a 
precedent, it has failed to prove that women's sports should be considered on par 
with men's sports; for it is being proven time and time again that women cannot 
do so and remain physically (or hormonally) healthy. And more importantly, you 
can bet that their silence is their way of not losing the enormous dividends they 
are making at the expense of their less-than-knowledgeable female participants, 
who unwittingly take part in their "Amazonian agenda." Looks to me like today's 
feminists have become who and what they claim to hate the most.
Think about that beloved sisters.
9


--- PAGE 149 ---
101
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Sandra Farmer Patrick 
Figure 10
'L, Uh x s) a o  ■Jiaof \Si
6^-&rtv~eJp f-& dJ^euf-<L &4- A- •^U ^yy^- d ^L ^,
t'rufJl ^ o f  tmedfv cfr 
'Pfan  v $ u > ~ ^ c ^ '
'^yn&a-ia. ^ ^ sCsC&o j.-- ? \Q -ftrtrA - <k £  'C&j l s
PAA^yJ bJ-h^jL--
A , ^ h o L is  (v -k ijfts ^ y b s v f, U ? A C -f <JL U jJrdU l'A . 
^Cu/AOyy^-. A sJl ***1^* fcxx^OHl
-- '-  - f r - i  / , 1  J - .  ~ >
Erl* is


--- PAGE 150 ---
102
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Sandra's Secret...
•
Sometimes, when a woman knows what to look for, she'll find 
precious gems hidden just below the jaded awareness of society's 
'sheeple-consciousness.' But then again, who knows? One woman's 
treasure is another woman's trash.
I've said this to bring your attention to an ad featuring Olympic 
gynander Sandra Farmer-Patrick, who by all appearances in her 
written statement, seems to be caught somewhere between her 
gynandrous proclivities and her now latent gynic instincts.
In her written note to the public (courtesy Planet Reebok)  she 
states...
"... m y m other w as so strict that I w asn't allow ed to w ear 
shorts as a young girl. So w hen I w ent out for track I 
had to w ear a skirt."
The treasures hidden within her statement will no doubt go 
completely unnoticed by the average sports fan, particularly the 
women. Sandra's mother (Amen bless her) represented a near-extinct 
breed of gynic woman who for one or more reasons gave birth to a 
gynandrous girl; a girl who became mortified at the prospects of 
having to wear a skirt to compete in a boy's game. Sandra's mother's 
"strictness" amounted to being a last ditch effort to retain some small 
remnant of gynic instincts and behavior for her precious daughter. 
Mother Farmer insisted that her little girl at least carry with dignity 
the last archetypal symbol of her endangered gender (the skirt) into 
the female version of this sport, and into a hormonally deranged, 
instinctually de-sensitized world.
It's a shame that the public (especially little girls) will likely never 
take notice of the sublime message being conveyed by Sandra's 
words in this advertisement.


--- PAGE 151 ---
103
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
G a y in The WNBA?
No Way!
•
Right now, in the political sectors of the gay and lesbian 
community, there is a passionate concern that the female athletes of 
professional sports who are gay are not coming out of the closet en 
masse to announce it, or to support those who do.
Gay and lesbian groups say that the number of genuine lesbian 
basketball players in the WNBA for example, is significant enough to 
support a legitimate campaign for social awareness aimed at fighting 
homophobia in sports.
But the fact that the majority of such women playing professional 
sports (married or not) are either gay or "on the way", came as no big 
surprise to anyone. And this really irks the gay community.
John Ryan of the San Jose Mercury News said...
"... Let's face it: On the list of shocking headlines,
'WNBA player is gay' falls somewhere between 
'Romo took steroids' and Steinbrenner is angry'..."
The interesting part of this "issue" is that behind the scenes there 
is an enormous effort being put forth by the financial promoters of 
women's sports to play down the obvious homosexual angle, while 
playing up the fact that these women are just your average everyday 
feminine heterosexuals. This has infurated the gay community, who 
are demanding that professional sports put an end to this sham and 
pretense.
And I whole-heartedly agree!  Maybe not for the same reasons, but I 
certainly agree that the general public should know what hyper­
active, masculine-related, stress-intensive activities can do to a 
woman, as well as the type of women that would seek to participate 
in them.
As I stated earlier, these women have perverted bio-chemistries —  
perverted to such an extent that at their infrastructural genetic cores 
they are no longer "real women." And I know that some of you 
seekers reading this would be moved to give an emotional response


--- PAGE 152 ---
104
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
like "that's cruel and insensitive; how could you say something like 
that?"
Because beloved, bio-chemically and psycho-spiritually—it's true! 
This accessment is not based on hate or ridicule, but on provable facts 
of Nature that the lesbian community and their sympathizers would 
attack as being "homophobic pseudo-science and gay-bashing." 
They would attempt to twist my arguments to convince the public 
that when I say such females are no longer "real women", I'm saying 
that they are no longer human.
This is patently ridiculous, and serves to shift the focus of the issue 
from one of critical analysis  to that of emotional paralysis.  It's their 
typical game of cynical one-ups-man-ship using jingoism and 
popular catch-phrases to manipulate feelings, and by default, 
circumvent logic.
On the other side of the farce-fence, portraying a pregnant Sheryl 
Swoops in the magazine Women / Sport as a 'shop-til-you-drop-aholic' 
Discover Card holder and good little domestic goddess/housewife 
pushing a shower-cleaner on T.V., was like piling hot manure into a 
wet paper bag.
It just would'nt hold!
And it didn't! Just recently (2006), the Houston Comet's superstar 
came out of the closet to announce that she was a lesbian. Again, 
what was the response of the sports writers of America?
A collective yawn topped off by a resounding ho-hum\
Associated Press  described it best, calling it "a shrug of 
indifference."
Of course gay activists were positively livid that she didn't get 
more attention than she did. But what did they expect? Reporters 
want news that shock and demand attention—something fresh and 
innovative. Gay women in sports?! Who would be shocked?
I believe the gay community was so pissed because they didn't get 
to bask in the political limelight that they hoped a superstar would 
have provided them, had this announcement been socially relevent.


--- PAGE 153 ---
105
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
And then there's the beautiful Cheryl Miller, prominent women's 
basketball star and as of late 2006—early 2007, NBC's sports 
analyst—sister of NBA superstar and hall-of-famer Reggie Miller.
Ms. Miller is a strange sell for the advertisers of women's sports. 
People are made to wonder "is she gay, or on the way?" She appears 
to be playing "both sides of the court"going for the 90's-androgynous 
look in her public style of dress. In 1984 while playing for her USC 
Trojan team, she said in an interview...
".. .Our goal... is to play like men on the court and behave 
like women off the court..."
In a 1997 New York Times  fashion supplement, Miller described 
how she prepares to go before the public;
"... I like to take a bubble bath and a few moments to reflect.
Then I start dressing. I like to wear tailored slacks and a 
tailored white shirt with French cuffs. The shirt has to be 
crisp — starched lightly, not real hard. I put on my favorite 
cufflinks. I put on my suspenders and a nice tie.. .then I 
slip on my trousers, socks and favorite Gucci shoes. This 
gives me the all together look that doesn't compromise 
my femininity..."
Hummm! Sounds more like little sister preferred to watch daddy 
get dressed when she was a girl, not mommie. It also sounds like her 
management and employers may have orchestrated what the 
industry refers to as "gay window dressing"; that is—promoting 
sexual ambiguity through androgynous styles of dress, so as to 
arouse and keep the interest of the growing lesbian supporters of 
professional sports —all the while remaining just under the "gay-dar" 
of the huge fudamentalist Christian fan-base.
Be that as it may, homosexuality in professional sports is a glaring 
reality in both the women and men's divisions. However, the 
underlying factors governing the bio-chemical pathologies of each 
(though sometimes related), are separated by one major exception for 
the ladies -bio-chemical perversion through stress-related behavior !


--- PAGE 154 ---
106
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Adverse physiological stress exerted upon the archetypal female 
anatomy over time, triggers adverse mutagenic changes in her 
bloodstream that eventually degenerates her overall physiology, and 
subsequently, her psychology as well.
Testosterone Pathway Toxicity:
T-Positive = T-Toxic...
•
Testosterone Pathway Toxicity  (TPT) is a phrase I coined to better 
distinguish the hormonal anomalies of women who overtly exhibit 
the physical and behavioral proclivities of men. It's a terminology 
that I think best articulates the many and varied consequences of 
such imbalances in women, and how this condition plays physical 
and mental havoc with their delicate anatomies and bio-chemistries.
The following may be considered a metaphysical hypothesis.
A woman's physiology (and mentality) are designed to be under 
the bio-chemical imperatives of estrogen and progestogen; more 
specific of the latter — progesterone. Interestingly enough, it's the 
male hormone testosterone (whose molecules look almost exactly 
like progesterone) that is said to be a direct precursor of estradiol, 
one of the 3 components of the estrogen steroid group. Estradiol is 
the most powerful endogenous estrogen of the tripartite, the others 
being estrone and estriol. In other words, the most powerful 
estrogenic component in a woman's body is converted testosterone,  
and it is the cytochrome P450 enzyme called " aromatase" that 
converts the testosterone/progesterone precursor into estradiol.
Question. What happens if this conversion process is disrupted?
As mentioned earlier, estradiol is vital to the proper development 
of secondary sex characteristics in the female; eg. her breast and 
gonad development, figure, temperament and much more. These 
changes begin at puberty and are enhanced over time during her 
reproductive years. Estradiol is the shaper of femininity in females.
Estradiol is also present in small doses in the Sertoli cells of the 
male testes, and is said to be there more as a cell


--- PAGE 155 ---
107
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
protectorant to prevent what is called "apoptosis" of the male's 
germ cells.
Apoptosis is the biochemical time-frame that measures the life- 
to-death-cycle, or 'programmed cell-death' (PCD) of a blood cell.
For both men and women, the androgenic (male) materials 
circulating in the blood are higher than the estrogenic (female) 
materials. In the male of course, the proportion is much greater. If I 
overstand it correctly, it's a combination of the general levels of both 
types of materials, along with the completed levels of testosterone 
and estradiol in each, that together create the phenotypical or 
physical features that become either "balls or breasts."
But now more that ever, endocrinologists and biologists are 
witnessing a pathogenic 'dissonance' in the normal aromatizing 
processes responsible for converting androgenic materials into the 
stabolizing hormones that define the archetypal feminine principle. 
This has caused a radical shift in the proportional balance of normal 
androgenic-to-estrogenic materials, allowing for a greater build up 
of masculine steroid materials in women thus affected.
The disruption of the aromatase enzyme conversion cycle may be 
caused primarily by the over-saturation of endocrine disruptors 
now polluting our global environments. Some of these endocrine 
disrupters include the genetically modified soy-based products now 
given to humans from infancy, the birth control being administered 
to girls as young as 12 years, and the organochlorine pesticides that 
are capable of adversely affecting estrogen receptor sites throughout 
the body.
Based on the growing number of gynandromorphic females 
appearing over the past three generations, western civilization (and 
now most of humanity) may be on the verge of witnessing an 
epidemic of pollution-based Aromatase Deficiency Syndrome in  
women; what I've dubbed 'Testerone Pathway Toxicity." (TPT)
Aromatase Deficiency Syndrome (ADS) is a medical description 
for the mutation of the gene CYP-19 that is inherited in one or more 
of the 44 autosomes of the cell. People normally have 22 pairs of 
autosomes in each cell, together with two sex chromosomes (XY in


--- PAGE 156 ---
108
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
the male and XX in the female), which collectively make up the 46 
chromosomes that define the genetic foundation of the human 
species. The Aromatase Deficiency Syndrome mutation is 
transferred in an "autosomal recessive" way, which means that both 
parents contribute to the defect. In genetics, most Toss-of-function' 
defects are recessive. However, some are dominant and are called 
"dominant negative" or anti-morphic mutations. Are the 
increasingly higher levels of toxic, gender-bending materials in our 
environment causing more and more recessive traits of pathological 
mutations like ADS to slowly become dominant in humanity?
If the aromatse enzyme converting process is imbalanced, it 
could be caused by a hypothalamic/pituitary dysfunction affecting 
the chemical polarities of the neuro-steroid precursors that 
manufacture it; neuro-steroids like pregnenolone — a 'pro-hormone' 
found in high concentrations in the brain involved in the steroido­
genesis (steroid creation) of progesterone, androgens and estrogens.
Simply put; no aromatase conversion, no feminine stabolization.
Now. If unconverted androgenic radicals become free-floating 
materials in a woman's bloodstream, but do not permeate or 
become part of her cell-nuclei and germ-plasm material (or remains 
somatoplasmic), it is called 'un-bound testosterone', and she may 
exhibit only a few physical anomalies related to TP-Toxicity. Such 
anomalies take the form of slightly pronounced facial, arm, leg and 
abdominal (vellous) hair, moodiness and some impatience, but no 
significant changes to her instincts, her hour glass shape, her nature 
and her feminine mannerisms. Although she is stricken with a 
minor level of TP-Toxicity, she will still express and deeply feel 
those powerful innate instincts exclusive to the feminine principle.
Let's call this level of affliction "Exogenous TP-Toxicity."
If on the other hand un-converted, free-floating androgenic 
radicals do permeate and synthesize with a woman's cell nuclei and 
germ plasm material, it is referred to as 'bound testosterone', and it's 
almost certain that such a female will no longer possess the


--- PAGE 157 ---
109
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
greater portion of her delicate gynic instincts. Instead, she will 
harbor and display masculine tendencies (or virilism) that invariably 
affect not only her body and mind, but through her genetic template, 
may adversely affect the gender-integrity of whatever child (male or 
female) she births from her womb. And it will most certainly affect 
her intimate relationships with heterosexual men as well.
Such a female may have begun to walk like a male early on in her 
young adulthood, what the ancients called "the elephant's gait" —  that 
is—heavier steps and longer more preponderant strides. She may 
relish in her role as a tom-boy favoring the aggressive, hyperactive 
behavior, games and company of young andric males to that of gynic 
females.
The following may help to expand your awareness, so that you 
can observe for yourself those sublime characteristics which define 
the gender-integrity of a genuine gynic woman.
Look closely at her and observe.
As a gynic woman walks, you will notice (from behind her) that 
her arms swing loosely and freely—her hands partially oriented in a 
"palm-forward, wrist-up" position. Her shoulders are somewhat 
smaller in proportion to her hips. Her wrists are generally slack and 
loose as she walks, with elbows oriented to the curve of her waist. 
Her feet point somewhat straight, slightly outward at times, or are 
ever-so-slightly pigeon toed.17 All of her walking motions are 
centered below the waist in her hips, which define a horizontal, 
undulating (side to side) motion, with her lower lumbar vertebrae 
acting as the fulcrum or axis around which her movements revolve.
Old-schoolers called it "sacheting" —  pronounced sa-shay-ing.
On the other hand, the andric woman's shoulders are generally 
broader in proportion to her hips, with arms more rigidly held. Her 
elbows are oriented away from her body pointing outward slightly at 
right-angles from the waist—her palms facing backwards. This
17 This tendency em ulates or expresses her m agnetic orientation tow ards 
"inwardness" and em pathy, as well as her incubative, nesting nature ... -  Author


--- PAGE 158 ---
110
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
happens because, like a man, her latissimus dorsei (the muscles 
starting under the armpits and ending in a 'V'- shaped attachment 
down the spine) are more pronounced and developed, making her 
back broader or more 'V-shaped' in relationship to her narrower 
pelvis and hips.
She may also emulate what is called the "quarter-to-two" gait that 
men stride to; that is —feet and toes oriented slightly outward, each 
step anchored by a dominant leg propelling the body forward, 
causing the upper body to seemingly rock horizontally from side to 
side in what the ole' school brothers used to call 'jitterbuggin'. This is 
because an andric woman's center of gravity is being expressed above 
the waist (like a man) making her physical actions top-heavy, instead 
of below her waist, which is natural for the gynic woman.
Figure 11a 
Gynaecoid Pelvis
Figure lib 
Android Pelvis
In fact, it's becoming somewhat rare in this society to see women 
organically "sway" at the hips anymore. And I mean sway naturally 
because of gynic orientation and instincts, not contrived or put on 
like a runway model. Such a motion is natural to the gynic anatomy 
since her center of gravity (or equilibrium) is in her generally wider 
hips, not in her chest and shoulders like a man. Her swaying hips are 
like a rocking cradle that Mother Nature gave her for the care and 
comfort of the potential life she carries; that is—her precious eggs.
Only women with the andric hip structure and/or hormonal 
integrity of a man would find it difficult to sway naturally, because 
their hips and pelvis are generally narrower (again) like a man's.


--- PAGE 159 ---
I l l
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
If they are not narrow and she has the anatomical features of a 
gynic while exhibiting a strong andric nature, it is most likely due to 
a delayed short-circuiting of the pituitary and hypothalamus after 
puberty, caused by the triggering of a previously dormant 
gynandromorphic program-signature in her genetics. Such an 
anomaly would greatly influence her TP-Toxicity status, switching 
her endocrine/blood chemistries from exogenous to endogenous 
TPT. But this aspect of my research is not yet final. It is still evolving.
Another anatomical indicator of feminine integrity is the gynic 
neck structure. Today, more women can be seen possessing the neck 
angles and neck densities of men, which is yet another reason why 
women afflicted by such imbalances are so attracted to playing 
sports. In fact you can see this for yourself—especially in the 
summer time. Some women possess thick sternocleidomastoid and 
trapezius muscles along with an upper muscle mass density like that 
of men, while still others can be seen possessing their own enhanced 
Adam's apple!18 (see Deborah Norville-TV's "Inside Edition")
Women possessing true gynic neck angles who try to do male 
oriented sports or exercises, suffer from every bump and jolt 
directly to their thyroids. Trying to lift just ten to fifteen pounds 
would be a strain. A gynic woman does not possess the developed, 
striated neck muscles that are necessary for lifting heavy weights like 
a man. For example, the gynic neck (like that depicted on the 
Hyksos-styled bust of Queen Nefertiti—figure 12) was purposely 
designed in a curve by Nature to keep the occipital area of the head 
from putting too much pressure on the spinal nerves of the neck area, 
the blood vessels, the arteries and of course, the thyroids. The 
occipital lobe (occiput) is oriented posterior to the Atlas (Cl) and Axis 
(C-2) segments of the upper spine.
If gynic women with a neck curvature of this design were forced 
to straighten it continuously, they would cause themselves great
18 This w as clearly seen at the 1996 Olym pics during the w om en's diving event. It 
w as gynanders on parade. -  Author


--- PAGE 160 ---
112
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 12
discomfort to the thyroid area, since the added weight from the 
occipital region is meant to be tilted back to keep pressure off.
In fact, in certain regions of Thailand and Africa, there are 
indigenous tribes whose women use rings to stretch their necks. 
Although it may appear "barbaric" to western eyes, this practice 
could have been an attempt to imitate "the ancient goddesses" and 
their archetypal features. Or, to correct their own mutations caused 
by genetic damage suffered over many eons from the fallout of 
ancient Earth's nuclear wars and cataclysms.
The model Imam is a near perfect example of our Kemetic and 
Kushite ancestral mothers' archetypal anatomies and features. 
However, whether she herself has maintained her gynic proclivities 
to match them, is another story.
I get clients with problems of the thyroid that are mostly women, 
due mainly to their poor eating habits. Deficiencies in bio-available 
iodine caused by the over-consumption of sugar, dairy, devitalized 
starches and greasy meat proteins is mostly to blame, along with the 
heavy burden of pollution in the environment.


--- PAGE 161 ---
113
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
If these women also possessed a straightened cervical vertebra 
more closely resembling a man's, it would put enormous pressure on 
the back muscles and thyroid causing cellular damage as well. And, 
if the thyroid happened to be small in an andric female (as it would 
normally be in a gynic) the pain from the pressure would be 
excruciating.
When a person lifts a heavy load it forces the sternum and neck 
muscles up while placing stressful force on the thyroids. The amount 
of stress and force is proportional to the amount of weight lifted. 
When a gynic woman lifts heavy weights (like those pocket books 
with the "kitchen sinks" in them), she will destabilize her thyroid by 
injuring cells and capillaries in and around the organ. This happens 
because she does not possess the anatomical counter-weight that a 
true andric man possesses, that being —the heavy cartilage in the 
neck region created by Nature to deflect such pressure. This heavy 
cartilage counterweight in the man is his Adam's Apple.
This is why gynic women should not be lifting very heavy things. 
If they are true gynics, they would soon find out with great pain and 
difficulty that they are not anatomically structured to do so. Only 
gynandromorphic, TP-Toxic women like Zap of the former American 
Gladiators, or Sue Price (see figure 45) go in for power lifting as an 
exercise or a sport. Poor neck structure and design pre-disposes these 
types of women to do mannish things, which further destabilize their 
thyroids and overall hormonal circuitry.
Let's call this second type "Endogenous TP-Toxicity."
Fragile —  Handle with Care...
At speaking engagements I always use the following example to 
show women just how simple and logical it is to associate fragility 
with the human female anatomy; specifically, the womb.
Example: When you are shopping at the supermarket and you visit 
the dairy section to purchase eggs, do you ... (a) handle them 
carefully, being cautious not to drop them while placing them gently


--- PAGE 162 ---
114
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
into your grocery cart? Or ... (b) stand back, take aim and throw 
them at the cart hoping they land in it?
Of course everyone picks "a" as the logical choice. When I ask 
why, the women say that if it were "b", you would surely end up 
breaking a good portion of the eggs.
It is here that I ask them with all sincerity "... then why is it that 
you have allowed yourselves to adopt masculine-oriented physical 
activities, that for all intents and purposes exposes your anatomy to 
the same potential risk and consequences of choice "b"?
At this point a great many of the ladies would appear perplexed. I 
would then ask "... do you have any idea what you happen to be carrying 
in your delicate ovaries"?
Usually after this question is asked their jaws would drop and 
their eyes would open wide with a sudden burst of realization.
They'd all respond— eggs!!
And the suffering continues...
(A summary)
•
Again. There are many subtle, seemingly unrelated pathologies 
attributed to the loss of gender-integrity and instincts in a woman. 
Some will show up only after she has had a baby, where she may 
notice her lack of desire or ability to nurse. She may have been in 
labor for upwards of sixteen hours or more due primarily to her 
android pelvis! (See figure 5 Gwen Torrance and figure lib.)
She may also have a problem with hair loss in nearly the exact 
places that a man loses his. She may have higher calf muscles (again) 
with small straighter hips accompanied by a more pronounced 
latissimus dorsei, greatly developed trapezius and squarer broader 
shoulders (e.g. like Jackie Joyner Kersee and Gwen Torrance). On a 
few you may also notice squatter, thicker necks with thicker 
sternocleidomastoid muscles along with pronounced chest definition 
like the weight-lifters featured further on (figures 43—50), along with a 
square jaw and/or protruding chin (like 'Captain Janeway' in the si-fi 
T.V. series Star Trek: Voyager, and actress Rene Russo).


--- PAGE 163 ---
115
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
As a child, the andric female is also more susceptible to 
contracting severe acne caused by the atrocious dietary habits that 
develop due to her higher levels of bound, non-aromatase converted 
testosterone. It may also be caused by a persistent release of 
corticosteroids (corticoids) like adrenalin or other stress-related 
androgenic materials, primarily from developing the destructive 
habit of frequent masturbation through direct clitoral stimulation.
The fact that acne in young adult females is caused primarily by 
high levels of male-related hormones, can be substantiated by the fact 
that as of January 1,1997, the FDA approved a drug called Tri-cyclen, 
a birth control-type medication comprised of attenuated estrogens to 
be prescribed for use against acne in women.
Clue?
And as of January 1999, commercials for a product called Differin 
Adapalene Gel were broadcasted frequently on the Lifestyle and 
Oxygen channels, cable TV programming dedicated specifically to 
women. One commercial began with the words "... you're a grown 
woman now... why should you have to worry about acne?" It shows 
an active, smiling, stress-occupied "90's-millennium woman" looking 
as if she hadn't a care in the world.
Oh, if they only knew.
"... The Sins of the Mother ..."
•
Many of my staunchest critics take vigorous issue with the fact 
that I refuse to believe professional female athletes (in fact athletic 
women of all kinds) are having "normal, healthy" pregnancies and 
giving birth to "normal, healthy" babies. I've been shown articles 
with female athletes (of Olympic caliber) proudly exhibiting their 
precious children as an 'in-yo-face' contradiction to my "outrageous, 
unsubstantiated" claims.
But I implore the beloved seeker to remember this cosmic truth; 
'... the sins of the father (or the mother) are inevitably visited upon the 
son ...and the daughter.'


--- PAGE 164 ---
116
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The anatomical integrity of a child birthed from the womb of a 
stress-accelerated, TP-Toxic, hormonally dysfunctional woman, will 
inevitably show signs of genetic compromise due to their inheritance 
of severely perverted cellular germ plasm material. If distorted 
genetics fail to show up in the child or children of such a woman, rest 
assured that it will eventually show up somewhere in the child's 
child, or grandchild's future offspring.
Endocrinologists are acutely aware of the fact that any living thing 
will suffer disastrous consequences to its lineage if their genetics 
and/or germ plasm material are perverted in any way.
This is Immutable Cosmic Law  beloved, not my 'misguided 
chauvinist opinion', or 'black, racist/black eugenicist' beliefs!
It's just unfortunate that we may have to wait some twenty to 
thirty years just to show that I am correct. But by that time, a whole 
generation-and-a-half of innocent unsuspecting girls will already 
have been callously sacrificed upon athletic altars dedicated to the 
gender-feminist's delusional utopia called "equality."
See section entitled Pre-Pubescent Puberty  for further details 
concerning the consequences that arise as the result of the "sins of the 
mother."
Onanism:
The Untold Consequences of  
Female Masturbation...
•
Whenever I happen to lecture on so 'touchy' and personal a 
subject as masturbation, supporters of this perverse habit 
automatically go on the offensive. I tend to lose popularity because of 
my hygienic and metaphysical stance on this issue —most of the 
detractors believing that I'm some sort of closet bible-thumping, 
born-again nut-case.
The majority of their objections are based on the belief that this 
practice was (and is) some form of 'natural' expression of self- 
fulfillment. To such people I must sound like someone resurrecting 
old wives' tales pretending that they contain some secret scientific


--- PAGE 165 ---
117
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
truths of redeeming value. Or simply doing it for the "shock value."
Hey, I could care less who wants to masturbate! It's their choice 
and their own business. But that does not change the mandates of 
Immutable Law. No matter what we choose to personally believe, 
what is —is what is!  The consequences that inevitably arise when 
Cosmic Law is either broken or "insulted", will faithfully give 
evidence as to whether I am right or wrong regarding this subject.
The following is based on the operations of Omniscient 
Intelligence, not my personal beliefs, opinions or old wives tales. And 
believe me beloved, the truth often has a "shock value" with ten times 
the impact of your wildest expectations or imagination.
Most of the information received by the general public on the 
subject of masturbation has come via a grade school hygiene class, or 
more recently, from television, internet and radio talk shows. These 
programs feature popular "sex-perts" whose advice is as warped and 
perverse as the medium chosen to give it from, because all such 
popular media-venues omit, trivialize or de-emphasize the 
consequences of this practice in the minds of the viewer or listening 
audience.
For example, a particularly reprehensible little troll named 
Dr. Ruth became the popular 'guru-ess' of sexual advice for 
hyper-hormonal teens back in the late 70s through the 80s. I can 
remember one day listening to her radio call in talk-show, where I 
heard her tell a young man (and a female who also called in on this 
same subject) to "... go right ahead and masturbate as much as you 
want. It's your body—explore it. Experiment. It's safe too, and you 
can't get anyone pregnant... Don't let anyone tell you what to do 
with your own body.. .enjoy it..!"
At the time, most young people thought it was allll good.
'Til they learned better.


--- PAGE 166 ---
118
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Onanism19 can cause a severe bio-electrical imbalance in the body. 
Sexual intercourse, in and of itself relies heavily on the proper 
interaction of hormones, pheromones, electrical conduction and the 
chemistries that are ignited by the approach of the opposite gender —  
all working together to keep the act from being severely injurious to 
the overall system.
Beloved, all sexual activity —  from the time it begins in the mind as 
an erotic thought—to the time it culminates in orgasm—causes 
precious life-essences in the form of zinc, vitamins E and A, calcium, 
magnesium, boron, iron, copper, cholestrin, lecithin, aminos and 
phosphates to be lost from the bodies of both partners — along with 
manganese, potassium and assorted electrolytes.
Which is why the act, if continuously engaged in, causes the 
sexual apparatus to eventually hypertrophy20 resulting in mental 
disturbances, early painful menopause or swollen cancerous 
prostates.
Masturbation is an act like sex, but it is not sex. It gives none of the 
much-needed exchange of healing fluids and nurturing energies that 
the archetypal act of sexual intercourse is designed to give when 
performed by integrus male and female polarities. It is a chronic 
waste of the body's precious life force due to the enormous 
expenditure of vital life energy, fluids and nutrients.
It is often suggested by sex therapists for use as a form of "tension 
reliever." But the problems that caused the tension in the first place 
still remain, while you've sacrificed what amounts to being 1/3 the 
total number of corpuscles in your entire body  the very moment you 
orgasm!!21
Those who defend this practice will say that I am teaching myth as 
fact. Well, all myth is based in fact. There is no new knowledge
19 Onanism - "1. Masturbation 2. Coitus Interruptus 3. Self-gratification: Named for
Onan, Son of Judah ..." - Amer. Herit Diet.
20 Hypertrophies - wasting away or emaciation.
21 An amount equal in energy to one (1) pint of your blood! -  Author


--- PAGE 167 ---
119
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
anywhere in the universe of human experience, only that which has 
always been and is yet to be re-discovered.
Quiet as it's kept, the majority of men locked away in mental 
institutions were once or still are, habitual masturbators. Chronic 
masturbators may (more often than not) be childhood victims of 
molestation or an over-bearing mother. They may become rapists 
and/or child molesters, and in the case of men, are generally very 
abusive towards women.
Why are the men generally hostile toward women?
Well, the best way to explain it is through a metaphysical 
illustration.
Use it... You Lose it!
The Maleficent Metaphysics of Masturbation
•
When a man masturbates and ejaculates constantly, he loses 
precious life-essences that are of the exact composition as brain and 
spinal fluid! Such a traumatic loss causes a gradual breakdown and 
degeneration of his bio-electric (yang or jing) potency —the same 
energy necessary to keep his gonads, hypothalamus, adrenal, and 
pituitary glands strong enough to manufacture or convert 
androsterones from essential fatty acids and cholesterol into integrus, 
well-balanced testosterone-based hormones. This bio-electrical 
charge is part of a holographic energy grid that radiates outward 
from the temple core enveloping the entire body; a grid-matrix of 
qualified astral light I call the Bio-Kinetic Life Force.
In short, the Bio-Kinetic Life Force (or Ankh-Taa) is the energy 
created by the flow of electro-magnetic/astral-light currents (current 
energy) coursing through the nervous system. It is primarily solaric or 
sun-based plasma energy, modified by synthesis through the 
atmospheric layers of the planet, and further qualified when focused 
into the body by the operations of the breath.
It is quite literally the representative 'spark of life' in the body.


--- PAGE 168 ---
120
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In fact, it is closely related to the soul's essence; part of the 21 
grams of weight that the human body loses at the moment of death.
The cells inhabiting the body's 60,000 miles of blood vessels, feed 
almost exclusively on cosmic gasses or plasma-based astral light 
energy. The lungs synthesize the Sun's light energies and 
atmospheric gasses into the foundational minerals that act as the 
material catalysts for sustaining the electrical spark of life in the body. 
The individual blood cells of the body could not live if they came into 
direct contact with the powerful cosmic current flowing through our 
specialized nerve conduits. Like us in relationship to the Sun, they 
thrive in the residual "glow" that is generated by it. These nerve 
conduits are extremely strong and durable bio-conductors of cosmic 
solaric energy, as witnessed by the fact that they are the only parts of 
the body that remain unaffected, even in death by starvation.
The Bio-Kinetic Life Force is responsible for maintaining the 
electro-magnetic thermo-dynamics that sustain the hormonal health 
and well-being of the endocrine system, and is sometimes seen by 
clairvoyant people as part of the field of light surrounding the body 
called the aura.
When the Bio-Kinetic Life Force is being depleted through 
consistent ejaculation by masturbation, an electro-magnetic 
imbalance occurs. A chronically masturbating man severely dilutes 
his male essences, which contain the foundational minerals that 
maintain the gender-integrity of his endocrine system; in fact—the 
very spark of life for his entire being.
Since testosterone and progesterone are virtually alike in design, 
theoretically, any consistent depletion of a man's androgenic steroid 
blood essences, would cause a severe weakness in his essential jing- 
energy integrity. This would lead to a buildup of degenerated or 
immature androsterones, leading to a drastic elevation of ym-jing and 
estrogen-like materials in his bloodstream.
Because of the overall saturation of our environment with literally 
millions of tons of toxic, endocrine-disrupting pollutants contributing 
to the genetic anomalies suffered by humanity today, men can and do 
retain more estrogen than they naturally should. But—a healthy


--- PAGE 169 ---
121
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
andric, testosterone-integrus man can quickly flush any excess 
'estrogenic' materials from his system by way of the liver.
However, constant masturbation and ejaculation debilitates the 
liver, causing it to become weak and dysfunctional. This in turn may 
cause a retardation of his ability to eliminate estrogenic materials 
allowing them to accumulate, eventually resulting in bio-chemical 
perversion leading to behavioral confusion. He begins to radiate a 
more 'gynic'charge and energy field from his Bio-Kinetic Life Force.
This higher presence of female-based hormones due to 
'androgenic' exhaustion, causes him to be repelled by the similar field 
energy frequencies naturally emanated by a healthy gynic woman. 
He is afflicted with the opposite imbalance to the andric female; that 
is —Estrogen Pathway Toxicity (EPT)—where an overproduction of 
estrogen or estrogen-like materials become bound up in his cell 
nuclei or germ plasm. In essence, he becomes a ''gynic male/
Couple this with the fact that the entire processed food industry 
uses genetically engineered soy (a known endocrine disrupter 
containing potent phyto-estrogens) as a primary ingredient in 
virtually all of their products (including baby food), and the body's 
ability to regain its masculine homeostasis is severely compromised.
(See section entitled Mixing apples and oranges )
The conflicting emotion-based thought-currents created by the 
presence of higher estrogenic levels in a body designed for 
testosterone, could theoretically cause a man to be sub-consciously 
repulsed by the sexuality, instincts and behaviorisms of a true gynic 
woman. His "inner woman" becomes the repelling force.
Chronic masturbation does this. "Tension relieving" masturbation 
could lead to this.
Herein lay the metaphysical and bio-chemical reasons for his abuse of  
women!
(See movie: The Silence of the Lambs, and the character "Buffalo Bill")
A chronic loss of sperm is quite literally the chronic loss of 
precious brain fluid minerals vital to the proper electro-chemical 
operation of glands that keep a man’s masculine hormonal integrity


--- PAGE 170 ---
122
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
intact. Not only that, these precious fluids are absolutely vital to his 
overall sanity!
Somehow the old myth told to us by our grandparents that if you 
masturbate you could go blind (worse yet crazy), begins to make 
sense when decoded with ancient metaphysical facts still largely 
unknown to, or unaccepted by western science and society. Today we 
may laugh and ridicule our elders' wisdom as 'unscientific', but 
when you overstand what a body goes through just to have an 
orgasm (and what is lost as a result), myth and fact are not that far 
apart.
The continuous loss of vital life fluids through this abusive practice 
causes traumatic consequences to the individual far into the future.
The "going blind" part is not so far-fetched, and may also be 
validated by the fact that persistent onanism can cause the erratic 
release of corticosteroids like adrenalin, epinephrine, and other 
irritative stress-related hormones. This in turn poisons the blood, 
causing a severe depreciation of its vital life-energy nutrients, which 
dysfunctions the liver, the prostate and the kidneys. The liver controls 
sight, and is also the aryuvedic seat of anger and frustration!  Most chronic 
masturbators who are male are perpetually angry, withdrawn and 
frustrated —  especially with women. As the liver degenerates so does 
the eyesight, along with a balanced temperament and overall 
demeanor.
Metaphysically, the chronically masturbating and ejaculating 
male begins going blind by losing his 'first sight'; that is—his pineal 
in-sight. As mentioned earlier this happens because the pineal organ 
becomes "calcified", or flaccid and spongy due to his severe loss of 
brain fluids containing precious cosmic, light-based minerals that if 
stored and saved, would nurture and support the pinealocyte 
mitochrondria causing the pineal to become strong, vibrant and firm 
"as a rock."
This is the "Rock of Ages" symbolically represented in the Bible's 
Book of Psalms, where Ankhenaten (David) writes in chapter 18 
verse 2 "...The Lord is my rock." Again we see in Mathew 16: verses 
17 and 18 where Christ told Simon Barjona "... You are Peter (petre;


--- PAGE 171 ---
123
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
minerals) and upon this rock (the pineal) I shall build my church 
(the body of light) and the gates of hell (sexual lust, depravity) shall 
not prevail (win) against it..."
The consequences for females are no less severe, beloved. Most 
women who masturbate frequently (especially clitorally) eventually 
become de-sensitized to their intrinsic feminine instincts, as well as to 
the feelings and erotic touch of the male. In the same manner that a 
chronically masturbating man loses his natural yang sensitivities 
toward women, so too does a chronically masturbating woman lose 
her natural yin sensitivities or empathy towards men. And this is 
especially true of the women who use "tools" in their practice.
Metaphysically, a woman who constantly masturbates her clitoris 
de-sensitizes her feminine nature by stimulating "the inner man" to 
rise up from within. The clitoris (by itself) is the only 
'mono-functional'22 organ in the entire female anatomy. This goes 
contrary to the natural balance, or yin and yang equilibrium 
inherently designed into all aspects of biological life. It is designed 
like the male penis, but does not/could not function like one.
It may be compared to male mammary glands. It is vestigial.
The sole purpose of the clitoris (which has a greater density of 
nerves than the penis, simply because of size), is to agitate the 
nervous system into an intense release of electro-chemical spasmodic 
energies by the brain. The trouble that arises by continually agitating 
it however, is that the nerve force energy it calls forth and releases is 
primarily that of the yang-jing (male) polarity, not the yin-jing 
(female). The former is direct (male) the latter indirect (female).
Constant, direct stimulation desensitizes the nerves of the clitoris 
with each contact, making it necessary that the next session require 
harder more intense manipulation to achieve the same levels of 
excitation received from the previous session. Meanwhile the nerves 
of the organ are progressively becoming atrophied, along with the
22 Single-functioning.


--- PAGE 172 ---
124
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
neural networks of the brain; the same as with an addict attempting 
to re-live that "cherry high" when she shot up heroin the first time.
Consequently, the frequent release of yang-generated sexual force 
by the female nervous system causes gradual on-going hormonal 
derangements. Androgenic chemicals are released into the 
bloodstream to match the yang quality of the sexual stress. If 
aromatase conversion is already subverted and her cell chemistry 
displays endogenous tendencies, the blood overloaded with 
unconverted male hormones will affect both the physiology and 
psychology of the female over time.
Constant (clitoral) onanism by a female may also appear on the 
surface as severe outbreaks of acne as well, especially in young girls 
entering puberty.
Much information has been written about the consequences of 
onanism and women throughout the centuries, but much of it has 
either been suppressed or ignored due largely to the loss of this 
society's higher natural instincts. Two books recommended by 
Cantrell entitled What a Young Girl Ought to Know  by Mary 
Wood-Alien and Slyvanus Stall, and A Cultural History of the Human  
Body by Stephen Kem, give vital supportive information pertinent to 
the fact that our ancient ancestors frowned upon this practice because 
of what it did to their superior bio-chemistries. Allen and Stall wrote 
the following passage to inform impressionable young girls...
(Excerpted from "The Greatest Story Never Told.")
"... You would not put sticks or stones in your ears nor let anyone else do so. 
Every organ of the body is sacred and should be protected, and this is just as true 
of the sexual organs, as it is of the eyes or ears. You should never handle them 
(recreationally) or allow anyone else to. And yet, little girls sometimes form the 
habit of handling their sexual organs because they find a certain pleasure in so 
doing... It is called "solitary vice" ... It leaves a mark upon the face  so that those 
who are wise may know what the girl is doing ... We can almost always tell when a 
girl begins this habit of solitary vice ... she will soon become peevish, irritable, 
morose and disobedient... She may become bold in her mannerisms instead of 
being modest, as a little girl should be. She will manifest an unnatural appetite, 
sometimes desiring mustards, pepper, vinegar and spices... which appetites 
certainly are not natural for little girls ..."


--- PAGE 173 ---
125
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
What this excerpt means...
The "mark" on the girl's face (as I mentioned earlier) is that of 
acne, whose primary cause is stress. This 'mark' will also show up as 
a flushed complexion accompanied by glazed eyes —a symptom 
caused by the flood of histamine that becomes locked into the parotid 
glands and sinuses, causing both to become irritated and congested 
with toxins from the stimulation. Sometimes the face will show the 
opposite extremes of ashiness and pallor. Her irritability and 
peevishness happens because of chronic cellular destruction, 
bio-chemical derangement and a severely agitated nervous system. A 
consistent practice of this habit can cause a young girl to look older, 
developing bags under her eyes with lines on her forehead and the 
comers of her mouth; in effect—all of the attending symptoms of 
pre-mature aging.
A chronically masturbating girl will eventually show signs of 
masculinity in her temperament as well. Her facial features become 
hard, accompanied by a symptom known as hirsutism as she grows 
older; that is —  accelerated hair growth in the forms of a moustache, 
chin hairs, nipple hairs, sideburns, accelerated leg and arm hair, or 
vellous stomach and back hair. In other words, most places that 
would not generally have seen hair growth until she reached 
menopausal age where her estrogen levels would have 'normally' 
diminished.
She may also acquire a perverse taste for such things as hot 
peppers, vinegar and heavily spiced foods, eventually moving up to 
more intense forms of stimulation like the kinds received from 
alcohol, tobacco or cocaine. Her preference for the above-mentioned 
stimulants like hot herbs and related food stuffs, means that there is a 
heavy influx of androgenic hormonal materials coursing through her 
bloodstream, and her need for them is a behavioral reflex, or 
'appetite-quirk' created by her perverted bio-chemistries. She 
becomes dependent on these stimulants to keep her body temperature 
radiating at levels dictated by the masculine-type hormones coursing 
through her blood. Men can tolerate heavier spices and condiments


--- PAGE 174 ---
126
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
(in moderation) more so than women, because their stomach linings 
are normally thicker.
Enfeebling "fun"...
Gynandrous women are often habitual masturbators both 
consciously and unconsciously due to their bio-chemical imbalances. 
Consciously—by what they knowingly do to their sex organs 
(onanism), and unconsciously by what they wear or the masculine 
activities they participate in (e.g. horseback riding, boxing, volleyball, 
football, gymnastics, mountain biking, etc).
The act of clitoral masturbation itself causes such an enormous 
buildup of corticosteroids and histamine in the bloodstream, that 
cells are often completely destroyed. To a gynic woman, continuous 
eroticism (through onanism) is not 'fun' because her higher instincts 
tell her that any sensation connected to the procreative act is sacred to 
her body. Consistent tactile abuse of her reproductive area would 
severely jeopardize her chances of creating a healthy baby.
Masturbation is "fun", "tension relieving", "pleasurable" and 
"liberating" only to those gynandrous women (and androgynous 
men) whose bio-chemistries have degenerated to the point where 
they no longer have access to their higher instincts for discerning 
what is right and wrong.
Women who fall into this category are more susceptible to giving 
birth to dysfunctional offspring; that is—mentally and emotionally 
challenged children. Their bio-chemistries are so perverted by this 
constant practice (as well as the dietary habits and other destructive, 
stress-related behavior that grows from it) that they need this type of 
stimulation constantly to release the pressure built up by the high 
presence of androsteroids coursing through their bodies.
9


--- PAGE 175 ---
127
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Spasmosis and the Epileptic Joy of  
Female Ejaculation...
A disorder characterized by re-occurring attacks of motor 
sensory or psychic malfunction, with or without consciousness 
or convulsive movements: to lay hold. From the Greek Epi = 
upon + lambanein = to take ..."
To eject or discharge abruptly (esp.) to discharge semen in 
orgasm; 2. To eject semen; semen ejaculated in orgasm. From 
Latin Ex = out + jaculari = to throw ..."
- American Heritage Dictionary
Ever since the rise of Amazonian feminism, great attention and 
support has been given to the more perverse, degenerative behavior 
of women —one of which is a peculiar phenomenon called the 
'female ejaculation.' I call it peculiar because the words "female" and 
"ejaculate" (when viewed together through the lens of Immutable 
Cosmic Law) reveal a pathological contradiction in terms.
Allow me to explain.
Gynandrous women have now become comfortable and even 
arrogant with their degenerate proclivities. Due to their pervasive 
influence within every fabric of today's society, they have managed 
to create a high profile platform from which to mould and 
manipulate the public's perception of right and wrong. We are now 
asked to accept and believe that their distorted behavior, physiologies 
and accompanying symptoms are all somehow 'natural' and 
'healthy' to the biology of today's 'modem liberated' woman.
For example, when feminist sex-perts began promoting the 
nonsense that female ejaculation was a normal (but here-to-fore) 
"un-discovered pleasure principle" buried deep within a woman's 
vast erotic repertoire, conscious sisters should have instinctively 
gotten the hint.
The very word ejaculate (see definition above) is synonymous 
with a male-designed function, the ultimate purpose of which is to 
fulfill a predetermined design of Nature. And believe me, that 
purpose is not just to simply achieve a ten to twenty second
Epilepsy -
Ejaculation -


--- PAGE 176 ---
128
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
spasmodic release of precious nerve-force energy and fluids, just for 
a woman (or man) to get her jollies.
An orgasm may be likened to what is technically referred to as an 
epileptiform convulsion,  or more plainly, an epileptic fit. Spasmodic 
muscular contractions by the body, along with an enormous output 
of chemical and electrical energies by the brain, show the correlation 
between the two. For the male this is especially true. But with the re­
discovery and wide-spread promotion of female ejaculation as a 
desirable component of women's pleasure-principles today, the 
genetic and psycho-spiritual outlook for future generations (and for 
us as a species) are looking very, very dim.
It's interesting to note here that, on the subject of female orgasm 
and ejaculation, scientists and some feminists agree (for now), that 
the various forms experienced by women appear to be a 
phenomenon of adaptation. In other words, methods to achieve 
orgasms accompanied by fluid-stream ejaculations by masturbating 
women today, are actually the by-products of "learned evolution" 
rather than "natural occurance." Which means that this "ability" was 
perfected by repetition, practice and frequency, through the 
encouragement, development and cultivation of a perversely 
degenerate appetite, and not by any natural expression of inherent 
cosmic design.
This may all appear somewhat incongruous to the seeker because 
what we are given to study on this issue is only what modem 
medicine, research science and feminist adherents present to us as the 
facts. And these facts stem from research that focus solely on the 
gross or material designs, functions and processes of the human body 
temple.
Nothing related to its bio-psychic or metaphysical ramifications is 
even hinted upon; which is why the promoters of this perverse 
practice can get away with pushing their garbage on the 
unsuspecting public, with little or no opposition.
'Til now.


--- PAGE 177 ---
129
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
A look back at the 'Female Ejac...1
•
To overstand what I mean, we must first analyze and de-construct 
what is being promoted to the public as "legitimate science", so as to 
fill in the perverbial blanks left by their all-too obvious ignorance of 
subtle-body dynamics.
The search for proof of the 'female ejaculation' reveals that it is 
certainly not new. It began with the question of whether or not the 
human female even possessed homologous tissue related to the 
male's prostate gland. Was there even such a thing as a "female 
prostate gland?"
Apparently so. Or then again, maybe not?
Hippocrates, the so-called "father of medicine", mentioned the 
"female semen" in his writings. The great plagiarizer of Kemetic 
philosophy and sciences Aristotle taught of the existence of female 
seminal fluid. Galen described the "female prostate" in the 2nd 
century. In 1672, the Dutch anatomist Regnier de Graaf made 
reference to the existence of a "female prostate", what he called the 
corpus glandulosum.  He even went so far as to note that this organ 
secreted a fluid that made women more libidinous.
In the 17th century, the Italian anatomist Renaldus Columbus 
referred to the "female ejaculate" while explaining the function of the 
clitoris, and John W. Hoffman described the "Skene's Gland" in 
anatomical detail in 1948. There is even an ancient depiction of what 
is believed to be this phenomenon on a statue from the Hindu temple 
at Karnataka India, circa 1200 CE. (See figure 13). Of course the esoteric 
meanings of this statue would be given no relevance by feminist nay- 
sayers.
In more modem times (1980) we find the works of Dr. Earnst 
Grafenberg (1881-1957) being consigned to the forefront of clinical 
sexology by one Beverly Whipple, a certified sex education counselor 
and John D. Perry, ordained minister, psychologist and sexologist— 
both of whom authored the very popular work entitled The G-Spot 
and Other Recent Discoveries about Human Sexuality.


--- PAGE 178 ---
130
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The title for their book was borrowed from an article submitted to 
the International Journal of Sexology by Dr. Grafenberg, who wrote 
about the erotic sensitivities existing along the anterior (front) end of 
the vaginal walls of women.
Figure 13
The now-famous phrase "the G-spot" is an 'omage' to 
Grafenberg's works, but was actually coined by Whipple and Perry, 
not the good doctor. In fact, Grafenberg only wrote the word "spot" 
twice in his article, in one case simply stating that . .there is no spot 
in the female body from which sexual desire could not be aroused."
Location, Location, Location...
The so-called G-Spot is actually an area in the anterior wall of the 
vaginal cavity wherein is located a spongy mass of glandular tissue 
surrounding the urethra and para-urethral glands that, when lumped 
together, is called the "female prostate." The para-urethral glands are 
also called the yuxtaurethral or Skene's glands, and are located closest 
to the opening of the urethra; hence para-urethral.
The exact location of the G-spot is behind the pubic bone just


--- PAGE 179 ---
131
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
beyond the rough-surfaced tissue and the cervix. (See figure 16). It is 
very soft and smoothe and responses primarily to deep pressure 
rather than to stroking. The actual area in question is about the size of 
a large grape. When manipulated properly, it is said to cause an 
eruption of profuse fluids from the urethra —  sometimes at great 
distances, prompting the term "female ejaculation." (See figure 16)
Figure 14. The Female Prostate Gland
But even though the female prostate (aka the G-Spot) is standard 
equiptment for all women, research scientist Dr. F. Cabello 
Santamarie, in his analysis confirming the works of the following 
researchers, stated quite clearly that it is a phenomenon that occurs in 
very few women!  He and his colleagues put their estimates at about 
10% in the least and 40% at most. These statistics were based on the 
findings of Bullough (1984); B. Whipple and J. Perry (1982); Darling, 
Davidson and Conway Welch (1990) and Kratochvil (1994).


--- PAGE 180 ---
132
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The logic used to support the legitimacy of the female ejaculation 
as "normal" and "healthy", is based on the works of Dr. Milan 
Ziviacic, Dr. E Belzer, Dr. J. G. Bohlen, Dr. Regnier de Graaf, Dr. D.C. 
Golgerg, and as mentioned above, Dr. F. Cabello Santamarie.
P.S.A. You Say...
•
The entire case for whether or not the female ejaculation was a 
genuine ejaculation and not simply a result of bladder incontinence 
rested on two things; (1) proving that the female ejaculate was not 
urine; and (2) that the female actually possessed a prostate gland.
To do so, an analysis had to be done on the urine samples of 
women before experiencing orgasm (pre-orgasmic) and after orgasm 
(post-orgasmic). An analysis was also conducted on what had to be 
pure female ejaculate fluid, to see if it was different in any way to 
urine fluids.
Dr. Santamarie analyzed the urine for a substance called PSA, 
using the Micro-Particle Enzyme Immunoassay (MEIA) test. PSA 
means "Prostate-Specific-Antigens", the substance produced by men 
that forms the basis of the male ejaculate, and is produced in the male 
prostate gland.
He reported that seventy five percent (75%) of the samples 
submitted contained concentrations of PSA in the post-orgasmic 
urine, which were not present in the pre-orgasmic urine. The PSA 
content of the female ejaculate showed up at 100%! Also present in 
the ejaculatory fluids were...
- Glucose and Fructose
- Low levels of Creatinine and Urea
So. By the brief circumstantial evidence presented above, does the 
seeker believe that science has sufficiently proven that human 
females do have "prostate glands?"
Well, read on and decide for yourself.


--- PAGE 181 ---
133
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Once the seeker has taken the time to review the available 
'scientific data' surrounding this issue, she or he will find themselves 
facing the same proverbial brick wall that the scientists did.
What do I mean? Well, let's review what they do know.
They say the "female prostate"...
a. Produces and stores prostatic fluids in the ducts, 
a function of the exocrine gland; fluids contain 
PSA and PSAP (Prostate-Specific Acid Phosphate)...
b. Has numerous ducts that drain into the urethra...
c. Releases hormones into the bloodstream; performed 
by the neuro-endocrine cells...
d. Has the only hormone known so far to be produced 
in the female prostate by the neuro-endocrine cells - 
serotonin...
(Briefly...as mentioned earlier; serotonin is defined as a mono-amine 
neuro-transmitter that is a substance used to transmit electrical 
messages derived from aromatic amino acids like tyrosine, 
tryptophan, phenylalanine and thyroid hormones. It regulates body 
temperature, moods, sleep, sexuality and appetite. Low levels signify 
depression, migraines, irritable bowel, bi-polar disorder and anxiety. 
About 90 to 95% of it comes from the gastro-intestinal tract, and is 
primarily stored in the platelets of the blood)
Figure 15. Figure 16.
Location for "G-spot" stimulation Actual "Female Ejaculation?"


--- PAGE 182 ---
134
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
(See previous section entitled "The Original Bonehead").
The fluids expelled by the urethra during sexual arousal and 
ejaculation have been described as mucus-like, yellowish, milky or 
clear, and after a volume has been expelled it becomes transparent like  
ivater! Please keep this fact upper-most in your mind as the enigma 
unfolds.
In some women, the menstrual cycle influences the type of fluid 
expelled. (Women do this while they're menstruating?!!)
Diet also has an affect on consistency, texture, smell and taste. The 
amount of fluids vary from a few drops, to two cups or 15oz.
The average size of the female prostate is 1.3 inches long, 0.75 
inches wide and 0.4 inches high. (See figure 14 and 15). It is also said 
that the longer a woman orgasms, the more fluids she ejaculates.
Now here's what they don't know...
1. N one of the scientists could identify the actual 
source of the fem ale ejaculate fluid; they are not 
sure if it originates via the prostate or the bladder...
2. Despite the num ber and types of tests conducted 
on fem ale ejaculate fluids, no scientist can yet 
identify or determ ine w hat it is constituted o f...
3. Researchers have no answ ers as to w hy the female 
prostate fills up and em pties continuously at a 
rapid rate, and w hy the m ore a w om an orgasm s 
the m ore she ejaculates...
4. Researchers are at a loss as to w hether the female 
ejaculation is connected to sexual arousal, or to a 
sim ultaneous reflex caused by m uscular contraction 
during orgasm ...
?


--- PAGE 183 ---
135
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Kanda-Kardia
[ Zechariah 4  : 2 , 3 ,1 2 - 1 4  /  Hebrews 1 0 : 1  9 /  Peter 1 : 2 /  John 1 : 7]
•
From this point on beloved seeker, we will briefly enter into 
realms of ancient knowledge and wisdom where the vaunted 
achievements of western science appear crude, feeble or totally 
meaningless. In his monumental work Man, The Unknown  (page 1), 
even the world renowned Canadian scientist Dr. Alexis Carrell was 
compelled to write the following words about his chosen craft...
".. .Those (of us) who investigate the phenomenon 
of life are as lost in an inextricable jungle; in the 
midst of a magic forest whose countless trees 
unceasingly change their place and shape. These 
investigators are crushed by a mass of facts which 
they can describe, but are incapable of defining...
How true; particularly of the hapless researchers mentioned 
above. As we saw earlier, all they could do was describe the 
phenomenon of female ejaculation —  they could not define it. Which is 
why after all of their prodding, sampling and analyzing, they could 
not identify the source of the fluid or exactly what it was made of.
This being the case, I've decided to offer a brief metaphysical 
lesson on what this perverse practice of 'squirting' truly implies. I do 
this because the issue of female ejaculation appears to have 
suspended critical thinking and analysis behind all the hype and 
excitement whipped up by the novelty of the moment.
I have also chosen to include in the following analysis the 
metaphysical interpretations of certain verses of Christian scripture, 
which as we all know are actually the remnants and vestiges of the 
arcane wisdom once taught by our ancient ancestral masters, now 
propagated throughout the world in crypto-lyrical form as the so- 
called "Holy Bible."
I do this because during my research into the subject-matter, I 
happened upon the website of a group out of Phoenix Arizona 
calling themselves "The Liberated Christians", who, as it turns out, 
eagerly practice and promote the virtues of female ejaculation.


--- PAGE 184 ---
136
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
It's obvious that these "Christians" (God bless 'em) are nothing 
more than "dead-letter believers", meaning those who seek no 
esoteric depth to the teachings of scripture. They blindly gloss over 
the inherent treasures of meaning that lay hidden in such verses as 
Mathew 10:26, which says "...There is nothing covered, that shall not 
be revealed; and hid that shall not be known."
That said then —let us be about the task of "resurrecting the dead- 
letter." Let there be Light, ya'll!
The Virgin Mar-y...
•
Of the 4 points concerning what scientists don't know about the 
female prostate and female ejaculation, the first 2 should certainly be 
viewed as vital and revealing clues to the inquiring mind of a student 
of the arcane sciences. The unknown nature of the so-called female 
ejaculate would be an enigma to the material scientist, because the 
ingredients that comprise it are made up of semi-refined astral 
substances. They are derived or synthesized from the pure un-refined 
'Waters of Nu' —what the ancients called the Empyrean Sea.
In the Bible, its called "the Virgin Mary."
The word Mary comes from the latin mare meaning sea. The first 
three letters 'mar' appear in the prefix of words that mean the sea, 
waters or a liquid; words like marine, maritime, marina, mariner, 
marinate, maricolous and mariculture. The Empyrean Sea represents 
the Cosmic Life-Force as it consolidates into the solar-charged 
atmosphere we breathe (pure air/waters = Virgin Mary) wherein we 
all live, move and have our being.
The Empyrean Sea is also a definition for the "Waters of Life."
Since the major issues being considered here are whether or not 
the human female has a "prostate", as well as identifying the 
mysterious makeup of its essential fluids, its fitting that we begin by 
examining the physical and esoteric functions of its less ambiguous 
equivalent—the male prostate.


--- PAGE 185 ---
137
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In the male near the base of the backbone, there sits a gland about 
the size of a quail's egg called (today) the prostate. Esoterically, it 
constitutes the third 'pearl' in what the ancient masters referred to as 
"the 4 Sons of Heru", or "the 4 Secret Glands of Redemption and 
Resurrection"...
1. Pineal (Fire)
2. Pituitary (Air)
3. Prostate (Water)
4. Gonads (Earth)
The male prostate touches the lower part of the bladder, and 
through it runs the urethra as it leaves the bladder. The ejaculatory 
tubes of the male testes enter the prostate gland, and between it and 
the pubis is a rich, spongy venous pudendal plexus where the dorsal 
vein of the penis ends.
The ancient Dravidian masters called this gland the Kanda. In the 
original Greek version of the Bible it is written as the Kardia.
This gland is so important and so crucial to the redemptive and 
perfective processes of the human body, that the ancient Kemetic 
priests referred to it as "The Throne of Ast whereupon Pharoah 
sits" —the seat of what the Dravidian masters called the Kundalini 
power; the Solar or Khu-Ra force—the Serpentine Fire.
Due to our society's insane obsession with recreational sex, the 
abuse of this gland by the male (and now the female) makes it 
painfully obvious that modem science, feminists, and most men 
know little to squat about its higher functions. In fact, in the vast 
majority of modem men, we would find this spiritual organ in sorry 
stages of degeneration and decay, due mainly to the incessant loss of 
the vital and precious seminal substances it qualifies.
And believe it or not, the so-called "female ejaculation fluid" is 
composed of virtually the same precious substances (derived by the 
blood and the breath from the Empyrean Sea) as those excreted by 
the prostate of the male during his ejaculations. This precious fluid is 
referred to as "the Golden Oil" in Zechariah 4:2, and is subject to 
varying degrees of density; that is —from a thin and volatile


--- PAGE 186 ---
138
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
consistency that immediately evaporates when it hits the air, to a 
thicker more fixed consistency that produces a stain on paper or bed 
linen. This oil that stains is the same elixir released by pubescent boys 
when they experience nocturnal emissions.
Healthy men have a thick, fixed oil. In the average man it is more 
or less thin or volatile. Here we see a correlation between the 
researchers' description of the fluid consistencies of a woman's first 
ejaculate. It is described as thick in the beginning, but then thins to 
the consistency of clear water after continuous ejaculations.
Now. If this oil is conserved it enhances and improves the body 
and the brain, and can eventually be transmuted by way of the pranic 
forces in the breath into an electro-chemical agent that vivifies and 
ignites the Serpentine or "Nibodhika" Fire. This in turn activates the 
7 Superior Ganglionic Centers of the Human temple that activate the 
higher powers of the epiphysis or pineal gland.
Nibodhika is the "astral fire" that the Bible says lights the lam(p) 
of Gad (the 7th chakra or son of Jacob who wrestled the angel on 
Mount Pineal—Gen. 32:24— 30) that taketh away the sins (ignorance) 
of the world—by causing our two eyes to "become one, thus filling the  
entire body with light”(Mat. 6:22).
This 'light' is astral light that is aided in its expression (or glow) by 
the density of radiative potassium appearing in healthy seminal 
fluids.
The two masses comprising the para-urethral or Skene's gland of 
the so-called female prostate are of similar constructs to those of the 
male, which are represented in the Bible as "...two olive trees upon 
the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof.. .which 
through the two golden pipes, empty the golden oil out of 
themselves; ... These are the two anointing ones that stand by the 
Lord of the whole earth." (Zechariah 4:11,12,14)
The research scientists earlier confirmed that the female prostate 
(1) produced prostatic fluids (of an unknown source and 
constitution); (2) had ducts that drained (emptied) into the urethra; 
(3) released hormones into the bloodstream by way of neuro­


--- PAGE 187 ---
139
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
endocrine cells, and (4) has the only hormone produced by the 
prostate —  serotonin.
Unidentified fluids; ducts that "drain"; hormones made and 
released —  all constitute the "golden pipes" that "empty" their 
contents (golden oil/hormones) into the bloodstream for distribution 
throughout the entire body, or "the whole earth." (Zech. 4: 14). This 
prostatic fluid or 'golden oil' is one of the paramount constituents of 
the blood, that in its purest state was called "Chrism" (or 
Krst/Christ) by the early Greeks.
And this beloved seeker was the magnificent secret of the 
Ascended Masters. This was the bio-spiritual science of resurrection 
and redemption taught by them to the select few called "The Path of 
The Hidden Light", which is now ridiculed and derided by the slaves 
and promoters of temporal, destructive, somatogenic appetites.
The con-founding fathers of Christianity took the above 
descriptions of this etheric essence and its cosmic processes and, 
when compiling their "New Testes" or New Testement, changed the 
name and description of the Nibodhika Fire of the Universe to that of 
their mythical lord and savior "Jesus the Christ", in order to deceive 
and control the evolutionary consciousness of the unweary masses.
Everybody is a Star...
(Literally)
•
In esoteric anatomy, the male prostate (or Kanda) consists of 
muscular and glandular tissue with 12 excretory ducts that pour their 
by-products into the blood. The 12 are related to the 12 Signs of the 
Zodiac. The 4 Superior Glands of Redemption mentioned earlier 
correspond to the 4 fixed signs if the Zodiac —Leo, Aquarius, Scorpio 
and Taurus.
At the same time, each of the 4 glands takes 3 signs and their 
qualities; a positive sign, a negative sign, and a neutral or balancing 
sign—collectively called "the 12 Gates of the Great City Jerusalem" in 
the Bible; which says ".. .on the East 3 Gates, on the North 3 Gates, on


--- PAGE 188 ---
140
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
the South 3 Gates and on the West 3 Gates. (Genesis 49; Revelations 
21:10-13, 25).
The Gates are the names of the 12 mythical Tribes of Israel, or 
signs of the Zodiac. Jerusalem means "Son (Sun) of the Perfect 
Peace"; the prefix "Jeru" derived from the Kemetic Heru, the 
Redeemer-Son.
Revelations 21:14 also makes reference to the 12 glandular 
excretory ducts as the "...twelve foundations" (wherein) "...the 
names" (or purpose) "...of the 12 apostles" (or 12 inorganic tissue 
salts comprising the "unidentified" solar minerals of the Golden Oil) 
that activates the Serpentine Fire (the glory or "glow ray") of God that 
lights "the Lamb (lam-p) that is the Light thereof." (Rev. 21:23)
In the arcane scientific literature of the ancient Adivasian yogic 
masters, the Kanda/prostate is said to be the seat of the Astral body. 
From it rises the 72,000 Nadis or astral tubes made up of astral 
substances and energy currents.
These tubes are the 'bio-cosmic' conduits of the astral currents.
Through the spinal section of the 12 dorsal vertebrae, there runs 
thread-like lines into which the Nadis feeds their essences, and 
through which the Serpentine Fire flows up and down continuously 
in the body; referred to in Zechariah 4:10 as "...the eyes of the Lord, 
which run to and fro through the whole earth."
These are the precious essences that constitute the so-called 
'unidentified' fluids of the female ejaculate, as well as where the 
precious fluids originate from. And this is the arcane knowledge that 
perverse and clueless feminists like Dr. Susan Block and the 
"liberated Christians" who practice and promote this nonsense, along 
with research scientists who study this phenomenon to give it 
legitimacy and credibility —  are sorely lacking in.
They carelessly promote the all-out temporal "pleasure principles" 
associated with this act, but do nothing to prepare the people for 
what could accurately be defined as the "cum-ing consequences."


--- PAGE 189 ---
141
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Dr. Block-Head...
•
Dr. Susan Block, with her website dedicated to "squirting" (the 
colloquial term for female ejaculation —  see fig. 17) ardently professes 
that we humans learn to live and behave more like the Bonobo apes 
of the Congo. Of course she has a huge following, particularly of 
feminists and feminized men.
Through what she terms her "bonobo foundation", Block writes in 
her article "The Bonobo Way - Peace through Pleasure" that the 
bonobo apes are perhaps "the homiest apes on earth."
From the genus Pan Paniscus  ('Pan' being the half-man half­
animal god of music, nature and prophesy with the hind- quarters, 
horns and sexual habits of a goat), these so-called "pygmy chimps" 
are so perverse and lascivious in their behavior (particularly the 
females), that they actually use plastic balls and other artifacts that 
are given to them to play with at preserves and zoos, as sex-toys to 
rub their vulvas into perpetual states of stimulation.
Dr. Block (the "squirt doctor") literally loves these apes because 
the females maintain a social order that controls the males through 
copious sex. Pointing to their anatomies, she states that they "...are 
more like humans than any other ape species", which have longer 
legs, smaller ears, more open faces and higher foreheads.
Of particular interest to Dr. Block is the fact that the genitals of the 
female bonobo ape are rotated forward like the human female's so 
they have face to face sex, unlike other chimps. She states that 
"...these ladies strengthen their friendships through lesbian sex" 
frequently performing what researchers define as "genito-genital" or 
"g-g rubbing"; that is—quick vulva to vulva friction that the 
Mogandu people of the area call "hoka-hoka."
Of course she passionately promotes that all human females do the 
"hoka-hoka" because this (among other sexual practices) "...would 
lead to world peace!"
Dr. Susan Block is of the philosophy that men and only men are the 
exclusive cause of all the problems of the world today — all the wars,


--- PAGE 190 ---
142
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
starvation, disease and strife. But with women controlling the world 
through copious sex by way of "rational hedonism", this would 
ultimately bring peace and joy to everyone on Earth—just as it has for 
the bonobo ape society.
Interesting that she should fail to make the qualitative distinction 
as to which "men" are royally f**king up this world...
Oh; By the way Beloved Sistas...
I've been saving the best for last.
If you are thinking about experimenting with this practice of 
female ejaculation, or have a girlfriend or two who indulge in it, you 
should know that at the very end of his research paper on the female 
prostate and female ejaculation, Dr. F Corbella Santamarie (and his 
associates) had the following to say...
"...  In our clinical experience, am ong the few w om en 
that claim  to ejaculate, urinary infections are common.
This contradicts the idea, defended by W hipple and 
Perry (1982), that w om en w ho ejaculate suffer less 
from  cystitis. It is logical that those that em it m ore 
quantity of fluids. ...could probably favor infections 
and other pathologies such as admocarcinoma of the 
para-urethral gland.. ..w hich m ake up 0.003%  of 
all fem ale genital cancers..." [Emphasis mine]
Ummm. All told, it seems that "squirting" is somehow "flirting" 
with reproductive disaster.
Quest for the Cosmic Pleasure Principle
•
A woman's "sex-sensual" organs were not constructed to 
healthfully withstand the continuous physiological stress needed to 
perform spasmodic muscular contractions (or 'squirting'), and 
though it appears to be so, the male sexual organs weren't designed


--- PAGE 191 ---
143
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
for it either. However, a woman's reproductive chamber—the uterus —  
would certainly be. It's denser mass and construction make it the 
only area in a woman's body specifically designed to naturally 
undergo intense spasmodic contractions, which are initiated for the 
sole purpose of giving birth.
Spasmodic uterine contractions for the purpose of birthing a baby 
are not coitus-related. Hormones from the pituitary are created for 
the distinct purpose of moving the baby (by peristaltic undulation of 
the fascia/ muscles) out through the pelvis and the vaginal canal.
The seeker must overstand this subtle anatomical difference! The 
sex-sensual organs of a woman's reproductive system (vaginal orifice; 
labium minus and majus; clitoris; so-called female prostate; urethral 
orifice) —do not technically comprise the reproductive chamber  
(uterus) —only the surrounding access to it. The female sex-sensual 
organs constitute the bio-spiritual locus through which the 
phenomenon of physical life is initiated, and subsequently born.
Within the framework of the reproductive process, the vagina's 
purpose is to guard and define the path to and from the reproductive 
chamber; the holy of holies —the sanctum sanctorum—the precious 
womb. Therefore, the occurrence of intense spasmosis in a woman is 
cosmically designed to take place only in the reproductive chamber  
during birth, not repetitively in her sex-sexual organs.
Think of it this way. Those of you who have given birth know how 
draining and exhaustive the process truly is. As men, we could not 
even begin to fathom this type of physical ordeal.
Consider the vital energy being utilized within that concentrated 
period of time, and what the body feels like afterwards. Consider 
what is lost in the form of nutrients and intrinsic minerals and how 
long it takes (women of the western world) to properly recover —  the 
average timeframe being four to six weeks.
Now. Remember the way you felt after a wonderful night of sex 
and multiple orgasms, and the feeling of "blissful fatigue" you 
experienced upon waking the following morning? Well both 
experiences (giving birth and sexual climax) are qualitively the same


--- PAGE 192 ---
144
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
because the anatomical side-effects of pain and pleasure both yield the 
same result —exhaustion!
But quantitatively they are vastly different. Where birth 
concentrates the debilitative process to within a timeframe of 4 to 16 
hours (give or take), with a standard six-week period set aside for 
rest and recuperation, orgasm (of which the body needs a period of 7 
to 14 days to nominally recover from just one), debilitates and 
enervates the body incrementally — by degrees, since the standard 
prescription for having sex promoted to the sheeple by the social 
engineers of our twisted reality, is 2 times per week to 5 times per  
month —average'.
Which gives credence to the notion that our present-day society 
is literally  "fucking stupid!"
The way we are coersed and conditioned to pursue and practice 
the sex act, the average man and woman seldom allow their bodies to 
substantially recuperate after every sexual episode. This eventually 
leads to symptoms of pre-mature aging and systemic degeneration 
that eventually manifest as the myriad of reproductive dis-orders we 
all experience later on in life —not the least of which are the 
epidemics of prostate cancer and dementia in men, and menopause 
and uterine cancers in women.
I can venture a guess as to what the cynical seeker is probably 
thinking right about now; "Brother Valentine's got to be a closet 
Fundamentalist working on the down-low for Jesus! This guy is a 
certified party-pooper —  a pleasure killer who wants everyone to 
believe that sex is wrong", or (dear I say it) —"sinful."
Look. This is exactly what the "master-baiters" and parasites of 
your higher consciousness-awareness want you to believe. They keep 
your attention focused below the belt, instead of above the neck. 
Below-the-belt consciousness keeps you worshipping and giving 
alms to their "lord and slavior" —  blissful ignorance!
To be blissfully ignorant is just a classy way of being called 
"fucking stupid" in the vernacular. And this is an appropriate 
metaphor to describe what anatomically occurs, because the fluids


--- PAGE 193 ---
145
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
comprising the ejaculates of both men and women constitute the 
cerebro-spinal elixirs used by the brain for the purpose of higher 
perception and awareness. So you can literally "fuck yourself stupid" 
if you continually abuse yourself, and by persistent ejaculation, 
"lose" yourself through the callous and foolish wasting of your 
precious "golden oil" —what Christians unwittingly refer to as "the 
Blood of Christ."
Again, the individual choice of action belongs to the seeker. I do 
not write in judgement of anyone. 1 have simply provided a missing 
equation to the esoteric algebra of life; that being...
a - k + cs = p.i.c
or; (a)ction minus (k)nowledge and (c)ommon (s)ense = (p)ainful 
(i)nevitable (c)onsequence.
The bottom line to blissful ignorance beloved? Karmic grief!
As unpopular as this may all appear to some, truth is, the 
phenomenon of female spasmosis and ejaculation cannot be natural 
simply because a consistently spasmodic vagina (and related sex- 
sensual structures of the reproductive system) is sacrificing enormous 
amounts of precious blood-organized solar minerals and related 
nutrients. By the dictates of Immutable Cosmic Law, Nature would 
never have designed the very sanctuary of physical life to sacrifice its 
most precious energy and nutrients, at the most critical time, and in 
the most critical area where life is destined to begin!
If a healthy conception and pregnancy is to occur, the 
reproductive chamber would naturally want to conserve its precious 
energy and fluid-nutrients at this precarious time, in order to make 
sure that the infrastructural housing of the womb (endometrium; 
myometrium; internal os; cervix; etc.) is strong and safe for the newly 
developing fetus. Which means that multiple orgasms by the female 
during sexual intercourse, amounts to being a severe waste of life- 
giving, life-sustaining energy and nutrients from the blood, and an 
overall detriment to the structural integrity of the reproductive 
apparatus; that is — if the goal of the couple engaged in the sex-act is  
to conceive a healthy baby! If it's not, then it is merely the lustful


--- PAGE 194 ---
146
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
waste of one's precious vital life-force, through the pathologically 
popular exercise of erotic stress-relief; the perverbial "booty call."
Again; I’m almost positive the reader thinks that I'm some sort of 
puritanical chauvinist nutcase given my views on this particular 
subject. But you know what? I don't care what feminists, so-called 
educated sex-perts and anatomical biologists want us to believe. As 
conscientious seekers and critical free-thinkers, we must look at this 
issue clinically and metaphysically if our humanity is to resurrect and 
ascend in consciousness. The determining factor for decoding and 
comprehending the truth of this issue goes back to that catch-all 
phrase...'design denotes the mechanisms of Junction!'
Again, please read the following carefully.
"Do the (Bio-Chemical) Math..."
•
The function of spasmosis is to cause a sudden outburst of nerve 
force energy that is convulsive in nature to bring about ejaculation —  
nerve force energy that is (again) likened to an epileptic fit.
During an orgasm, the muscles of the man's body become semi­
paralyzed as the system sacrifices enormous amounts of Bio-Kinetic 
Life Force to propel and eject his nutrient-rich sperm out of the body. 
This is why many men (both young and old) have been known to die 
during this act, which also happens to a number of males of the 
animal kingdom, as well as insect life-forms.
Death from sex?!
Yes. We've all heard stories of middle aged and fairly young men 
dying at the point of orgasm, thinking that it was simply attributed to 
a weak heart. But when we do the 'bio-chemical math' associated 
with spasmosis and ejaculation, the truth literally "cums" to light.
In the normally healthy male, about 25 to 45 percent of the Ki or 
Pranic-Jing energy he accumulates from solar lightwaves, breathing, 
ambient starlight, drinking and eating is converted into the 
manufacturing of sexual energy, which is stored by him in his sperm 
and seminal fluids.


--- PAGE 195 ---
147
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
When a man ejaculates, his semen contains an estimated 200 to 500 
million sperm cells — each cell having the potential to become a fully 
grown human being. After the semen is discharged, blood cells 
immediately begin the process of producing more sperm, leaching 
the archetypal etheric essences and related precious materials needed 
from everywhere in the body —with particular emphasis on the solar- 
based minerals and nutrients in the cerebro-spinal fluids and the 
brain.
Let's say that an average healthy man over his lifetime ejaculates 
maybe 2000 to 5000 times, totaling in volume about 15 litres or over 
20 quarts'. If you do the bio-chemical math with 200 to 500 million 
sperm per ejaculation, one man's ejaculated sperm-count throughout 
his lifetime, has the capability of generating over 200 to 300 times the  
entire population of this planet!
Which is why retaining "the Bindu", or semen, was taught by the 
ancient Adivasian (Dravidian) masters through the practice of the 3 
Kriyas; the art of Vajroli Mudra, Moola Bandha and Uddiyana 
Bandha —  all pertaining to the technique of holding back the precious 
semen during sexual intercourse; what Pascal Beverly Randolph (the 
black man who revolutionized the Rosicrucian Order, and from 
whom the legendary Aleistair Crowley learned his "sex majic") 
called the "Eulis" or "The Anseiratic Mysteries."
To the masters, any loss of semen was tantamount to a Tittle 
death.' Through the science of Tantra, the act of sexual intercourse 
was taught to be one of sharing and participation in sensual bliss, 
which was attained through the art of retaining and circulating  one's 
precious essences, not expelling them.
In the Kalachakra Texts, the Tantras teach that 'astral semen' is 
originally stored in a moon-like bowl beneath the roof of the skull. 
No sooner than a man experiences his first arousal of sexual desire, 
this 'cerebral dew' begins to leak out drop by drop, passing down 
into the 5 firey centers of the Nibodhika Tree (the 5 lower chakras and 
astral-based nerve plexi of the spinal column) igniting them toward 
sensual bliss, while at the same time creating a degenerative somatic


--- PAGE 196 ---
148
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
appetite for sex that grows with each experience —  if not contained by 
the disciplines and practice of the 3 Kriyas.
Thus it is logical and wise (with conscious utilization of the 
creative forces released through sex) that spasmosis and ejaculation 
by the male should have only one distinct and defining purpose; that 
being—to propel sperm from within the testicles, up through the 
ductus deferens, across the ejaculatory ducts, out through the shaft of 
the penis and into the vaginal cavity of the female —  all for the 
purpose of the sperm entering the os or mouth of the cervix to unite 
with an ovum.
That, dear brothers and sisters, delineates the bottom line divinely 
orchestrated sole/solitary purpose for seminal ejaculation and 
spasmosis by a man. In fact, for any male creature.
Now let us briefly examine this function (spasmosis/ejaculation) 
as it pertains to the female's reproductive design.
Metaphysically, the male reproductive system is designed as the 
dominant (yang) or initiating apparatus. On the other hand the 
female reproductive system is designed as the receptive (yin) or 
incubating apparatus. The former gives to initiate life, the latter 
receives to nurture and manifest it. The male is electric/dynamic —  
the female magnetic/ receptive.23
After understanding the ultimate purpose for the debilitating acts 
of spasmosis and ejaculation in the male, one would have to be a 
certifiable psycho to believe that an ejaculating vagina is 'normal', j 
much less natural to the physiological designs of a woman. Just 
imagine what is happening to the physiologies of women, who are 
being encouraged by feminist sex-perts to frequently use their 
vaginas as spewing fountains to achieve a nerve-paralyzing, energy- 
draining, nutrient-depleting phenomenon like female ejaculation.
23 However, the "charge" that compels the sperm and the egg to come together 
manifests as opposites while in stasis —  that is —  the male seed is magnetically 
charged, while the female's egg is positively charged. - Author


--- PAGE 197 ---
149
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
What damage does the entire body suffer in the long run, much 
less the sexual organ and the reproductive chamber itself? What 
damage is done to a child birthed from the structurally exhausted 
womb of a woman dedicated to this perverse practice?
Remember what I said earlier beloved sisters, "squirting" was not 
a function inherently natural to the evolution of the reproductive 
process in the female anatomy, but a learned capability — one 
developed and perfected over time by the perverse practice of 
onanism.
But you would never know this because gender feminist 
philosophies and political viewpoints, coupled with the myopic 
tenets of western medical science, have together penned a social 
scripture of belief-oriented doctrines and practices that the 
unsuspecting masses have accepted primarily on blind, oblivious 
faith.
The purpose of this thesis therefore is to help expose such dubious 
philosophies as they are advocated from within their respective 
schools of deviant thought. More importantly, it is written to 
investigate and explore the intrinsic nature of Omniscient Intelligence 
and Its magnificent operations as Immutable Cosmic Law within the 
human body temple.
In this particular case, our aim has been to explore and disclose the 
fundamental intention of the reproductive chamber, the sexual act 
and the ultimate purpose for spasmosis and ejaculation.
Bottom line beloved —the function of spasmosis and ejaculation 
are for the initiation of life as well as for its birthing. Whatever 
pleasures women individually derive from the sexual apparatus that 
leads to the reproductive chamber—if not used to achieve the 
designated goal of conceiving life, should be done tantrically to cause 
the least amount of damage to the overall structure; a minimal 
amount of loss in vital etheric essences to the overall organism, and a 
maximum amount of pleasure with the goal of blissful peace.


--- PAGE 198 ---
150
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Clitoris...
... Nicknamed 'the little man in the boat.'
Co-incidence? Not at all. This is the appendage most often used in 
female masturbation. It is characterized as a vestigial organ. The 
American Heritage Dictionary defines the word vestigial as:
"... occurring or persisting as a rudimentary or degenerate 
structure ..."
The word vestige, from which vestigial was derived, is defined as:
"... A small, degenerate or rudimentary organ or part, 
existing in an organism as a usually nonfunctional 
remnant of an organ or part (that was) fully 
developed and functional in a preceding generation 
or earlier developmental stage..."
The words rudiment and rudimentary mean;
"... imperfectly or incompletely developed: imperfectly 
developed organ; incipient..."
The definition of the word vestige gives us a clue to our specie's 
hermaphroditic imbalances with the line "... in a preceding generation 
or earlier developmental stage." However, this line may mislead the 
seeker into believing that the clitoris was once a penis or vice-versa. 
In reality, the clitoris is only a rudimentary outgrowth attempting to 
be a penis—just as the prepuce or foreskin of the male penis is a 
rudimentary outgrowth attempting to be a vulva.
How and why these two biological appurtenances may have been 
formed in the first place, is scrutinized in book 5 of my Regenesis 
Chronicles entitled The Epicene Enigma.
Feminist-thinking grass-roots sisters also tend to disagree with 
me about the function and purpose the clitoris serves in a woman's 
life. But most of their disagreements are philosophical or cultural, 
rather than conclusions of scientific fact. Lack of knowledge 
concerning the metaphysical principles of occult anatomy, the 
original archetypal designs of the human temple, or the ancient 
nuclear wars and environmental cataclysms leading to the poisonous,


--- PAGE 199 ---
151
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
degenerated biospheres that contributed to the eventual development 
of the organ itself, may also be the reason for this.
Or perhaps it's because of their penchants toward latent 
gynandrous proclivities. Who knows?
One thing is scientifically certain. The clitoris is a vestigial (or 
rudimentary biological remnant) that serves no other function than 
for the stimulation and expenditure of intense neurological energy.
Conscious sisters must ask themselves whether the Omniscient 
Most High Cosmic Intelligence would create an organ whose sole 
and exclusive purpose is to irritate, exhaust and deplete the nervous 
system of its limited vital life forces and nutrients, for an average of 
10 to 20 seconds of intense epileptic-based sensations.
Item: As mentioned earlier, all functions in Nature have a divine dual purpose —  
(1) an initiating stage that provides the means to manufacture an end-product; 
and... (2) a fertile end product that insures continuity. Continuity (secondary 
stage) represents that condition of life where the end-product gives back to, or 
perpetuates the process that initiated it. This divine principle is called the Law of  
Reciprocal Maintenance.  Continuous clitoral masturbation gives nothing back to 
the overall organism, while it takes an enormous amount of its life-force nerve 
energy and essences. Divinity denotes reciprocity - giving and receiving. 
Therefore, masturbation is not divine. Continually sacrificing enormous amounts 
of Bio-Kinetic Life Force, nerve energy and precious solar/cosmic nutrients, 
simply for the purpose of receiving the 10 to 20 second rush of a "neurological 
nut", is not a balanced utilization of this cosmic principle, and a temple thus 
violated, eventually crumbles.
In Summary...
The penis has three primary functions; (1) as a vital component of 
the male lymphatic system; (2) for the elimination of fluid wastes, 
and (3) as a conduit for the depositing of sperm.
Can the same be said of the clitoris?
No! The clitoris is a vestigial remnant having a design and 
structure similar to the penis, but retaining no capacity to carry out 
any of its precise functions! In other words, it has no vital reciprocal 
purpose in the functioning or maintenance of the human female


--- PAGE 200 ---
152
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
anatomy. Again, any arguments to the contrary originate from the 
minds of ignorant or misinformed people, or by those who refuse to 
contemplate this issue from the manifold scientific facts founded on 
basic biology, the metaphysical knowledge of occult anatomy, logic 
and common sense.
When the act of sexual intercourse is culminated, the ejaculation 
of sperm and the receiving of it, have as their final goal the divine 
purpose of manifesting life. This is how the Omniscient Cosmic 
Intelligence of the Creator-Spirit structured Nature to fulfill Its 
Covenant to "be fruitful and multiply" within third-density reality.
This is not my "opinion" beloved. This is Universal Lawl
Stress, Gynandry and Osteoporosis ...
•
Gynandromorphic women (or women approaching masculine 
tendencies) are 75% more susceptible to bone decay from 
osteoporosis, since enhanced levels of androsteroids in the 
bloodstream prevents their bodies from properly assimilating and 
utilizing calcium. This used to happen primarily in Caucasian 
women, but more and more there is medical evidence of the same 
type of bone erosion occuring in melanated women today. There is 
also an 85-90% susceptibility to growing fibroid tumors and cysts, 
compared to the 3-5% susceptibility of gynic women living in so- 
called 'primitive cultures' or' emerging nations' around the world.
More evidence has recently come to light proving beyond the 
shadow of a doubt that perverted estrogen and progesterone 
production due to toxic environments, stressors, poor nutrition and 
the presence of abnormally high levels of androgenic stress-related 
hormones in the blood related to Aromatase Deficiency Syndrome 
(ADS), are the true causes of poor calcium assimilation in gynandric 
females, and a primary reason why heavily athletic or career-stressed 
women inevitably contract varying degrees of osteoporosis.24
24 Poor electrical conduction and brain function, along w ith heart diseases are also 
potential consequences as well. -  Author


--- PAGE 201 ---
153
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Today, such women are told to take more calcium because sports 
medicine experts claim they need more as active women. However, 
they are never told that proper assimilation of the calcium depends 
heavily on how andric or gynic their bodies are. In women, calcium 
must work in tandem with integrus estrogen and progesterone 
production to properly bind to the bones, while trace elements like 
boron must be present in sufficient quantities to keep it there. Boron 
is essential in the making of integrus estrogen.
Sports-active gynandromorphic women do not manufacture 
integrus estrogen, and this fact shows up as various dysfunctions 
related to calcium deficiency later on in their lives. Female athletes 
lose great bone mineral mass especially in the spinal region, which 
pre-disposes them to fractures, cartilage damage and severe muscle 
sprains.25 Men have testosterone, zinc and a variety of trace minerals 
and enzymes to aid in their metabolism of calcium.
In her work The Greatest Story Never Told,  author Lana Cantrell 
describes how one group of young athletic women were tested for 
the effects of strenuous exercise on the female anatomy. The resulting 
report appeared in the book Imprints - The Long Life Effects of the Birth  
Experience, by Arthur Janov, PhD. It was documented that these 
athletically stressed out young ladies had the bone-mass density of 
fifty-year-old women!
What more proof does a woman need in light of such a startling 
revelation? Strenuous athletics and exercise were never meant to be 
pursued by anyone ... especially females! The sports industry and the 
pharmaceutical cartels will never admit outright that continued 
stressful exercising by gynic women (or any woman for that matter), 
will greatly disturb their estrogen production, and that lactic acid (a 
by-product of stressful exercising), accumulates in the muscles 
preventing calcium from being taken up by the bones.
This only goes to show that the current promotion and acceptance 
of amateur and professional sports now being played by today's 
young women, are trends orchestrated primarily by the gender-
Like Jackie Joyner-Kersee who came up lame at the 1996 Olympics. - Author


--- PAGE 202 ---
154
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
feminist parasitic elite who are motivated primarily by their 
gynandrous proclivities and the perverbial bottom line.
Under enormous pressure from the economic interests of today's 
Amazonian feminism, the secret causes of osteoporosis may never be 
openly admitted to by the pharmaceutical cartels. Which means that 
as a latter-day "woman of the '90s" or "new millennium woman", 
you are left to fend for yourself when the painful consequences of 
your masculine stress-related activities, inevitably come home to 
roost.
The truth is the light, and it will always reveal itself my sisters. The 
trick is to pay close attention to every word that the pharmaceutical 
pimps allow the media to report whenever they are promoting a new 
drug product for sale. Sometimes a single line speaks volumes.
Item: As of November 30, 1995, the FDA approved a drug called Fosamax,  at the 
time the pharmaceutical cartel's newest "weapon" in their "war" against 
osteoporosis. The newscasters on every major network gave away a most profound 
clue as to the actual underlying cause of this disease, when they reported that this 
particular drug (Fosamax) did not contain estrogen  as did all the previous  drugs 
formulated to treat this disease!
Sisters, a logical question to ask yourselves at this point would 
be... why would pharmaceutical companies have developed drugs to 
treat bone erosion and decay in women, using estrogen as a primary 
ingredient?
Another logical question; how can an element like estrogen, so 
essential and intrinsic to the basic underlying integrity of a woman's 
health, suddenly be singled out as one of the primary factors for 
blame in the development of breast cancer?
In fact, the real question we should all be asking ourselves is ... 
whose estrogen has been used to cause these soaring rates of cancer?
You may read more on the subject of perverted progesterone and 
estrogen production and their roles in menopause, cancer and 
osteoporosis, in the section entitled Woe-menopause and the History of  
Eternal Youth Therapy (HRT).
Think on these things beloved, and stay tuned.


--- PAGE 203 ---
155
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Uterus
The reproductive system of a woman is the sanctum sanctorum of 
human life. It is God's incubation chamber. Every part of it is 
designed to give form, substance and comfort to the infinite potential 
of re-manifesting divinity. Abused, mismanaged and altogether 
misunderstood, through it all it remains ever faithful and integrus to 
its ultimate purpose; that is —  to maintain health and to manifest life.
The uterus is the main area of amino acid concentrations in a 
woman, and as such is a major site for DNA and RNA synthesis.26 It 
is a primary member of the endocrine system producing vital 
hormones before, during and even after menopause. It is also said to 
be the central site for lipid and glycogen production, as well as the 
main site for the production of prostacyclin, a hormone that protects 
women from heart disease and unwanted blood clotting.
The uterus keeps a woman's metabolism in mint condition, and 
should there be a deficiency of elements occurring anywhere in her 
body, it sends a re-vitalizing boost of energy to that area.
Despite its small size, the uterus is a powerhouse of concentrated 
nourishment, taking blood through its vast network of vessels to 
allow for a more rapid turnover of nutrients back into the 
bloodstream. (See figure 26.) As Nature's "dark-matter tuning fork" it 
vibrates at very high frequencies, which keeps the whole body's 
electro-magnetic system stable.
Metaphysically, it is extremely sensitive to highly refined cosmic- 
energy signatures as well, where it acts as a consciousness-capacitor 
and bridge to the material world through the dynamics of thought 
and emotion. The uterus is also an inverted pyramid, as is the mons 
pubis. In fact, every time a woman looks down at her genitalia, she 
may be said to be looking 'up' at the apex of a pyramid.
When it is incubating a child the uterus becomes the exact shape 
of an avocado pear —  or the oval shape of the Ankh (see figure 25).
26 But this may not always apply where it concerns melanated women. - Author


--- PAGE 204 ---
156
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
According to the esoterica of occult anatomy as taught by the 
ancient masters, on the molecular-atomic levels, corporeal life 
crystallizes within a triangular matrix. This principle may be seen 
under a microscope where blood platelets coagulate and crystallize 
into triune lattices.
Thus the spark of life that animates gross elemental matter into 
conscious being, is first captured within a molecular-atomic closed 
circuit. The original closed-circuit/geometric template for the 
dimensional materialization of Dark Matter Consciousness in matter 
is the triangle;27 the archetypal containment of Being used for the 
projected Intentions of the Universal Mind, which becomes the "... 
altar to the Lord (pineal) in the midst of the land of Egypt" 
(head/body) [Isaiah 19:19] —more commonly known as the mer-kut, 
or pyramid.
The word pyramid dis-assembles to become 'pyr' —meaning fire, 
and 'amid' —meaning within. The fire (or spark) within. The upward 
pyramid (A) is the male force, and the downward (▼) the female —  
depicting the head of the penis or sperm, and the uterus respectively. 
Metaphysically, the female principle primarily draws her power from 
the Earth force and the male principle feeds from the forces of the 
cosmic canopy; the positive charge and the negative charge 
(centripetal and centrifugal) coming together to manifest sentient life.
This positive and negative force coming together was originally 
depicted as two triangles superimposed upon each other in opposite 
directions. It was inherited by the ancient Muurs and called the Hex- 
alpha, but is now being used as a Kaballistic political symbol 
displayed on the flag of Israel —  misnamed the Magen David, or "Star 
of David". This symbol once represented the universal bi-polar 
circuitry of divine creative intelligence.28Sadly, the uterus of the 
modern day woman is no where near the same as the uterus of her 
great, great, great, great, great, great, great ancestral grandmothers.
27 God creates geometrically. The number 3 represents the first "container," or circuit
—  the pyramid -Author
28 It is also a hidden symbol adopted by the Masonic Order depicting the Square and 
the Compass. -Author


--- PAGE 205 ---
157
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Great Pyramid;
Dimensional Capacitor as Resurrecting Womb...
•
The life-giving powers of the womb have always been revered by 
ancient melanated civilizations throughout recorded time. One of the 
most famous of all temples erected to glorify that power, giving 
praise and honor to the Omniscient Father and the Eternal Mother 
i the celestial Nu), is the Great Pyramid of Giza.
Without becoming too elaborate, I'll just say that every part of this 
magnificent super-structure—from its age of over 100,000 years, to its 
scientifically specific design and shape calculating the transcendental 
constant of Pi (TT), to the elements it is comprised of, and its 
mathematically precise alignments with dimensional, space-time and 
intergalactic star-energy grid coordinates—represents the component 
parts of a "cosmic fertility capacitor" that units the un-embodied 
consciousness of Dark Matter energy (through the hydrogen halo of 
Ra) with the harmonic resonant vibrations of the Earth, to balance the 
life-sustaining encoded light energies broadcasted from our central 
galactic core, the Hunab Ku.
It is also part of a chain of pyramids that act as geo-gyroscopic 
fulcrums stabilizing the orbital spin of our planet around the sun.
Aside from it being a super-sophisticated bio-electrical generator 
as well, it is also a profound representation of the human cranium 
depicting the pineal gland (King's Chamber) and its connection to the 
pituitary gland (Queen's Chamber).
Of its symbolic comparison to the uterus we see that the 
myometrium (or wall of the uterus), is largely comprised of the 
mineral calcium. Calcium is a powerful bio-electric conductor. It 
helps to move electrically charged fluids efficiently through cellular 
walls. The bio-energy vortex responsible for the administration of 
this activity is the throat chakra, which powers and regulates the 
thyroid and parathyroid glandular systems. Proper calcium levels in 
a healthy woman are instrumental to pain-free childbirth, for it is a 
major component utilized by the body during uterine contractions. 
Severe cramps, tension or muscular spasms during menstruation can


--- PAGE 206 ---
158
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 17 - The Uterus
cause for this.
The Great Pyramid of Giza is also a cosmic capacitor; in fact —its 
the grand-daddy of ALL capacitors ever created! In its original state, it 
was constructed as a consciousness-incubator to absorb, amass and 
then transmit qualified forms of inter-dimensional energy. In other 
words, to attract, accumulate, incubate and to give birth to the life 
sustaining energies that nurtured our world.
also be caused by the lack of it.
Beloved seeker, it just so happens that the walls of the Great 
Pyramid are also constructed of a micro-crystalline calcium material 
called limestone. Limestone is calcium carbonate, a powerful 
electrical conductor. Its presence throughout this great superstructure 
enhances its electrical field resonance, which is why many sensitive 
people visiting the monolith have reported feeling strange sensations 
(sometimes seeing visions), or hearing voices and music inside their 
heads. This would be due to the field resonance of the temple 
interfacing with their auras and brain wave patterns. The pyramid's 
shape and precise engineering, that is, the extremely small ranges of 
variation related to the structure's physical dimensions, is also a
FALLOPIAN TU8E CORNU OF UTERUS
BODY,
ISTHMUS 
AND 
CERVIX 
OF UTERUS
INTERNAL OS  
EXTERNAL OS
LATERAL FORNIX
VAGINA


--- PAGE 207 ---
159
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The uterus is also a capacitor/incubator, and as with all bio­
incubators, it too uses cosmic energy amassed as solaric heat to 
form and nurture physical life. The calcium lining of the uterus also 
provides a highly charged, negatively ionized environment to 
remove CO 2 pollutants (hard particle electrons; positive ions; 
so-called free radicals etc.).
The cavity of the uterus is very small in relationship to the 
overall size of a woman, much like the size of the Queen's Chamber 
in comparison to the Great Pyramid itself. The proximity of the 
King's Chamber29, in this case, forming the five levels of stone in the 
cubicle represents the sacrum, or "head of the Djed" column. (See 
figures 20 and 23)
This stone configuration, located in the King's chamber, 
represents the approximate alignment of the sacrum and its 
relationship to the mid-section of the uterus, which is why walking 
(not running) is so healthy to an expectant mother.
For a pregnant woman's womb, the sacrum becomes an 
important field energy regulator. As she walks, the motion of an 
expectant mother's hips stimulates compression in the bones and 
cartilage of the sacrum, making the little connective tissues there 
blend for just a brief moment, then "pop" as they separate. This 
"popping" creates a minute electrical charge that stimulates ionic 
energy. Compression causes a negative charge and the resulting 
tension releases a positive one. Thus the sacrum (Djed column) 
comprised of calcium (the perfect bio-electric conductor) creates the 
"spark" or "charge" that feeds electrical pulses (caused by mother's 
walking) directly into the uterus zapping its nutrient filled matrix 
with a balanced, revitalizing charge of ionized energy.
The limestone of the great pyramid also emulates the calcium of 
our bones as well, primarily the cranial bones.
29 The King's Chamber has another esoteric interpretation; it represents the Pineal 
Gland, and the Queen's Chamber represents the Pituitary. The passageway leading to 
the underground inverted pyramid is the trigeminal nerve, or brain stalk leading to 
the spine. The inverted pyramid also symbolizes man's physical body (death) and 
the upward pyramid symbolizes man's resurrected body (born again). - Author


--- PAGE 208 ---
160
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
As mentioned earlier, calcium is a crystallized element that when 
pressurized, emits electricity. The King's Chamber (containing the 
phallic pillar of Wsr, or Osiris —  see figure 20b) once harbored a quartz 
crystal-like array of minerals that helped amplify the electro­
magnetic spectrum radiated by the monolith.
Within the King's Chamber is a sarcophagus. This sarcophagus 
once acted as a base altar for the entire chamber, which was also lined 
with another element called garnet (all pillaged by Arab and Vatican- 
sponsored tomb robbers, along with other precious minerals found 
around and within the chamber walls). Garnet is a ferro-magnetic 
crystal that has the same molecular properties as red blood cells'.  Garnet is 
so independently responsive to temperature fluctuations, as well as 
sound and light frequencies, that its polarity can actually be reversed 
with the proper frequency calibrations at virtually any time.
The sarcophagus and the chamber's garnet containment were used 
for harmonic healing, to reverse the aging process and as a 
regeneration chamber to literally "bring the dead back to life."30 
During a neophyte's initiation or redemptive process, the garnet lined 
King's Chamber acted as an excellent insulator when the limestone 
was heated during rituals. The garnet remained cool and the 
regenerative effects of the electrical field that the chamber emitted 
were received without harm.
The identical thing happens in an impregnated uterus.
The Queen's chamber represents the pituitary/womb where the 
tiny developing blastocyst faces the same type of pressure and 
enormous heat that the initiate would experience while in the King's 
Chamber. It could incinerate. But the rich blood of a healthy uterus 
insulates the blastocyst just as the garnet does with its ferro-magnetic 
crystals, along with the water estuary created in the subterranean 
chamber to cool and protect the overall structure.
30 This is why the royal families of the Khemetic dynasties were so fanatically 
meticulous about preserving their bodies after death. They knew that one day "the 
gods" would return to literally re-animate or resurrect them. The far-ancient 
Khemetic ancestors had no former experience with early death. It was a new and 
tragic experience for them. -Author


--- PAGE 209 ---
161
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
ANCIENT ESOTERIC SYMBOLS  
OF THE 
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE  
SYSTEM


--- PAGE 210 ---
162
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 18
Subterranean Chamber 
and Water Estuary 
(Amniotic Pathway)
King's Chamber = Sacrum/Prostate/Pineal  
Queen's Chamber= Sacrum/Uterus/Pituitary


--- PAGE 211 ---
163
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Djed Column 20 (b)
The Djed Column and the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid are esoteric 
symbols of the sacrum, where the caduceus-uraeus, Serpentine(Asr) fire lays coiled 
and ready to be "freed" (resurrected) as the Kundalini force that lights "... The lamp  
of God (Pineal) that taketh away the sins of the world."
The Ankh atop the Djed represents the resurrected "Nibobhika Fire" that is the 
white and blue-green Astral "light-essence" of the body temple.
Figure 19
Kings Chamber


--- PAGE 212 ---
164
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 21
Figure 22


--- PAGE 213 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 21 —  A metaphysical representation of the womb and its pelvic housing. 
The uterus is seen as the physical tabernacle of primordial unity wherein the 
potential for all corporeal /material life is manifested. It is the "chrysalis-cocoon" or 
I "seat of Ast" — the container for the cellular organization of all corporeal form. 
From this tabernacle is expressed the dual polarities of matter by way of the 
ovaries — the yin and yang dynamics of existence. The "eyes" represent the right 
eye of Uchat-Akhat  (intellectual; creative; electric / yang); and the left eye of Abhut  
intuitive; distillative; magnetic /yin). The right "eye" (ovary) depicts the visible 
sun (son); the "vitalizer" radiating outward as the Divine Word; in this case — "the 
Word made Flesh." The left "eye" (ovary) is the lunar or moon-eye; the "reflector" 
of the solar (soul) light; like the mirror —  it is the magnetic eye of "inflection" and 
"in-volution." Children conceived from an egg formed in the right ovary are more 
outgoing, dynamic, active and worldly —  by nature a "doer", and are most likely 
born under a zodiac configuration (or sign) influenced by houses where the sun, 
air, and fire  are primarily exalted. Children conceived from an egg formed in the 
left ovary are more psychic, intuitional, reserved, and less likely to be attracted by 
the hyper-activity of the outer world — by nature a "thinker." They are born in 
signs or star configurations influenced by houses where the moon, water, and earth  
are primarily exalted.
Figure 22 — Depicts the Djed Column or "principle of stability" — in this case the 
stability of Divine Cycles —or that which represents the steadfastness of 
Immutable Law —Its everlasting continuity as and within life. The four horizontal 
layers of the upper column symbolize the 4 elements or 4 "Sons of Heru." The 
Sacrum (see figures 19, 20a and 23) and its 4 sections are the backdrop representing 
the horizontal pillars of stability — the elemental base of the human temple. It is 
the "seat" that energizes the womb. The eyes in the Djed are esoteric symbols of 
Wsr "trapped by Set within the tree-trunk" (spine); in this case, the stagnant Solar 
force utilized by Ast (Kundalini-Serpentine fire) or electro-magnetic Astal force, 
to spiral upward, creating the vortex of life which brings together the "pieces" of 
Wsr's "dismembered or discarnate flesh" (or randomized elemental/atomic 
components) manifested as the body in physical life. Notice the symbolic 
resemblance of the arms, elbows and hands of Wsr holding the symbols of electro­
magnetic polarity (crook and flail), to the bones of the lower pelvis (see arrows) as 
they come together to form the coccyx or "tail of the coiled serpent." Note as well 
the placement of the eyes within the 4 upper sections of the Djed. They are 
symbolically located in precisely the same area where the womb and the ovaries 
are placed in relationship to the sections of the sacrum in the woman's body.


--- PAGE 214 ---
166
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
a. b. c.
An isolated view of the female sacrum (figure a.) shows the distinct "wings" of the 
Ala, symbolically depicted by the wings of the Caduceus (figure, b) At the very top of 
the sacrum (figure a) the two upper arrows point to the two "heads" of the 
"serpents"on the Ala. The 8 portals of the sacrum called the Sacral Foramina are the 
starting gates or root portals of the Kundalini force. The serpents of the Caduceus 
(center), in their undulating patterns, represent the flow of the Kundalini fire as it 
follows the same pathway as the portals of the Sacral Formina (see circles 
representing the Sacral Formina in figure b.) Figure c. represents the paths taken by 
the energy vortex of the Kundalini fire, as it circulates thru the nerve conduits and 
muscle fibers of the uterus...
Figure 23


--- PAGE 215 ---
167
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The Mirror of Het-Heru.
Figure 24 - The figure of Het-Heru represents the "embodiment of compassion," or 
the magnetic centripetal force that "emotes", coagulates or brings together all 
aspects of corporeal life. Her arms extended symbolize the lower ligaments where 
the ovaries are attached to the womb (see figure 25). The upper arms of the mirror 
represent the fallopian tubes. The circular form of the mirror represents the cycles 
of birth, death and resurrection inherited by the flesh. The mirror itself reflects the 
persona, or "true face"—the "other side of the self" in constant states of refinement 
within the flesh.
Figure 24


--- PAGE 216 ---
168
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Figure 24 — The feminine principle in all of its glory as symbolized in the "Fruits 
of the Tree of Life in the Garden of Eden". The oval shape of an impregnated 
womb is depicted in the shape of the upper arc of the ankh, the ancient symbol of
life, and the shape of the avocado. Interestingly enough, the prefix of the word 
"avocado" can be segmented, revealing the word AVO - which when reversed, 
spells the word "OVA", or "eggs."
Figure 25


--- PAGE 217 ---
169
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The dry molecular weight of the uterus is 8% DNA, while 80% of 
its overall organic content is protein, the rest comprised of fat and 
other mineral constituents. This makes it a very fragile instrument 
with a high metabolic rate.
Like the male penis, the uterus is 
honeycombed with a sophisticated 
lymph drainage system that receives 
blood from the uterine artery (see 
figure 26). It also serves as a filter 
where, like the liver, it passes blood 
back into the system purified.
Should the lymph vesicles become 
weak where they can no longer filter 
waste efficiently, the uterus becomes 
physically susceptible to disease 
(i.e. fibroids, etc.).
The entire reproductive system of a woman is a very active matrix, 
and being hollow it allows air to flow through like a wind tunnel. 
Otherwise a woman would always be plagued by serious uterine 
complications.
Tight clothing like crotch-cutting jeans, "poon-poon" shorts and 
"daisy dukes", as well as artificial materials used in the making of 
cheap nylon underwear, prevent the free flow of air to the vagina and 
invariably contribute to the proliferation of putrefactive bacteria that 
leads to infections. This in turn acts as a contributing factor to the 
soaring epidemic of vaginal yeast, Candida and chlamydea being 
suffered by modern workingwomen today.
Item: It's interesting to note here that, etymologically, the word vagina descends  
from the Spanish term for a vanilla pod - vainilla - which was a smaller version of  
the word vaina, meaning sheath. Vaina is an extract of the Latin word for sheath—  
vagina, which ultimately became the colloquial term applied to the female  
genitalia...


--- PAGE 218 ---
170
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Sick Sex...
•
The emphatic sensitivity of the female anatomy, in particular her 
reproductive system, is legendary. This fact can be substantiated by 
the way it is affected when exposed to radiation or various 
exogenous toxins.
For example, women who mate with unclean men (or use 
condoms, sex tools, foam contraceptives, Norplants, IUD's, or 
practice 'squirting', etc.) inevitably suffer. Men who engender 
pathological thoughts and related life-styles, create their cellular 
fluids and germ-plasm material from pathological properties that end 
up in their bloodstreams. As a result, vast numbers of women today 
are experiencing acute gynecological disorders, the worst of them 
infertility, because of their exposure to men who consistently inject 
them with spermatotoxins.
When sperm enters the vaginal passage, the essences that 
comprise its make up are eventually absorbed directly into a 
woman's bloodstream. This means that a titration of virtually every 
chemical bio-toxin and adverse thought-residue carried in her 
partner's bloodstream, eventually ends up in hers —(e.g.) alcohol, 
drugs, urea (acid) and etheric thought-signature toxins.
A biological synergy such as this would be good if the female is a 
hygienic woman and her mate is an "ital" man —both pure in 
thought, word and dietary deed, for once sperm has entered the 
bloodstream of a woman it forever becomes a part of her biological 
(and in some cases) psychological matrix.
In fact, research science has recently confirmed the latter, 
discovering that the ingredients in sperm have a distinct anti-depressive  
effect on women whose husbands do not use condoms during sex!
Well now! It appears that science has once again confirmed the 
obvious; that being —  sex is a reciprocal act, and any interference with 
this natural exchange of energy (like condoms) creates consequences. 
Dr. Ruth never told you such things as a guest on Geraldo, did she? 
None of the so-called talk show "sex-perts" ever told a young sister 
that the man she has her very first sexual encounter with,


--- PAGE 219 ---
171
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
will have a psychic and bio-chemical bond with her for life!
This phenomenon is due (in part) to the fact that sperm is highly 
charged with irradiative potassium (and phosphorus). It literally 
lights up or "nukes" a woman's bloodstream re-programming her 
cells, plasma, tissues, womb-orientation —  and yes, even her thinking!
Women who frequently use antibiotics or consume high quantities 
of denatured starches, refined sugar products, flesh and dairy 
proteins containing hidden toxic ingredients like rBST growth 
hormones and MSG —or use inserts like foams, tampons, condoms 
with talc, an IUD or frequently douches —may become highly 
susceptible to the afore-mentioned symptoms as well.
If a woman has had or is having many sexual partners, you can be 
sure that this will also alter or disturb the bio-electrical charge of her 
current mate's sperm when it enters her. This phenomenon has 
caused many psychic disturbances within a marriage, although most 
men can't quite put their fingers on the real problem.
Couples in this predicament may find themselves bickering at the 
slightest thing. If the woman is promiscuous and yet becomes 
pregnant by her husband (and he has retained his own andric 
instincts), he may feel within himself a distrustful uneasiness or 
psychic disturbance towards her. After the birth, a type of weariness 
like 'the child just doesn't look right' comes over him.
You see even though the child may truly be the husband's, the 
influence of her former sexual partners could have drastically altered 
the germ plasm material of her body, to the point where the child will 
carry the signature features of the man (or men) who made the 
deepest impression upon her; not the husband mind you—but the 
former partner (s).
The above scenarios (and others) are being played out on daytime 
syndicated T.V. talk shows like Maury almost every day. I saw one 
woman actually put 11 men through DNA paternity tests, in a 
pitifully frustrating effort to find the true father of her child. 
(Momma's baby —daddy's maybe). And the average number of tries 
made by the women on these programs is five (5)\\


--- PAGE 220 ---
172
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Item: It's interesting to note here how the DNA test has 
exposed the false virtue (or lies) utilized by a majority of feminized 
women to promote the perception of the 'natural faithfulness' of their 
gender, while arguing the fact that it's men who are really the sexual 
"dogs" and "pigs" who can't keep their pants up! 11 men within a 24 
hour window for conception?!  Sisters; how many men over the past 4 to 
5 generations before the advent of this test have been taking care of 
children that were not their own, simply on the say-so of the woman. 
In fact, further proof that we exist in a hive-minded feminized 
society, may be found in many court records attesting to the fact that 
even after taking paternity tests and proving that the child was not 
theirs, the court still charged the men to pay child support to the mother!!
Can we say "criminal gender bias" kiddies?
Forced Adoptions:
The Growing Phenomenon of 'Parasite Parenting'...
•
Case in point. The April 2007 Men's Health magazine featured a 
gut-wrenching, heart-breaking article entitled "Are You Raising 
Another Man's Child" by Oliver Broudy, which exposed in detail 
the morally corrupt, self-serving gender-biased nature of today's 
feminized society; a society where the masculine gender has now 
become an incidental fixture within the modern-day hive-minded 
concepts of 21st century family life.
The article dealt with a subject that 99 percent of feminist 
publications, women's forums and college curricula conveniently 
omit, when evaluating female responsibilities to family, society and 
their men. Called "paternal discrepancy" or PD (what I call 
"parasite parenting", the subtext of "paternity fraud") it is where 
men are unknowingly raising children that the mothers know are not  
theirs.
Sixty-seven studies on the subject of PD by the University of 
Oklahoma researchers, and 19 studies by a group at Liverpool John 
Moores University have concluded that 3.85% and 3.70% 
respectively, or over one million out of the 27,940,000 fathers with


--- PAGE 221 ---
173
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
children under 18 years of age, are unknowingly taking care of 
another man's child. And the numbers are growing because 
sophisticated advancements in the science of genetics are "outing" 
more and more of the women engaged in such deception.
So what you say? What does it matter as long as there is a family 
for the child? The child's welfare should come first?
Such sentiments betray the nonchalance of the western- 
feminized mindset, which negate the father's personally vested 
interests and feelings, in deference to the vested interests of a hive 
society and the 'feelings' of the woman. Society now operates on the 
premise that "biology does not matter" and that fatherhood is simply  
a social construct!
But in 2003, 20 men and 20 women were recruited to conduct a 
scientific test at the State University of New York at Albany that 
subsequently refuted such nonsense, and revealed the psycho­
spiritual connection that men have with their own progeny.
Each of the men and women had their faces morphed or fused 
onto certain pictures of children. The women responded equally to 
the photographs of children whose faces resembled their own as 
well as strangers,  whereas the men responded far more receptively 
and exclusively to pictures of the children whose faces resembled 
their own.
But why was that?
Simple, says Dr. Rebecca Burch PhD, author of the study;
...It is not reproductively beneficial to invest all of your resources in a child who is 
not carrying on your genetic line. Men throughout the history of the species who 
have invested all their time and energy in children who weren't theirs, no longer  
have genes in the population..."
In other words, the individual consciousness template carried 
within the DNA of the father —  the template that constitutes the very 
essence of his corporeal nature and astral being— becomes extinct!
Thus fatherhood and parenting to a man is far more than just "a 
social construct." A real man knows that fathering a child is 
fathering his own future existence as a conscious entity within the


--- PAGE 222 ---
174
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
human gene pool! The mother automatically perpetuates herself 
through the transmission of her genes and mitochrondia, no matter 
who the father is.
Many feminized doctors have now joined in to perpetuate the 
deception against men, tacitly supporting the "privacy" of women 
who engage in parasite parenting, stating that if a woman becomes 
their patient and they find the discrepancy (as Alan Meisel, director 
of the Center for Bioethics and Health Law, University of Pittsburg 
puts it) "...why create problems if I don't have to."
But problems more often than not are created, particularly when 
the truth suddenly surfaces in a medical emergency, and/or when 
the child eventually finds out that he or she has been lied to for 
years.
Of course, feminists doctors argue that disclosing the truth of 
paternal discrepancy to an unsuspecting father would cause the 
unnecessary breakup of 'a family', or cause the woman to be 
battered. But Mary Mahowald, Ph.D., a professor emeritus at the 
MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics in Chicago, put this 
"professional excuse" to rest, saying...
"...The literature documenting the possibility or probability of a family breaking up 
or the battering of women is not really good, and you could make the argument 
that if partners are going to separate on grounds of disclosure, maybe they should 
separate regardless. It might be better for the family. So, to my mind, the family- 
values rationale is questionable..."
When a man who has been a loving and devoted father 
suddenly discovers that the child he has invested his love, time, 
energy, sweat and finances (in effect, his very life) raising, is not his 
own, such devastating news can physically and psycho-spiritually 
cripple him to his core. And the feminized press and other media 
refuse to report on the fact that these rude awakenings are taking 
place virtually everyday, numbering in the thousands.
Beloved, the above was offered as a way to balance out the 
generally on-sided, unfair and often damaging press that men as 
fathers receive in the feminized media. However, in no way is it


--- PAGE 223 ---
175
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
meant to minimize the behavior of those men who callously refuse 
to exercise their parental responsibilities as fathers by not loving, 
financially caring for and raising their own flesh and blood.
In the ancient-of-days our wise fore-mothers and fore-fathers 
knew of this phenomenon somewhat, and gave an accounting of it 
that appears in such books as The Legend of the Jews,  translated by 
H. Szold. In it we read:
"...The children a woman bears resemble the man who loves 
her. If she loves him, then they resemble her husband. If it 
is (for) an adulterer, then they resemble the adulterer.
Frequently, if a woman sleeps with her husband out of 
necessity, while her heart is with the adulterer with whom 
she usually has intercourse (and gets pregnant for the 
husband) the child she will bear is bom resembling 
the adulterer..."
Again, from the same work we read:
"...Do not prostitute your wife, defiling your children; for 
the adulterer's bed brings not sons in your likeness ..."
Returning to the topic of sick sex; a promiscuous man with caustic 
thoughts and filthy eating habits can also ruin his wife's germ plasm, 
and no healthy child can be expected from a pairing of the two. His 
lurid thoughts and related activities can lead to her astral body 
emphatically absorbing his disease-signatures. This would force her 
body to sub-consciously react by showing her revulsion towards the 
act of sex through such symptoms as chronic discharges, vaginal 
warts and a host of other un-named related ailments in between; the 
worst case scenario being cervical cancer.
Thermal fatigue is yet another contributor to female reproductive 
diseases. This is where the womb and vaginal areas lose the proper 
temperature levels that keep potentially harmful bacteria from 
proliferating. Sexual quantity without quality, along with poor dietary 
habits instigate this.


--- PAGE 224 ---
176
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Again; just as debilitating as it is for someone to have sex too 
frequently, it is just as detrimental for a woman to have sex when her 
mind and her body does not want to. As in the previous example, if 
the man disgusts her and she feels the act is one of duty rather than 
love, her thoughts will change the chemistry of her body to match 
her feelings, and the area that most typifies her feelings of disgust (in 
this case her vagina) expresses those feelings as an 'infection.'
As mentioned earlier, an added liability of the man's licentious 
life-style is his spermatotoxins, which emanate from his filthy eating 
habits or general thinking and behavior. This may greatly injure a 
woman's ovaries, very often hastening her degeneration into cervical 
cancer or early (peri) menopause.
O vulation
•
Unbeknownst to a majority of sisters, ovulation is an exhaustive 
process to the female anatomy. Releasing an egg made from the 
blood's precious solar minerals and germ plasm material each and 
every month, then losing it only to have to form, release and expel 
another —and another (along with blood and related precious 
essences)—is nothing short of a life-draining, anatomically 
degenerative process.
No matter how it is rationalized, this is not natural! A woman's 
body surrenders enormous amounts of vital nutrients and energy to 
create an egg, as does the male in his manufacturing of sperm. 
Losing these eggs continuously is exactly like a man losing his sperm 
in wreck-reational sex. It is nothing less than a waste of precious life 
force and vital, life-sustaining materials.
During ovulation, the ovum (egg) literally tears through the 
delicate walls of a woman's ovary. It creates a severe wound that is 
sometimes felt as a radical shift in moods, a need to sleep, 
queasiness, or cramping. To seal this puncture the cells of the ovary 
wall must divide and reproduce each time. This consistent damage- 
and-repair cycle amplifies a woman's susceptibility to ovarian and 
other reproductive-related cancers.


--- PAGE 225 ---
177
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
But alas! Lo and behold! 21st century research science has just 
revealed something that should literally piss-off your average card- 
carrying feminist. It seems that every time a woman becomes pregnant  
and bears a child to full term, her risk of ovarian cancer drops by at least 10  
to 15%!
And why is this?
Simple. The process of going through nine months of pregnancy 
(along with another 10 months to 2 years of continuous breast­
feeding) allows a woman's reproductive system to rest from the 
pathogenic cycles of ovulation by remaining in a type of 'hormonal 
stasis.' If you do the math, this significantly alleviates the monthly 
traumas suffered by her ovaries saving her from 24 severe puncture 
wounds in two years, or 12 episodes of exhaustive cellular division, 
damage and repair each year; cellular divisions that could possibly 
cause oncogenic mutations due in part to the over-production of 
radicalized estrogens —  more specifically, estradiol.
Once again; the esoteric disciplines of Tantra teach that a male must 
never ejaculate his sperm during intercourse, unless it is to procreate, 
for it is a loss of such magnitude to the body that it would take him at 
least a month or more to fully recover what was truly lost. Just one full 
ejaculation has the potential to release hundreds of millions of sperm, 
and is the equivalent of sacrificing over 1/3 the total number of  
corpuscles in his entire body!  It's as if he lost the concentrated 
equivalent of a pint of blood, and the subsequent feeling of 
exhaustion is virtually the same.
In the Bible, the metaphysical interpretation of this traumatic loss 
of seminal essences is referred to as "the slaughter of the innocents by 
Herod." The innocents are the sperm and the corpuscles, with Herod 
translated to mean 'lust' or 'passion/
It requires an enormous amount of vital force and precious germ 
plasm material to replace this great loss (or "slaughter") of sperm, so 
you might well imagine a man's mental condition if he were doing 
this self-destructive nonsense continuously!
In Tantra, to save one's sperm during intercourse is to "harness the 
Bindu and feed the Lotus." This means to return one's precious 
essences back into the 'crystal river' or cerebro-spinal fluid (the River


--- PAGE 226 ---
178
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Jordan) for its return (or ascension) back to the brain (heaven) to sit 
at "the right hand of the Father"; the Pineal being the 'right hand', the 
Pituitary 'the left'. The precious essence travels by way of hollow 
vesicles (the Nadis) that lead up the spine along an occult conduit 
called "The Path of the Hidden Light."
No precious fluids are lost.
By comparison, ovulation and menses constitute the same loss for 
the female. The esoteric sciences teach that a woman evolved does 
not lose her eggs or shed her blood. She may even go so far as to 
ovulate without menstruating—which is still debilitating, but 
considered the best choice between two evils. In this case Tantra 
teaches her to re-absorb the egg. Menopause was virtually non-existent.
Before the great cataclysms that crippled the atmospheric 
equilibrium of our world, ovulation was done entirely by choice and 
not compelled or instigated (as is believed) by the cyclic fluctuations 
of the moon (moon-th or month). Voluntary ovulation was a carefully 
planned sequential process initiated by the man and followed 
through by the woman in preparation for conceiving a baby.
Again, the sexual act was once done either to achieve non- 
—ejaculalory " total-bein g-bliss", or solely for the purpose of 
procreation.
The ritual of ovulation took on a variety of forms where in many 
ancient cultures the woman's closest friends and family members 
participated (women only). The process took approximately three 
days to sometimes a year to complete.
In far-ancient millennia, a wife prepared herself for her husband 
(and vice-versa) through the application of austerities that focused 
her mind, body and soul-energies into her womb. Ritual dance 
movements and music taught by the elder mothers, along with 
chants, ovarian/yogic breathing, baths, inner purification and special 
foods served to her, as she meditated on her egg being formed and 
properly positioned to receive her husband's seed. These rituals 
prepared the body in a special way so as to minimize the damage 
normally done to the cells by the sexual act itself. The majority of far-


--- PAGE 227 ---
179
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
ancient orthobiotic women had sex with their husbands for 
procreation, perhaps 5 to 10 times in their entire lives!
Please see section entitled Eye of the Beholder  for a metaphysical 
hypothesis on how our more evolved ancestral parents may have 
used the higher principles of mind to voluntarily initiate the cycle of 
ovulation, through "the focus of loving intent."
Beloved, when an egg is released from the ovary it embarks upon 
a very perilous journey. The egg is only alive for approximately 
24 hours, and is in a very weakened state for the first few minutes 
after its release from the corpus luteum.31
The so-called 90s-millennium independent woman whose been 
taught from her youth to ignore her subtle feminine instincts, literally 
throws herself into the body-bruising activities of men, not realizing 
that strong sunlight, stress, the impact of sports, exercise, falling 
down, or even the scent of a strange male's pheromones, could 
disrupt or cause irreparable damage to her delicate body and 
endocrine system; particularly her ovaries and any newly-formed
egg-
Refined foods are also major de-stabilizers of the female hormonal 
circuitry.
Consistent involuntary ovulation by women after the great 
cataclysms was considered to be a clear indication that our species 
was degenerating. Our remote ancestors instinctively knew that it 
would lead to 'sex out of season', which inevitably led to heightened 
carnal appetites, leading to libidinous behavior, promiscuity, random 
indiscriminate birthing and over- population.
To them, this was the definitive sign of their end of days.
A more ortho-biogenic ancient humanity did not suffer the 
plagues that arose from involuntary ovulation such as venereal 
diseases. However, this is not to say that such conditions did not
31 Another result of our physiological degeneration as specie due to the great atomic 
cataclysm. -Author


--- PAGE 228 ---
180
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
eventually occur in ancient civilizations that subsequently 
degenerated and fell due to war and environmental cataclysm.
(See: The Ebers Papyrus for evidence of this.)
Beloved seeker: the demise of the true and original  western 
civilizations (the black autochthones Washutaw or "Mound Builders") 
began when the so-called "new world" was introduced to the 
ravages of European acculturization; more specifically—to the 
degenerative consequences of their 'oblivious-to-others' behavior, 
refined foods, destructive hygienic habits, theo-psychotic religions 
and egocentric disregard for the sacred Laws of Nature Mother. 
Global 'mono-cultivation' by environmentally myopic, fortune- 
seeking European nations, has tragically forced the world's 
indigenous populations to rape and pillage their own natural pristine 
habitats with destructive, market-driven, mass-farming techniques —  
not only to feed their now unnaturally growing populations, but also 
to over-compensate for what little nutrition they receive from the 
very foods they are forced (by the World Bank and IMF) to grow.
This violation of the original equilibrium between the land and its 
people, eventually led to the final stages of perversion in our 
autochthones humanity's natural ability to regulate their own birth 
rate. In fact, it was primarily through the psycho-bio-chemical 
distresses of culture shock, coupled with the forced consumption of 
refined, de-natured foods by the world's indigenous populations, that 
collectively led to the final destabolization and suppression of ancient 
humanity's self-regulated, natural reproductive stability.
Before this, there was little to no need for contraception back 
durins Earth's far-ancient high civilizations; not until the latter 
dynasties of Kemet, when wars were more frequent and the ecology 
was in virtual collapse. The foods our remote ancestors ate prior to 
the so-called 'new kingdom' dynasties were few, fresh and organic, 
and their very purity kept human genetics vibrating in 
synchronicity with Cosmos Intelligence and Its expression as 
Natural Law.


--- PAGE 229 ---
181
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
This harmonious interplay allowed a woman to consciously 
prohibit ovulation until it was voluntarily instigated by her mind 
and her mate. The women of that time were far more aware of their 
body-cycles, being able to more clearly and accurately read their 
own subtle biological signs. Women could do this today if (among 
other things) they would only stop eating refined sugar and foods.
Believe it or not, even the eating of certain fish —  particularly 
shellfish and other toxic types made popular on today's fast-food 
menus, will upset a woman's ovulation cycles due to the presence of 
certain noxious enzymes in the animal's flesh. But of course, our 
ancient ancestor-mothers already knew this.
Today, due to eons of genetic de-volution, the process of ovulation 
by women has now become an involuntary one. As our ancient 
mothers felt themselves adversely change and deteriorate with each 
successive generation, they wisely began to institute scientifically 
specific 'austerities' to be practiced within their existing social 
customs. They were incorporated as part of the culture to counteract 
and compensate for what their severely injured and weakened 
bio-chemistries could not longer provide.
These austerities were survival techniques and principles based on 
divine instinct and natural science, not dogmatic religion, superstition 
or "male repression."
In a contemporary work entitled Is Menstruation Obsolete,  by Drs. 
Elsimar Coutinho and Sheldon S. Segal (two of the world's most 
renowned researchers in the field of conception), science it seems has 
categorically confirmed what our ancient ancestral mothers knew all 
along. They found that incessant ovulation was indeed a serious 
problem for women's health. They wrote...
"... incessant ovulation serves no purpose except to increase 
the occurrences of abdominal pain, mood shifts, migraines, 
fibroids, endometriosis and anemia..."
Indeed! And they added that anemia is perhaps the most serious 
health problem suffered by women around the world today.


--- PAGE 230 ---
182
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The anatomical matrix of the modem human female has 
degenerated tremendously, to the point where her bio-plasm is now 
at its weakest and most vulnerable state. Today there are a dozen or 
more triggers in and around her environment that can automatically 
"fire up" the ovulation process. It may be set off by her continuously 
close proximities to strange men in the work place,32 adverse 
radiation from electrical equipment and the sun, the ionic fields 
generated by the rain and lightning of a thunderstorm, or even a high 
wind blowing consistently at a specific temperature.
For the past 300 years, the Earth has been in the early stages of a 
monumental polar shift where the orientation of the planetary grid 
(and lei lines) towards magnetic north has significantly weakened, 
shifting to a southerly orientation. The temporary effect of this 13 to
100,000 year event, is to allow the onrush of unfiltered solar-plasmic 
radiation into our immediate atmosphere, creating havoc on the 
genetics of all life on this planet. As this phenomenon matures, many 
women will be severely affected hormonally in the decades to come.
Ovulation and 
the Eye of the Beholder:  
The Melanin Connection...
And then there are the eyes...
Yes the eyes were once the powerful instigators of ovulation, and 
some women who still retain their higher feminine instincts can feel 
this.
In the metaphysics of occult anatomy, the eyes of a man are said 
to be electrically charged when he is in an 'amorous way.' A Vedic 
story tells of the virgin Siva becoming pregnant by the "eyes of a 
hermit."
This story was told according to the accounts of the Bharkman 
Sect of Hinduism.
The most common of all reproductive abnormalities in workingwomen, I have 
found, is irregular cycles'. - Author


--- PAGE 231 ---
183
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The eyes are the windows of the soul. The principle of sight is 
under the elemental auspices of fire. Fire is light, and light is sight.
Metaphysically, a man could very well trigger ovulation with his 
'visual glare' simply by concentrating and focusing a beam of light 
particles to follow his 'intentional line of sight' straight into the pupils 
of a woman.
Read the following metaphysical interpretation very carefully 
beloved seeker, and imagine how "the eyes of a hermit" may have 
actually impregnated Siva. But please overstand that my theory is not 
yet fully perfected, and may become somewhat complicated as I 
attempt to explain it. Should those of you with more technical 
knowledge on how the eye and the brain work together find a 
mistake in my little scenario, please feel free to correct the content 
and the order in which the particulars are presented.
If looks could 'thrill' and activate ovulation, here's how I think it 
would happen.
The human eye is a light-sensitive instrument that can process
1,500,000 forms of stimuli at one time. It is an external component of 
the brain.
The human brain in turn, is a photo-metric33 instrument that 
synthesizes light through a holographic perceptual matrix. It can 
receive light from great distances as well as project it to great 
distances. Together, the eye and the brain have the capability to see, 
perceive, project and receive light, feelings and desires at any 
distance through any dimension of time.
Feeling and desire are conscious polarities of light.
Visual information from an external origin is translated into 
electro-chemical signals by way of the retinal rods and cones. The 
electro-chemical signals then pass along the optic tract to the lateral 
geniculate body, and optic radiations pass into the photo-receptive 
center of the cerebral cortex, stimulating the principle of sight.
33 Photometric - Measuring the intrinsic properties of light


--- PAGE 232 ---
184
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Scientific research into the bio-rhythms of sleep disorder has 
recently discovered what occultists and metaphysicians have known 
all along; i.e. —that the human head possesses a physical light- 
sensing circuitry for the purpose of a "second sight"; a light- 
processing sub-system that is distinct from our conventional visual 
system. In fact, it is said to be connected directly to the body's own 
circadian or biological clock, as well as to other subtle, psycho- 
biological mechanisms and systems within.
The process of the eye using light to set this 'clock' is called photo- 
entrainment. This second-sight mechanism is a non-visual, light- 
sensing system consisting of a neural circuitry that connects the retina 
to the brain's circadian control center called the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus (SCN), as well as to a multiple of other structures of the brain.
And the molecular key to this connection —  this 'second sight'— is 
melanin.
Yes, it is a light-sensing derivative of melanin called melanopsin, 
found in the retinal ganglion cells, that carries visual light- 
signatures to the brain. Melanopsin then "labels" the light impulses 
as they travel along the axons of the ganglion cells and the finely 
branching dendrites. There are approximately 100,000 or more 
retinal ganglion cells, but only about 2,500 (or just about 2%) would 
become "labeled" with the "intent-signature" imparted by a man.
It is the axonal projections of these cells that reach out like 
gossamer branches to supply the electro-chemical light-signature 
information to the SCN. And it may very well be these same axons 
projecting themselves into other areas (like the pineal and the 
pituitary) that create a sought of "light-bridge feedback loop" of 
melanopsin-labeled information, that is distributed throughout the 
multiple structures of the brain.
If my speculation is found feasible, then within a focused beam of 
"sight", a man's thoughts could carry "signatures of intent" that 
cause a stream of photon particles to orient along the line of sight, 
and respond like sperm cells entering the woman's pupils. This is an


--- PAGE 233 ---
185
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
example of the bi-phenomenal effect  where a light-wave stream is 
transformed (by focused intent) into a particle stream (Tight sperm').
The pupil of the woman's eye, in this case, would metaphysically 
be compared to a "dark matter" zona pellucida (the outer surface of 
an ovum) as the light particles ("photo-optic sperm") penetrate it. It 
could also behave like the photographic lens of a camera receiving 
the man's intent-signatures as a light-wave/particle-image projection 
into the eye. The pupillary light reflex would then act to bend, refract 
or filter the focused light rays from the man's glare, so that they are 
processed through the melanopsin (or even another light-sensitive 
melanin tagging pigment in the retinal cones called iodopsin) as an 
electro-chemical signature of intent that enlists a "feeling" from her. 
As the ovum allows only one sperm cell out of millions to enter, so 
too would melanopsin allow only a few light particulates to be 
labeled, or "seeded."
The light beam is thus picked up as an 'image of intention' by the 
female brain, and the feeling or desire it conveys (in this case sex) is 
projected like a subliminal picture on a 'movie screen' within her 
mind. She "sees" his intent through her nervous system as a 
"feeling", because the light particles of the image stimulates the 
complex layers of her nervous and endocrine systems with the desire 
carried within (or as) the light particles.
Finally, the light-energies emanated from feeling and desire 
stimulate the hypothalamus gland to secrete luteinizing hormones to 
the pituitary, aided also by electrical feedback from the pineal. As a 
result, the focused 'sight-as-intent' coerces her to "get ready to 
procreate."
Mind you, all of this takes place in a millisecond — the speed of  
thought.
The heat energies generated by her erotic feelings (through the 
brain) triggers all of the above glands to voluntarily activate her 
ovaries, telling her "to begin the process of producing the corpus 
luteum to manufacture and position an egg—you want to 
procreate"... and, voila —  ovulation!
Her body is made ready to receive the man's seed.


--- PAGE 234 ---
186
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Vivid imagination? Science fiction? Maybe.
But don't bet the farm against it.
The above is an occult interpretation of why it was the custom of 
women from certain old world high cultures never to look a strange 
man directly in his eyes. A young girl was told never to 'lock-looks' 
with a stranger, for if he were pleasant to her eyes, it could stimulate 
her to ovulate. These sisters were eminently more in tune with their 
bodies for they were more gynic in nature. Their acute senses and 
higher instincts were put on the alert by the direct approach of any 
strange virile man, knowing that his 'electrical presence,' along with 
the desire his eyes conveyed and the feelings they might envoke, 
could cause the uterus to become engorged with blood and possibly 
trigger them to ovulate. Hence, if they had to speak to such a man 
they would lower their eyes or avoid his gaze.
Europeans in their ignorance and arrogance thought this was an 
act of subservience or submission by women due to male oppression. 
There was even a time in the public school system when white 
teachers believed that such a gesture by so-called 'minority' boys and 
girls was an act of belligerence, since in their culture such behavior 
was taken as a sign of rudeness. But to our ancient mothers, this was 
actually an organic display of genuine modesty and respect; how true 
gynic women naturally behaved —  unlike the contentious, 
confrontational and aggressive mannerisms now displayed by 
today's feminized gynandromorphic female.
Try explaining a gynic woman's behavior to a gynandrous TP- 
Toxic female, and it would be like explaining the parabolic nature of 
intersecting dimensional portals. Try explaining to her why a gynic 
woman has so gentle a step; why she maintains sedentary hygienic 
habits and has a soft mellifluous voice; why she doesn't feel the urge 
to do strenuous exercise, sports and heavy labor-intensive work, or to 
shout and curse like a sailor on leave—and a gynanderous female 
would probably think that such a woman was forced into being this 
way by some 'overbearing', 'controlling', 'abusive' man.
Sadly, what were once considered advanced scientific principles of 
culture by the civilizations of our wise fore-mothers and fore-fathers,


--- PAGE 235 ---
187
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
have either become the repressive mandates of religious tyranny, or a 
' going-thru-the-motions' exercise of frivolous rituals that have long 
since lost their true meanings.
Purdah (veiling and seclusion) is an excellent example of this.
Figure 27
Purdah 
The Veil of Ast / Isis...
•
Covering the nose and mouth was most likely another ideal and 
simple technique that our far ancient fore-mothers used to prevent 
(among other things) spontaneous ovulation. If already pregnant for 
example, it was vital that the stimulus-sensitive woman remained 
veiled while out in the noon-day sun, or more importantly, in the 
presence of strange men. If not, the bio-electric field resonances and 
pheromonal signatures of certain males not related to her, could 
influence or alter her body's susceptible chemistries causing the loss 
of her growing baby's genetic strength, or in rare cases during the 
early stages, miscarriage or spontaneous abortion.
Sound outlandish?


--- PAGE 236 ---
188
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
A Dutch scientist named Hendrik Zwaadermaker (1857-1930) 
didn't think so. In his works entitled On Physiological Radio-activity, 
and The Biological Action of Potassium and its Radio-activity,  he showed 
that the sperm of a young man is highly radioactive, emitting rays 
that can actually be detected by instrumentation. Which means that a 
young man's seminal fluids are somehow super-charged with 
potassium ions, making him in effect, a low level bio-nuclear emitter.
Zwaardemaker opened the way for the plausible speculation that 
it is actually the radiations emitted by the sperm (and the egg) that 
are the true causes of fertilization and conception. In other words, the 
egg and the sperm are actually "light-bearers" (John 1:4).
In fact, he proved conclusively that there are radiations similar to 
the ones emitted by sperm that can and do induce ovulation and 
abortions—radiations like those emitted by the sun, or by another 
human body!
In mice, it's a scientifically proven fact that when a strange male is 
placed into a cage with a pregnant female, she will abort!
I know. It still sounds outlandish.
But the legacies of traditional gynic behavior are still being 
practiced among certain sects of Islamic, Judaic and Hindu women 
through such disciplines as Purdah; and for good reason.
From the Hindi word parda, meaning "curtain" or "to seclude," 
and the Persian word pardah, meaning "veil" —  Purdah is a way of life 
that has truly lost its original meaning. It has also been 
mis-interpreted and vilified by card-carrying feminist sociologists. 
Today, because of western media influence and the oppressive 
doctrines of certain orthodox sects, the world now thinks that Hindu 
and Islamic men originally forced women to cover their faces and 
seclude themselves as a way of controling them to "protect their 
property."
How stupid! The practice of Purdah did not originate with Islam, 
Judaism, or the Hindu religions. These 'faiths' simply incorporated 
its principles into their theological laws, because this was the way all 
spiritually evolved women from ancient high civilizations (like The


--- PAGE 237 ---
189
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART 1
Sibyls or  "Black Doves")  dressed for eons after the many ancient 
nuclear wars and environmental cataclysms.
Figure 28
Even women from the Catholic sects of Christianity still 
symbolically cover their heads and veil themselves today. They are 
called "nuns" —after the "Tripple-Black Mother Goddess" Nu, Nw, or 
Nzvn. (See figure 4d)
The disciplines of Purdah are actually very ancient cultural 
traditions that were the outgrowths of a gynic woman's natural 
behavior the world over. Her purer instincts and feminine intuition 
worked in harmony with the metaphysical mandates of Nature to 
adapt, protect and support her fragile physiology during such 
traumatic and perilous times as those noted above.


--- PAGE 238 ---
190
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
These environments became so hostile to the true gynic's 
physiology, that veiling and seclusion became two of the many 
behavioral counter-measures she adopted, to help ameliorate the 
ever-worsening symptoms expressed by her progressively 
deteriorating genetics; again—symptoms like her susceptibility to 
specific solar light wavelengths, and her heightened sensitivities to 
the bio-electric resonances and pheromone signatures of certain men.
The women of indigenous cultures around the world originally 
used various styles and methods of adornment to achieve the same 
results as Purdah —all with the purpose of protecting themselves 
from the deleterious affects of their environments. Bead works, 
crowns, wraps, ankle bracelets, arm-bands, earrings, nose rings, eye 
make up, lip make up, facial painting, scarification, veils and the like 
(see figure 28) were all originally used as methods of protection 
against the devastated post-Edenic environments.
In other words, the signature styles of clothing worn by Earth's 
surviving indigenous cultures, were first designed and manufactured 
as defensive mechanisms against the hostile environments settled by 
each. Sadly, due in most part to European colonialism, migration and 
inter-tribal warfare, most of them cannot remember the true reasons 
why they dress, make up and adorn themselves the way they do 
today; or why their ancestors did so since time immemorial.
Meta-historically, Purdah and all other such feminine practices 
were said to have been taught to our ancient mothers by the female 
'Neteru-Ennead.' They were originally presented to humanity by 
these ancient "goddess-mothers" as methods of survival within 
highly active solar and nuclear-irradiated environments.
Also; what feminists (i.e. Europeans) fail to overstand about the 
gynic woman's deep-felt need to practice systems like Purdah is, that 
it is the inherent intelligence encoded within the consciousness of her 
DNA that is the true orchestrator of her behavioral instincts —  all to 
preserve the delicate integrity of the gynic physiology of woman.34
34 The consciousness of the DNA is expresses as the "mind" of the cell. - Author


--- PAGE 239 ---
191
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Yet another example of the "counter-measure styles" worn by the 
ancients against the hostile environments, is seen in the headdress of 
the veiled Arab woman in figure 29, which is almost an exact replica 
of the nemes—with slight modifications. The nemes became the 
standard headdress of the ancient Kemetyu (Egyptians). Along with 
lanolin-coated sheep-hair wigs, they were worn as a means of 
deflecting harmful solar radiation, as well as the residual fall-out of 
radioactive pollution from the head, neck and shoulder regions. Both 
the women and men of ancient Kem also wore lead-based "eye­
shadow", as a desperate means of preserving the high levels of zinc 
concentrated in this area. Zinc is a natural pain suppressant.
You may see the nemes design displayed on the bust of the 
boy-king Amen-Tut-Ankh, or any of the various Nsw-t Btys 
(pharaohs) of ancient Kem. Arab men sometimes wear it as well. The 
veil came later for all of the reasons mentioned earlier.
Again, it was because of environmental cataclysms and a series of 
nuclear wars causing degeneration in early humanity's 
bio-chemistries that such practices had to be adopted, which at the 
time were absolutely essential to their survival. These scientifically- 
based survival techniques were passed on to our refugee-ancestors, 
and eventually became the various culture-based styles and ritual


--- PAGE 240 ---
-
192
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
practices now seen in different locations around the world
Of course the deeper spiritual, metaphysical and meta-historic 
meanings behind most of what I've presented above, are all but lost 
in the shadows of time. Now, ancient traditions such as Purdah, 
when practiced today, are often used as abusive instruments of 
repression against women by certain psychotic, mal-adjusted 
estrogen-toxic men, who stubbornly adhere to the distorted letter of 
ego-based (service-to-self) theocratic traditions.
Traditions like Trokosi, for example.
Trokosi is a practice still going on in certain parts of Ghana, Africa. 
It is an archaic, repressive tradition that for all intents and purposes, 
amounts to generational slavery. It is the classic scenario where the 
sins of the father (or the mother) are paid off by their children; in this 
case —their daughters. And the "payment" (believe it or not) is 
oppressive servitude and sexual favors —for life!
Trokosi is an ancient ritual of appeasement to the gods where 
virgins are chosen to wed the deities. The priest acts as a "stand-in" 
(of course) for the gods. But what was once a cultural policy 
instituted to deter criminal behavior, as well as insure balance and 
harmony in early tribal society, has now devolved into a ritual-tool of 
oppression, exploitation and brutality in the hands of a corrupt, self- 
serving priesthood.
(Boy! Does this sound familiar ...or what?\\)
Which goes to show once again just how low the archetypal man 
(and the archetypal woman) has fallen from his original heights of 
cosmic self-awareness and benevolent Godhead.
9


--- PAGE 241 ---
193
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Menstruation:
The Phenomenon of Complacent Pathology...
•
Contrary to what is believed and taught by new age women (and 
a few cultural sisters as well), to our ancient fore-mothers —  
menstruation was always a vile and terrible sickness!  It was never 
considered a 'natural' or 'normal' process that 'defined' their 
womanhood. And they were correct in their belief because the human  
female is the only mammal that does it!
In fact, no other healthy animal in the organic spectrum of life on 
Earth does it routinely, except the human female!
When this pathology is studied without the feminist rhetoric, 
hand-me-down European fables, chauvinist medical theories, 
emotional misconceptions and perverse mysticisms attached to it, it 
can easily be shown that (bottom line) menstruation is caused by the  
violation of Natural Law!
But you wouldn't think so based on how it is being interpreted 
and promoted by those who direct the course of the so-called new 
age movement. A type of religious reverence now surrounds it to the 
point where workshops are conducted to "...celebrate the neglected 
power(?) of menstruation." But this quote would have been more 
accurate had it read "celebrate the neglected power lost by 
menstruation."
The above was taken from a 1993 booklet distributed by the New 
York Open Center  advertising an assortment of women's workshops, 
two of which were dedicated to the menstrual cycle. Even now in 
2008, as we cross the threshold into a "new millennium of 
enlightenment", it amazes me how this pathology is still being 
revered as an "empowering blessing" by most educated women.
The very top of the page in question was entitled Our blood is  
Gold.35 A woman named Lara Owen was slated to conduct one of 
these workshops where the overall theme was The Power of the Womb.
35 In fact, it used to be, when the magnesium molecule was able to bond with our 
archetypal blood hemoglobin before the fall! - Author


--- PAGE 242 ---
194
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
She shared space on this advertisement page with another woman 
called "Spider", a teacher of Earth wisdom with the Carney Indian 
Spiritual Circle and the Wolf Clan Teaching Lodge.
Ms. Owen began her part of the advertisement by saying "... we 
have been taught that menstruation is simply a messy biological 
inconvenience, and that we should suppress and distrust our pre­
menstrual emotions...(we) adapt our cyclic nature to an external 
reality that values consistency and productivity more than 
authenticity, genuine health (?) and self-awareness ..."
She went on to say that her workshop would "... unlock the key to 
the inner room of the wise womb by learning the ancient knowledge 
(?) about the magic of the bleeding time;" also; "...the day will echo 
the pattern of the monthly cycle beginning with the extraversion of 
ovulation, flowing into the emotional cauldron of the pre-menstrum, 
and then transforming into the release, peacefulness and deep inner 
knowing of the time of bleeding ..."
Incredible! Here we have in captioned phrases the fundamental 
philosophy of the new age movement (then and now), as it pertains 
to the pathology known as menstruation.
Beginning with the line "... a messy biological inconvenience ", we 
see how the mainstream population has been conditioned to either 
trivialize this event, or with the line "... suppress and distrust our 
pre-menstrual emotions", made to believe that a woman should 
accept "pre-menstrual emotions" (PMS, etc.) as being "natural" to her 
organic womanhood.
If women only knew why there is so severe a shift in their 
emotional states and what makes this particular time so "biologically 
messy", such nonsense as quoted above would be considered too 
ludicrous to put into print.
The phrase "magic of the bleeding time" is yet another 
Cinderella slant to the propaganda, where the Euro-centric new age 
movement has nurtured their own tribal superstitions into a 
doctrine approaching religious reverence; not surprisingly giving 
rise to a lucrative commercial market.


--- PAGE 243 ---
195
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The last lines of her ad "... the extraversion of ovulation" and 
"...the emotional cauldron of pre-menstrum" are especially 
revealing because they emphasize both the physical and 
psychological traumas that women continue to suffer. Today, such 
traumas are primarily the result of toxic reactions caused by the 
accumulation of internal filth and environmental poisoning —  all 
leading to hormonal derangements instigated by a severe loss of 
blood and vital nutrients. The so-called "emotional cauldron" or 
psychological symptoms that manifest, are the direct result of over­
stimulation from systemic toxemia affecting the spleen, 
hypothalamus, liver, pituitary, thyroids and adrenals —  all reeking 
havoc in the body, and as a result, on the harmonious functioning of 
the mind.
In the second section of the advertisement, the Native woman 
calling herself Spider remained a bit more nebulous and subdued 
about what she was offering, but still gave the impression that her 
workshop was to 'celebrate' this pathology.
Interestingly enough, her reference to singing "moon-time 
celebration songs" seemed to contradict her call to "... remember, 
reclaim and rebuild the sacred healing space of the woman's lodge." 
In fact, her advertisement appeared to be a subtle admittance that 
"the moon time" must have been considered a sickness by her native 
ancestors —  otherwise, why else would she call for menstruating  
women to help "re-build a sacred healing space?"
A Personal Observation of  
the Moon-Time Celebration...
•
After reading a ton of valuable information on this subject (both 
ancient and current), and having listened to a great many intelligent 
women with a wealth of knowledge from the medical, cultural and 
so-called new age perspectives, it occurred to me that each group 
expressed views that were (in essence) no different from one another.  
All seemed to share the same bottom-line consensus viewpoint 
founded on a singular prevailing belief.


--- PAGE 244 ---
196
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
They all agreed that it was both 'normal' and 'natural!'
For years I have puzzled over why different, or rather, 
qualitatively distinct philosophies on health and well-being for 
women, by women, all seem to coalesce into a singular perspective 
when dealing with the topic of menstruation. Why was it that (in the 
end) regardless of the physiological evidence—regardless of their 
own first-hand painful experiences — this pathology was still 
considered a "life enhancing", "magical", "uniquely fulfilling", "rite 
of passage", "getting in touch-with-self" experience for the female 
gender—and not a time of severe illness and weakness as all of the 
accompanying symptoms would appear to indicate.
1 was completely befuddled. So after long research and deep 
reflection, I resigned myself to the following hypothesis. Maybe (just 
maybe) women of today —like their ancient fore-mothers who 
initiated the practice of female blood rituals —are admitting by the 
very existence of such ceremonies that they have all but given up 
trying to find a solution to this monthly malady.
It seemed to me that our beloved fore-mothers, sisters, wives and 
daughters had psychologically resigned themselves into tacitly 
accepting this biological affliction, in a manner I've chosen to define 
as 'a phenomenon of complacent pathology!
This revelation came to me one night at a Sweat Lodge, as I quietly 
observed my Turtle Island sisters who could not participate due to 
the presence of their menstrual flow. They stoically danced around a 
separate fire dedicated to what they called their "moon-time."
It was then and there that it suddenly dawned on me. Ritual became 
the coping mechanism when science was lost!  It seemed that the practice 
of blood-based moon rituals somehow preserved a psycho-spiritual 
covenant made between our ancient foremothers and the Great 
Mother Goddess, wherein women (working through the 
transformative dynamics of ritual) maintained a psycho-symbiotic 
connection to Nature, in the hopes of one day repairing and 
regaining the bio-spiritual link that was tragically broken with their 
higher archetypal selves.


--- PAGE 245 ---
197
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
In other words, moon-time blood rituals are feminine vibrational 
healing techniques utilizing "psycho-spiritual homeopathy." If we 
can't cure it now, then for the time being, "revere" or "worship" it.
In effect, harmonize with it.
Ritual as Science:
The Methodologies of Myth...
•
With a seemingly insurmountable pathological condition 
crippling their gender, and after generations of courageously fighting 
to maintain feminine bio-stases, our ancient fore-mothers eventually 
found their efforts futile, and reluctantly surrendered to it.
In truth, they fought a brave but overwhelming battle back then; 
overwhelming in the sense that the Earth of their time was suffering 
through a devastating series of wars and environmental catastrophes, 
the latter brought on by cosmic upheavals and cataclysmic Earth 
changes. Almost nothing of the original Edenic bio-sphere that had 
previously supported their health and well-being existed anymore.36
Consequently, the ceremony  of ritual evolved to become the 
psycho-spiritual reference point, or 'noetic archive', by which they 
maintained some semblance of the ancient ways, until the science 
behind the dynamics of ritual is resurrected and implemented once 
again.
Ritual and ceremony are the ways we access the forgotten 
scientific deeds of our progenitor-ancestors by way of genetic 
memory; deeds that now fall under the category of "myth." Myth 
speaks of events that took place in the dimensions of 'The 
Dreamtime.' To re-enact a myth through ritual is to suspend
36 However, before the advent of the European's influence across the globe, the 
women of our near-ancient melanin civilizations had established a culturally 
inspired scientific process of strict behavioral codes based on instinct and 
instructions from the benevolent Neteru, which helped to control or completely 
eliminate it. With the loss of these culture-sciences and the adoption of western 
"de-naturism", menstruation returned with a vengeance - Author


--- PAGE 246 ---
198
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
temporal (material) time for the moment, and to enter into the sacred 
or divine (Dream) time.
Thus myth is not merely a fanciful dead-letter fairy tale of the 
pretended achievements of our ancestors. It is an allegorically 
encoded schematic hiding a metaphysical formula of science. When 
acted out through ritual and ceremony, myth teaches, regulates, heals 
and transforms from within the collective 'one-consciousness' of the 
people who birthed it. To enter into the mythical dimensions of 
existence through ritual, is to enter into a virtual time of primordial 
unity —  a time where all things were (and are) in divine order.
And this is why our Turtle Island sisters continue to do their 
moon-time blood ritual dances. If there was a crisis afflicting our 
ancestors that needed redemption, healing and transformation, then 
ritual contact with our mythic realities accelerated these healing 
principles into being. Harmony then arises when the two 
dimensions —  the transpersonal and the mundane—are brought into 
contact with one another through the mediating ceremony of the 
ritual.
Puma LaGuitana, a Shaman priestess, brought a letter of 
enormous significance to my attention dealing with the importance of 
maintaining our spiritual connectedness through ritual, myth and 
culture. She knew what 1 was attempting to accomplish by the 
writing of this work, and graciously gathered some much needed 
material to aid in this endeavor.
The letter, entitled "Hold Fast to Moon-time Beliefs" appeared in 
the 1996 winter issue of The Shaman's Drum  (#43), a magazine 
dedicated to reporting and maintaining the traditional ways of our 
indigenous cousins of Turtle Island.37 It was so powerful in the way 
that it conveyed the very essence and purpose of my overall thesis, 
that I felt duly compelled to include it herein. The author of these 
words may very well surprise you when you find out who she is. 
She sure as hell surprised me.
37 Turtle Island is the original name given to this continent by a large segment of 
North America's indigenous peoples. - Author


--- PAGE 247 ---
199
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Her words are as follows...
"... After reading the letter entitled "Don't Treat Moon-time as Bad 
Medicine" (Fall 1996), I felt compelled to respond. The woman 
who wrote the letter said she was concerned that people would 
accept the traditional beliefs about moon-time. It saddens me 
to know that people are so misinformed or only partially 
informed on traditional ways. My concern is for "The People" 
and the future generations.
Your reader is right that moon-time is a controversial issue. What 
her letter doesn't state is that it is only controversial amongst 
White women. I have never heard of a case where a Native 
American woman argued against the belief that moon women 
should stay away from sacred objects.
Women were given a very special purpose in life, but people 
have lost sight of it. Just two generations ago, a woman's 
accomplishments were measured by how well she took care of 
her husband and children. She would stand behind her husband 
and give him reason to achieve status in society. She would take 
care of him in many ways. She would raise her children with 
love, spirituality, morals, values, and respect. She would always 
be there to keep the family strong and together. She would never 
put herself before her family. Her hard work and sacrifices were 
noble and humble, not self-serving. Each woman knew that she 
held the destiny of many people in her hands. This is what made 
women great.
About forty years ago, the elders saw what was happening to 
women. They decided that women should sweat and Sun Dance,  
because they were becoming like men.  Women were losing sight 
of their spiritual nature and the meaning of life. The elders held 
fast to the moon-time beliefs. Moon-time, after all, represents the 
essence of purification and life. It contains so much power that  
women have difficulty controlling it.
The ancestors knew the sacred purposes of women and the 
traditional ways of life, and they lived full and happy lives. Once 
people started changing traditional beliefs, we ended up with the 
world we know today. The moon lodge that the reader described 
may seem harmless, but I believe that to change moon-time 
beliefs could lead to the destruction of future generations. After


--- PAGE 248 ---
200
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
having seen the results of abandoning the old ways of life, I dare 
not question the elders' knowledge of the moon-time ...
To alter things of the spiritual way to benefit oneself causes loss 
of the essence and the power of spirituality itself. These ways  
were not given to White people.  Some White people have been 
honored by being given the opportunity to follow the traditional 
ways. The problem is (White) people have a tendency to change 
things to benefit themselves. This only breeds resentment, and in 
the end, others (Whites) will not be afforded the same 
opportunity....
I would like to thank the woman who wrote the letter for giving 
me the motivation to choose this forum in which to share my 
views. If more women believed as I do and spoke out, maybe we 
could change the world as we know it today. Would it be 
possible to return to a better way of life —  to the life of our 
ancestors? It is probably not surprising to learn that I am the wife 
of Chief John Crazyhorse, Lakota medicine man and traditional 
leader.
However, it might surprise you to know that I too, am a White 
woman. My husband and I have committed our lives to the 
traditional ways of life and to the people. My husband has taught 
me to find my purpose, and I have found myself. I never knew 
the strength, power or love that I possessed until 1 faced the 
challenge to be the best at what I am—a woman.
Mitakuye Oyasin, 
-Kim Crazyhorse 
Indianapolis, Indiana
Everywhere around the world, and throughout every culture that 
came into contact with Europeans, there exists some form of proof 
documented in writing or articulated by the elders through oral 
tradition, telling of a time in their people's history when women who 
bled were considered sick. They tell of special huts, sanctuaries and 
spaces that were built and consecrated by women to address this 
sickness; ritual places where women would isolate themselves in 
order to sweat, fast, purge and rejuvenate.
The Dogon women of Mali West Africa were, and still are, just 
such women.


--- PAGE 249 ---
201
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Ancient women who bled were not allowed to prepare food, wet- 
nurse babies or draw water. And this is the way it was around the 
globe, in tribes and cultures that oft-times knew nothing of the 
existence of one another.
If this was not the case, then 9 times out of 10 it was because the 
cultural ways of the tribe in question were somehow polluted by 
European intervention and ideologies —  to the point where the tribe 
was forced to forget the customs and conduct of their predecessors.
Truly, most of what we now study and think we know about 
ancient cultures today, is based upon the adverse behaviorisms many 
tribes adopted after their encounter with the European.
Kara Morrison of the Detroit News  commenting on an article 
written by Malcolm Gladwell in the New Yorker Magazine,  represents 
a growing number of mainstream female writers who are finally 
bringing this issue of menstruation-as-pathology to the public's 
attention.
The article entitled "John Rock's Error" dealt with the mid-1980's 
research of Beverly Strassman, an anthropologist at the University of 
Michigan who worked in conjunction with Harvard scientist John 
Rock, the Catholic (Opus Dei) co-creator of the birth control pill.
Aside from the obvious fact that the article was written as a 
promotional spin for pharmaceutical estrogens (complete with the 
pill's alleged ability for preventing ovarian and endometrial cancer), 
we none-the-less bear witness to a critical scientific conclusion as it 
relates to the menstrual cycle.
It was argued that John Rock committed an error when he 
created the pill to align to a 28-day time cycle; a calculation said to 
have been based on religious beliefs rather than science. Ms. 
Morrison went on to make the following revelations:
a. "In his quest to sell his pill to the church, Rock wanted to
mirror a woman's natural monthly menstrual cycle..."
b. " What many scientists now realize, in large part because of
Strassman's research, is that making women have a monthly


--- PAGE 250 ---
202
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
period probably isn't healthu..."
c. " She and other scientists now believe that the pill would be
healthier if it resulted in more infrequent menses —a period 
of perhaps every 3 or 4 months rather than monthly..;" and:
d. "The process of repeated cycling.. .that's not natural',
Strassman explains. The Dogon have one-third to one-fourth 
fewer menses than American woman..."
(Emphasis mine.)
Well now! It would appear that the various branches of orthodox 
western science are finally (but still begrudgingly) catching up to 
metaphysical and meta-historic facts. Truth once ridiculed and 
denounced is slowly fighting its way back into the realms of light and 
reason.
Still however, such truths continue to be filtered through the 
analytical screens of European academia, who distort and manipulate 
bona fide information for the benefit of the ruling powers-that-be.
For example, to say that the Dogon women experienced less 
menstrual cycles because they were "continually pregnant and/or 
nursing", is a gross misrepresentation of historic facts; Wo-historic 
and meta-historic facts about menstruation that I will reveal and 
attempt to make clear in subsequent sections.
One more thing of vital importance...!
Feminized biologists, sociologists and behavioral psychologists 
have all failed to factor in the psychological impact that the habitual 
use of birth control chemicals may be having on male-female 
relationships. In fact, the lack of public knowledge concerning this 
issue reeks of conspiracy, because these birth control drugs might 
have greatly contributed (and still continue to contribute) to the 
sudden rise in domestic abuse incidents over the last 25 years, and 
to the steady rise of male-related clinical depression as well.
The research on this subject could have been lifted word for 
word from the pages of The Willie Lynch Letter; Making of a Slave,  a 
thirty-page booklet published by Lushena Press. In it is depicted


--- PAGE 251 ---
203
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
some of the first experiments in trauma-based mind control and 
behavioral manipulation, allegedly carried out on African slaves in 
the Caribbean and the United States.
It appears that as early as 1970, endocrinologists studying the 
effects of analogue progesterones as a method of birth control, 
reported deleterious behavioral affects appearing in virtually all of 
their initial test subjects. One such research centered on a stump-tail 
monkey named Austin and his three sexually active female partners.
Artificial progesterone was given sequentially to his three mates. 
Within a matter of hours, Austin completely lost interest in his 
favorite mate while she was on the birth control chemical, but just as 
suddenly regained interest when the progesterone wore off. When all 
three of his mates were injected with the chemical, Austin became 
noticeably irritated, nervous and began to masturbate.  He became 
hostile and emphatically refused sex with all three of his mates!
Now. Based on the above findings, what logical conclusions could 
be drawn regarding the drug's affect on humans, since the ape is said 
to be our closest living genetic relative on the primate tree, and 
scientists are famous for using them to test for the side-effects of 
drugs on us? Could it not be hypothetically concluded, that the 
human male's apathetic, temperamental and sometimes hostile 
response to the human female over (at least) the past 35 to 40 years of 
feminism, may have been caused or instigated by the chemical birth 
control materials now coursing through the veins of the new 
liberated, 90s-millennium woman?
Beloved sisters and brothers; sexual response is triggered by the 
secretion of hormones into the bloodstream, which causes the release 
of pheromone signatures (subtle musk-like gasses) through the sweat 
glands of the skin. They in turn are picked up by special olfactory 
cells in the noses of both partners. These then trigger the erotic 
processes that culminate in the sexual act. However, when the female 
takes birth control chemicals into her bloodstream, her natural 
pheromonal signatures become perverted, so that the odors released 
by her glands now say to the higher olfactory senses in the brain of


--- PAGE 252 ---
204
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
the male — this female is already pregnant and thus undesirable, or, is  
having sex with someone else—don't bother!
So Austin the 'stump-tail husband' was seen to get cranky and 
aggressive because a major change had been made to the fundamental  
nature of his healthy psycho-sexual relationship with his mates!  The 
females' pheromonal mating clocks were being unnaturally switched 
on and off, which caused drastic, uncharacteristic behavioral 
reactions in Austin.
Hendrik Zwaadermaker also conducted pioneering works related 
to odor and the human olfactory system, using his patented 
"olfactometer" to measure and catelogue their affects on behavior 
and health —the results of which are now referred to as 
"Zwaadermaker's Conjugates."
But as Dr. Edward Stephens, chairman of the Committee on 
Men's Issues, Psychiatric Society of Westchester said in a pamphlet 
issued by the society, Austin may very well have become confused 
when his partners signaled pheromonally that they were artificially 
pregnant; but - his female counterparts did not compound the  
problem by changing their gender roles!
In other words, when Austin's mates were released from their 
maternal obligations by the drug, they didn't take over 60% of the 
undergraduate places in college, or with government subsidies, take 
a whopping 75% of the graduate and post-graduate spots. They did 
not force the elimination of entire male sports programs at the college 
and high school levels, by campaigning politically to "equalize 
sports" at all levels of society.
They didn't divorce Austin. They didn't get pregnant outside of 
marriage, nor did they help create survival units called "single­
parent" families, supported and supplemented by the family court 
system and social services. They didn't flood into the workforce 
displacing Austin's here-to-fore 'natural role' as provider and 
protector in a balanced heterosexual society.
What this insidious little experiment did reveal however, was that 
intimate primate relationships, along with their overall psychological 
effects and social impact, can be radically manipulated and controlled


--- PAGE 253 ---
205
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
through the covert chemicalization of the human bloodstream; and it 
could be done without any overt signs to depict what is really 
happening to the relationship of the male and female test subjects.
Just look at today's media portrayal of men as an example, where 
it all appears to fit some sort of 'fem-fascist rhetoric' on the order of 
Susan Brownmiller's book Against Our Will. In it she says that what 
had once been considered courting, seduction, consensual sex or 
lovemaking, is actually rape in disguisel
Andrea Dworkin takes it a step further in her book Intercourse, by 
stating categorically that all heterosexual intercourse is rape!
Marilyn French, author of The Women's Room  stated in The New 
York Times, July 1995, when discussing men and women...
... I think men would be much happier if they behaved 
like women. I think they would get more out of life 
and would have much more easier selves if they were 
like women; if they behaved like women ..."
Today, what our feminized society is diagnosing as "un­
explained abusive male aggression", may in fact be an overt 
reaction to the insidious manipulation of his inter-personal 
environments — in part by using the bloodstream of the female to 
engender hormonal confusion and subjective pathological emotions, 
propagating hostility and conflict between the sexes, thereby 
ensuring an effective form of subversive control over both.
Question. Given the facts related above, does this finally explain the 
overwhelming popularity of the male sexual enhancement drug 
Viagra since its release about 10 years ago? Was the true purpose for 
creating and marketing this drug an attempt to override the 
hormonal and psychological effects that female chemical 
contraception has been having on the male psyche?
I've asked these simple questions because the truth of the matter 
is, more and more men 45 years and younger  are now being 
prescribed this drug as a matter of course!
Something to ponder my sisters. No?


--- PAGE 254 ---
206
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
De-mystifying the "Blood Sacrifice"...
When investigating the phenomenon called menstruation, we 
must first and foremost ask ourselves this question; why? Why 
would Nature Mother create a microcosmic representation of Her 
Divine Self as Woman —then cripple that Divine being so that it will 
hemorrhage and spill its most precious life-fluids each and every 
month?
Why? Is Nature-Mother a cosmic masochist, or galactic sadist? 
What is gained by such a traumatic monthly event afflicting so 
precious and sacred a matrix as the human female body?
Does the human female body (designed to be the incubator and 
nurturer of the crown of all creation) profit by this cyclic erosion of its 
sacred infrastructure?
...Please contemplate the following...
- When we breathe we gain ... oxygen, minerals and other vital 
atomic elements to sustain life
through the revitalization of the 
cells...
- When we eat we gain ... the replenishment of cells so that 
they may continue to centralize 
consciousness and stimulate the 
bio-kinetic life force within the
- When we sleep we gain ...
body-matrix...
a rejuvenated body-temple, so
that we may continue to function 
at peak levels of strength and
awareness...
- When we urinate and defecate 
we gain...
relief through the elimination of 
waste by-products of nutrition to 
re-cycle these products back into 
the earth for the shared


--- PAGE 255 ---
207
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
- When we procreate we gain...
continuity of all life... 
continuity of life and bestowal of
- When we study life we gain...
conscious awareness... 
the knowledge of self...
- When we pray we gain... affirmation of the existence of 
Divine Intelligence...
- When we menstruate we gain... ?????????????????????????????
I have made the above comparisons because it seems that for far 
too long, this condition has been accepted as 'normal' and 'natural' 
regarding the health and well being of a woman. Remember when I 
said earlier beloved, that the intricate mechanisms of physical life are 
based on the principles of reciprocity —a delicate balance of give and 
take called symbiosis? Well, within the bio-dynamics of menstruation, 
this does not occur.
The above graft is a way to drive home the point that Cosmic 
Intelligence designed Its temple to function as a vital matrix of life— 
L-I-F-E being the operative word. Therefore, vital functions do not rob 
life-energies, or create suffering during the natural performance of their  
appointed duties within the body.
It is not within the modus operandi of Omniscient Intelligence 
to manifest suffering, deficit or untimely death within the bio­
mechanics of Its created life-forms!
Life does not "steal" life from Itself!
Life does not "suffer" to live as Itself!
Please review the previous words as many times as necessary to 
over-stand their crucial significance, for they constitutes the supreme 
measure of Universsl Law governing the healthy operation of human 
biological life.
Another thing. Most medical scientists are of the ridiculous 
presumption that the menstrual cycle is vital to a woman's hormonal 
health. They claimed that without it, a woman's body would not 
manufacture the proper amounts of estrogen or progesterone each 
month to keep her body healthy.


--- PAGE 256 ---
208
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
But if menstruation is so 'natural' or 'normal' as it is now 
professed to be, then like breathing, the body should not have to 
suffer through a myriad of traumas, changes, symptoms and 
adjustments just for it to occur. If something is "natural" to you, it 
should not make you suffer as a consequence of its intrinsic function.
So isn't it interesting to note that during this so-called 'natural' or 
'normal' time in a woman's life, one or more of the following 
symptoms (in varying degrees of intensity) are suffered by 99% of 
today's menstruating women?
- drastic temperature fluctuations (rising and falling)
- mental disorientation and or confusion
- violent mood swings (PMS)
- lethargy and exhaustion
- depression
- impatience; frayed nerves
- blurring or limiting of field of vision
- dizziness
- severe cramps; nausea
- severe migraine headaches; lower back pains
- bloating
- blood capillary breakage due to bloating
- severe joint pains
- loss of smell or taste sensations
As a Hygienic Scientist and practicioner of Classical 
Naturopathy, I have witnessed many of the above symptoms 
afflicting my sisters all too often—even in what appears to be the 
healthiest of women.
Tell me dear sisters; could such symptoms truly be the 
by-product of a higher intelligence? Should such symptoms be 
considered "normal" to your everyday health and well-being if they 
emanate from a truly "natural" function, and would Nature Mother 
intentionally cripple or debilitate Herself during the process of a 
"natural" function?
Think long and carefully on these things, beloved queen.


--- PAGE 257 ---
209
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The flow of a menses will vary in quantity at times from 30 to 95cc 
(a little more than IV 2 to 4V2 oz) in what is recognized as a normal 
cycle—to a pint or more in severe cases (fibroids). A "normal" flow 
might last from 4 to 8 days. In some instances, I have also found that 
a heavier than usual flow may not be just fibroids or ovarian cysts at 
all, but spontaneous abortions  where it concerns a sexually active 
woman using the new modern-day abortive types of contraception.
Item: One of the biggest falsehoods propagatedby western medicine, is that 
menstruation is the way Nature provides for a woman to cleanse herself of toxins 
and renew the body each month. Doctors even claim that if the uterine lining 
didn't slough off every month, the incidence of uterine cancers would be much 
higher in women today...
Of course uterine cancers would be much higher! During the time 
of the menses, the uterine lining is engorged with dead decaying 
blood-matter! The "sloughing off" of the lining is a highly exhaustive 
defensive reaction taken by the body to prevent such damage, all of 
which eventually proves futile as it inevitably leads to a complete 
shut down of the system, in a reproductive disease called menopause.
And if what doctors claim about cleansing and renewal were true, 
then why aren't all the poisons in a woman's body eliminated by the end of  
her cycle?
Because it's simple beloved; menstruation is hemorrhaging ! It is a 
malfunctioning of the sacred archetypal matrix of woman; a 
progressive degeneration of physiological integrity that has now 
become a "normal" monthly process to eject systemic toxins through 
abnormal means. Nothing more, nothing less!
In fact, any time a body bleeds, no matter how little or perfuse, it 
is a traumatic loss of its most precious life-essences and all of the 
systems of the body are thrown into a panic. With all of the mental, 
physical and environmental madness we do battle with every day, 
the very last thing a woman needs to do, is to hemorrhage every 
month on top of it all.


--- PAGE 258 ---
210
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"The Issue of Blood "
•
To my devout Christian sisters —  those of you who faithfully 
believe in the written 'Word of God', as revealed in the Bible 
through the teachings of the Gospel and your Lord and Savior Jesus 
the Christ —I bring your attention to a portion of New Testament 
scripture that makes a distinct reference to the fact that the 
menstrual cycle was truly considered a disease. Of course, you may 
scoff and claim that my interpretation of the following verses is just 
that — my interpretation. You may also believe that only a priest or 
minister educated in Christian schools of theology could give you a 
"more valid" and "truer" interpretation. Whatever the case may be 
beloved, I ask is that you please read and contemplate the following 
points with an open mind.
Mark 5: 25-34...
(25) "... And a certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years, (26) And 
had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and 
was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse (27) When she had heard of Jesus, 
came in the press behind, and touched his garment (28) For she said, If I may touch 
his clothes, I shall be whole (29) And straight way the fountain of her blood was  
dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague  (30) And Jesus, 
immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him 
about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?... (32) And he looked 
around to see her that had done this thing (33) But the woman fearing and 
trembling knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and 
told him the truth (34) And he said unto her, Daughter thy faith hath made thee 
whole, go in peace, and be whole of thy plague..."
[Emphasis mine]
First, for the sake of clarity, 1 would like to make sure that there 
is no mis-understanding on the part of the reader concerning my 
use of the word issue as the Biblical interpretation of the pathology 
known as menstruation. I am certain that this is a correct 
interpretation of the above verses, and wherever else the word is 
used by the Biblical scribes in this context. And though there are 
few clues to substantiate the correctness of my assumption, I offer


--- PAGE 259 ---
211
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
one to the seeker by way of a definition of the word issue, as it 
appears in Webster's 7th Collegiate Dictionary, copyright 1961, and 
the American Heritage Dictionary, copyright 1982, respectively...
Issue: "... (7) A discharge (as of blood) from the body.
[Webster's. 7lh.C.D.]
"... Pathology (a) A discharge as of blood
(b) A suppurating sore; To cause to flow out..."
[Amer. Herit. Diet.]
I also ask the seeker to read the above biblical passages once again, 
this time paying close and particular attention to the lines "... And a 
certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years,  and had 
suffered many things by many physicians, and had spent all that she had,  
and was nothing bettered, but rather, grew worst..]"
Hmmm. Do these words seem remotely familiar to you? Where 
have we heard them before? Especially you sisters with fibroids 
suffering menstrual cycles (or "issues") of 8 to 15 days each month!
How many of you sought the help of your primary care physician 
or healthcare provider, only to find that after thousands of dollars 
and thousands of days (in this biblical sister's case —  4,380 days), being 
medicated with all types of experimental hormonal drugs, 
co-agulants, iron pills and what-not—your monthly suffering 
continued anyway; even worsened?
How many of you were told after years of enduring the pain of an 
ever-growing fibroid, or constant endometrial suffering (during 
which time you were actually in the care of your physician), that the 
only recourse left to you (since you already had children) was to cut 
out your uterus?
Seems like nothing has changed concerning the "practice of 
medicine" for over 2000 years.


--- PAGE 260 ---
212
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
And think on this as well. If the 'issue of blood' (or menstruation) 
was not considered a debilitating sickness, why then is it referred to 
in the Bible as a plague? The line "... and Jesus, immediately 
knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him 
about in the press and said, who touched my clothes? " is a veiled 
reference to the fact that menstruating women (a rarity in those 
ancient-of-days) were considered to be sick women, and did not 
permit themselves to socialize with the general public. Neither did 
they have sexual intercourse (See; Lev. 15:19/25-28; 18:19). Nor were 
they allowed to wet-nurse babies, prepare food, draw water, perform 
sacred ceremonies, or to milk cows or goats.
Back in the ancient of days it was normal not to have an issue of 
menstrual blood, and ab-normal (a plague) if you did. The truth of 
this can be seen in Leviticus 15: 19, 25 and 28 by the author's use of 
the conjunction if, instead of the conjunction when.
The word "if" (as it is used in this Biblical context) denotes 
ambiguity and randomness; something non-specific and uncertain. 
The word "when" on the other hand, implies a fixed coordinate of 
time—cyclic and predictable; a more appropriate conjunction for use 
in forecasting a specific moment or event.
So it wasn't when she had an issue, but if Which means that the 
instructions left in Leviticus 15 were based on a situation that was 
random and unpredictable; something that did not conform to a fixed 
coordinate in time, as it does for the menstrual cycles of modern-day 
women.
You were compelled to follow the instructions of the priest, only 
"if” the condition should arise.
Today the human species has become so chronically degenerated 
that virtually all women now menstruate as a matter of course. So the 
social perception has reversed; it is now considered "normal" to 
hemorrhage, while women who do not bleed are considered 
"abnormal!"
In truth, I defy anyone to tell me that they know a woman who 
would honestly say she wants to have her period; that she absolutely


--- PAGE 261 ---
213
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
looks forward to it eagerly each and every month. If they can find 
such a woman, chances are she is being pridefully dishonest because 
she accepts the feminist viewpoint promoting the delusion that this 
pathology is considered a sickness solely by men.
Sadly, she has also accepted one or more of the following:
(a) that it is actually a defining badge of her 'magical' womanhood...
(b) that it is a time of 'great power' that men have historically "envied" 
and "feared..."
(c) that it is a 'natural' occurrence...
(d) that it is the 'superior' part of being a woman...
Let's be real my sistas. The only reason men sometimes fear 
hemorrhaging women is because of the unpredictable, erratic and 
sometimes violent behavior exhibited by them before and/ or during 
this time. Also, young women have frequently confided to me that 
the only reason they don't mind seeing their menses each and every 
month, is because (and these are not my words) "... it's the best proof  
that you' re not pregnant."
Hmmm...!
To continue...
Verse #29 says "... And straight way the fountain of her blood was 
dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of that 
plague.."; Verse #34 says "...daughter thy faith hath made thee 
whole, go in peace, and be whole of thy plague."
Both verses speak volumes attesting to the fact that stopping or 
'drying up' the frequent and un-natural waste of precious life-force 
energy and nutrients, which now occurs year in and year out 
(12 years for the biblical sister), will surely make a woman "whole."
To be whole means that no part of you is missing. You are 
complete. When a woman menstruates she bleeds liquid flesh!  It 
means that each month of her adult life, a woman's body is being 
traumatically "fragmented" where a part of her total physical being is 
lost forever!


--- PAGE 262 ---
214
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Feminists will no doubt claim that the Bible was written by men 
during the times when a misogynist patriarchy ruled; that 
menstruation as a sickness was only men's fearful interpretation of 
this so-called 'natural cycle' in a woman's life.
This is pure nonsense! Maybe women bleeding monthly was 
'natural' for European cultures, but not so for the spiritually advanced 
autochthonous civilizations of this planet, and their culture-based 
'rituals-as-science' provided substantial proof of this.
Now. Unbeknownst to most Bible-thumping Christians today, 
nearly halfoi  the ancient works left by our ancestors that made it into 
this "holy" book (as well as those that did not), were actually 
plaguarized ancient prophesies and teachings first articulated by the 
black 'Dodona womett'l  An example of this appears in the collective 
works of The Nag Hammadi Library, where we find a gospel/prophecy 
dictated by women entitled The Tlnmder - Perfect Mind! This scripture 
is known to be the source material for the Wicca's Book ofLillith.
Historically,' Only 65 mutilated manuscripts originally survived 
the censoring hatchets of the early Christian fathers, who staged the 
Nicean Council  to legitimize the fraud of their new religion with a 
"Holy Book." This was followed up in subsequent centuries by an 
ongoing series of in-house ecclesiastical meetings to "tweek" its 
contents —all for the purpose of enhancing the Church's power over 
the minds of the masses, through the imposition of oppressive 
"tenets of faith" that undermined the evolutionary consciousness 
and free-thinking capabilities of the greater global humanity.
Such gatherings were documented in their records as The 
Councils of Trent, The Treaty of Verona, The Secret Plans of Chieri  and 
Vatican 1-Tlie Syllabus of Errors  (just to name a few). All were staged 
by the Vatican to further erode and destroy the natural rights and 
spiritual freedoms of every last man, woman and child on Earth. 
The church outright stole and distorted all of the precious astro- 
theological teachings and cyclic prognostications of our ancestral 
masters; among them —  evidence of the black woman's immense 
contributions to the theo-philosophical sciences of Godhead.


--- PAGE 263 ---
215
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
And much of the surviving 700,000 "Alexandrian" manuscripts 
containing incredibly profound historical, metaphysical, 
cosmological and philosophical data from the ancient African world- 
paradigm, were also used to compile the original Roman Catholic 
books of the Bible, with 33° Master Mason and Rosicrucian Sir 
Francis Bacon (a.k.a. William Shakespeare/Edward de Vere) later 
editing the Protestant King James version published in 1611.
It is also a little known fact that the 66th book called Revelations 
(whose original title was named Vie Initiation of Annointed Iesous,  
written by Apollonious of Tyana) was just recently added to all 
versions of the Bible as late as the 18th to early 19th centuries!
Thus in our pursuit of truth (according to the Bible), we must 
keep uppermost in mind that the versions now taught to be the 
"one and only true authoritative and complete Word of God", are in 
fact the bits and pieces of many astro-theological masterpieces of 
prophecy, plagiarized from a colossal archive of ancient documents 
representing a long history of highly advanced spiritual sciences 
articulated by our earliest melanated ancestry. In other words, the 
material scholarship of today's Bible, as attributed to anglosized 
"prophets" and semetic patriarchs, and spoon-fed to the clueless 
masses as their divinely 'inspired words', amount to nothing more 
than sanctified table scraps thrown to us from a series of Roman 
ecumenical banquets; a disjointed quilt of cryptic dogma based on the 
scholastic mischief of the con-founding Fathers of Christendom.
In fact the early Crusades, beginning with Pope Urban II in 1095 
AD, were originally censorship campaigns to destroy all traces of the 
ancient doctrines and artifacts plagiarized by the Roman Church. The 
New Testament is in fact a watered down version of the myths and 
legends of over 16 cultures that pre-date Christianity. Albert 
Churchward, the mythicist writer, said ...
"... The canonical gospels can be shown to be a collection of 
sayings from the Egyptian Mythos and Eschatology..."
In a work entitled Forgery in Christianity, Joseph Wheless states ...
"... The gospels are all priestly forgeries over a century after 
their pretended dates..."


--- PAGE 264 ---
216
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In fact, forgeries were so rampant in the early church that a special 
phrase was coined to describe it—the "pious fraud." Bishop Eusebius 
of Cesarea (260-339 a.d.), one of the prime perpetrators of the Nicean 
hoax is quoted as saying...
"... It is an act of virtue to deceive and lie, when by such 
means the interests of the church might be promoted..."
Such deceit is confessed to time and again in the Catholic 
Encyclopedia, and is actually a basis for honor and reward adopted by 
the dreaded Jesuit Order in their secret oath. Pope Leo the 10th (1513- 
1521) is quoted as saying...
"... How well we know what a profitable superstition this 
fable of Christ has been for us ..."
Beloved, we must thoroughly sift through the scholastic wreckage 
left behind by the Roman state church, to find the precious fragments 
of metaphysical truth that lay hidden within all western theological 
literature. Keep in mind that the different so-called "books of the 
Bible" were actually spiritual/alchemic formulas written in different 
ages and throughout different epochs of ancient Earth history—not 
sequentially through different years, decades or centuries of latter- 
day "A.D." —"B.C." European history. The timeframe between the 
writing of each 'book' (in some cases) may have amounted to 
thousands of years —each one written during a different "age" (i.e. 
Pisces, Aquarius, Leo, Libra, etc.) or equinoctial solar cycle.
So believe it or not dear sisters, much of the profound teachings 
contained in many of the precious books of antiquity38 (like the Bible), 
though not scripted by women—were still very much inspired, taught, 
dictated or articulated by women!
Again; these powerful adept sisters of ancient Earth were known 
as The Sibyls,  or "Black Doves", and what are now passed off as the 
so-called "prophesies of the Bible", are actually stolen from the 
many prognostications made by these ancient, black, super-psychic 
women known as The Sibylline Prophesies!  Herodotus knew the
38 See the many Pseudopidogrcrphicas as well as The Ten Lost Books of the Bible.


--- PAGE 265 ---
217
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Sibyls personally as sacred temple divinators called 'the 
Dodoneans', who he said were of the black Egyptian stock!
The arcane meta-chronicles of our ancestors also stated that these 
black women did not bleed;  that they were 'wholistic', celibate and 
sometines gynandrous; that is, having semi-masculine features.
During the heights of The Inquisition for example, to test for 'a 
witch' (or Sibyl), one needed to find the spot on her body that was 
de-sensitized to pain. You see the healthy, orthobiotic women who 
didn't bleed back then, had such areas at different locations around 
their bodies. Thus it was that the cruelest most torturous of devices 
were invented by the Church inquisitors to find these 'spots.'
But bottom line beloved seeker, throughout all of the books in 
the Bible (Old Testament and New), one thing remained consistent; 
the menstrual cycle (i.e.) the "issue of blood" —"her time of 
separation"—  "her fountain of blood" —the "issue of her un­
cleanliness"—  all were terminologies pointing to the fact that the 
monthly hemorrhaging of our precious womankind was, and still 
is, a sad and tragic plague upon us all.
A Final Thought. Isn't it interesting that at this time (2007-08) —  at 
the very dawning of a new millennium—women today define their 
present states of stress, confusion, depression, inability to cope, 
loneliness, insecurity, health problems, money problems, man 
problems and so on —as having issues?! Is it therefore safe to say 
that a woman's modern-day "issues" of the mind and heart, work 
hand in hand to perpetuate the ancient-day "issues" of her womb?
Absolutely! So it's not so surprising that such a word and all of 
its connotations should once again become prominent in our social 
lexicon —  especially at this time in history when we are all soon to 
experience virtually the same conditions that caused the pestilence 
and suffering depicted in the book of Leviticus, chapters 13 and 14.
Metaphysically, when a woman is dealing with heavy problems in 
her life, her thoughts are primarily centered in her womb whether she 
is aware of it or not. Thus the quality of her thoughts affect the 
quality of her health as it relates to her womb. A woman is womb


--- PAGE 266 ---
218
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B  - PA R T I
conscious 99% of the time, even if she isn't always brain-conscious  of 
this fact. The womb is the dark-matter core of her universe. Her body 
is ruled by it—ruled by the mind of her "womb-niverse." It is the 
center and circumference of all her "issues."
And this, beloved queen, constitutes the underlying and ongoing 
saga of...The Wounded Womb.
Menstruation, Emotion, and the monthly loss  
of Primal Creative Power:
(A Meta-historic Overview)
•
A menstruating womb may be compared to a nuclear reactor with 
a severely damaged core. The reactor (womb) is leaking vital fuel and 
unstable radiation. The fuel she leaks is her precious blood, while the 
unstable radiation emitted is her emotions.
Meta-historically, the above analogy is given to convey just how 
badly damaged the emotional body-matrix of womankind has 
became as a result of the tragic circumstances that led to "the Fall."
Due to the great atomic and environmental cataclysms that 
occurred during the so-called "Wars of Heaven", the multi-phased 
astral/ethereal bodies of our Adamic ancestry suffered great damage. 
Trauma to their genetics forced the physical, mental, astral and 
emotional bodies of humanity "out-of-phase." Without proper 
harmonic alignment of the subtle-body matrices, Edenic humanity 
gradually lost its ability to control the elementals, and thus to 
manipulate matter spontaneously with the mind through the 
organizational mechanisms of thought and creative visualization.
But perhaps one of the most dramatic consequences to befall 
humanity showed up as a genetic pathology that cyclically occurs in 
the female body-temple. She began to express this mis-alignment of 
the physical, mental, astral and emotional bodies through a 
hemorrhaging of her procreative bio-matrix —a pathology we define 
today as the monthly cycle of menstruation.
Loss of alignment in our creative subtle-body matrices meant lost 
of control over our pro-creative gross body-matrices as well. This was


--- PAGE 267 ---
219
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
the reason for the strict codes of conduct practiced by ancient women, 
and the precisely crafted rituals for ovulation they performed. These 
rituals were organic scientific formulas done for the expressed 
purpose of aligning the mental, psychic, astral, emotional and 
physical bodies, in an effort to maintain control of this awesome 
primordial force. As a result, there were no menstrual cycles or 
menopause for an extended period of time in humanity's history, 
even after "the Fall."
Emotion is the vibrational fuel of both the mental and the physical 
pro-creative processes. In fact, it is primarily due to the semi­
functional capabilities of the emotional body that humanity retains its 
ability to sexually procreate. Through the utilization of emotion-as- 
intention (through its polarities as feeling and desire), humanity 
accesses the Creative Will of the 'One Most Fiigh Universal 
Intelligence Mainframe' to propogate corporeal life.
It must also be understood that the cycle of menstruation invokes 
un-differentiated primordial forces (the Mut-force)39 from within the 
female procreative matrix as well. The menstrual process ignites 
latent primal cosmic energies that are expressed through the medium 
of a woman's stirred (albeit) mis-aligned emotions.
And our ancestors knew this. It is the reason why they forbade 
menstruating women from participating in certain ritual, medicinal 
or administrative duties and decisions. According to them, 
archetypal woman lost her instinctive ability to maintain control of 
this awesome creative force internally—and so she bleeds. It is also 
why our ancestral elders considered menstruation to be a type of 
monthly abortion! To them, the egg signified potential life. Thus, it 
was life. If it leaves a woman's body without fulfilling its sacred 
purpose of manifesting life, it was considered an untimely death; 
hence, an abortion!
39 Mut (pronounced moot) is the Khemety-u principle of undifferentiated power or 
primal forces. The symbol for Mut is the vulture. The vulture is attracted to carrion. 
Carrion is dead organic matter. Menstruation was considered an abortion —  a 
"little death" by the ancients. Menstrual blood is dead (or dying) organic matter. 
Co-incidence? - Author


--- PAGE 268 ---
220
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
A few days before the actual bleeding begins, a vast majority of 
women experience a variety of emotional shifts directly related to 
severe hormonal shifts, which sometime lead to random emotional 
outbursts. Again; the loss of blood from her precious reproductive 
tabernacle (the womb) is the evidence of her loss of control over this 
powerful Mut-force, which often leads to a woman's loss of physical, 
mental and emotional control.
And this is precisely the reason Native American elders, as well as 
African elders, Adivasian elders, Chinese elders —  virtually all the 
elders of the world's melanated high cultures, refused to allow 
menstruating women to make critical decisions related to tribal 
welfare, the handling of food, infants, sacred objects, or to enter 
certain sanctuaries earmarked for special rituals. But most latter-day 
gynandrous feminists (mostly Caucasians; but now of late, educated 
"Christianized" continental African women) who are allowed to 
study and/or participate in ancient indigenous cultures today, refuse 
to accept or respect such customs; one of the many reasons why 
European society is looked upon with distrust and disdain by the 
vast number of alert old world autochthones cultures who still hold 
fast to their ancient ways, and why those assimilated by Euro- 
centrism are in the overall wretched states of mental chaos and 
physical decay we see today.
Again, the above are merely my metaphysical observations.
The Crystal Essence...
To the ancients, any loss of blood was a tragedy. Blood was 
considered the crystalline essence of life, and they knew how 
traumatic it was to the total organism if any amounts were lost.
Your precious blood was you\
Losing blood is a shock to the system, plain and simple. On 
average, our bodies must manufacture nearly 2,400,000 red blood 
cells every second, which is a ridiculous amount to have to produce 
within that given period of time, for it requires a severe expenditure 
of vital force to accomplish this.


--- PAGE 269 ---
221
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Scientific evidence has shown that a blood cell has the capacity to 
live indefinitely if given a stress-free, nutritionally stable 
environment. But if a toxin or stress-inducing agent is introduced 
into its environment —  it divides!
Now what does this tell us?
It says that cellular division after attaining adulthood, and the 
constant replacement of erythrocytes by the body, may very well be 
an wn-natural process after all; un-natural because Nature has shown 
that when the environment is harmonious and stable to an organism, 
there is no abnormal stress exerted, and therefore no exhaustion of 
vital force in a self-preserving effort to defend itself.
So; without stress the cell does not multiply. With stress it  does! 
Ergo, cellular division as it occurs in an adult human body today, is 
most likely a 'suicidal' attempt by the collective organism to 
abnormally maintain its bio-stasis against the stressful, polluted 
environments within which it has to function daily.
Cellular division after maturity should therefore be considered a  
"defensive act!" As a result of this continual and drastic depletion of 
vital life-force energy, the body degenerates and pre-maturely dies of 
systemic exhaustion, in stages and degrees we call aging.
And this is why bleeding each and every month cannot be 
"natural." This is why the female reproductive system finally crashes 
into biological entropy; to that final phase of cellular exhaustion and 
depletion commonly known as menopause.
Beloved; the series of ecological and war-time catastrophes 
occurring over the last 75 to 100,000 years, has caused so many 
mutative changes within the total spectrum of world humanity (and 
planetary life in general), that we no longer know what constitutes 
true and lasting health for the human body any more. Today we 
study its present construction and believe the evolutionary rhetoric of 
western anthropological authorities, that modern-day humanity is 
the best specimen that Homo Erectus ever presented to the world.
As a consequence, we have all settled into the afore-mentioned 
state of "complacent pathology" — as if it were all somehow par-for- 
the-evolutionary course.


--- PAGE 270 ---
222
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Item: The fact that we need glasses to see what's directly in front of us,
while the Dogon people mapped their cave sanctuaries with the  
precise and exact coordinates, distances, locations, names, birth and  
death-dates of stars, planets and solar systems, is laughable by  
comparison. It becomes even more embarrassing when we note that  
this modern-day "crown of evolution and world civilization", had to  
build a monstrosity like the Hubble telescope just to begin to  
speculate about what the Dogon and other advanced ancient  
civilizations already saw and knew first hand. All of these things  
don't seem to factor into the final assessments and analyses of  
European "anthro-apologists", whenever they attempt to formulate  
their theories of what humanity may have truly been like before  
they came to prominence, or what it has subsequently become as a  
result..
Everything about present-day humanity shows us just how far 
down the de-volutionary scale of life we've fallen as spiritual beings, 
and one of the primary pieces of evidence to substantiate this fact, is 
the monthly hemorrhaging of the human female.
To Bleed .. Or not to Read:
That is the Answer ...
•
Again beloved; much of what you are reading will appear 
outlandish and off-the-wall, but I am only relating to you what our 
remote ancestors taught and practiced as their natural, everyday 
ways of life. And as the world already knows, their orthobiotic 
traditions were vastly superior to our present-day "life-styles."
To this date, most of their wisdom-teachings have been either 
plagiarized and commercialized by the so-called new age movement, 
or rejected outright by western academic orthodoxies—  the results of 
which can plainly be seen in our society's present state of chaos and 
disrepair. I truly believe it's high time we re-evaluate and re-apply 
the ways and means of their superior wisdom.
Case in point. With the onset of menarche (or first menses), even 
something as simple as reading could have a destabilizing affect on a 
young woman's delicate hormonal integrity, causing her cycle to


--- PAGE 271 ---
223
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
begin pre-maturely. Today, ancient literature that made reference to 
this fact have all been either banned or vilified as being "chauvinist" 
in origin. They're removed from our national libraries and storefronts 
at the behest of the feminist inquisition, and severe criticism is 
leveled at countries whose women as yet remain 'illiterate/
But illiteracy is not stupidity, and overall intelligence can never be 
derived solely from the pages of a book. This is precisely what a 
despotic 'sociocracy' promotes and wants us to believe, since they 
write (or re-write) the books and place a high monetary value on 
what you can recall of the information they teach you.
In fact, I know some pretty stupid people who taught me 
throughout my school years; people who were "well read" and 
"highly educated." They had virtually no common sense or 
intuitively sponsored intelligence. Most illiterate women from the 
so-called third world are infinitely more superior in intelligence than 
all of the best read feminist academicians who travel to their 
countries to promote book learning.
In fact, many highly educated feminists who travel to study and 
live with the women of ancient cultures, say they did so not only for 
the research, but for the curious purpose of "finding themselves."
Hmmm...
Besides, if you look closely at a great many of the so-called 'well- 
educated' PhD female academicians, they all look unusually 
masculine anyway. Which is precisely my point.
Do not mistake the following information as a pronouncement or 
opinion that women should be banned from learning. This would 
truly be stupid of me or anyone else who thinks to espouse such 
nonsense.
You see, it's not just about "book-learning" per se. It is the 
institutionalized teaching methodologies and techniques of the 
European educational process that is my primary point of contention. 
The methods of learning presently used in western academia were 
primarily adopted from the old-world European's masculine models 
of education.


--- PAGE 272 ---
224
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In part 2 of this thesis, we will briefly discuss how a feminized 
model of public education was super-imposed by the Rockefellers 
and the Carnegies onto the fabric of American society in the late 
1800s, for the purpose of introducing a dumb-down method of 
indoctrination that became known as "the Prussian System."
This 3-tiered system originated in Germany, and gave birth to the 
fragmented categories of education we've come to know as 
curriculums, programs, courses, classes, periods, subjects, sessions, 
seminars, labs, diplomas and degrees (aka-the "bachelors", the 
"Masters" and the "PhD."), as well as to such institutions as day-care, 
pre-school, kindergarten, grammar school, high school, etc.
In Orthodox Islam and Orthodox Judaism, women of certain 
sects are as yet forbidden to read, but due largely to the incursion of 
western influence and the overall gametic degeneration of our 
present species worldwide, this ancient rule is quickly changing.
Reading books written from within these two cultures would 
ordinarily be difficult for a woman's bio-chemistry anyway—not 
because of her lack of skill or due to the intellectual contents of the 
book —but because the text itself is oriented from right to left, which is 
tailor-made for a male's psycho-metric acuity and bio-telemetry. This 
literary orientation of words allows for a more efficient assimilation 
and inner-standing of information by the masculine brain.
The male brain is dominant on the right side for greater visual 
stimulus.
But in westernized learning systems, the reading orientation is 
feminized. The texts of their books are read from left to right —  an 
orientation that is far more conducive to a female's psycho-metric 
acuity and bio-telemetry. This is why a majority of the time, little girls 
in Euro-dominant societies seem to learn to read, write and spell 
more quickly and efficiently than little boys. And feminists have used 
this unfortunate circumstance to promote yet another ridiculous 
reference to the overall "superiority" of the female gender.
Truth be told however (even though it is not 'politically correct' to 
say such things now-a-days), andric males, by and large are far


--- PAGE 273 ---
225
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
superior in the exercise of math, reading, and overall intellect, and 
can retain information much longer and in far greater abundance 
than a gynic female, if he is hormonally healthy and is originally 
taught to learn according to his own bio-telemetric and psycho­
metric orientations; that is —from right to left!
In the distant past, children were also taught to read and 
comprehend through melody, for the words that they learned were 
sung and not just spoken. Not surprisingly, scientists in the field of 
developmental psychology today have discovered that children learn 
faster when the subjects they study are sung as a melody or 
accompanied by music.
But the real issue here is not which gender is more intelligent, or 
who has the greater capacity for accurately retaining knowledge. 
Both men and women can achieve the highest levels of intelligence, 
as can they both equally descend to the lowest levels of stupidity. 
What we want to examine is whether or not the consistent act or 
exercise of reading is anatomically healthy for a growing girl and 
young woman.
A good place to begin studying the consequences of heavy 
reading for females would be in the corporate office. Secretaries more 
than anyone else suffer from a myriad of reproductive diseases and 
other related ailments, due in part to their lack of sufficient 
vitamin A. The problem stems from reading words where the eyes 
must focus on the flat, 2-dimensional texts of a book or computer 
screen. The secretary's eyes must literally strain to process each word 
and letter.
The human eyes are made to process "3-dimensionality", and uses 
less energy and nutrients to process images that are of the organic 3- 
dimensional world. On the other hand, the eyes use a greater amount 
of energy and nutrients to process one and two-dimensional linear 
stimuli, as is represented in books or on word-processing machines.
This is true especially for women who work at such machines 
nearly 8 hours or more a day.


--- PAGE 274 ---
226
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The primary problem with computer-worded images can be 
found in what are known as pixels; dots of light that make up the 
words and shapes emanating from the computer screen. They are not 
"stark" like ink-printed words. They glow bright in the center but 
fade around the edges. This causes a built-in blur that forces the eye 
to consistently re-focus, sometimes as much as 30,000 times in an 8- 
hour day. It severely overworks the eye causing a massive drain on 
cerebral nutrients even though you can't always immediately feel it. 
Add to this the fluorescent lighting common to all office buildings, 
and it's easy to overstand the reason for those all-too familiar 
complaints of eye-aches, double vision, blurred vision, 
far-sightedness, migraine, blood-shot eyes and "halo imaging" 
suffered by today's secretarial work force.
A disturbing projection by marketing experts estimates that in this 
new millennium, between 85 and 90% of the work force and virtually 
100% of all school curriculum will be dependent upon computers. To 
those who can 'read between the lines', it is a prediction of greater 
pathological consequences yet to be suffered by future generations of 
working women (and men).
When vitamin A is lost, estrogen is flushed or left unprocessed in 
the female. This hormone relies heavily on A as much as the male 
hormone testosterone relies heavily on zinc. In the long run, a woman 
who is a heavy reader can ruin her gamic (or fertilizing) organs.
A book entitled 'Magical Child: Rediscovering Nature's Plan for our  
Children', by Joseph Chilton Pearce, mentions a study conducted on 
females in Norway at the beginning of the 20th century. It was found 
that test groups of girls who read a lot from an early age, started 
menstruating between the ages of 13 and 16 years; whereas groups 
who began reading in later years experienced menache between 17 
and 20 years of age. The test consistently proved that pre-mature 
literacy can cause early menstruation in girls, because the severe loss 
of vitamin A from heavy reading causes the blood vessels of the 
uterus to weaken and burst, resulting in the loss of its nutrient-rich 
lining through a leukorric discharge.


--- PAGE 275 ---
227
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
It also showed a connection between early menses and the 
epidemic of breast cancer.
Pre-Pubescent Puberty...
The results of overlooked or ignored research (such as depicted 
above) have been substantiated by the appearance of many 
"unknown" bio-anomalies popping up in recent generations. Today 
for example, scientists say they are "baffled" by a curious trend they 
claim to have been following for years —that of little girls (ages 4 
through 12) exhibiting various signs and symptoms they call pre- 
pubescent puberty. Giving the benefit of the doubt, let us presume 
for the moment that these "scientists" have been innocently 
overlooking a few of the more relevant details in their examination of 
this growing problem.
With absolutely no clue as to the true causes of this (or any) 
disease, yet sanctioned by "academic letters of authority", the 
broadcast media's officially appointed medical talking-heads spew 
eloquent dribble-speak from neatly prepared scripts, tailor-made to 
"scientifically" explain away the mounting evidence of our specie's 
genetic decline due to gametocytic erosion and mutation.
For example, astonishing research statistics revealed that 48.3% of 
pre-pubescent black girls and some 14.3% of pre-pubescent white 
girls, now show distinct signs of puberty in the form of regular 
menstrual cycles, fully developed breasts and substantial amounts of 
pubic and armpit hair. Most of this information was formally brought 
to light for public scrutiny with the publishing of an article in the 
journal Pediatrics. Doctor Marcia Herman-Giddens, then adjunct 
professor at the University of North Carolina School of Public Health, 
conducted a major study of 17,000 girls and accumulated some 
startling data, part of which included the above figures.
She and her colleagues found that the ages young girls were 
experiencing menarche (first menstruation) dropped dramatically 
(from 17-19 yrs. of age, to about 11-13 yrs. of age) from the middle of 
the 19th century to the middle of the 20th.


--- PAGE 276 ---
228
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Now here's something truly ludicrous to think about.
Would you believe that these same "scientists" claimed that the 
reason for such a significant drop in the ages of girls beginning to 
hemorrhage was because of "... improvements in nutrition?"
Lord deliver us!
Embellishing upon the premise of this same article, CBS's Up To 
The Minute, an early morning news-cast which aired May 28, 1997 
(4:45 a.m.), had their own in-house talking-head celebrity doctor 
(one Emily Senay) techno-babbling about "experts" who "believe" or 
"suspect" that being overweight was the major problem behind 
pre-pubescence in little girls. She stated that the primary reason 
African-American girls in particular are experiencing such a high rate 
of pre-pubescent puberty, is that they tended to be more overweight 
than White girls. Yet none of the little 'African-American' girls they 
interviewed in this news-piece were overweight! In fact, it was 
mostly the Caucasian girls!
In an article written some three years later in Time magazine (Oct. 
2000), this hypothesis was also supported by Dr. Paul Kaplowitz, a 
pediatric endocrinologist at the Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine in Richmond. In fact, it made the cover story of 
the month for Time that year. On the cover was the picture of a young 
Caucasian girl (see figure 30) with a noticeable amount of vellous hair 
growing down the back of her neck, accompanied by the words 
"...Early Puberty: Why Girls Are Growing Up Faster  - Is it hormones? Is  
it fat? Is it something in the water? How parents are coping ."
On page 66 the continuing title to the article read; "...Teens 
Before Their Time: With budding breasts and pubic hair, girls are 
developing earlier that ever. What's causing it? And what are the 
psychological effects...?"
With dramatic flare, author Michael D. Lemonick opened his 
article with the plight of 3 mothers and their daughters, all of whom 
gave vivid accounts supporting my contention that the present-day 
species of humanity is on a collision course with extinction.


--- PAGE 277 ---
229
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Figure 30
The following is a capsulation of each of their stories as 
presented by the author.
$
"... Marissa Carter - a Galveston, Texas housewife, could not believe it when her 
daughter Sharon, at the tender age of 4, seemed to be developing breasts. The tiny 
buds that appeared on the little girl's chest were gone within a couple of weeks, but 
three years later, they reappeared, and this time they grew— along with pubic hair 
and hair in Sharon's armpits...So after a series of medical consultations, the Carters 
(all these names have been changed at the families' request) put Sharon on Lupron, a 
hormone that slams the brakes on puberty—only to see their happy little girl go into 
terrible mood swings. "I had a child acting like she was in menopause", says Carter. 
The parents stopped the treatment, and by age 9, Sharon had full-blown breasts and 
was getting her period ..."


--- PAGE 278 ---
230
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
?
"...Laura Stover - took her daughter Karen to a specialist when the girl began 
growing pubic hair at age 5. The doctor put Karen through a battery of blood tests to 
rule out ovarian tumors (which can force glands to churn out puberty-triggering 
hormones). But there was no apparent medical problem, and by age 8, Karen had full 
pubic growth. "We didn't allow her to go on any slumber parties," says Stover, "or 
to change bathing suits in front of other children."
?
"...Cecilia Morton - in Santa Maria, Calif., has not one but two daughters who 
developed early. Clara, now 13, started spouting breasts and pubic hair when she 
was 8 and began menstruating a year later, at summer camp. Says her mother: "It 
was scary and embarrassing because the girls in her cabin didn't have their periods 
yet." Then Clara's little sister Susan, a kindergartner, began developing at the same 
time. Although Susan's tests were normal, Morton put her on hormone treatments. 
"We already see how
men look at Clara," she says. "If my younger one didn't have the medication, I can't 
even imagine the problems we'd be having ..."
Immediately after these testimonies, Mr. Lemonick offered this 
brief summary comment;
"...If these were isolated cases, they might be chalked up to statistical flukes. But it 
seems as if everywhere you turn these days—outside schools, on soccer fields, at the 
mall —  there are more and more elementary schoolgirls whose bodies look like they 
belong in high school and more and more middle schoolers who look like college 
coeds. 'Young girls [in the 5-to-10-year-old range] with breasts or pubic hair—we 
encounter this everyday we're in clinic/ says Dr. Michael Freemark, chief of pediatric 
endocrinology at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C "...It's as if an 
entire generation of girls had been put on hormonal fast-forward," Mr. Lemonick 
continues, "shooting up, filling out, growing like Alice munching on the wrong side 
of the mushroom —and towering Mutt and Jeff-like over a generation of boys who 
seem, next to the girls, to be getting smaller every year."
Throughout the length and breath of his article, Mr. Lemonick 
states that the "expert scientists" either had no clue what-so-ever, or 
postured theories that obesity, pesticides, and hormones in meat and 
milk should now be considered the primary suspects in this on-going 
biological melodrama.


--- PAGE 279 ---
231
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
With such overwhelming evidence finally clawing its way into the 
public arena, how could anyone in his or her right mind continue to 
think that we as a species are not spiraling downward toward genetic 
oblivion?
I mentioned it earlier and I will state it again; when a civilization is 
in its final stages of decline due to the overall environment becoming 
so toxic as to be incapable of sustaining a balance of health and well­
being for higher life-forms, the deleterious effects will begin to show 
themselves first and foremost (and at their worst) in the female!
Why? Again —  because the female body-template of the cosmic 
equation called Man is the primary barometer and bio-sympathetic 
processor of subtle planetary frequencies. Being of a more delicate 
material consistency, the nervous system of the gynic female body is 
more acute, making her highly sensitive to the slightest fluctuations 
in cosmic and planetary field energies.
Thus, when the female of a species begins to show signs and 
symptoms of infrastructural degeneration, being the incubator of 
biological life, what issues from her womb will replicate that 
degeneration in kind. This will continue until such time as the 
generational integrity of the species becomes severely compromise, 
resulting in its downward spiral to ultimate extinction.
And this is why 1 am so adamant and intractable in my teachings 
about the current behavioral practices of women living under the 
influence of western civilization; and why, in my passion to get this 
message out to my sisters, feminist detractors have come to label me 
a "woman-hater."
Most of my supporters say that I should be flattered. But what 
troubles me most about my detractors is the perverse influence such 
people continue to have on impressionable young minds, who are 
not being given the full facts about the issue of gender conduct and its 
direct connection to the overall health and well being of a woman.
Is all this wild speculation on my part? No; because 
endocrinologists around the world now know this for a fact! And to 
put it mildly, they are scared s**tless at what they are finding in their 
research on gender anomalies in the animal kingdom today. They


--- PAGE 280 ---
232
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
know that the animal kingdom is the first to show the signs and 
symptoms of environmental perversion and toxicity. And they also 
know that as the animal kingdom goes —  so goes humanity!
Why do you think they experiment on animals to study the 
deleterious effects of substances on humans?
Beloved brothers and sisters, androgyny and hermaphroditism are  
now becoming rampant in the animal kingdom!  For over 35 years 
scientists in the fields of biology, oceanography and endocrinology 
have discovered that animals such as frogs, alligators, otters, 
salamanders, beavers, hawks, owls, eagles, polar bears, chimpanzees, 
gorillas, baboons, and certain species of whale and dolphin —are all 
showing clear and distinct aberrations in their sexuality and mating 
habits. Some of the male animals are being born with no testicles, or 
with shortened, atrophied, and missing genitalia. The females are 
born without reproductive organs.
Dr. David Norris, profressor of Integrative Physiology and 
Endocrinology at the University of Colorado, reported in 2004 that 
the fish living just below the Boulder Wastewater Treatment Plant's 
outflow pipe, were sexually mutating. Chemicals from 
pharmaceuticals (mostly residual estrogens in the urine of women on 
birth control pills), detergents and other personal-care products, 
passed unprocessed through the treatment plant back into the 
Boulder Creek waterways. He found that 90% of the sucker fish 
swimming down-river from the plant were female, while those 
upstream from the plant were an even 50-50 split.
Dr. Norris stated that after taking tests, the fish down-stream 
looked as if they were taking birth control pills. The female fish (both 
the trans-sexuals and the original females) had smaller-than-average 
ovaries, and the males had a significantly reduced sperm count.
Dr. Norris and his collegue Dr. Alan Vajda tested fish in two 200 
gallon isolated tanks, and found that human estrogen (or 17 beta 
estradiol) had a mutative affect on fish at concentrations as low as one 
part per trillion— what Dr. Norris says is the equilavent of a pinch of 
salt in an Olympic-sized swimming pool.


--- PAGE 281 ---
233
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Then Larry Barber of the U.S. Geological Survey Department hit 
'em with da' bomb. He said that volumes of human estrogen in the 
pure treatment-plant effluent ranged from one part per trillion, to 10
parts per trillion.
Dr. Norris stated that the male fish from the experimental tank 
were feminized within 7 days. Even diluting the treatment plant's 
effluent by 50% still feminized the male breeding fish in a week to 15 
days, and the feminizing effects were still somewhat evident even 
after it was diluted by 75%.
Question: If the fish and all other higher forms of animal life are 
being adversely affected sexually by the filth and bio-toxins of 
industry, what in God’s name makes us think that we humans are 
somehow immune?
It should come as no surprise to anyone now that the preliminary 
evidence of "pollution-compelled hermaphroditism", which began 
surfacing in the animal kingdom some 25 to 30 years ago, is finally 
being "physicalized" in the children of subsequent human 
generations. And little girls will always be the first to show the 
deleterious effects of our species' decline, with little boys following 
close behind.
In this case, we have seen from the comments made by Lemonick 
that the outward pathologies in boys may show up as the exact 
opposite affect in girls; that is to say —  a stunting or shrinkage in their 
average levels of growth.
Offending Immutable Law:
The Cosmic Penalties ...
•
Gender, one of the 7 Universal Principles of Existence (see: The 
Kybalion) is now under the severest attack. As this principle becomes 
more and more distorted within current representations of the 
human equation, and as the signs of structural deterioration become 
ever-more apparent in our children (and our children's children), it is 
a foregone conclusion that if this trend continues, gametogenic 
corruption and extinction will be the closing chapter for our


--- PAGE 282 ---
234
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
humanity in the Cosmic Book of Life.
And evidence for this continues to mount.
On the previously mentioned CBS Up To The Minute  news piece 
aired May 28th, 1997, social worker Linda Maggio and Dr. Maria New 
both made the comment that in the 1930s and 40s (when they were 
girls) the average age for a young girl to begin menstruation was 
17 years! Then inexplicably (as if from a sudden collapse of I.Q.) 
Ms. Maggio states with her very next breath that even though the 
average age for girls to begin menstruating today is 9 years of age— 
"not to worry" she says — "it's normal!" ... Huh?!
They even interviewed three little girls ages 8, 11 and 13 about 
their pre-pubescent conditions, and those who know the truth could 
plainly see the bio-plasmic and gametic degeneration afflicting these 
precious little babies. The 11 year old (who for all the world looked 
like she was 18) showed distinct shadows above her upper lip that 
gave the appearance of a developing moustache, while the 8 year old 
had distinctly elongated sideburns with a peach fuzz moustache —  all 
of which were declared "normal" by the talking-head celebrity 
doctors.
Not one single word was focused on the filth our Nubian children 
(and their parents) eat daily at home, in the public schools and 
throughout our communities; filth that we naively assume to be food.
None of the talking-head celebrity doctors discussed the fact that 
foods delivered exclusively to black and latino communities, are 
heavily saturated with phyto-estrogens, assorted toxic chemical 
additives and by-products of the most destructive kind; that there are 
so-called 'food products' specifically created and earmarked for black 
and latino communities that will never be found in the vast majority 
of white communities. In fact, it is virtually impossible to find a well- 
stocked natural or wholistic health food store anywhere in a 
predominantly black or latino community.
Through a process called "rendering" for example, factory- 
discarded cadaver remnants and various body-parts from all species 
of animal life end up on our dinner tables —all of which are laced


--- PAGE 283 ---
235
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
with complex bird and bovine hormones, preservative chemicals and 
anti-biotics that literally cripple our endocrine systems.
Also worthy of note (something that T.V. medical health experts 
continually fail to discuss), is the fact that certain artificially colored 
beverages bottled in the cheapest most toxic "number 1 grade" 
plastic containers, with no visible brand names and a listing of 
chemical ingredients that take up the entire side of the bottle, are 
found no where else but in black and latino communities!
In fact, the September 2002 issue of The American Journal of  
Epidemiology (152:446-452) published a revealing article about young 
girls who consumed diets rich in animal protein and fat (potato chips, 
Me Donald's, pork skins, etc.). The report documented the dietary 
habits of 67 white females bom in the 1930's and 1940's. These girls 
consumed the most animal protein from ages 3 to 5 years. They were 
all said to have experienced early puberty and increased incidences of 
chronic diseases later in life.
In matters of health and well-being, I truly yearn for the day when 
the talking heads of medical science and the food industries 
collaborate to have a telethon to eliminate stupidity. It would no 
doubt be a self-serving charity to which I would donate most 
generously.
For a better understanding of the biological effects of 
xeno-estrogens caused by the chemical poisoning of our 
environment, see sections entitled Environmental Attack  and Alien 
Estrogens.
The Griot Girls
•
Again, let me be very clear. I am not advocating that women 
should not be allowed to read or learn. 1 am simply calling for 
another approach to the principles of learning for girls, or at the very 
least, a drastic reduction of their reading time before puberty so that 
they may preserve their fragile anatomical integrity. Audio-visual 
mediums, lectures, or the use of the griot-principle of teaching in the


--- PAGE 284 ---
236
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
manner of our earliest ancestors would be a superior modality to 
pursue. Better yet, a speed reading (or more accurately) learning 
acceleration program could be implemented throughout the current 
public education system, to significantly cut the time it takes for 
children (particularly girls) to concentrate on one and two 
dimensional words. Also, separate schools or classes for girls and 
boys, which was a superior custom of the ancients implemented after 
children reached the age of seven and/ or twelve years.
Not surprisingly, this is the system now being re-considered by 
today's failed education mega-complex. Curious however, is the fact 
that a majority of the gender-segregated classes of today are for girls, 
but we hear little or no flack from feminist watchdogs even though 
they tend not to support it. I wonder if this would be so if these 
experimental classes consisted primarily of boys?
The verbal/griot type of education-medium for girls would be 
right in line with the findings of a study by researchers at Johns 
Hopkins University in Baltimore. The study found that the area of the 
brain controlling verbal skills appeared to be "more enhanced" in the 
female by design and structure than in the male. Although the male 
brain is bigger overall, scientists claim that two areas of gray matter 
in the female brain have a denser concentration of cells.
The part of the brain in question, at eye level—called the dorso­
lateral prefrontal cortex,  has 23.2% more cells in women and the 
amount of grey matter in the lower side of the brain —called the 
superior temporal gyrus,  contains 12.8% more. According to 
Dr. Thomas Schlaepfer, assistant professor of psychiatry, this helps...
"... explain why women have greater verbal ability than men..."
On the other hand, researchers in Denmark discovered that men 
have a greater overall quantity of brain cells than women—  
something in the way of six billion (6,000,000,000) more. News of this 
seemed to embarrass feminist anchorwoman Dianne Sawyer of 
ABC's “20/10", who began her report that evening by saying "... I 
can’t believe I'm going to read this next piece, but..."


--- PAGE 285 ---
237
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
After reading the statement that men had more brain cells and 
brain matter than women, she proceeded to say sarcastically "... so 
what do they do with them?"
Hmmm. Imagine what would have happened the next day if an 
news anchor man made such a sexist remark about women.
To pose such a patently asinine question to the viewing audience 
while sitting in a studio containing some of the most sophisticated 
technologies on Earth—technologies that have afforded her the 
opportunity to accumulate enormous wealth talking trash before the 
millions of sheeple who listen to her diatribe every night; 
technologies imagined and created by men —  shows the level to which 
fem-fascist ideologies have infected and influenced the collective 
psyche of our society today.
In light of the medical mindset conducting such a study (at Johns 
Hopkins), we must of course take all such orthodox scientific 
research results with a grain of salt, as I have done with all such 
orthodox scientific research material throughout this thesis. First - in 
this case, because we don't know who these tests were conducted on, 
whether they were black or white, sick or healthy; and, secondly - we 
must also take into account the gametic degeneracy that the total 
spectrum of humanity suffers from today. In other words, were the 
male and female test subjects androgynous, gynandrous or not.
Be that as it may, if the above findings were even half accurate, it 
would lend enormous weight to my argument for an alternative 
approach to teaching little girls.
In fact, women already read in the correct direction for their own 
psycho-metric orientation (from left to right), and it is to the western 
male's detriment that we are forced to read in the same manner. 
Either way, the societies of the world should return to the study 
methods of our ancient ancestors —  that is, reading "north to south", 
"south to north", "west to east" and "east to west." They should not 
allow any intensive reading to be practiced until both the male and 
the female child are well into the ages of puberty. In this way, the


--- PAGE 286 ---
238
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
eyes (as well as the overall body) have gone through the better part of 
their foundational neurological development.
Straining to read flat two-dimensional numbers, letters and words 
while the eyes are still developing (as in two, three, four and five year 
olds), has caused the past four to five generations of this society to 
become acutely myopic. It has also seeded the potential for future 
gynecological diseases in girls due to their continual loss of essential 
nutrients, which leads to the incidence of early menstruation, 
unhealthy children and eventually, an early and painful menopause.
Solution:
Something to think about...
•
Little girls should be allowed to practice conventional reading 
skills no more than one half to one hour per day — max. And, if they 
were taught to read through speed reading/speed comprehension 
methods of learning, this would achieve enormous benefits in health 
down the road, because more learning would be accomplished with a 
minimum expenditure of precious vital-life energy. There should be a 
significant delay in the starting time both girls and boys formally 
begin reading, to the age of seven. This would greatly conserve 
precious nutrients like vitamin A that would be lost before then, 
assisting in the foundational development of the visual cortex and 
preventing the onset of myopia. In fact, it's not only fibroids and 
mammarian cysts that form because of the lack of vitiman A, but 
brain tumors as well! Brain tumors are prevalent in andric women 
today, especially those who have attained advanced levels of 
academic achievement; that is, those who have read and studied a lot.
(Item: The Hunzakuts of the Himalayas do not read or write, and live to very  
advanced ages. When tested from ages 90 thru 110, their eyesights were 20/20!)
The western world would be greatly impressed by the superior 
intelligence of orthodox Islamic, Hebrew Israelite and Hindu women. 
Although in some instances she cannot teach her children reading or 
writing, she is extremely well versed in her people's history, the 
science of life, story-telling, botany, the healing arts, the disciplines of


--- PAGE 287 ---
239
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
music, weaving, ornamental crafts, dancing, proper nutrition and 
food preparation —  in other words, the cultural foundations of a higher  
civilization —  all of which she teaches to her offspring.
Learning by being able to correctly repeat what has been told to 
you, is just as vital and valuable to the development of a sentient 
being as is the learning that is received from reading the contents of a 
book. In fact, it has been shown throughout the history of our species 
that it is the oral traditions that endure far beyond a culture's 
academics.
Sacrificial blood ...
Let me repeat. No other healthy animal existing in the entire 
spectrum of life on this planet menstruates —except the human female[ 
Question. Is this how the Omniscient Universal Intelligence behind 
the infinite living cosmos would think to bless Its highest creation 
with life? Is this what makes us the supreme specie, and woman 
"superior" as a gender?
Beloved, the blood that fills the uterus during a woman's monthly 
menstrual cycle is drawn directly from the life-streams of her body. 
It is not specially produced separate or apart from her bloodstream 
just for this particular event to take place each and every month. 
Enormous amounts of vital cosmicly-sponsored nutrients are stored 
in and around the uterus — so much so that when the lining ruptures 
as it becomes engorged, a high concentration of amino acids and rich 
specialized nutrients are lost to the body, sometimes in the form of a 
white discharge called leucorrhea. A leukorrhic discharge is actually 
the stripped away, nutrient-rich lining created and exuded by the 
cells in the uterus, and it is lost primarily due to poor nutrition, lack 
of rest, environmental stress, toxins accumulated in the area and too 
much sex. It is this constant bleeding throughout a woman's life that 
drastically and traumatically deteriorates the lining of her uterus each 
and every month. This gradually erodes the reproductive chamber's 
integrity—not to mention a woman's overall physiological and 
psychological integrity as well.


--- PAGE 288 ---
240
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
As a result, women become more susceptible to degenerative 
diseases and are less able to bear healthy balanced offspring. By the 
thirty-fifth year of life, they begin showing the undeniable signs of 
their losing battle with this pathology. In varying degrees and stages, 
all women begin to show symptoms of hirsutism, myomas, 
depression, or senile dementia —all ultimately leading to that 
dreaded systemic meltdown called menopause.
During the menstrual cycle, estrogen flows into the uterus 
stimulating the growth of the uterine lining, or endometrium, 
causing the acceleration of potentially dangerous cellular division. 
Women who do not menstruate frequently would not unduely 
burden the endometrium with that risk. Ovarian and endometrial 
cancers are virtually new, culture-based diseases specific to 
women living in industrialized countries —those who menstruate 
over 400 times and more during their lifetimes!
A test conducted in the earlier part of the 20th centurry found that 
excess amounts of carbon dioxide or any other forms of unstable 
carbon could also trigger ovulation and menstruation. The test 
showed that the breath ratios of a woman, that is, her capacity to 
exhale less by comparison to a man, made it twice as important that 
she is able to efficiently expel C02, just as she would need to 
eliminate any other toxic substance from her system.
Women not consuming refined foods (sugar, grains, salt, milk) 
found that most if not all of their painful symptoms lessened greatly 
or completely disappeared, along with a substantial lessening of their 
blood flow. This is due in part to the rise once again in calcium, 
B-complex and zinc levels, along with a better assimilation of iron 
and manganese, which are deleted from the body by sugar and other 
such processed foods. Women who menstruate 4-7 days are also 
highly prone to colds and flu symptoms.
Believe it or not, epileptic fits can be triggered by it as well. By the 
time a menstruating woman is twenty-eight years of age, she has the 
capacity to lose in excess of thirty to forty times her normal calcium 
levels, which inevitably leads to some form of osteoporosis, nerve 
energy depletion and mental degeneration. Also, with each new


--- PAGE 289 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
hemorrhaging cycle, the thyroid becomes enlarged and overtaxed 
due to the continuous loss of iodine and other vital trace minerals.
•
Item: It's been reported that nearly 2/3 of the 60 million
American women of childbearing age use some form of contraception. The  
following are the new (or re-cycled) concepts in birth control to be introduced in  
the first to middle part of the new millennium that directly affect the menstrual  
cycle, with new systems or brand names being introduced every year or so. As a
single commodity, birth control pills constitute a 3 billion-dollar  market .....
•
Mircette: A pill tested by the drug maker Organon. Made to cut the 7- day placebo 
interval to 2 days...
Depo-Provera - has been on the books (and the shelf) for some time now; made by 
Pharmacia and Upjohn, it is administered every three months with only progestin. 
These companies are soon to release a product called Lunelle a substance that is 
administered once a month...
GnRHA: Tested by Balance Pharmaceuticals. This is a class of drugs to stop 
women's ovaries from producing estrogen and progestin completely. The birth 
control pill was designed to trick a woman's body into thinking it's "slightly 
pregnant". GnRHA is designed to make it think it's "slightly menopausal."It was 
also shown to shrink fibroids by up to 50%. This product also comes with a 
substantial risk factor, because women need estrogen to keep their hearts and 
bones healthy, and progestin to keep the uterus toned and temperaments balanced. 
Doctors are hoping this drug will lower risks of endometrial, ovarian and 
breastcancer.. Johnson and Johnson also has a product called Evra. It's a half-dollar 
sized hormone- releasing patch to be changed weekly.
The Mechanisms of the Menstrual Cycle...
In what has now become a genetically ingrained pathology, the 
phenomenon called the menstrual cycle has 'evolved' to become a 
series of complex hormonal communications between the ovaries, the 
hypothalamus and the pituitary glands. The hypothalamus secretes 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which in turn triggers the 
production of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) by the pituitary, 
thereby stimulating the growth of the egg follicle (a small excretory 
sac or gland) in the ovaries to trigger the process of ovulation. (See 
figures 2 and 31). As a woman's egg follicle grows, estrogen is


--- PAGE 290 ---
242
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
manufactured and released into her bloodstream, Estradiol, a 
derivative of ovarian-produced estrogens, stimulates the 
hypothalamus causing a change in gonadotropin. As a result, this 
new and improved "altered" hormone then stimulates the pituitary 
to produce luteinizing hormone (LH), which then causes the creation 
of the egg follicle that has developed into a corpus luteum.40 All 
hormones released during the menstrual cycle are secreted at 
different times and at different rates during the various stages of the 
28-days. On the downside however, excess estradiol has been 
recognized by research science as being a promoter of breast cancer.
In essence, the more you menstruate the more estradiol you 
produce and the greater your risk of contracting breast cancer and/or 
ovarian cancer. Analogue estradiol can be gotten through 
pharmaceutical pills taken to relieve menstrual symptoms. But a 
balanced nutritional regiment of fruits and vegetables is a more 
natural way to counteract this problem.
________________________
Primordial ’follicles
Figure 31
Ovary creating ovum through Corpus Luteum
40 (a) Corpus = body .. Lutein = a yellow pigment found in body fats and egg yolk ...
(b) Corpus Luteum = A "body" formed by the triggering of luteinizing hormone 
made up of yellow pigments ...


--- PAGE 291 ---
243
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
During the interim between cycles, the first 11 days normally finds 
the ovaries producing a lot of estrogen. Estrogen prepares the follicles 
for the release of one of the eggs. The rate and amount of estrogen 
produced begins to wane at about the 13th day, some 24 hours before 
ovulation begins. As the estrogen diminishes, progesterone begins to 
rise, stimulating a rapid growth of the follicle. As progesterone is 
secreted, ovulation is occurring at the same time.
After the egg is released from the follicle (known to western 
science as the luteal stage of the cycle), the follicle begins to mutate 
becoming enlarged to where it is now known as a corpus luteum (see 
figure 31). Progesterone is secreted from the corpus luteum, and even 
though it is tiny in comparison, it has the incredible capacity to 
manufacture enormous amounts of hormones. In fact, it is the rise or 
surge of progesterone production during the time of ovulation that 
causes the increase of a woman's sexual libido—not the rise of 
estrogen as is commonly thought. This rise in libido is interesting to 
note because as mentioned earlier — both the progesterone and  
testosterone molecules are almost identical in design and configuration.
Metaphysically, this could be construed as representing woman's 
loss of pro-creative control over her feminine principle, due in most 
part to her monthly agitation (or 'persecution') by this masculine 
principle (the testosterone/progesterone libido) from within!
After 10 to 12 days, if fertilization does not occur, ovarian 
production of progesterone diminishes dramatically. This sudden 
decline in progesterone triggers the shedding of the secretory 
endometrium, thus beginning the bleeding phase of the menstrual 
cycle.
But the belief that menstruation is 'normal' and therefore 'natural' 
has fostered an incomplete overstanding of the menstrual 
phenomenon, leading to the false conclusions now held by modem 
day science and women. One versed in the metaphysical principles of 
life must see by the elaborate physiological processes detailed above, 
that these conditions as they appear to occur are extremely 
debilitative to the overall organism. A quick glance back to the


--- PAGE 292 ---
244
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
section De-mystifying the Blood Sacrifice  will re-affirm just how taxing 
and debilitative ovulation and menses can be. Continuously stressful 
monthly hemorrhaging cycles by the female reproductive organs, are 
extremely exhaustive to the overall system, and by the Divine Laws of  
Vital Compensation and Conservation,  a healthy organism would never 
subject itself to such complicated, life-draining processes —  unless it 
had already lost its infrastructural integrity, and by the show of  
such activity, was arduously struggling to regain it!
The above demonstrates further proof that in a far ancient 
millennium, ovulation must have been a voluntary process initiated in 
accordance with strict codes of conduct and cultural science —all to 
prevent severe or irreparable gynecological damage. During the 
bleeding portion of the cycle, the electrical flow of a woman's body 
rises tremendously. Lactic acid and unstable phosphorus levels have 
been found in the blood during this time as well, and as we know, 
lactic acid is extremely toxic to the cells.
A menstruating woman is a toxic woman, plain and simple. It's 
been scientifically substantiated that during menses, a woman's 
entire body is in a heightened state of nervous tension suffering 
hormonal abnormalities and bio-chemical derangements, while at the 
same time expending enormous efforts to throw off accumulated 
toxins. These symptoms are nothing less than desperate attempts by 
the body to re-balance itself.
Sugar is a primary contributor to all such physical ailments. PMS 
is common to heavy sugar and coffee users, as these items leech the 
body of calcium creating higher than normal levels of unstable 
phosphorous, which in turn causes great pain and anxiety. A 
substance unique to the menses called "menstrual toxin" is a 
by-product of this, and is normally ejected out through the skin.
It was for these reasons (as well as those mentioned in previous 
sections) that our ancient fore-mothers did not allow each other to 
handle children, food or sacred objects. They dis-allowed cooking, 
the milking of cows, the churning of butter, hulling peas or husking 
corn. It’s also been shown that fresh cut flowers often wilt sooner 
when handled by a heavily menstruating woman.


--- PAGE 293 ---
245
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Consequently, menstruating doctors should not be performing delicate  
surgical procedures either,  since concentration, quicker nerve 
conduction and a heightened necessity for extra brainpower are 
needed—all of which are severely compromised during menstrual 
hemorrhaging.
Menses and the Superior Child ...
Again; to put it bluntly beloved sisters —  menstrual blood is liquefied  
flesh. In fact, all blood is liquefied flesh, and you lose a part of yourself 
each time you bleed a substantial amount of days.
Every year, the average woman of childbearing age in a western 
industrialized society is susceptible to losing enough menstrual 
blood to fill the equivalent of a full-sized human body!  By comparison, 
this means that she sacrifices enormous quantities of blood-borne 
nutrients from which a healthy, evolved child may be formed.
With this in mind it's safe to assume that a genius child could only 
be born from either a very young mother, or an older, more ortho­
biogenic woman who didn't suffered continuous hemorrhaging.
And know this beloved sisters and brothers; conservation of 
genital secretions is the foundation of human regeneration, and is 
the necessary precursor to conceiving of a superior organism!!
The mother of a future super-child must conserve and retain the 
precious brain food (contained in menstrual blood) for at least 
2-3 years prior to conception. For a superior child to be formed, a 
superior brain must be nurtured from the very beginning, which 
takes the conservation of blood materials like cholesterin, lecithin, 
aminos and phosphates in the bloodstream of the mother. This can 
only occur with the absence of menstruation, persistent leucorrhea 
discharge and the strict retention of those precious fluids now being 
carelessly lost by the perversely popular practice of "squirting" or 
"female ejaculation."
All such precious essences must be conserved for a sufficient 
enough period of time (again) before conception occurs.


--- PAGE 294 ---
246
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Truth be told beloved —a woman "dies" a little each time she 
bleeds, and the large amounts of minerals and nutrients lost during 
her 4 to 7 days of hemorrhaging, could never be totally retrieved 
within the following twenty eight days! In fact, it would take more 
than 90 days (3 months) to assimilate and properly restore the 
balanced amount of solar-based nutrients necessary to compensate 
for the loss a woman suffers from just one cycle! And that's also 
providing she consistently eats organic, nutritionally rich food, stays 
away from drugs (of all types) and stressful, debilitative activities.
But sisters, how many of you can honestly say that you are truly 
ready to commit to this?
The monthly sacrifice of blood and its solar-based minerals and 
vital nutrients, is nothing less than the slow sacrifice of precious life 
energies through the repetitious loss of precious life-essences.
The primary instigators of menstrual bleeding today are shown to 
be the end result of many things —all preventable. Non-tantric sex, 
toxemia, environmental poisons, physical and psychological stress, 
smoking, consuming de-natured refined foods like sugar, salt, 
alcohol, coffee, recreational teas and MSG, are at the very top of the 
list of offenders. But believe it or not beloved, what may very well be 
the biggest offender in the continuing sacrifice of female blood (next 
to diet, pollution, occupational and recreational stress) —  is eroticism!
Eroticism...
Gynecological and endocrine research have shown that 
physiological symptoms appearing in the female reproductive organs 
during the menstrual cycle (from ovulation to bleeding), are nearly 
identical in nature and character to the symptoms experienced when 
in a heightened state of sexual arousal.
It appears that both menstruation and sex are accompanied by an 
erectile accumulation of blood in the uterine blood vessels. This 
condition is called hyperemia, and it is due to nervous stimulation 
produced by distended follicles in and around the ovaries. At the 
onset of menses, hyperemia creates irritation throughout the entire


--- PAGE 295 ---
247
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
reproductive system, causing an unnaturally constant engorgement 
of blood in the organs until ultimately, under increased pressure, the 
blood vessels of the uterine mucosa membrane are severely 
weakened. They rupture, then voila — the menstrual hemorrhage.
The link between eroticism and menses is a fact that has been 
related to me personally by dozens of women, even in open forum. 
In addition to their times of ovulation, some sisters have readily 
admitted that they often feel unusually amorous, and sometimes 
downright licentious right before (sometimes during) or immediately 
after their menses. Again, this happens because of (1) heightened 
progesterone levels (2) engorged blood vessels in the uterus causing 
an erectile accumulation of blood, distending the follicles and 
sensitizing the nerves in and around the vagina; and (3) during high 
uterine activity (such as sexual excitement and menses) the uterus 
throbs, pulsates and at times retracts, rising up and out of the vaginal 
cavity. Uterine contractions are the end point of sexual excitement, 
and such contractions are required for a complete female orgasm.
And this is the problem beloved sisters. Involuntary eroticism 
(which sometimes occurs at specific points during the complete 
menstrual cycle) has a progressively debilitating effect on the entire 
reproductive system. It is primarily caused by very poor dietary 
habits, as well as agitation to the womb and surrounding area from 
masturbation, "squirting", and frequent, aggressive non-tantric love- 
making.
During coitus, intra-vaginally induced orgasms happen in women 
when the penis presses hard and repetitively against the cervix, or in 
the area identified earlier as the so-called "G-spot." Since retraction 
and contractions of the uterus are essential to heightened sexual 
pleasure or orgasm in the female, some women often encourage 
strong and consistent pressure from the head of the penis against the 
cervix and or G-spot. This constant battering from the penis against 
the cervix causes the womb to temporarily develop a higher tolerance 
or threshold for pain. Damage is occurring, but since pleasure often 
over-rides pain during heightened sexual excitement, the woman's 
womb becomes 'tolerant' and generally does not feel it.


--- PAGE 296 ---
248
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Until later!
Beloved, repetitious non-tantric sex erases the borderline between 
'pain and pleasure' thresholds, creating in the blood and nervous 
system a pathological craving for consistent erotic stimulation. This 
artificial urge is a somatogenic, erotic-based appetite-entity that may 
be involuntarily activated at anytime. And like any other addiction, 
in order to achieve the same levels of sensation and satisfaction, the 
act must be even more intense the next time since the nerves in the 
area were rendered less sensitive by multiple previous encounters.
A womb afflicted by involuntary eroticism is often flaccid and 
debilitated, which causes it to suffer from an ever-worsening variety 
of reproductive plagues like those presently suffered by today's 
liberated, "squirt practicing" women; plagues such as cervical cancer, 
endometriosis, mood swings, depression, pelvic cramps not 
associated with menses, or eventually, (due to hormonal dysfunction) 
osteoporosis and senile dementia in later years.
A dysfunctional uterus and ovaries also allow for the buildup of 
radical or unprocessed, free-floating testosterone and 
androstenedione in a woman's body. As mentioned earlier, 
androstenedione is a form of 'progestero-genic' androgen used as a 
precursor in the production of estrogens, particularly estradiol. 
Progesterone, testosterone and androstenedione are all masculine- 
based hormones. Also, the progesterone molecule in the female is 
virtually identical to the testosterone molecule in the male. But as the 
healthy andric man flushes any residual traces of unnecessary 
estrogen material from his system by way of his liver, so too does a 
healthy gynic woman flush any excess masculine precursor steroids.
Again —  only if she is a true and healthy gynic woman.
Menses also causes the clitoris to sometimes become engorged 
with blood, giving the woman a false impression that her body is 
ready to mate. However, if she follows through with her feelings, the 
act becomes an autocytolysic (cell killing), disease-producing act.
Sex then precipitates 'infection.'


--- PAGE 297 ---
249
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Some sisters have asked "... well, aren't these feelings natural 
since the egg is in position during this time. And isn't Nature causing 
these feelings to happen so as to allow me to have a baby?"
These questions are valid except for one thing. They are not in 
context.
In the normal process of a menses, the egg is already out of its 
proper position for conceptus to occur—completely gone before the 
first day of bleeding begins. Only in extremely rare cases does an egg 
remain in its 'conceiving position7  after the blood flow has begun. 
Some women have claimed that they became pregnant during or 
immediately after menstruation. But I strongly believe that they were 
already pregnant, and due to systemic toxicity, a mis-calculation of 
ovulation, or faulty diagnosis by the physician—had a menstrual 
cycle even though they had already conceived!
The consequences of the reproductive act involve (a) a primary 
cause (b) a primary effect (c) a secondary cause and, (d) a secondary 
effect.
The primary cause is sex for conception; the primary effect is the
creation of bodies as receptacles for the life-principle to animate. The 
secondary cause is experienced as intense erotic sensations; the 
secondary effect involves all of the progressive symptoms of 
enervation and degeneration mentioned above.
If the egg (the primary objective of the sperm) has already moved 
out of position for fertilization to occur by the time bleeding begins, 
why then would Nature continue to cause you the undue stress of 
sexual eroticism, if the very object associated with its primary cause
— sex for conception (or egg fertilization) —is gone?
No beloved. Nature Mother does not work this way. These 
"feelings" are false and are there due to the creation of a morbid 
somatic appetite, causing severe irritation to the reproductive area 
with support from poor sexual habits, poor eating habits, toxins and 
follicle sensitivity —  all of which keep the blood vessels in the uterus 
engorged and over-sensitized.


--- PAGE 298 ---
250
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
And one other thing...
Please do not take the above-mentioned facts out of context. I am 
not suggesting that all women experience eroticism during menses, 
just those who may have nurtured their eroticism into an addictive 
appetite. Most feelings during menstruation usually range from mild 
to miserable—to down-right horrible. And smart women do what 
their ancestral mothers did; disengage from family, friends and the 
insanity of the outside world—cloister themselves ... and rest!!
Beloved, most men and women today are so addicted to the 
eroticism of sex that we now place a greater emphasis on its secondary 
cause, than on its primary cause and effect. This has resulted in the 
proliferation of feeble genetics adversely affecting our subsequent 
generations of humanity, where erotic sensations are now triggered 
by the very least exposure to sexual stimulus.
(See: Girls Gone Wild)
I wonder if my sisters are aware of how emotionally and 
psychologically sensitive they are to certain stimuli during this time? 
And not just from watching such things as porno flicks, torrid love 
scenes from a favorite soap opera, or hearing sweet nothings being 
whispered in your ear. Sisters, I've been told that you can get aroused 
just watching two people kiss on a toothpaste commercial!
No rest for the weary ...
Many women reading this work might say that, as a man, I have 
no business writing about what amounts to being a woman's personal 
life condition; something I have absolutely no experience of.
Strange. With hundreds of how-to health and interpersonal 
relationship books being written by women giving "expert" opinions 
and advice to men —  about men (like Dr. Ruth, Dr. Brothers or Susan 
Kelly's Why Men Stray; Why Men Stay),  you'd think that such women 
would at least take a moment to examine my arguments and give me 
(a poor 'clueless' man) the benefit of the doubt.


--- PAGE 299 ---
251
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Go figure!
One of the most perverse mindsets to evolve out of the woman's 
liberation movement is the notion that men and women are not 
different. "Whatever a man can do a woman can do better" has been 
one of the most inane and dangerously misleading battle cries of 
Amazonian-feminism, and is a pathetic indication of just how deaf, 
dumb and blind western civilization has become as a result of 
androgyny and gynandry.
This phrase, and the myriad of hostile competitive feelings it has 
invoked throughout the last 40-45 years, has led to the wide-spread 
impression that girls do not need special care in their upbringing, or 
in their daily lives before and after they have attained puberty.
True gynic girls and women now suffer terribly in such a crass and 
unfeeling environment.
Modem anthropologists, biologists, and the women's lib 
movement are drastically flawed in their so-called expert assessments 
of what constitutes health in a gynic woman. Theories pertaining to 
"primitive cultures" and the behavior of our ancestral mothers, have 
long been processed and presented through the slanted, myopic 
mind-sets of Euro-centric scholarship.
The anthropological lens of western academia has also been 
tainted by gender feminism, where much like the perverse 
Darwinian concepts they teach related to archetypal humanity and 
Nature, it is racially myopic, self-serving and monolithic. As a result, 
western academia (under feminism) cannot be trusted to accurately 
interpret within its scholarship, the legitimate existence and 
experiences of a reality outside of the Euro-centric culture that 
spawned and supports it. In other words, the Amazonian feminist 
and the western academician cannot help but add their own culture- 
centric, ice-conscious neuroses to their interpretation of the data.
Anyway, as I mentioned earlier, most if not all of the research 
material gathered about our ancestors, were made from observations 
on cultures studied after their encounters with the European man, 
and his industrialized, "de-naturizing" civilizations.


--- PAGE 300 ---
252
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Of this, a Caucasian author named Havelock Ellis had this to say;
"... The very leaders of the women's movement have often betrayed the causes of 
women. They have adopted the ideals of men; they have urged women to become 
second rate men; they have declared that the healthy, natural woman should 
disregard the presence of (and predicaments surrounding) her menstrual functions. 
This is the very reverse of truth. 'The claim', said Englemann, (is) that 'woman in her 
natural state is the physical equal of man', constantly pointing to the primitive 
woman, the female of 'savage' peoples, as the example of this supposed axiom. Do 
they know how well this same 'savage' is aware of the weakness of woman, and her 
susceptibility at certain periods of her life? I believe not. The importance of 
surrounding women with certain precautions during the height of the great 
fluctuational waves of her existence was appreciated by all races at all times, and 
among their comparatively few religious customs, this one, affording rest to women 
was most persistently adhered to. It is among the white races alone  which, 
outgrowing the religious ideas with which the menstrual seclusion of women was 
associated, have flung away that seclusion itself, throwing away the baby with the 
bath..."
Within this one paragraph, Ellis has capsulated nearly everything 
I have been trying to impart to my sisters for over thirty years.
Pathology and 'Nu-Age Non-chalance../
•
The physical and psychological effects of human degeneration 
that resulted in the ongoing pathology known as menstruation, have 
become a matter-of-fact reality for the millennium woman, and those 
with eyes to see can bear witness to this through the flood of nu-age 
health magazines that specifically target women.
One particular publication, called New Woman (May 1999), carried 
just such an article entitled What's Up With Your Period?  by Jennifer 
Cadoff. In one of three sidebars named "Your Period at 20, 30 (and) 
40", Ms. Cadoff documents what a woman is expected to suffer as she 
menstruates through each of the above decades of her life.
I have combined my opinions with the statements of the author in 
the following. Ms. Cadoff's begins her commentary with the 
sub-title...


--- PAGE 301 ---
253
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
".. .The Menstrual Cycle Changes in Predictable Ways 
as Women Age. Here's what You can Expect..."
In your 20's...
$
"... The author states quite emphatically that a young woman in her 20s 
should expect to experience "gradually worsening cramps" which would be 
a sign of endometriosis (especially if there is pain during sex). Incredibly, 
she goes on to state that endometriosis is "... a common condition which is  
now recognized in younger and younger women!!"  Endometriosis actually 
occurs due to a severely weakened and debilitated uterus where the inner 
lining (or endometrium) ruptures or herniates, with the inner membrane 
clinging to the pelvic organs outside the uterus. The excruciating pain that 
results is caused by the nerve endings of the uterus still being attached to 
the ruptured portion of the inner lining. Of this Ms. Cadoff claims that the 
endometrium "sloughs off each month in response to cyclic hormonal 
changes." Again, these "perky", "upbeat" types of explanations for the 
problems facing the new-millennium woman are all (of course) very 
typical, very medical, very nu-age—and very stupid!
In your 30's...
$
"... Regularity and predictability are the menstrual hallmarks for women in 
their 30s, nclaims OB/GYN Suzanne Merrill-Nach, M.D. But she states 
"... PMS may kick in now, with symptoms such as moodiness, migraine, 
irritability and breast tenderness, with acne peaking in the late 30s or early 
40s." She goes on to say that "... painful periods and heavy bleeding at this 
age can be a sign of endometriosis or uterine fibroids. Endometriosis is the 
likely culprit if sex is painful. Cramps hit both before and during your 
period and get worse aver time...!" What insanity!
In your 40's...
9
"... Expect your cycles to become irregular and lengthy" says the author, 
"veering crazily from 21 days to 35, then back to 27 ... Bleeding may get 
heavier, in part because up to 40% of women (57% Black women) in this 
age group have fibroids which can cause heavier periods ... Irregular 
bleeding may be the sign of uterine polyps which are diagnosed through 
an ultrasound or biopsy ..."


--- PAGE 302 ---
254
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The above represents the typically perky matter-of-fact nu-age 
bullshit passively force-fed to the susceptible minds of clueless 
consumers. Crippling disease conditions suffered by modern 
women are treated with a disgraceful nonchalance, nurturing the 
perception that the above reproductive pathologies are natural, 
expected conditions that are (and always have been) normal to the 
functioning of "healthy" women!
These publications do nothing—absolutely nothing to explain the 
why of it all! Why for example, are "...younger and younger 
women..." being afflicted with such a cripplingly painful condition 
like endometriosis? Why indeed is it that diseases such as those 
mentioned above, were never suffered by our ancient mothers as 
routinely as they are by so-called "liberated women" of the new 
millennium today?
Think on this beloved, and stay tuned...
Leucorrhea:
Leaking Your Life Away...
•
While everyone's attention is focused mainly on the 'red' menses, 
we seem to overlook the seriousness of a parallel problem called the 
'white' menses —  leucorrhea. Leucorrhea is a chalky white mucoid 
discharge that sometimes appears shortly before the actual bleeding 
begins. But any time it shows up it is a preliminary indication that the 
woman is going through a radical anatomical adjustment. Some 
believe that it is evidence of the body doing its job flushing toxins, 
but they'd be only half right.
As discussed earlier, leucorrhea represents a substantial loss of the 
system's collective specialized nutrients. Poor dietary habits factor 
greatly into this problem, because such things as sugar, salt, dairy 
products, MSG additives, fatty meats and de-vitalized grains cause a 
serious loss of vitamin A. Vitamin A is essential to the processing of 
estrogen. Estrogen in turn is essential to the proper assimilation of 
nutrients in a gynic woman's body, especially calcium.


--- PAGE 303 ---
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
255
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
This is why prolonged reading is so detrimental to a woman, as 
this activity causes a substantial loss of A to the system. Also lost is 
vitamin E, and with calcium also forfeited, this contributes to 
hypertrophy (hyper-stimulation) of the reproductive organs (what 
we mentioned earlier as hyperemia), or what is commonly called 
puberty in adolescents.
Estrogen production is destabilized while boron, potassium, 
lecithin and phosphorus are lost as well —the latter two comprising 
the elements of brain and nerve tissue. Which is why many women 
suffering with a heavy leukorrhic discharge and prolonged menses 
(4-7 days) are so nervous, tense, depressed, easily agitated and 
distraught, suffering symptoms defined medically as clinical 
depression and/or chronic fatigue syndrome.
The varying types of discharges that exude from the vagina are 
indicators of a woman's overall health, or the lack of it. Clear or light 
discharges are normal —  simply on-sight maintenance by the 
reproductive organs; whereas heavy discharges varying in color, 
density and odor are indicators that the body's normal conduits for 
eliminating waste have become enervated and dysfunctional. This 
causes the system to re-route the waste using the reproductive canal 
as an outlet for filth that would have normally been processed 
through the bowels, the bladder or the skin.
The materials comprising the leucorrhic discharge originate in the 
mucus membrane, and exudes from the cells of the uterus in varying 
consistencies that are indicative of the types of food a woman is 
prone to consume. It is normally triggered by a change in the pH 
factor of the blood.
There are several types of leucorrhic discharge classified by 
medical science, which include cervical, vaginal, vulva and uterine 
leucorrheas. Of course, the tendency of western medicine to fragment 
a wholistic condition into distinct categories, gives us the impression 
that each of these discharge consistencies has a separate cause. But all 
are the results of disobedience to the Immutable Laws of Life and 
health, the "differences" being representative of the degrees of abuse


--- PAGE 304 ---
256
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
and fatigue suffered by the overall system, and the types of toxins 
being processed.
(a) Cervical  leucorrhea is described as being thick, with a 
consistency like thin pudding; (b) vaginal  leucorrhea has the 
consistency of thick mucus and contains dissolved adipose, blood 
plasma, traces of whole blood, and the shed lining of the vaginal 
canal surfaces; (c) vulva leucorrhea is of the consistency of olive oil, 
like the type secreted by the sebaceous glands, only thicker, and is of 
the type suffered mostly by young girls and older women. In a young 
girl, vulva leucorrhea is triggered by poor nutrition, poor hygiene 
(and of all things), gametoplasmic pollution from spermatotoxins due to  
frequent sex performed by her mother during pregnancy!  In older women, 
suffering is due to medication and exposure to consistently high 
levels of physical and mental stress, along with poor nutrition.
And finally, (d) uterine leucorrhea, which has a consistency like 
watery jello containing pus, fat and traces of blood.
Fasting, sexual abstinence, raw foods, the cessation of stressful 
activities and the complete elimination of de-natured food-stuffs 
from one's diet for an extended period, are the natural and most 
efficient ways to initiate the healing of all forms of this malady.
The Moon and the Menses ...
•
Again; I empathize deeply with my beloved sisters who follow 
certain misinterpreted traditions they believe were once practiced by 
our ancestors; or adhere to certain new age philosophies that perform 
"rituals of reverence" to "celebrate" this pathology. But as I said 
earlier, ancient women treated the cycle of menstruation as a severe 
perversion of their archetypal physiologies.
In other words —  as a disease.
Dearest sisters, you must be honest with yourselves. What you 
may now call menstruation (or your "moon"), is by the Laws of 
Nature nothing more than a form of hemorrhaging—plain and simple. 
The Khemites (Kemetyu), as well as every other ancient high 
civilization at that time (and before) understood it to be so, and


--- PAGE 305 ---
257
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
it's high time that we do as well. There was no "celebration" of the 
moon time as we know it today by the ancient mothers. Rather, it was 
a time of seclusion, rest and meditation for the application of 
immediate and precise natural healing techniques.
John Locke's twenty-eight day theory on the menstrual cycle was 
centered around the moon's gravitational influence, and was based 
on more of the same Euro-anthropological nonsense; fragments of 
medical conjecture coupled with European tribal folklore, all spliced 
together to make 'a contemporary scientific truth.'
There is however a 7 to 8 day magnetic flux in the Earth's 
magnetic/ gravitational fields. These adverse fields define a set cyclic 
pattern of interference between our moon, the planets and the Sun. 
It's a time when many living organisms become weakened by the 
magnetic tides. Those already weak to begin with, become weaker, 
finding it extremely difficult to fight off the adverse affects of certain 
nature-forces that precipitate bio-adjustive reactions called "disease."
Now consider the following ...
In the 1970s, scientists discovered that the Sun (which just recently 
experienced a radical 19 degree polar shift in 2005) is a magnetic 
sphere divided from pole to pole into separate "energy sectors" —  
each of which affects an adjacent energy sector corresponding to our 
Earth.
During a magnetic flux or "pulse" of the Sun, all of the planets end 
up being aligned to certain energy sectors or grids while in their 
orbits around it. Every 7 to 8 days (in the case of our planet), a new 
magnetic force (or solar tidal wave) hits the Earth causing its field 
resonances to change, bringing a day or more of subtle to sometimes 
severe weather and/or atmospheric disturbances.
Our lunar "days" and months are based on the activity of this 
solar magnetic field, while the planet's own magnetic field is said to 
emanate from the circulating liquid iron and nickel ore that make up 
one or more of the levels lining the Earth's inner mantle. This


--- PAGE 306 ---
258
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
resonating magnetic field interacts with the charged gases of the 
ionosphere. Together the two form an electron-dynamic resonating 
cavity producing micro-populations in the Earth's magnetic field 
from 25 frequencies per second, to 1 every 10 seconds—concentrating 
mostly at the 10 hertz range.
An electrostatic field of hundreds of thousands of volts per foot 
follows, which ionizes many of the air’s gas molecules pulsating at 
low range. Earth's own generated current and the ionosphere tend to 
collide more frequently at this time, and with greater force.
As ominous as all of the above may sound, this is actually healthy 
for recharging Mother Earth and the cosmic energy layers 
surrounding her. Unfortunately, without her compressed hydrogen 
halo, the above display of frequencies can end up being harmful to 
many of the creatures who inhabit Earth, especially those not 
intelligent enough (or instinctively in tune) to know where, when or 
how to stay clear of areas where these adverse effects are centered.
Cellular damage is the consequence as free radicals proliferate 
uncontrollably, creating lethargy, irritability, cancers, heart attacks, 
endocrine pathologies, seizures, blood clots and symptoms related to 
premature aging. But the most common and prevailing disease 
related to biological instability from the Sun's energy-dynamics in this 
day and age, is the human female's reproductive affliction as 
expressed through the ongoing phenomenon of menstruation.
Many animals instinctively stay away from areas that emit too 
much or too little radiation. Our earliest ancestors also had the 
instinctive good sense to follow the lead of their animal bretheren 
and avoided such areas as well, calling them "bad medicine." Their 
instincts were in tune with this 7 to 8 day resonating cycle, which 
caused these areas to emit harmful emanations, and they chose to 
deal with these times as "days of rest", or "Sabbaths."
In fact, when the Europeans invaded Turtle Island 
(Amexum/America) and forced the autochthonous populations off 
their ancestral lands, the areas they were forced to settle were the 
very areas they avoided because of the presence of these harmful


--- PAGE 307 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
magnetic radiations. This, coupled with the overwhelming 
psychological traumas and stresses associated with genocide and 
extreemly poor diets, caused untold millions of our indigenous 
populations to perish from diseases.
Another thing. The so-called "sabbaths" of five thousand years 
ago should not be compared to the "sabbaths" of today. The Earth's 
magnetic cycles (along with its poles) have dramatically shifted since 
then, and its relationship to the magnetic energy sectors (or grids) of 
the Sun has also changed. The days of the week and months of our 
year were also distorted through random juxtapositioning, thanks to 
Roman emperors and the subsequent influence of the Papacy.
For example, September is named for the black Roman emperor 
Lucius Septimus Severus. Sept is the Latin prefix meaning "seven", 
but this month is considered the ninth month of our calendar year. 
October was named for the emperor Octavius — Octa is the Latin 
prefix meaning "eight", but this is considered our tenth month. 
December is from the Latin word Deca, which equals "ten", but is 
considered the twelfth month of our year, and so on.
So the days celebrated as "the sabbath" in our time (Saturdays and 
Sundays) are not the Satur-n (Set-Ur)41 days and Sun-days that were 
once calibrated according to the Earth's relationship to the magnetic 
tides of the Sun, and the deleterious influences of the planet Saturn.
'Set' ur or 'Sat'ur-days —that is, days of 'bad medicine' causing 
'evil'; and 'Sun'-days, or days when the sun caused disorientation, 
disease and drastic weather changes, could actually be falling on the 
Tuesdays and Wednesdays of our time. We don't know anymore. 
We no longer plan the sabbath according to the ways of our 
ancestors.
Again; we lost our cosmic-based higher archetypal instincts as 
Dark-Matter Sun Children, when we were forced to adapt to the 
pathogenic consciousness-paradigm of the Iceman (European).
45 Set = Darkness; Evil twin of "light" - or deadly radiations; disease bringer... 
Ur = Exaulted; "radiator"; prefix of the word Ur-anium...


--- PAGE 308 ---
260
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Explorer-priests and physicians of the past wrote that so-called 
"primitive women" would bleed maybe 2-3 times a year! If that. 
They remarked that these women ate in a special way and avoided 
the noon-day sunlight! Hmmm...
Also documented was the fact that these same "primitive 
women" were healers by nature and very wise (Sibyl-Daughters?), 
building special sanctuaries to accommodate them during this 
difficult time —some of these structures not large enough to stand 
straight up in. Within these healing huts it was said that the women 
remained for the most part horizontal, avoiding the sun, their 
families and the public until their bleeding ceased.
Feminized European women have tended to ridicule such cultural 
healing procedures, as they are the only women who seemed to have 
completely disregarded the severity of this time. Today, a majority of 
our sisters have also become just as callous to this truth. The last four 
decades of the feminist inquisition and their equality agendas 
promoting 12-hour "keep-up-with-the-men" work ethics for women 
in sports and career-chasing—are a vividly perverse testament to this.
Westernized (andric) women have not only caused enormous 
damage to themselves, but to their own future bom and those 
'homogenized' third-world women who've chosen to adopt their 
gynandrous ways. Because of overt pandering and propagandizing 
by such feminists as Hillary Clinton (during her "visit" to Kenya in 
March of 1997), our sisters around the globe have been seduced into 
abandoning the safety and protective seclusion of the inner (feminine) 
society, and unwittingly entered the stress-paced, yang-orchestrated 
maniacal world in the outer (masculine) society.
Beloved sister, it was your abdication and abandonment of the throne  
of your inner feminine divinity, tlmt has overwhelmingly contributed to the  
torrents of blood now spilling from your precious womb!
Women caught up in the hyper-active world of masculine 
careerism suffer far more frequently with endometriosis, heavier 
irregular periods and 'break through bleeding', in much the same


--- PAGE 309 ---
261
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
manner as the women we call "ladies of the night" —  and it is a matter 
of medical record how heavy and erratic their menses are apt to flow.
Spotting:
Show-through or Break-through Bleeding
•
One incredibly disturbing example of how degraded the instincts 
of western women have become may be seen in a 1996 commercial 
for Stay-Free Maxi Pads.  This insensitive piece of gender feminist 
propaganda posing as product endorsement and advertisement 
(which by the way was aired frequently during the women's events 
of the '96 Olympics), has two women sitting in a locker room just 
after an intense exercise session. One woman turns to the other, and 
in a somber confiding tone, makes a comment about her exercise 
instructor pushing her to do fifty (50) stomach crunches.
She goes on to say that she began doing them when, much to her 
horror and overwhelming embarrassment, she began to "show 
through." For those who may not understand what it means to 
"show through" (and I'm referring to the men), it means that a 
woman has suffered a disruption in her artificial, hormonally 
regulated menstrual schedule, and began bleeding (showing 
through) without the benefit of sanitary protection.
The birth control pill is normally used to decrease or change the 
menstrual cycle. However, women who used the pill to regulate 
their bleeding were sometimes caught off-guard when their activities 
disrupted their structured cycles, causing them to bleed.
What they don't tell you is that highly stressful activities can cause 
bleeding to occur in women using artificial hormones to regulate 
their cycles. So a woman doing 50 stomach crunches during a time 
when she would normally be bleeding, but has artificially caused her 
natural cycle to be suppressed, may sometimes suffer these kinds of 
biological adjustments with embarrassing results.
What was especially insensitive about this commercial was the 
callous way the advertisers nonchalantly side stepped giving the 
viewer any clue as to why this woman's artificial cycle was disrupted


--- PAGE 310 ---
262
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
in the first place. Or the fact that a woman's reproductive area is a 
delicate precision instrument that was not constructed to undergo 
masculine forms of concentrated, centralized exercises (like stomach 
crunches)—especially during this precarious time—pure and simple!
Hopefully women who are sane will see through such crass 
commercial nonsense, and view it for precisely what it is; the 
corporate-sponsored brainchild of an ignorant, self-serving, and 
hormonally deranged mind.
As mentioned earlier, the women of orthodox Islam and in part 
the orthodox Hebrew Israelite and Hindu communities (whose 
philosophies were birthed directly from the ancient
Kushite/Khemetian social sciences), practice a discipline of feminine 
behavior presently called Purdah. Though most of the scientific 
reasons for this practice are now lost within the rituals of religious 
dogma and tribal tradition, Purdah (as practiced by the many and 
diverse ancient cultures still left on Earth) is the last and purest  
philosophical /scientific / behavioral sanctuary of the genuine gynic woman!
The Tampon
•
The business of menstruation has spawned so many gimmicks 
that it would take another book to fully cover it. The menstrual 
plague has become so 'normalized' to us as humans that there is even 
a menstrual museum  dedicated to it. Its curator was one Harvey 
Finley, grandson of the founder of the Miss America Pageant.
Menstruation (and the many crippling symptoms that continue to 
accompany it), has been a golden goose for many pharmaceutical 
companies promoting products that promise "security", 
"anonymity" and "that all-over freshness" to women. The goal of this 
marketing ploy was to make this time of the month as convenient for 
the new workingwoman as possible. Good Housekeeping magazine 
even ran ads promoting a product called "Meds" with the words:
"... You don't know you're wearing one—and neither does anyone else ..."


--- PAGE 311 ---
263
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The more panic stirred up in women about "accidents" or the fear 
of "exposure", the easier it became for companies to push newer more 
convincing gimmicks to their already anxiety-ridden, apprehensive 
female consumers.
Tampons became very popular because they temporarily put to 
rest the "fear of exposure", while allowing for an air of control and 
confidence in the working woman.
So said Karen Houppert, writer of an excellent article that 
appeared in New York's Village Voice weekly entitled Embarrassed to 
Death: The hidden dangers of the Tampon Industries.
Houppert stated that "...anonymity was the best selling point, 
and companies like Kimberly-Clark gained female consumer 
confidence through the promise of confidentiality."
But in 1992 she says, everything began to backfire.
A congressional watchdog committee charged with overseeing 
the Food and Drug Administration, happened upon an exchange of 
in-house memos containing research reports showing that the FDA 
neglected to make public critical scientific findings concerning the 
safety of tampons. The reports stated that several FDA scientists had 
discovered trace levels of the chemical dioxin (a cancer-causing 
by-product of the chlorine bleaching process done at paper and pulp 
mills) in most commercially produced tampons. It's a fact that most 
over-the-counter feminine suppositories contained rayon, a wood 
pulp derivative.
Studies have indicated that dioxin is unsafe at any level, and will 
destroy the body's defensive systems even to the extent of causing 
various forms of birth defects. (High levels of dioxin were said to 
have also been found in Ben and Jerry's Ice Cream).
Ms. Houppert went on to say that a 1989 inter-agency scientific 
memo stated quite clearly that "... the risk of dioxin in tampons can 
be quite high ..." The FDA was so upset by the implications of such a 
memo, that they felt the need to delete the following sentence from 
their own final report on dioxin and medical devices ...
"...It appears that the most significant risks may occur in tampon products ..."


--- PAGE 312 ---
264
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Given that dioxin is cumulative and slow to disintegrate, the real 
danger comes by virtue of a woman's repeated contact with it. And, 
since dioxin is so prevalent in the air, the water and the food chain 
today, as well as in virtually all the paper products we use in our 
everyday lives, it is a poison very difficult to regulate.
A company known as Tambrands admitted that chlorine is used in 
the manufacturing of their tampons. Bruce Garren, a Tambrand's 
spokesman, also conceded that their product contained trace levels of 
dioxin, but that "... dioxin is a natural product", and that there were 
no "significant levels" to be concerned about.
However, the organization known as Greenpeace refuted these 
findings stating that ancient artifacts excavated and studied have 
shown that dioxin does not appear "naturally" in Nature. The 
hypothesis of "natural occurrence" based on forest fire residues was 
also dismissed by the fact that dioxin-ladened pesticides, polluted 
water sources and smog would account for the dioxin found in the 
ashes of recently burned forests: 
-------
An estimated 75 million women were said to have been at risk of 
accumulating unusually high levels of dioxin in their bodies because 
they used the tampon. If (as mentioned earlier) repetition is the key to 
the systemic accumulation of dioxin, consider how totally exposed 
the vagina and uterus are during the menstrual cycle, and how much 
more susceptible to reproductive-related pathologies they are than at 
any other time of the month. Consider as well the average use of 
tampons by a woman during her cycle at being 4-6 tampons per day, 
5 days a month for 39 to 45 menstruating years. This all adds up to 
approximately 11,445 tampons in an average woman's lifetime.
Consider too that all of the major brands like O.B, Kotex, Tampax 
and Playtex are constructed with rayon!
By law, any product destined for internal use by the public is 
supposed to list all ingredients on the package for the consumer to 
read. Yet there was no comparable requirement for tampons (or 
vaccines and cigarettes I might add) —  a product that is inserted and 
held in the vagina for hours, in perhaps the most delicate, porous 
and permeable part of a woman's body —besides her mouth.


--- PAGE 313 ---
# B '  1IAMPAX
Is '
Fluslrable
Applicator
6
/ U
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Wmmrrn
g k q M ijifiM riiH liau -aiB  w taoife prmed*.
asrsaS?«(»«! wfelte. FtehSe, BWesnttit -T/WM3 w p n
Ifewstapr.nMinKtsa^-ssBSi s-ssRacsssulM^SJisHliWttttad 
BH M W *nt?*aa«enM rf
aysloSetfjSviia^iKiei shapsfct M m ff li®  {S la n t?!
T Sgnecim t:
f c t e ^ a ^ w s .  (toils dwtfa M > «
f***. itc*
WB tew stf
lijiM te st stock: 
B«fSS,jsisW liis!
4a!®fSw?iBnET lass tt^S 
fepi* Marta#} 6BS
StpirStartm:; 9tc
SmstPte/iaMner/ 12 B 15
ietisss
i,<r >H5pr.Bf l*ndi;-FiM3f
ATTENTION: Tampons are associated with Toxic Shoek Syndrome (TSS). TSS is a rare 
but serious disease that may cause death. Bead and save the enclosed information.
Figure 32
Consequently, it's mind-boggling to me that women continue to 
use this product, even with such a grave and explicit warning written 
on the side of the box (see figure 32).
It's even more insane when you note that unlike a package of 
cigarettes, the word "warning" is not used on a box of tampons. 
Instead the word "attention" is used to minimize the impact of the 
words that follow. In fact, I don't believe I've ever seen the word 
"death" used on a package of cigarettes, a product widely known for 
causing cancer-related deaths in the hundreds of thousands.
But the word 'death' is articulated quite clearly on a box of tampons!
What in Amen's name possesses a woman to continue using a 
product that clearly states she could die from it?!
Think on these things beloved Queen Sister, and stay tuned.


--- PAGE 314 ---
266
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
T.S.S.
Toxic Shock Syndrome...
•
In 1980, some 38 women were said to have died from a malady 
called "tampon-related toxic-shock syndrome." The tampon product 
known as Rely (manufactured by Procter and Gamble) was found to 
be directly linked to these deaths. According to Ms. Houppert, the 
company began distributing their tampons in test markets back in 
1975, going public in 1980, mailing over 60 million free samples to 
women across the country. These tampons were constructed with 
"super thirsty" synthetics much like the super-absorbent super-thin 
panty liners with product names like Stay Free, Always, and Freedom, 
along with store brands like Rite-Aid and Pathmark.
The super-thirsty synthetics were made of a compound called 
carboxymethylcellulose and polyester, the latter being a non­
breathing material.
A book entitled Tlie Inside Story of Procter and Gamble,  by Alecia 
Swasy, mentions in detail the fact that a managerial paper-trail gave 
evidence indicating Procter and Gamble executives knew many years 
before they put the Rely product on the market, that there were 
definite health dangers connected to it. In 1975, an internal memo 
outlined the ingredient components of their tampon product, all of 
which were known cancer-causing agents. It also showed that their 
product "altered the natural micro-organisms and bacterial flora in 
the vagina." The company received a minimum average of 
177 consumer complaints per month concerning the Rely product.
Procter and Gamble quickly adopted a "no harm-no foul" policy 
by dismissing these complaints, and telling their sales representatives 
to do the same as well. Of this policy Ms. Swasy writes;
"... If asked, the salespersons were to give 'canned answers' 
that denied any links between tampons and toxic shock ..."
Further investigation of the super-thirsty materials still used in 
popular super-absorbent products for women, showed that they 
provided a superior breeding ground for the proliferation of 
staphyloccous aureus bacteria—a bacillus that is normally dormant.


--- PAGE 315 ---
267
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Toxic shock was eventually tied to the higher absorbency 
products, but it wasn't until 1990 after this disease afflicted upwards 
of 60,000 women, that the FDA implemented a new criteria of 
industry standards regarding absorbency.
Of late, perfumed feminine products for women worried about 
"freshness" and "odor" have become even bigger ticket items, due in 
most part to psychological anxieties commercially nurtured by the 
pharmaceutical pimps who profit from this universal pathology.
Question: What does this say for the state of women's 
reproductive health when perfumed pads have now become so 
popular? What else is inferred by the fact that products, which were 
at one time acquired solely by a doctor's prescription (yeast infection 
products like Monistat 7), can now be purchased over-the-counter? 
Well for one thing it shows that the pharmaceuticals know a good 
thing when they see it, and when to take advantage of it.
Beloved queen sisters — women's diseases (and ignorance) are big  
ticket, money making items!!
Playtex brand perfumed products continued the psychological 
assault on women's insecurities, by promoting its product with the 
words:
"... The nice thing about this tampon is that it helps keep you odor free ..." 
Translation: (first) "...if you menstruate, you're going to stink; and, 
(second) .. .you can now forget about how badly you really smell and 
what's really causing your "intimate odors." In other words ladies, 
you can trust big brother because he promotes his poisonous 
products in a "kinder", "gentler", albeit more "politically correct" 
manner. He promises to use only soft, sensitive, carefully chosen 
words to procure a lady's much-valued consumer confidence, and 
along with it, the assurance of continued patronage.
The Tampax brand continued to "comfort and assure"(translation: 
bullshit) their female consumers, with these sensitive carefully chosen 
words;
"... Tampax eliminates odor because it prevents its formation ..."


--- PAGE 316 ---
268
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Translation: "...If you're not using our product, it's automatic that 
you're gonna smell bad. Without it you will be offensive to everyone, 
every month —  even before you start bleeding!  So use it even when 
you're not menstruating..!"
My sisters, bad odor from menstrual blood is due to putrefaction 
caused by dead or decomposing blood-tissue mixed with systemic 
toxins. It is the sign of an internally weak and overall unhealthy 
woman. This decomposing tissue is often made up of blood that 
accumulates in 'pockets' that form within a uterus that has weak 
muscle tone. The accumulated blood forms clots that are either the 
first or near last menstrual material to exit the womb. If it is the last, 
then a stronger odor accompanies it.
Another thing. Women who experience heavy clotting during 
menses should know that what they believe to be their starting date 
when the bleeding begins, is often a delay of about 1 to 2 days, 
because the first blood flow accumulates in one or more of these 
'pockets.' When blood finally shows it is due to the over flow, and it 
is often clotted, heavy, accompanied by a strong odor, and very dark.
As I mentioned earlier, menstrual blood is liquefied flesh; in this 
case, dead and de-composing liquefied flesh—sometimes with an 
odor much like that of a 2 to 3-day old decomposing cadaver —  
another reason our ancient mothers called it "the false labor" and 
considered it to be a quasi-abortion. To them, it was the passing of "a 
little death."
The above ads gave birth to what writer Karen Houppert calls "the 
perfumed-pussy age."
Other menstrual gadgets include Instead — a disposable cup 
manufactured by a company called Ultrafem that looks like a 
diaphragm and is worn in similar fashion; The Keeper —  a reusable cup 
made of soft rubber placed into the lower vagina; and Fresh 'n Fit  
Padettes — a tiny pad about two and a half inches in size designed to 
be worn between the vaginal lips or labia. The first is made from a 
medical grade plastic that is said to soften with the woman's body 
heat, allowing it to mold to the individual's anatomy.


--- PAGE 317 ---
269
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Remember sisters, all unstable plastics with the ability to "soften 
on contact" are toxic to the internal anatomy. Saying that it is 
"medical grade" promises nothing. The powerful acids secreted by a 
menstruating woman are more than enough to destabilize any 
artificial chemical bond over time, making the absorption and 
accumulation of particulate by-products in the plastic hazardous to a 
woman's health. The second (the Keeper) is reported to be 
constructed with "soft rubber." Are they trying to promote latex 
again, this time in another form and under a new name? As for the 
latter product, you simply have to review this section for information 
on the dangers of "absorbency" and artificially manipulated cotton 
tampons, as well as the rayon-cotton blends.
And finally, there is a lat ex-like product that recently became 
available to the general public. It is marketed under the name Yulatex 
and is made from a plant with a viscous byproduct that is alleged to 
contain less caustic protein resins than those found in the rubber tree 
that produces latex. This of course, remains to be seen.
Menopause:
The "Pause" that Depresses...
•
I won't devote too much space to this particular topic since I've 
already made several reliable references to it throughout this work. 
Suffice it to say that it should simply be seen as the inevitable end to a 
life-long debilitating pathology known as the menstrual cycle.
Medical doctors on the other hand, are quite fond of catering to 
the 'upside' of this traumatic time in a woman's life, stating quite 
emphatically that menopause is "...not a disease"; that there is 
nothing wrong with a woman during this "special" time; it's a 
"natural" process—the "golden passage" of a woman's life; etc., etc., 
ad-nauseam!
How these "professionals" can fix their faces to say this 
phenomenon is not a disease, when all of the symptoms indicated 
would clinically be diagnosed as diseases in a so-called "normal" 
healthy person —on any given day—is way beyond me.


--- PAGE 318 ---
270
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Beloved, if menopause is not a disease as doctors claim, then the 
following medically recognized individual symptoms that 
accompany it, should no longer be diagnosed or considered diseases 
by the American Medical Association (AMA).
Not a disease? Incredible! The medical doctor-priest will look you 
dead in your face with all the above evidence in hand, and still have 
the nerve to say "...who you gonna believe —me—or your lyin'
If menopause is not a disease, then why in the name of waning 
sanity would this same doctor routinely prescribe a pharmaceutical 
poison for each and every one of the above symptoms, should they 
happen to occur in a young "sick" individual? If all of the above 
symptoms on any given day are routinely diagnosed as a disease, 
with individual treatments prescribed by medical protocol for each, 
how are they suddenly not  diseases when they occur in a so-called 
menopausal woman?
Beloved; menopause is a disease! The body is traumatically 
affected by it, and is not "at ease."
If it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, swims like a duck and 
quacks like a duck—then damn it, it's a duck!
- Hypertension
- Insomnia
- Night Sweats
- Fatigue
- Incontinence
- Nervousness
- Hot Flashes
- Frequent Urination
- Depression
- Digestive Problems
- Heart Palpitations
- Back Pains
eyes?!"
?


--- PAGE 319 ---
271
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Peri-Menopause
•
As I made mention in the Prologue, medical science today is more 
science fiction than science. Apart from their outstanding advances in 
the techniques of trauma medicine, medical protocols concerning the 
causes (and healing) of disease, still amount to nothing more than 
superstitious pseudo-science based on the observation and 
categorization of surface symptoms; the study of "anatomical 
concessions" or "degenerative adjustments" made by the activities of 
cellular/atomic intelligence.
With hapless incompetence, medical science has shown that it is 
woefully incapable of stopping humanity's degenerative slide into 
genetic oblivion, and this is made glaringly evident with each passing 
year. As I said, there are no "new diseases" popping up every 3 to 5 
years as the medical talking-head experts claim; only newer more 
perverse expressions of the same catalogue of recognized diseases —  a 
sure sign of Man's impending demise.
Add to this the ever-growing wickedness of corporate "boardroom 
invented" diseases (as seen in a thousand T.V. commercials) 
promoted by the pharmaceutical companies for the purpose of 
generating sustainable markets of profit, and you get the picture.
Again; on the subject of 'disease', medical science(?) has merely 
perfected its myopic practice of diagnosis, cataloguing the different 
stages of Man's biological degeneration as various "versions of 
health"—constantly re-arranging, re-categorizing and setting 
updated standards, as each successive generation—de-generates.
The symptoms of pen-menopause are a perfect example of this.
"Experts" from the medical propaganda mill are constantly called 
in by the media to comfort a consistently ill and gullible public; to 
reassure us that the epidemic rise in disease symptomologies suffered 
by the consumer at what appears to be earlier and earlier ages, are all 
"quite normal", and more important —"easily remedied."
Ann Alexander, editor of Prevention magazine, appeared on NBC's 
Saturday Morning  show (April 17, 1999) to tell us that the disease


--- PAGE 320 ---
272
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
known as peri-menopause strikes women some time between the 
ages of 30 and 42. Typically, she stated that the following symptoms 
of suffering are "normal", and should therefore be "expected" by 
most women who fall within this age group. They are:
Anxiety 
Irritability 
Moodiness 
Hot Flashes 
Night Sweats 
Forgetfulness 
Sleep Disorders 
Irregular Periods 
Poor Concentration
Ms. Alexander also stated that forgetfulness and poor 
concentration are the symptoms that most often occur in the initial 
stages, and that a woman could also be pregnant and still go through 
the symptoms of peri-menopause!
I leave it to you to decide dear sisters. Should symptoms such as 
those listed above be considered "normal" or "natural" to women so 
young? Even pregnant women?
Must these symptoms continue to be considered your biological 
destiny simply because you're a woman? Isn't it time for sisters (and I 
mean true gynic women) to transcend to a new bio-spiritual 
awareness of health and well-being for the feminine principle?
Sisters, it's time to openly denounce the pathologically un-natural 
and perverse behaviorisms of gender-feminism (now calling 
themselves "femalists"); to reject the illusions of "equality" and to 
condemn outright the rampant promotion and pressures put upon 
girls to pursue a life of combat (sports and the military) through 
pseudo-masculine careerism. It is time to re-define the feminine 
paradigm according to the instinctive dictates of your original 
(archetypal) bio-spiritual nature.
Peri-menopause, menopause, PMS, involuntary ovulation, menses 
(et al.) are all diseases, no matter what the doctor-priest or the


--- PAGE 321 ---
273
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Amazonian feminist tell you otherwise. The accompanying 
symptoms alone should show you that!
"Once again! Don't say we didn't tell you...! "
•
Even after 30 years of traveling the Hygienic and Mystic "Path of 
The Hidden Light", I continue to marvel and be humbled at how the 
Great Spirit reveals Itself through a multitude of magical ways —and 
at the strangest of times. Not only do I get to see and experience the 
operations of Immutable Law as It manifests Its truth time and time 
again first hand, but I also get to enjoy the ultimate satisfaction of 
being able to say to my many feminist detractors and nay-sayers...
"... see? I told you so! "
And this has nothing whatsoever to do with vanity beloved; just 
the satisfaction of 'Divine Affirmation.'
One such magical time occurred on the morning of July 8th, 2003, 
5:30 am during a CBS television program called The Early Show. The 
magical moment came when I was awakened out of a deep sleep at a 
time when I would normally be in la-la land. It would literally take 
an A-bomb explosion just to get me to turn over. But there I was 
sitting straight up on the couch at the exact moment when the lead 
reporter on the show announced the topic of her next news item;
"...Women can now have their periods only 4x a  year...!"
It should be obvious to the seeker by now that I had fallen asleep 
with the boob tube on (bad move), and it must have been my sub­
conscious that woke me at that precise time to record the following 
treasures.
Yes my sisters, with every word spoken in the following interview,
I savored the sweet taste of vindication —  30 years worth of it!
The following is a verbatim recounting of this most extraordinary 
and revealing interview, and should put to rest any and all doubts 
that the pathology known as menstruation was ever considered 
"natural" or "normal" to our earliest ancestors.


--- PAGE 322 ---
274
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"For most women, PMS, cramps and feminine hygiene 
products are a way of life. But relief may be on the way.
The FDA is considering a new type of birth control pill 
called Seasonelle  that would actually reduce the number 
of yearly menstrual periods from 13 down to 4.
So women would get their period only once every season..." 
(Tricia Stubbs - TS) "... I'm the type of person that when I 
get my monthlies ... it's like don't touch me; I just... go 
away... I just don't, don't want anybody round me; so 
it's actually made it more pleasant for my family..."
"For Tricia Stubbs, a stay at home mom, the decision to try 
the birth control pill Seasonelle  was two-fold ..."
(T.S.) "... I'm done having children, so I could have easily 
gone and... had my tubes tied ...ah... but that wouldn't 
have done anything for health prevention for me ..."
"Stubbs is one of 1,400 women in a clinical trial of the new 
pill designed to suppress monthly menstruation ..."
"I have a very ... uh, uh ... a family history of reproductive 
Health disorders - at a very young age. So I was hoping to... 
if not prevent them completely, at least have a little more 
control over them, and keep healthier longer ..."
" Dr. William Givens is a reproductive specialist at Eastern 
Virginia Medical School, which developed and is testing 
Seasonelle..."
(Dr. Givens) "... There are the same types of benefits using 
Seasonelle that would be for anyone who's taking the pill. 
There's reduction in the number of ovarian cysts; there's 
reduction in endometrial ... eh...instance of endometrial 
cancer. There's reduction over any cancer..."
(Back in studio) "Good morning..."
(Dr. Anita Nelson) "Good morning."
"Explain how Seasonelle  works."
"Seasonelle  is a new way of putting birth control pills into a 
package, so that each package has 84 active pills - (the) 
woman takes one pill a day, and then there are only 7 
sugar pills at the end. So a woman goes 3 months with birth 
control pills and then takes the week off and has her period 
3, every 3 months. So it's only 4 periods a year rather 
than 13 ..."


--- PAGE 323 ---
275
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
Host:
Guest:
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"Is it safe; is it o.k. to do this to your body ...?
"Absolutely! We're trying to take away pain and suffering 
that women have with ... with regular periods. The periods 
that come with the birth control pills are really artificial.  
And women have been asking 'well, what else can the pill do 
for me'...it's cut down the bleeding - it's cut down 
the cramping ... but what if we could use the pill to 
take away periods altogether? If there's nothing up there  
that needs to come down, we don't need to force her to have  
her period ..."
" In reality, many women, um ... are manipulating their 
systems with the existing pills on the market. Is'nt that 
right? Which is it... eh, explain that..."
"Well, the pill takes over a woman's reproductive system.
For years it puts the ovary to sleep ... and it says we'll 
wake you up when we want to get pregnant. You can 
make eggs then. But we've been using it to make her have 
periods, to make her feel more like it was a regular cycle.
But women today are saying 'I don't wanna bleed, I don't 
wanna have the cramps - why are you doing this to me?  
And we're using those same pills in a different way, in this 
new product ..."
"Packaging it in a different way is the key here ..."
"Absolutely!"
"Is there a danger in doing this if I decide ...uuh, after doing 
it for 2 years, I wanna get pregnant. Is that gonna diminish 
the chances of my fertility rate after I get off the pills ...?"
"Absolutely not. When you stop taking the pill the system is 
cleared of the hormones in exactly the same amount of 
period of time. We've used this for years and years and 
years for women who've had particular problems related to 
their periods. Now it's time for us to say ... 'but what 
about women who are just suffering from pain.' We know 
that the #1 reason that women age 25 and younger miss 
school and miss work, is because of painful cramps. I mean 
just think of what a woman's life is if at every month a day 
or two she's bed-ridden. I mean how is she gonna get 
ahead? How is she gonna keep up?!
"In the final 20 seconds, who shouldn't take this?
"Any woman who cannot take the birth control pill, cannot 
use Seasonelle. But women can talk to their health care 
providers and see if they can use the pill in a new way to 
take away... this ivomatt's curse ...!!"  [All emphasis mine]


--- PAGE 324 ---
276
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Curse? Ummm. I wonder what would have happened if a man 
would have called it that on a nationally syndicated program?
Please understand that my reason for including the above news 
item had nothing to do with promoting a product. I simply wanted 
to show the seeker that western orthodox science is slowly but 
begrudgingly moving into an area of knowledge and awareness 
that we as hygienists, occultists, metaphysicians and meta­
historians have been operating from for eons. Simply put; the facts 
of the ancient meta-chronicles are becoming ever more irrefutable!
Item: If it is now possible to stop the cycle of continuous ovulation and bleeding 
in women through the introduction of exogenous  (external) artificial  chemicals, 
then by the Cosmic (Hermetic) Law of Correspondences, the human body in its 
natural  state of harmony would already possess the ability to endogenously  
(internally) do the same...
In other words, if an artificial chemical can enlist such a 
response, then it stands to reason that the same response can be 
created organically. Ostensibly, the pill could not artificially 
manifest or manipulate a result within the body, that the body itself 
was not capable of reproducing; that is —  that it did not already have 
the capacity to organically self-manifest.
By Natural Law —  something cannot come out of nothing!
If a pill can stop ovulation and menstrual bleeding, so can the  
mind and orthobiotic living habits\  After all, the pill is simply forcing 
the body to do what the brain —the ultimate controller of all 
chemical functions in the body temple —  has simply 'forgotten' it can 
do. Furthermore, it is now a scientifically proven fact that a 
woman's overall health greatly improves as her ovulation cycles 
and bleeding dramatically decrease, showing after all that 
continuous ovulation and bleeding is not healthy!
Now. Before we continue let's quickly review the dialogue 
between Dr. Anita Nelson and the host of CBS's Early Show.
The most intriguing and revealing part of their exchange (the 
part that really triggers the "I told you so" factor) is the good 
doctor's outright admission that women today are pathologically 
stressed to the point of serious health complications; more


--- PAGE 325 ---
277
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
specifically, because of their continuously painful monthly 
hemorrhaging of menstrual blood. Pay attention ladies.
Dr. Nelson states that she and the product Seasonelle are trying
to...
".. .take away the pain and suffering that women have 
with regular periods"; that women are saying 
"...I don't wanna bleed; I don't wanna have the cramps."
And of course, we can't leave out the blatant feminist diatribe. 
The good doctor states quite gleefully...
".. .and we know that the # 1 reason that women age 25 
and younger miss school and miss work, is because 
of painful cramps. Just think of what a woman's life 
is if every month a day or two she is bed-ridden.
I mean, how is she gonna get ahead? How is she gonna 
keep up?!!"
And then the coup de gras;
".. .women can talk to their health care providers to see if 
they can use the pill in a new way to take away ... 
this woman's curse1 ."
Wow! Can these words be any clearer my sisters? Contrary to 
all of the feminist propaganda and new age diatribe about the 'gift' 
and the 'power' of the menses being the anatomical phenomenon 
that makes women 'superior'; the gift and the power that causes 
men to fear the 'superiority of women' —is after all a generational 
'curse' suffered by the precious feminine principle of humanity.
Your honor, I rest my case.
But before I close the book for good on this most controversial 
subject, should any of my beloved sisters contemplate using this or 
any other such "liberating" birth control products (to "take away 
their pain and suffering" in order to "get ahead" and "keep up"), 
please consider the following tale of one who already made that 
tragic choice.


--- PAGE 326 ---
278
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Her name was Nicole Dishuk, a 31-year old doctoral graduate 
about to start her new career as a physician. Nicole had to be flown to 
a near by hospital one day because she had suddenly passed out.
They found a blood clot in her neck. They then flew her to 
another hospital ER, but by the time they removed the right half of her  
skull to relieve the pressure on her brain, another clot had already 
spread to the brain causing irreparable damage. They operated 3 
times, finally conceding that there was nothing left they could do. 
She had too many clots accumulated in the left side of her brain.
Nicole was pronounced dead at 4:30 pm. the next day.
Cause of death?
The birth control she took that allozved women to have periods one  
month a year! And the particular brand name Nicole used was called 
Lybrel. Another such brand with a name similar to that of the 
Seasonelle brand alluded to earlier, is called Seasonique.
Beloved sister-seekers and brothers, the following constitutes the 
"side effects" (translation —'poisonous reactions') associated with 
these and other such oral contraceptives. So... Buyer Beware...!!
-Thrombophlebitis 
-Arterial thromboembolism 
-Pulmonary embolism 
-Myocardial infarction 
-Cerebral hemorrhage 
-Hypertension 
-Gallbladder disease 
-Hepatic adenomas - 
(benign liver tumors)
-Loss of scalp hair
-Mesenteric thrombosis 
-Retinal thrombosis 
-Nausea 
-Vomiting 
-Jaundice 
-Depression 
-Severe mood swings 
-Candidiasis 
-Dizziness 
-Breast changes
-Hirsutism
-Headaches
-Acne
-Colitis
-Pancreatitis
-Spotting
-Rash
-Vaginitis
-Cataracts
Tell me beloved sisters. Is this type of toxic "chemical liberation" 
really worth the risk of you attaining that ultimate freedom —  death!
?


--- PAGE 327 ---
279
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Fibroids:
Medical Mercantilism and the Quick Fix ...
Intramural Fibroid
Figure 33 - Uterus with Fibroid Tumors
Fibroid tumors are classified as "typical gynecological problems" 
for women ages 35 to 55; which goes to show how debilitating this 
pathology is today and how non-chalant the medical mindset has 
become regarding it. This can only mean that they haven't the first 
clue as to its origin or remedy. All they claim to know is that estrogen 
"causes" it to flourish, high hormonal levels "speed its growth", and 
it "may just be hereditary."
In typical fashion, medical science has once again fragmented a 
unitarium symptoma  into three distinct categories, each according to


--- PAGE 328 ---
280
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
their location and their "behavior." In the case of the fibroid tumor, 
the categories are:
(1) I ntramural  Fibroids -
(2) SUBSEROSAL FIBROIDS -
(3) S ubmucosal  Fibroids  -
which appear and remain inside the 
uterine wall with virtually no 
symptoms of discomfort... 
those that appear in the outer lining 
of the uterine wall, and grow into 
the abdominal cavity. This type 
causes moderate to severe cramp­
like pelvic pains, and often puts 
pressure on the bladder... 
or the "imploding growth" —  the 
type that pushes inward towards the 
central cavity of the uterus. This 
type causes intense pelvic pain, 
heavy hemorrhaging (menses) and a 
wide variety of other gynecological 
symptoms...
Clues that connect the growth of fibroids to endocrine 
degeneration (gynandry) can be seen in the fact that experts in the 
field of gynecology routinely recommend hormonal blood tests 
whenever they occur. They also recommend a specific type of 
diagnostic vaginal ultrasound called saline infusion sonohysterography,  
or SIS, which should ethically be done prior to any decision for 
gynecological surgery, but often is not—particularly in black and 
latino populations because of its expense. According to recent 
statistics, 33.5% of the over half-a-million hysterectomies (575,000) 
performed (mostly on women of color) in the United States each year, 
are directly due to fibroid tumors.42
Some of the medical treatments for this disease range from 
hormonal replacement therapies (HRT), to an outpatient
42 This assessment is based on population ratio (white to black) and the higher 
incidence (per that number) of fibroids in black women. - Author


--- PAGE 329 ---
281
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
treatment called myolosis —  a process where a small electrical probe is 
used to destroy the blood vessels in the tumor. The process is similar 
to laparoscopy where a needle is inserted to repeatedly puncture the 
fibroid, allowing the current from an inserted electrode to coagulate 
the blood vessels inside.
Another treatment process that falls just short of removing the 
entire uterus (hysterectomy) is called D and C resectoscope,  a non- 
invasive procedure where the tumors are removed vaginally instead 
of through the abdominal wall. A myomectomy is considered major 
surgery where the fibroids are cut from the uterine walls. This 
operation is recommended when the fibroid is very large.
Lastly, the partial or complete hysterectomy  represents the most 
drastic and traumatic of all the procedures.
Note: Both the subserous  and the submucous  types of fibroid tumor can sometimes 
grow a stem-like root at the point where they are attached to the uterus (see 
figure 38). Called a pedunculated fibroid,  it causes the tumor to twist or "braid", 
resulting in an increase of pain and hemorrhaging. Some tumors grow to the size 
of a peanut or to the size of a grapefruit...
As for the ages that medical science claims are "typical" for the 
appearance of fibroid tumors (35-55yrs.) —  this is totally misleading. A 
fibroid takes years to develop. Physically, it begins when the 
environment is made susceptible by poor nutrition, stress and 
hormonal derangement. Metaphysically, it is activated when adverse 
thinking triggers or awakens a "karmic signature" that was 
etherically etched into the soul (or breath-form) from a past-life 
traumatic experience. That experience is subconsciously re-lived 
again and again in the present life by the interplay of environment, 
genetic encoding and the chemistries produced by the brain, wherein 
the genes recreate the signature imprints of the disease etched on the 
soul through activation of the cellular memory.
The awakened signature begins resonating within a specific area 
of the womb creating a template of energy that causes a blockage, 
which then "calls forth" fibrinous materials from within the 
bloodstream together with residual componants of the 4 elementals


--- PAGE 330 ---
282
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
(fire, air, water, and earth)—all of which germinate sympathetically 
around the resonant signature to manifest the tumor.
Metaphysically, an individual's "karmic memory return" begins at 
approximately 21 years of age —the age when the soul "re-awakens" 
the genetic memory of the body to 'remember' and continue the life- 
path lessons set forth by the most prominent thought signature- 
templates of experiences resonating from its previous incarnations.
But the set medical criteria for age and the fibroid tumor has no 
relevance today. I personally know of young women who'd already 
developed almond and grapefruit-sized fibroids by ages 21 and 24 
respectively.
Remember beloved seeker, it has been foretold that in the last days 
and time, the young will be afflicted with the diseases of the old.
Thought, Bio-chemistry and the 
Fibroid Tomb-et...
•
It's incredible that in this day and age, books allegedly written for 
the purpose of helping women turn out to be so chronically deficient 
of the most basic of truths. Or, in the case of the following —  are so 
masterfully deceptive that in the end, the alert seeker finds that 
they've been told absolutely nothing of enduring value after all.
Such an example is a work I read entitled Body and Soul43, a book 
written by a variety of authors and edited by Ms. Linda Villarosa.
In chapter 13 entitled Fighting Fibroids, the first section asks the 
all-inclusive question (in poor grammar), "What is Fibroids?" —as if 
the reader is about to be given a definitive answer. Instead, by the 
second paragraph we read...
"... No one knows what causes fibroids, though researchers believe  that 
tumors thrive on the hormone estrogen because they seem to enlarge 
during childbearing years and usually shrink after menopause ..."
[Emphasis mine]
43 See part two for a more indepth analysis of its contents - Author


--- PAGE 331 ---
283
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
To add insult to ignorance, the book allows the medical 
establishment to shamelessly plug one commercial product after 
another —  along with their dubious "health services." By the third 
paragraph, we read;
"... Experts hypothesize that black women suffer a higher rate of fibroids 
and more complications from the tumors because we do not get routine 
checkups early or often enough. Far too many black women delay 
getting basic gynecological exams so that by the time we get into a 
physicians' office, the fibroids are numerous and large..."
Now hold on sisters! Didn't we just read in the previous excerpt 
that their 'experts' had absolutely no clue as to what causes a fibroid? 
Then how in God's name is a visit to these 'experts' going to prevent 
you from getting fibroids?
I'll tell you how dear sisters ... drugs! And after you've been given 
stronger and stronger doses as time goes on because the first and 
second set of drugs no longer work —  cheer up\ When all else fails, you 
have the choice of a marvelous array of invasive mutilating surgeries 
to choose from!
Beloved, even if they did know, medical science would never tell 
you what causes fibroids; first — because this particular disease is far 
too lucrative a pathology to jeopardize with a solution; second—to 
truly prevent the epidemic of fibroid tumors, as well as a whole host 
of related diseases, western medicine and society (the primary causal 
paradigm for the vast majority of all diseases on the planet today) 
would have to drastically change its entire modus operandi.
Simply put —that would mean corporate suicide to the European 
parasitic elite, who earn obscene profits managing and promoting the 
business of their predacious medical church.
But it's safe to say that they don't know because western medicine 
deals in the "sciences of symptomology and poisonopathy", where 
they merely locate and treat effects, not the underlying causes.
Medical science can only begin serving you after the fact! I've been 
given first hand accounts from fibroid sufferers who were told by 
their doctors verbatim that "... the fibroid is too small to be concerned


--- PAGE 332 ---
284
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
with right now ... so don't worry about it. If it grows any larger by the 
time of your next checkup, we'll see what can be done."
It's astounding how the editors and authors of a book like Body and 
Soul (in good conscience) could tell our sisters to get "routine 
checkups" from a physician who possesses absolutely no concrete 
solution to the cause of their problem —  especially when they 
themselves most likely heard the same thing from their private 
physicians!
Brother Marvin said it best my sisters "... makes me wanna holla,  
throw up both my hands ..." Owwl
Truth be told my beloved sister-seeker; physically —  the fibroid 
tumor is an indication of exposure to greater than normal levels of 
stress and poor diet, causing hormonal derangements that end with 
your body's valiant efforts to isolate and localize disease-making 
toxins. It does this by surrounding them with a higher than normal 
accumulation of fibrin. If these toxins were left un-checked, they may 
have caused severe damage to your delicate reproductive organs.
Tumors themselves vary in constitution and composition ,but they 
all appear in the body primarily as a result of chronic deficiencies in a 
bio-chemical tissue salt known as Chloride of Potash. The lack of this 
tissue salt causes an excess of waste material to collect in the area or 
areas where the deficiency is prevalent. This inorganic cell builder is 
the mineral worker of the blood that helps in the proper formation of 
fibrin, and diffuses it proportionately throughout the tissues of the 
body where ever and when ever the need arises.
Its many aliases include the names Potassium Chloride, Kali 
Muriaticum, Kali Chloratum and Potassium Chloridum.
Some tumors are made up totally of fibrin and calciferous 
material, and eliminating this type can be very difficult because they 
have no blood vessels within them. There is no way of introducing 
the Kali Mur so that it can unite with the coagulated materials. Other 
tumors are comprised mostly of fat, while in some cases they are 
filled with water or other putrefied acidic fluids.


--- PAGE 333 ---
285
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Throughout my many years as a Hygienic Scientist and 
practicioner of Classical Naturopathy, I can safely say that a vast 
majority of all the women I had seen (about 85%) suffered from 
varying stages of abnormal fibrinous tissue growth in the breast or 
reproductive area. Of this number at least 65% had stated that their 
private physicians recommended they take estrogen as a temporary 
treatment. They were told that this therapy would lessen and help 
regulate their heavy menstrual flows, prevent mood swings, blood 
clots, headaches, neuralgia, P.M.S. etc. The women claimed that this 
type of drug therapy did temporarily allow them to "feel like 
themselves once more."
But then the 'piper' presented his bill!
Now we are hearing from this same medical research community 
that pharmaceutical estrogens are currently considered one of the 
primary causes of breast and ovarian cancers in women!
If at one time the primary medical treatment for a fibroid was to 
administer doses of analogue estrogen, shouldn't it be clear to 
everyone that this growth (along with the accompanying heavy flow 
of menstrual blood) is a vivid indication that (a)... a woman's 
hormonal integrity is directly linked to her potential for fibroids; and, 
(b) ... this being the case, for a fibroid tumor to appear, wouldn't her 
hormonal circuitry have to be severely compromised?
Yes and yes again!
In my humble experience and study of this pathology, I have also 
come to notice the presence of one predominant characteristic that 
appears to be a vital clue in solving the mysterious circumstances 
surrounding it. Apart from the evidence of poor dietary habits, all
women suffering from fibroid growths in later years exhibited one or more  
distinct signs of masculinity, due largely to hormonal derangement caused  
by their participation in pathological levels of physical and psychological  
stress!
That's right; all were stricken in some way with greater or lesser 
degrees of Testosterone Pathway Toxicity  (TPT). The evidence either


--- PAGE 334 ---
286
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
showed up on their faces or somewhere on the body. But you can 
rest assured that the gender feminist and the research scientist will 
never admit to this, for it would completely obliterate support for 
all of the garbage promoted to our sisters —the specious 
propaganda used to brainwash them into continued participation in 
that feminist-orchestrated dream-state called "equality."
Equality:
The Fall into Gender Purgatory ...
•
Speaking of equality, let's take a quick look at this feminist buzz­
word as it applies to our present social paradigm, and while we're at 
it, to the emotional and metaphysical consequences of its application 
in the operation of Divine Immutable Law.
Question: is there evidence that a man and a woman are 
physically and psychologically "equal?"
Well...yes and no!
No ... because each and every indicator based upon function and 
design says that we are by nature symbiotic, synergistic and therefore 
compatible, but not equal! If we were 'equal', there would be no need 
for fundamental distinctions in the basic designs of the human 
temple, as provided by Universal Cosmic Intelligence for the purpose 
of creative variety and continuity. If we were equal, we would repel 
one another in much the same manner as the 'like' or 'equal' poles of 
a magnet do when they are brought together; and...
Yes ... because if a woman insists on participating in activities that 
heighten her stress levels far beyond the thresholds of tolerance 
dictated by her archetypal nature and design, she will definitely 
show her latent potentials to be "equal" to a man, because she will  
eventually begin to look, think, feel and act like one!
I say this with all seriousness because the majority of career- 
chasing, sports-active women haven't the vaguest clue as to what 
their day-to-day activities are doing to their feminine infrastructures. 
Physically, hormonally, psychically and psychologically, today's


--- PAGE 335 ---
287
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"new woman" is doing more to persecute and abuse herself, than any 
man ever could.
Examine this carefully beloved, without the learned prejudices 
that feminism has conditioned your hearts with. Women today are 
taught to nurture and develop their aggressive career-motivated 
natures. But because of this, they have also unwittingly repressed, 
subdued and persecuted their own true gynic natures. This "nature" 
is the genuine feminine instinct that in today's world is considered 
restrictive, inhibiting or obsolete to the 'new woman.' Your precious 
instincts, once called the 'mother wit', are now ridiculed due largely 
to the feminist agenda, and our almost total ignorance of proper 
gender-conduct for both the male and the female —all of which has 
led to the chronic destabilization of female hormonal integrity.
A woman with fibroid tumors may have outrageously high levels 
of un-converted androgenic hormones and/or perverted estrogenic 
chemicals coursing through her bloodstream, and she can prove this 
by simply looking at her face consistently in the mirror over the 
period of one year. If she leads a stressful life, she may already have 
noticed signs of pre-mature aging; ie - a steady growth of facial hairs 
(side bums, moustaches, chin hairs etc.), or a histimine-induced acne 
and other such skin conditions about her body. All are caused by 
stress and poor "on the run" nutrition, leading to heightened levels of 
free-radical androsterones, or other 'masculinizing' stress hormones.
In fact, a woman can prove just how pervasive and harmful her 
stressful (and dzs-tressful) life has become to her own health, her 
daughter(s) and all of her female friends, by simply gathering them 
together (like the girls of the movie Exhale) for a critical analysis of 
their physical and psychological states of being.
Sisters, you should all be taking a collective inventory and reality 
check of how you are treating yourselves! See what happens when you 
begin this critical analysis on your own stressful 'anti-gynic' 
behavior, and examine the consequences such behavior has incurred 
upon your precious bodies. I guarantee that you will eventually see 
why the Waiting To Exhale girls (for the life of them) couldn't find the 
'right man' no matter how hard they tried, or how "successful"


--- PAGE 336 ---
288
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
they became. Why? It's simple.
You see, metaphysically, they already are “the right man!"
A Man... A Woman??! Yes!
Figures 34 and 35
Insulted? Don't be Sisters:
Check your local Info-mercials to see what I mean...
•
The previous section will have no doubt enraged most feminist- 
oriented women. And that's alright. I'm comfortable with that —  
simply because their actions to this point have absolutely enraged 
Mother Nature!
One can bear witness everywhere to the many levels of hormonal 
degradation caused by our society's belief in the equality myth. The 
masculinization of the 90s-millennium woman has become a multi­
billion dollar industry. To see what I mean, all one has to do is tune in 
to certain info-mercials on late-night television, or take a closer look at 
some of the female exercise trainers on cable channel Fit T.V.
A few years ago on one late-night info-mercial for example, I saw 
distinctly gynandrous women with virtually no hips, no breasts (or 
with implants), greatly defined muscle-tone and wash-board 
stomachs, hawking abdominal developing devices that promised 
women of the viewing audience the same "four-pack/6-pack" 
stomachs they had. In these commercials, even the male host (who


--- PAGE 337 ---
289
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
showed no abs by the way) pointing to his female co-host is heard to 
say "... ladies, don't you want to have tight washboard tummies like 
this one?" (See figure 35)
What is not made known to the viewing audience is the fact that 
internal damage is sustained by a gynic woman's mid-section because 
of the stressful localization of force exerted on this single area. For the 
average woman to obtain abdominal "cuts" like those seen on the 
gynandric women used to promote such devices and exercises, she 
would already have to be TP-Toxic, or have completely perverted her 
hormonal integrity and gynic physiology to accomplish this.
In another info-mercial, the product promoted seems to have been 
developed to stem the tide of the perverse consequences resulting 
from a woman's neglectful behavior towards her true nature. It was 
a product developed to undo the "fuzzy results" of TP-Toxicity, 
poor diet and stressful activities such as mentioned above —a hair 
removal product called Sweet Simplicity.
Of course the underlying causes for the rampant hair growth on a 
majority of stressed out career women today, was never discussed. 
Instead, we get a fluffy pink air-brushed commercial, featuring fluffy 
pink air-brushed women trying to look as "casually feminine" as 
possible; all sitting around girl-talking about the many old fashioned 
ways they resorted to getting rid of their "masculine problem"; that 
is —  the unwanted, uncontrolled growth of their own body hair.
Never mind that the woman who claimed to have invented it stole 
the formula and technique from Cuban women, who used this liquid 
sugar method for decades. This is us —the "nuevo-riche", upwardly 
mobile, suburban, 90's-millennium white career woman, setting yet 
another fashion trend that you poor peons simply have to follow.
But making it easier for a woman to easily remove her moustache, 
her sideburns, her "mono-brow" (eyebrow hairs that join together in 
the middle) her leg, arm and chin hairs, only allows her to continue 
her destructive habits without any awareness of the karmic 
consequences for such behavior.
In this sordidly feminized society today, it would appear that


--- PAGE 338 ---
290
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
cosmetologists are the newest order of corporate missionaries sent 
forth from the medical church to offer absolution and forgiveness for 
the degenerative effects of unnatural gender-conduct.
"... As ye Sow, so shall ye Weep .."
•
Metaphysically speaking, fibroids are a type of psychological 
'keloiding' of the inner-self, particularly for the Nubian woman. It is a 
'spiritual scaring' of the womb primarily caused by her 
internalization of emotional pains, great 'distress-as-stress' and 
psychological suffering—all predicated by the destruction of the so- 
called feminine "inner society"; that ancient sanctuary of culture that 
gave support and comfort to the gynic female and her orthobiotic 
instincts for thousands of years.
Today, reproductive diseases like the fibroid tumor are rampant 
because our sisters have willingly (and unwillingly) assumed the 
stressful burdens of their men in the "outer society."
As noted earlier, the fibroid tumor is first seeded by a traumatic 
event; an experience so psychologically painful to the woman that it 
becomes fixed as an etheric signature or blemish upon the soul- 
energy template, which eventually condences to become a chemical 
signature in the blood. Stressful living and repeated recalls of the 
experience (both consciously and unconsciously) strengthen the 
etheric blemish and chemical signature, progressively disrupting the 
body's electromagnetic equilibrium.
The area or areas affected depend upon the quality and intensity 
of the experience, and how thought interpreted that experience with 
its "first impression." It is her mental interpretation of the event that  
triangulates the target! In this case —the womb.
Constant pre-occupation with emotional, pain-filled thinking 
about the experience, roots itself into the subconscious where it 
intensifies the resonance of the etheric blemish being broadcasted 
from the soul. Immunogenic materials are then summoned to the 
targeted area (the womb) in a valiant effort by the body to protect the


--- PAGE 339 ---
291
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART 1
womb from this self-inflicted, self-injuring psychic attack.
The targeted area also attracts organic debris (made up mostly of 
dead blood cells, plasma, fibrin, un-absorbed minerals and toxins).
Preoccupation with painful thinking eventually debilitates the 
body and thus the womb, predisposing the tissue where the 
thought is centered to become weakened. Organic debris slowly 
settles into the weakened area and a fibroid is born. The four 
elementals of the fire, air, water and earth are proportionately 
attracted to the area as well, kinetically compelled by the intention, 
the design and the resonant quality of the thought.
Thought is the operational matrix through which the Creator- 
Spirit manifests44 all things.
The weakened tissue of the uterus has accumulated waste and 
assorted toxins based on thought, the four elements and what you 
put into your body as food. It all becomes a psychological and 
emotional cauldron for the woman who suffers from such thinking, 
in that her pain forces her to eventually seek out and consume what I 
call "pain-pacification foods;" that is —food -like materials that the 
cellular memory recalls were of comfort to her on previous occasions 
when she felt similar emotional pains. Many women admitted to 
having been suddenly driven to re-visit old appetite patterns for junk 
foods they hadn't touched in years, just after a severe emotional 
trauma.
The Artificial Appetite-Entity...
The favorite foods of the fibroid sufferer almost always involve a 
milk product. Milk = momma+nipples, which from the archival 
cellular memory bank equates to nurturing, acceptance, 
understanding and unconditional love.
Other brain-numbing pacifier-foods frequently chosen by the 
fibroid sufferer include lots of cheese, heavy starch products, fried 
foods, chocolate, coffee, heavy proteins, and of course, a wide variety
44 In this case "woe-manifests" all things. - Author


--- PAGE 340 ---
292
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
of sugar-based products.
Having been introduced to these food-like products early in life, 
that is, "rewarded" by her parents with cookies, potato chips, candy 
and ice cream for being such a "good little girl", the fibroid sufferer 
has learned to reward herself in success and in failure —  especially the 
latter! She feels that no one would reward her efforts in failure, so by 
eating junk foods, she simultaneously forgives and rewards herself 
the way her parents or grandparents once did.
As a result, during her many years of emotional ups and downs, 
through thick and thin, she has learned to nurture herself by way of 
an unconditional rewarding system (especially during times of 
emotional let-down) until she gradually creates an artificial appetite- 
entity. This "entity" is a living by-product of adverse thoughts created 
by the coming together of elementals, bio-chemicals and thought- 
based kinetic-vortex energy. It inherits the woman's own personal 
out-look on life. It continually calls for her to satisfy it ,even if she no 
longer feels any overt effects of her previous emotional pain.
In effect, they are both joined at the Zip —like Siamese junk-food 
addicts!
Sadly, women have also suffered the effects of psycho-spiritual 
trauma by adopting the opposite; acts of selfprivation and starvation.
Women with heavy fibroid growths have confided to me that 
they had a ravenous appetite for dairy, sugar and starches, 
sometimes consuming one or two pints of Haagen-Daz ice cream 
daily, along with chocolate, potato chips, French fries, cookies, pizza 
(with extra cheese), lots of pasta and buckets of fried chicken. There 
is also the consumption of refined, de-natured cereals and grains.
Of them all, sugar, starches and dairy are the constants.
But taking all of the above into consideration, far and away the 
food that may be most responsible for hormonally pre-disposing 
womens' bodies, and/or excellerating the growth of fibroid tumors 
over the past 57 years, is not only a food, but also a food additive 
called soy, particularly the bio-engineered variety commonly used in 
the U.S. that is highly embued with toxic endocrine disrupters.


--- PAGE 341 ---
293
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Believe it or not, many sisters who purport to be on a "natural 
diet" also develop fibroids, but primarily from the overuse of 
genetically engineered soy, coupled with a deeply emotional episode, 
and the physical stresses from the memories that have accompanied 
it over time. They also have to fend for themselves; for example, 
raising small children all alone with no help from their unsupportive 
or abusive male counterparts. Under such conditions, a woman's 
thoughts and actions represent a sustained sub-conscious anger, 
desperation and frustration, which can pervert the elemental 
chemistries of even the best organic foods into poison.
Her thoughts and actions become yang because she has become 
obsessed with proving to herself, her un-supportive (ex) mate and the 
world, that she is stronger than the situation she struggles against. 
She is very afraid of becoming a "victim" once again, so in her 
striving to be self-sufficient she adopts aggressive, stress related 
activities just for her and her children to survive. These survivalist 
emotions cause her bio-chemistry to change from that of a woman 
making pure integrus hormones (estrogen and progesterone), to one 
producing a surplus un-converted, endogenous androgenic materials 
by which to match her yang thinking and actions.
This artificially activates and feeds the tumor's 'vortex of life', and 
the fibroid grows to the "size" of the stress and the "depth" of the 
emotional trauma she bears.
Junk Foods:
Cuddling up with your Emotional "Guilt Quilt"....
•
Beloved sista-queen; the artificial appetite entity nurtured to life 
within your sub-conscious now motivates, manipulates and 
mandates your behavior. It unilaterally demands your obedience 
until what was once merely a whim or passing taste-fancy, becomes a 
fully blown enslaving addiction.  The entity acts as your nipple-pacifier, 
and the assorted types of junk food you eat become your 'guilt-quilt' 
to 'warm' you during the 'cold winters' of your emotional distresses.
The appetite entity is now a perfect reflection of your 'lower self'


--- PAGE 342 ---
294
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
craving continual attention. The garbage you eat (when you feel like 
garbage) provides for it the raw materials to match and thus pacify 
the pain. The junk food physically embellishes the adverse etheric 
signature of the thought that created the appetite, and it is etched or 
'tattooed' unto the related organs as deeply as the resonating levels of 
your painful feelings. The more mentally pre-occupied you are with 
your pain and the more garbage you eat, the stronger the 
signature/entity becomes, and the larger the fibroid grows.
A woman can bear witness to the intensity or strength of her own 
personal appetite entities, by participating in a protracted therapeutic 
purification program over the period of a year or more —  through 
juicing, consuming raw foods, fasting and meditation.
When you no longer feed your artificial appetite-entity with the 
garbage that gave it life, you begin to feel it die in your nerves; 
especially in the area or areas of the body where these painful 
thought-signatures first took root.
Your physical pains and bothersome aches during purification, 
are the 'cries of anguish' vented by your now-starving appetite entity. 
But joyfully, it is also the venting of the many internalized screams 
from the psychological pains you've been suppressing for so long, as 
you were giving physical life to a hurtful and persistent pathogenic 
thought-form.
Beloved, the body is a magnificently tuned cosmic instrument of 
Universal Intelligence, and as such it, cannot tolerate a 
preponderance of adverse thinking and filthy eating habits for very 
long. It first tries to warn you that your thoughts and their related 
actions are causing damage to the organs thru the re-occurrences of 
fevers, colds and major or minor aches and discomforts. In your 
mind's efforts to psychologically cope, your emotional anguish, 
physical pains and addictive cravings eventually combine to become 
one adverse life-form —  your artificial appetite-entity.
Since your thoughts and related dietary habits can affect the astral- 
etheric infrastructures of an organ, its electro-cl'iemical components are 
affected as well. Over time, the organ becomes too weak to eliminate


--- PAGE 343 ---
295
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
waste effectively, so the body surrounds the toxins accumulating in 
the weakened area with fibrinous tissue to localize most of it, 
insulating the organ from further damage while waiting for you to 
"think" and "do" the right thing.
The body also redistributes much of the waste that it cannot 
contain into other fibrinous pockets (cysts), or by localizing them in 
various other areas of the body, surrounding the harmful material 
with mucus, fat, or other types of viscus watery substances. This it 
does (again) to dilute the concentration of poisons in order to keep 
them from damaging peripheral tissue. It continues to perform this 
service while waiting for the chance to use direct or alternative means 
to eliminate the waste, and heal itself of the etheric injury causing the 
physical and psychological pain.
Herein lies the reason for the 6-10 day menstrual hemorrhage 
when a fibroid grows very large. The cellular intelligence (through 
the pituitary and the hypothalamus) extends the bleeding cycle to 
maximize its efforts at removing systemic toxins.
The pockets of mucus, fibrin, ptomaine, pus, acid and assorted 
filth45 become what medical science diagnoses as fibroid tumors and 
cysts.
Candida Albicans Yeast...
•
Candida albicans yeast is the actual name for what is commonly 
called Candida Monella, or yeast infection. An even more precise 
definition for the symptoms would be pathogenic albicans yeast.
Candida has the chameleon-like ability to imitate almost any 
disease symptom-complex, from allergies to chlamydeous infections 
and even Multiple Sclerosis. Consistent pains in particular areas of 
the body, especially in the digestive tract, may actually be caused by 
this disease.
45 When you get right down to it, a fibroid tumor is nothing more than one big solid 
ball of snot. Ladies....Eeeeeowww! ©  - Author


--- PAGE 344 ---
296
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Candida can spread rapidly when the body's defensive resistance 
has been compromised by poor dietary habits, over-indulgence in 
pharmaceutical medications and herbal extracts (particularly 
antibiogenics), severe injury or surgery.
This particular type of yeast propagates primarily in the mucus 
membranes of the intestinal tract and in the vagina, along with 
billions of other so-called "friendly" bacteria. So-called "un-friendly" 
bacteria (a.k.a. allergens) are also found in these and other such 
membranes and cavities around the body, but if the pH and the 
body's defensive system are integrus, they are isolated and not 
allowed to re-enter the bloodstream or the deeper tissue networks.
Besides antibiotics...cortisone-based medications, birth control 
pills, condoms, frequent douching, talcum powders, feminine sprays, 
commercial tampons, certain sanitary pads and most contraceptive 
foams, are also known to instigate the proliferation of Candida 
albicans. Physical (and psychological) side effects are exacerbated by 
well-established Candida through the use of the above medications, 
as well as non-hygienic dietary habits. These side effects include 
depression, suicidal urges with a substantial loss in sex drive, 
constipation, diarrhea, acne and cystitis. Steroids and immuno­
suppressants (i.e., chemotherapy; radiation treatment; A.I.D.S. drugs, 
etc.) feed and strengthen Candida, as well as diets rich in sugar, yeast, 
low-fiber and heavy saturated fats.
When a person is afflicted with Candida albicans, very often the 
method of treatment chosen by medical science is the quick fix broad- 
spectrum antibiotic. The very word antibiotic gives evidence of its 
intended effect ... anti = against, and bio = life—or quite simply 
anti-life! In effect, severe collateral damage.
As with all drugs, antibiotics are inert (dead) indiscriminate 
agents and cannot tell the difference between 'good' or 'bad' 
bacteria.46
So it kills both.
46 As we know, there is no such thing as "bad" bacteria. This is a classification by 
western medicine for an organism whose "nature" simply changes to match the 
filth it is tasked with eliminating. - Author


--- PAGE 345 ---
297
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
This helps the Candida to spread further because the doctor has hit 
the body's defenses with "friendly fire" leaving pathogenic toxins to 
accumulate, which in turn causes the "bad bacteria" to proliferate 
and thus irritate the gastrointestinal tract, vagina, lungs and sinus 
cavities. The bacteria spreads to various other enervated tissues and 
organs via the body's fluid transportation network —the circulatory 
system. Other symptoms resulting from Candida growth are 
heartburn, distention of the bowel tract, gas pains and bloating, along 
with vaginal pain, burning or discharge.
Candida albicans in women (and men) can also affect the nervous 
system, causing depression (a primary symptom) as well as anxiety, 
migraines, irritability, irrational behavior, mood swings and frequent 
outbursts of crying. A lot of conditions labeled "un-diagnosable" or 
"untreatable" by doctors are actually problems caused by subtle cases 
of Candida. To date the pharmaceutical most recommended as a 
treatment for this disorder is the drug Nystatin, which in itself is a 
fungus or bacterial derivative of Streptomycis Noursei.
Again—Candida albicans yeast is a chameleon, and in all 
probability is one of the most mis-diagnosed health problems in the 
country today. It can manifest in a vast variety of ways, which is why 
everyone in America may very well be afflicted in some manner by 
this disease.
In fact, the once popular "yuppie disease" known as chronic fatigue 
syndrome is, in all probability, caused by Candida albicans yeast.
In many people it remains dormant until activated primarily by 
stress, the overuse of antibiotics, or in most cases, by consistent diets 
of starch, sugar-based or fatty, fiber-less foods.
Dr. Wendell Hoffman, founder of the Hoffman Research 
Institute in Utah, devised a test by which to tell whether or not one 
is suffering from a candida-related symptom.
The following is designed for adults and cannot be 
proportionately applied to children. For every "yes" answer, give 
yourself the number of points indicated.


--- PAGE 346 ---
298
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Candida Test...
1 - Have you taken tetracyclines such as Symycin; Pannycin;
Vibramycin; Minocin etc., or other antibiotics for acne or the flu?
(25 points)
2 - Have you, at any time in your life, taken other broad
spectrumantibiotics for urinary, respiratory or other "infections," for
2 months or longer; or in shorter courses, for more times over the 
period of 1 year? (20 points)
3 - Have you taken a broad spectrum antibiotic —  even in a single
course: that is, during the period of just one illness? (6 points)
4 - Have you, at any time in your life, been bothered by persistent
prostitis, vaginitis or other problems affecting your reproductive 
organs? (25 points)
5 - Have you ever been pregnant? One time (3 points) Two or more
times (5 points)
6 - Have you ever had an abortion? Once (10 points) Two or more times
(25 points)
7 - Have you ever taken birth control pills? For 6 months to 2 years
(8 points) For more than 2 years (15 points)
8 - Does exposure to perfumes, cooking foods, insecticides, fabric shop
odors, dry-cleaning fumes and other chemicals provide moderate to 
severe symptoms? (20 points) Mild symptoms (5 points)
9 - Have you ever taken Prednisone, Decadron or other cortisone-type
drugs? For 2 weeks or less (6 points) For more than 2 weeks 
(15 points)
10- Are your symptoms worsened by damp muggy days or in moldy 
places? (20 points)
11 - Have you ever had athletes foot, ring worms, jock itch or other
chronic fungal infections of the skin or nails? Were the infections 
severe or persistent? (20 points) Mild or moderate (10 points)
12 - Do you crave sugar? (10 points)
13 - Do you crave breads? (10 points)
14 - Do you crave alcoholic beverages? (10 points)
15 - Does tobacco smoke really bother you? (10 points)


--- PAGE 347 ---
299
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
For the following symptoms, score yourself accordingly:
- Occasional to mild = 3 points 
- Frequent and / or moderately severe = 6 points
- Severe and/or disabling = 9 points
16 - Fatigue
17 - Feeling "drained" a lot
18 - Poor memory
19 - Feeling detached or
"spaced out"
20 - Depression
21 - Numbness, burning,
tingling
22 - Persistent muscle aches
23 - Muscle weakness or
paralysis
24 - Pain and/or swelling in
joints
25 - Abdominal pain
26 - Bloating
27 - Trouble-some vaginal
discharges
28 - Persistent vaginal burning
and itching
29 - Impotence
30 - Loss of sexual drive
31 - Cramps or menstrual
32 - Endometriosis
33 - Pre-menstrual tension
(PMS)
34 - Spots in front of eyes
35 - Fading or erratic vision
36 - Diarrhea
37 - Dizziness irregularities


--- PAGE 348 ---
300
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
For the following symptoms, score appropriately:
- Occasional to mild = 1 point
- Frequent and / or moderately severe = 2 points
- Severe or disabling = 3 points
38 - Drowsiness 64 - Pressure above ears;
39 - Irritability feeling of head swelling
40 - Lack of coordination and tingling
41 - Inability to concentrate
42 - Mood swings
43 - Headaches
44 - Ear pain or deafness
45 - Constant itching
46 - Rashes
47 - Heart burn
48 - Indigestion
49 - Constant belching
50 - Mucus in stool
51 - Blisters in mouth
52 - Bad breath
53 - Nasal congestion
54 - Post nasal drip
55 - Sore or dry throat
56 - Constant dry cough
(non smokers)
57 - Pain and tightness in chest
58 - Wheezing and shortness of
breath
59 - Frequent urination
60 - Burning while urinating
61 - Loss of vision
62 - Burning teary eyes
63 - Recurrent infections or
fluid in ears


--- PAGE 349 ---
301
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Your total score can help you to decide if the symptoms you are 
persistently suffering from are yeast related. Scores for women would 
normally run higher because 7 to 8 categories apply exclusively to 
women, while 2 to 3 apply exclusively to men.
Scores Symptom
180 (women) 140 (men) Definitely Yeast connected
120 (women) 90 (men) Probably Yeast Connected
60 (women) 40 (men) Possibly Yeast Connected
Under 60 Under 40 Probably Not Yeast
(women) (men) Connected
Please pass this test on to other sisters and brothers that you know 
are suffering from health problems that they or their doctors cannot 
explain.
Breast Cancer...
•
This section is a sad testament to the prevailing times. The 
primary causes of this tragedy can be found in (a) dietary habits (b) 
the toxic environments surrounding us (c) gender-related behavioral 
habits, and believe it or not... (d) the dangerous technologies used by 
medical science to diagnose such diseases. More on this later.
While on a lecture engagement in Pennsylvania, I happened to 
tune in to a Sunday morning radio-broadcast of the Bill Brosie talk 
show entitled Philadelphia Focus. His guest that day was a Ms. Fran 
Vesco, then president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition.
Ms. Vesco began by stating that the coalition, which began in May 
of 1991, had just succeeded at changing the breast cancer epidemic 
from a "women's" issue to a "political" issue, saying this attracted a 
more broad-based network for funding research into finding its 
cause(s) and a cure. Chalk up another dubious and insidious 'victory' 
for the propaganda-cranking feminist manure-machine.
According to the then statistics given by Ms. Vesco, the problem 
seemed to be worsening. An estimated 45,000 more women are


--- PAGE 350 ---
302
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
suspected of having it, while 1.6 million are actually diagnosed with 
some form or different stages of it. In 1996, one hundred and eighty- 
three thousand (183,000) women found out they had breast cancer in 
that year alone. And get this—1,500 men were expected to contract it 
by that following year, with nearly 500 of them expected to have died 
from it. (What more evidence do we need of this civilization's descent 
into hermaphroditism?) According to the figures then, one in every 
six women currently living in this country was projected to be 
diagnosed with breast cancer by the year 2002.
Sadly, throughout the interview, Ms. Vesco continually affirmed 
her personal support for a medical solution only, even as she claimed 
to be investigating "alternatives." At one point Ms. Vesco even went 
so far as to say that "... women can't prevent breast cancer because 
the vast majority knows nothing of the prevailing risk factors."
She made vague references to certain "scientific findings" related 
to "an isolated gene", claiming that 5-10% of all breast cancers can be 
traced to family history. Ms. Vesco carried on with the pathetic 
premise that the invention or discovery of a drug will somehow stem 
the tide of this rising epidemic, and eventually save the day for all 
womankind.
Ms. Vesco claimed that exercise has been shown to reduce the 
incidence of breast cancers. Apparently, (according to her) it had 
been surmised by science and most women's groups, that higher 
levels of stress and testosterone in females after a certain age is 
somehow "medically beneficial" for the prevention of breast cancer. 
However, research authorities are yet to report on the effects of un­
converted androgenic steroids as a causative factor in all the 
fibrocystic and cancerous conditions now suffered by women living 
in industrial-based societies.
October has been dedicated as breast cancer awareness month all 
over the world. In 1991, the Breast Cancer Coalition raised nearly 
90 million dollars for research. In 1996, it raised nearly 900 million 
and overtook the 2 billion dollar mark as of the year 2000!
Lord knows what it will take in between 2008 and 2012. More than 
likely, the gross national product of a small African country.


--- PAGE 351 ---
303
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
So here we go again family. Ignorance and fear are once again 
converted into profitable commodities, feeding an ever-fattening 
cash cow that in turn is voraciously suckled by the pharmaceutical 
cartels.
These corporate parasites grow ever-richer on the coins of 
desperate people, who lack the basic self-knowledge and simple 
universal truths to free themselves from the self-perpetuating 
bondage of ignorance, disease and early death.
In 2001, the life expectancy of women in the United States was 
said to be 79.8 years, 5 years longer than that of men (74.4 yrs.). Yet 
still, the top 10 causes of death among women up to that period 
were...
Cancer 
Stroke 
Accidents 
Heart disease 
Blood poisoning 
Kidney disorders 
Diabetes mellitus 
Flu and pneumonia 
Alzheimer's disease 
Chronic lower respiratory disease
It's interesting to note that by the year 2003, the leading cause of 
death among women in the U.S. was still cancer, with breast cancer 
leading this morbid statistical parade. The graph below represented 
the 2003 mortality estimates for women by types of cancer...
9


--- PAGE 352 ---
304
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Type New Cases Deaths
-Breast 212,600 39,800
-Lung 80,100 68,800
-Colorectal 4,700 28,800
-Uterus 40,100 6,800
-Urinary System 28,400 8,700
-Ovary 25,400 14,300
-Non-Hodgkin's Lymph. 25,100 11,200
-Skin Melanoma 23,400 2,900
-Thyroid 16,300 800
-Bladder 15,200 3,900
-Pancreas 15,800 15,300
-Leukemia 12,700 9,800
-Cervix 12,200 4,100
-Oral 9,500 2,400
-Vaginal/ other genital 2,000 300
Of course, nowhere in these so-called surveys is there any 
mention of the causal factors responsible for these appalling 
mortality figures. All we are given is the same b.s. about how 'close' 
they are to finding cures, and how 'we the sheeple' can make that 
all possible by sending more money I
So cheer up you unworthy peons. Rest assured that the anointed 
high priests from the citadels of scientific research, are hard at work 
with your money concocting new potions and tinkering with new 
gadgets to save the day. The following should make us all feel warm, 
fuzzy and confident that this dreaded disease (breast cancer) doesn't 
stand a chance against our 'messiahs of medical miracles.'
Scientists at Providence-Portland Medical Center in Oregon have 
already claimed success by discovering (of all things) a new "breast 
cancer vaccine." In a televised interview I saw with reporter Chris 
Patrov of NBC, a man calling himself Dr. Walter Urba alleged that 
the vaccine (which contains "modified" breast cancer cells) was 
supposed to 'compel' the immune system to destroy tumors.
For reasons he admits are "...totally unknown to him and his 
associates", the good doctor claims that there are certain cancer cells 
already in the body that the immune system is "ignoring." They


--- PAGE 353 ---
305
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
wanted to shoot this substance into a woman's body that already had 
a breast cancer operation, to (as they claim) "...light up the areas for 
the immune system to recognize."
In other words, Nature hasn't the vaguest clue about what's going 
on with Her own creation, or what She needs to do with it during 
illnesses, until the lord-high doctor-scientist-priest shows Her what to 
do by "lighting the way."
Yet another group of breast cancer researchers (this time at 
University Hospital in Stonybrook L.I.) claimed to have isolated a 
so-called key enzyme they defined as Mitogen-Activated Protein  
Kinase, or M.A.P Kinase; which they claimed rose from 5 to 20 times 
the normal amounts found in non-cancer patients.
Of course, it wouldn't have occured to these myopic brick-heads 
that any higher enzymatic levels showing up in diseased breast 
tissue, are merely incidental effects or symptoms of the problem, and 
therefore only indirectly related to the actual causes. But they're 
happy because now (you guessed it), they have yet another excuse to 
develop, manufacture and push MORE DRUGS; this time for the 
expressed purpose of suppressing this particular enzyme.
Believe it or not there is even a "Jewish gene" hypothesis that 
scientists claim may be responsible for breast cancer in women of 
Ashkenazi descent; that is—women descended from tribes 
originating in the Caucasus mountains of Eastern Europe. This 
"specialized" cancer gene was discovered about 20 years ago and has 
been labeled BRCA-1 and BRCA-2.
As a last-ditch effort at finding a solution to this epidemic, some 
women (mostly Caucasian) are opting to remove healthy breasts in a 
desperate attempt to prevent the dreaded disease from ever 
occurring to them. Called prophylactic mastectomy,  its purpose is to 
circumvent the appearance of cancer for so-called "high risk" 
women. But scientists have already stated that cancer can grow back on the  
tissue that remains amnvay!  It's a "throw out the baby with the bath 
water" solution—one more tragic testament to a humanity in its 
terminal stages of decline.


--- PAGE 354 ---
306
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
Item: This act of prophylactic mastectomy represents the very height of 
egocentric hypocrisy where it concerns feminism and their crusade against female 
genital mutilation (FGM). They (feminists) seem to turn a conveniently blind, 
racist eye to those Caucasian women who mutilate their bodies with this 
"prophylactic process", but shout rabid protestations, criticisms and indignations 
at African women (and men), for supporting the practice of their 10,000-year-old 
ritual of female circumcision! Madame feminist, remember that old Temptations' 
song - "If you livin' in a glass house ..."
I will elaborate further on the subject of female circumcision in 
part 2, The Politics and Economics of Women's Diseases.  For now, in light 
of Ms. Vesco's previous pessimistic statement that "women can't 
prevent breast cancer" due to their "...ignorance of the prevailing 
risk factors", the following is dedicated to putting such inane 
fatalistic rhetoric to rest.
Pandering to Ignorance...
•
Most of the public's perception of what causes breast cancer (in 
fact, any disease) is based on what is fed to them by an oligarchic 
medical monopoly through its mouthpiece the media. You see, it is 
more profitable for them if the public accepts their version of the story 
behind this problem, so that they can control the enormous financial 
windfalls that a frightened, paranoid public would gladly pay to 
ensure salvation.
The trick in this case is to make the average woman believe that 
her body is "attacking" her; or that most of her body parts are 
breaking down because of "cellular suicide", and that her body is 
nothing more than a series of fragmented pieces comprising a jigsaw 
of replaceable parts.
Now tell her that the doctor-priests are working feverishly on 
ways to replace or medicate these parts with a product (that is, 
'sacrament') they've invented and developed "just for her salvation."
Such was the gist of an advertisement appearing in The New York 
Times Magazine  dated July 9, 1995. In it, America's Pharmaceutical 
Research Companies who placed the ad wrote...


--- PAGE 355 ---
307
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"...In some women, a tumor-suppressing gene known as p53 isn't 
working. But we are...!"
It goes on to say;
"...Someday a biotechnology advance may replace p53 in the 
fight against breast cancer... Not long ago, no one knew that 
a p53 gene ever existed. But thanks to ongoing research, 
scientists now know that in many women who have breast 
cancer, p53 isn't doing its job to suppress the growth of cancer 
cells. Finding a cure for breast cancer will not be easy, but our 
researchers are working to find a breakthrough that would act as a 
substitute for a normal p53 gene. Pharmaceutical company 
researchers are working hard to find new treatments— 
and ultimately the cure—for breast cancer. 21 approved 
prescription drugs are available right now and 62 more are  
currently being developed ..."
Incredible! The above represents just one more link in a chain of 
shameless, gratuitous attempts to pander to a woman's fear and self­
ignorance. All this to insidiously recruit her into becoming an 
ongoing client/customer/consumer of pharmaceutical drugs for the 
rest of her life. According to the above ad, a total of 83 poisonous 
concoctions will be made available to afflicted women in the future, 
including an artificial gene tailor-made to do the job a woman's body 
is supposed to, but no longer can.
Not one line is given to convey the fact that the cause and the cure 
lay in a study of the habits, behavior and environment of the woman 
before the manifestation of this disease.
VVhy breast cancer occurs will never be revealed by any member of 
the pharmaceutical cartel (even if they do find out), because they 
know they would go out of business tomorrow should the general 
public become aware of its true causes, and with that awareness, 
mobilize intelligently to do something about it.
?


--- PAGE 356 ---
308
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"A Mammogram's A Mamma-Jamma..."
•
Perhaps the most insidious and downright diabolical precipitator 
of this disease, may in fact originate from within the very temple 
walls of medicine itself—through that highly promoted medical 
ritual called ...the mammogram.
I call this medical ritual insidious and diabolical with good reason, 
for when you come to know the real facts, no other adverbs appear 
appropriate.
It's impossible for me to embrace the depth and scope of how 
dangerous this practice is to the health of women within these limited 
pages, so I turn the reader's attention to these powerful books...
"Preventing Breast Cancer" - by Dr. John Gofman
"Reclaiming Your Health" - by John Robbins
"Nuclear Witness:
(Insiders Speak Out)" - by Leslie Freeman
Within these covers you will discover how women are duped into 
believing that the mammogram is the best available diagnostic tool 
for detecting breast cancers; how necessary they are in preventing 
breast cancer by way of "early detection", and how the media is 
complicit in propagating this wickedness by not informing the public 
of studies concerning the grave dangers associated with taking them.
Dr. Irwin Bross, former director of bio-statistics at Roswell Park 
Memorial Institute in Buffalo, New York, once headed a project that 
studied the drastic rise in rates of Leukemia in the 1970s. It was called 
the Tri-State Leukemia Study.  His sample used the tumor registries of 
16 million people from New York, Maryland, and Minnesota. Dr. 
Bross checked the health history, occupational history, residential 
history, family background, cause of death of parents, pet ownership, 
exposure to farm animals (et al) and came to this startling conclusion:
".. .the main cause for the rising rates of Leukemia, was medical 
radiation in the form of diagnostic medical x-rays!"


--- PAGE 357 ---
309
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Following the same stream of consciousness in 1995, one Dr. John 
Gofman, Professor Emeritus of Molecular and Cell Biology at the 
University of California at Berkley, published his research in the 400- 
page book noted above.
Professor Gofman writes that in his estimation...
".. .three-quarters of the current annual incidence of breast 
cancer in the United States is being caused by earlier 
ionizing radiation, primarily from medical sources...
Medical Science has known for 20 years that ionizing  
radiation is a prominent and proven cause of breast  
cancer..."  [Emphasis mine]
It should come as no surprise that Dr. Bross lost his funding from 
the National Cancer Institute, literally days after his study was 
published in the prestigious American Journal of Public Health.
And there you have it beloved sisters. Within these short verses 
you have the findings of two pre-eminent researchers in their 
respective fields; a man who worked for the Atomic Energy 
Commission and established the Biomedical Research Division at 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory for the purpose of 
evaluating the health effects of all types of nuclear activity; and a 
former director of Bio-Statistics at Roswell Park Memorial Institute in 
New York — both stating without equivocation that "earlier ionizing 
radiation"(e.g.) mammograms —  are proven precursors to the inevitable  
formation of breast cancer !
What more proof do we need to show that the ongoing crime of 
state-sanctioned iatrogenic manslaughter by way of nuclear 
bombardment, has become an insidious matter-of-fact reality 
concerning the breast cancer epidemic? This must be the case if these 
criminals have known about the deadly effects of mammogram 
radiation for over 20 years - and still continue to use it!
But hey! We've got the marathons, the walk-a-thons, the 
donations, the federal funding—the car ribbons; so it's allll good, 
cause it's allll -  big business! Right?


--- PAGE 358 ---
310
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Breast cancer is reported to be the second leading cause of cancer 
deaths in black women between the ages of fifteen and fifty four.
Fifteen?!
You read it right. Statistics show that breast cancer deaths are 
higher in young black women than it is in young white women, but 
the statistics reverse themselves after age 50.
Should we not be campaigning strenuously to alert our sisters to 
the imminent dangers associated with the doctor-recommended 
'nuclear' dosing of our women with yearly mammograms?
Finally, just about the time a woman experiences menopause, 
progesterone grows to pathologic excesses, causing vitamin A to be 
lost because adverse progesterone levels neutralize it. Gynandry 
(homosexuality in women) plays a crucial role in this epidemic as 
well, because the androgenic materials causing this condition, forces 
a woman's germ-plasm to be deficient of essential levels of vitamin A 
and other vital nutrients.
The Homosexual Factor...
•
Gynandry is on the rise here in western civilization (and now 
unfortunately, the so-called "developing world"), which has 
contributed to the sharp curve upward in the ever-growing incidence 
of breast cancer, infertility and other hormone-related diseases. Of 
course, the feminized media and the pharmaceuticals would never 
admit that gynandry (female homosexuality or "inter-sexuality") 
along with the hormonal instabilities that cause it, are also important 
anomalies to investigate when searching for the reasons why breast 
cancer is so rampant.
Case in point.
A National Cancer Institute report by Suzanne Haynes revealed 
that lesbians were 3x more susceptible to getting breast cancers than  
heterosexual women.
This report appeared in a gay magazine called The Advocate.


--- PAGE 359 ---
311
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In a predictable attempt to downplay the "dyke-factor", 
Ms. Haynes speculated that the higher occurrences of breast cancer in 
homosexual women are primarily caused by greater alcohol 
consumption, body fat, limited access to health care and fewer 
pregnancies -  excluding gender perversion through hormonal 
degradation as an instigating factor.
Predictably, Ms. Haynes never elaborated on the category of 
"fewer pregnancies", obviously a 'sanitized' way of reporting the 
high rate of abortions by gay women who previously led 
heterosexual lives —  a subject we will pursue in a later section.
The National Institute of Medicine also corroborated this in 1999, 
stating that "...There is some evidence that the prevalence of certain 
risk factors for breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers might be 
higher among lesbians."
The report went on to say that, to the vast majority of so-called 
"third world" women (those more gynic in nature like the so-called 
peasant women of South America, the Orient and Africa), breast 
cancer was virtually unknown. However, this is rapidly changing 
now that China and other eastern cultures have adopted the perverse 
lifestyles and habits of the European. You can tell the extent of the 
changes to their bio-chemistries over the last few generations, 
because the condition known as acne vulgaris 47 (a condition more 
common to females in the west) has become more prominent in 
many Asian women today.
It has now come to light that simply giving estrogen supplements 
to women afflicted with breast cancer, or with symptoms of 
menopause, acne and gynandry (as was the previous practice of 
medical science), was a huge mistake. This failed because the female 
body also needs vitamin A, boron, calcium and the proper 
integration of healthy progesterone production as balancing factors. 
Herein lies a primary reason why women who were placed on such 
regiments tended to develop ovarian and uterine cancers as well.
47 Acne on a young woman is a sure sign of elevated levels of androgenic hormones.


--- PAGE 360 ---
312
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The body needs a homeostatic balance  of environment, nutrition, 
and psycho-spiritual well being to function in optimal health, which 
is why to date, the westernized pursuit of a cure for this disease 
continues to amount to nothing more than futile, frustrating 
endeavors that will never realize a positive, wholistic conclusion.
Fibrocystic women and women with "genetic pre-dispositions" to 
cancer, are in desperate need of such nutrients as glutamic acid, paba, 
vitamin D, E and C —  all of which give essential and vital support to 
proper aromatase conversion in the production of integrus estrogen. 
If vitamin E is lost or deficient for example, it cannot help to prevent 
the destruction of vitamin A in the body, or help it to be stored in the 
liver. This will invariably speed up the aging process and other 
degenerative cycles that lead to the appearance of cancers.
Caucasian women suffer most during menopause because of 
vitamin D deficiencies as well, since estrogen metabolizes from it. 
Vitamin D is the melanin-enhancing vitamin, the purest of which is 
activated primarily by the light-spectrums of the Sun.
Environmental Attack...
Women are hardest hit by the wide array of environmental 
poisons because the mammary glands are comprised of 
'indiscriminate' tissue that attracts all types of radiation of every 
kind; more so than any other part of the body —with the thyroid and 
hair next in line.
Radiation poisoning from all of the home appliances and other 
electrical equipment usually found in modern day offices, contribute 
greatly to breast tissue damage as well. Electrical saturation of our 
environment has also helped to ruin the natural geo-magnetic waves 
of our planet. Poor nutritional habits and the overuse of synthetic 
vitamins, along with chemical/metal-based drugs used in treatment- 
based therapies, all work in tandem to undermine a woman's 
anatomical integrity.
Organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) such as DDT, y-BHC (lindane), 
PCP and a-BHC (benzene hexachloride), which are all banned in the


--- PAGE 361 ---
313
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
United States, somehow manage to find their way back into our 
supermarkets through non-organic butter, dairy, nuts, beans, 
avocados, meats and grains; also in Mexican tomatoes, mangoes and 
Spanish olives.
Organochlorine pesticide toxicity also occurs in plastic containers 
(primarily the #1 to # 4 density gauges), canned foods, fluorinated 
(tap) water, chlorinated swimming pools and paper products. Add to 
these the rBGH inoculants given to cows to enhance their size and 
speed their development to maturity, in order to mate them early to 
maximize milk production and meat market value, and you get the 
sordid picture.
It's estimated that between 40 and 70 million different types of 
toxic and hazardous chemicals are used in U.S. industries and 
businesses. In fact, it was also estimated that the U.S. generates 
approximately 95 percent of the zvorld's overall hazardous and  
"specialized" waste by-products!  As many as 45,000 assorted types of 
pesticides are now used in the United States alone, and although the 
use of such pesticides over the past fifty years has significantly 
increased nearly tenfold (to over a billion and a half pounds  sprayed 
every year), crop losses due to pests have literally doubled!
Another subtle precipitator of mammarian cysts has been the 
aluminum-based anti-perspirant deodorants frequently used by 
today's on the go career woman. Because the advertisers told her she 
has to remain "soft and dry" to impress the boss, the career woman 
has jeopardized her well being by complying with this commercial 
nonsense. The active ingredients in anti-perspirants shrink or seal the 
pores under a woman's arms, which are outlets for fluid wastes. 
These areas also happen to be major nodal points of the lymphatic 
system, which is why the doctor checks it for lumps as well.
If you block the body's ability to eliminate waste anywhere, the 
consequence is constipation; that is, a systemic retardation of normal 
eliminative functions, and the subsequent accumulation of filth that 
results. Breast cancer is physically seeded within a degenerated, 
enervated circulatory system and alimentary tract, which in turn


--- PAGE 362 ---
314
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
affects the lymphatic system resulting in an accumulation of 
lymphatic waste within the mammary glands.
An interesting article appearing in an offbeat newspaper made the 
statement that condoms were found to be a contributing cause of 
breast cancers in so-called third world countries. Susan Jameson 
wrote that Dr. Arne Gjorgov, an epidemiologist at the University of 
Kuwait, says that his research involving American women found 
that those whose husbands used condoms had at least a 30 to 70% 
higher incidence of breast cancer (and ovarian cancers) than husbands 
who didn't. The article stated that Dr. Gjorgov was urging 
governments to stop promoting condom use until further tests are 
conducted, so as to study their long-term effects on women's overall 
health and physiologies.
His tests also showed an even stronger link between thyroid 
cancers and condoms.
There may be some validity to these claims, since scientists have 
also recently discovered that the condom actually blocks the passage 
of organic lubricants containing protective factors secreted in the 
semen of the male. Without these protective chemistries that would 
naturally flow or be secreted during intercourse, bio-friendly 
enzymes are impeded from protecting the vagina and the penis 
against the poisonous constituents inherent in a condom.
Most condoms were/are usually made of latex covered with talc 
as a lubricant, both of which are toxic to the body if they manage to 
get into the bloodstream. Talc is made with asbestos-like materials. 
Latex is originally a milky viscous sap extracted from a rubber plant. 
It is an emulsion of rubber comprised of plastic globules set in water, 
and is used in paints, adhesives and various other synthetic rubber 
products.
Ladies, these ingredients are not what you want in the vagina!
And finally—radios, televisions, computers, sun lamps, 
fluorescent lights, microwave antennas, ovens, phones, and other 
such "modern conveniences", are also prime contributors to the 
destruction of mammary tissue as well. Radio wave density is now


--- PAGE 363 ---
315
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
100 to 200 million times that of the sun's natural rays, and coupled 
with the abnormal sunspot activity over the last 75 years, have 
adversely affected all of the Earth's female life forms.  Russian scientists 
who exposed female rats, rabbits, dogs and chimpanzees to 
microwave radiation for only a few minutes, found that it caused a 
heavy release of stress-related hormones, grew tumors and even 
caused cataracts to form.
Cellular damage and adrenal cortex exhaustion have been 
reported as well. Electrical fields, asbestos, lead and zinc sulfide 
environments from work places suffering with a toxic environmental 
condition called "sick building syndrome", have also caused women 
to lose significant levels of B 2, B6, copper, manganese, boron, 
molybdenum, iron and nickel —all of which contribute to liver and 
kidney dysfunction and damage. Loss of B-complex also causes 
depression, confusion, forgetfulness, prolonged menses, fibrocystic 
conditions and eventually, breast cancer.
Abortion
•
First; a qualifying statement. Please overstand that with the 
writing of this particular section, I am not advocating for or against 
the practice of abortion. What a woman chooses to do with her own 
body is her prerogative. Notwithstanding the obvious physical, and 
sometimes not-so-obvious psycho-spiritual and emotional 
consequences she surely endures, it is undoubtedly a deeply 
personal, heart-rending choice that a woman unfortunately has to 
address and experience alone —no matter what the arguments of 
proponents on either side of this issue.
That said, here are a few words spoken by Margaret Sanger, 
founder of Planned Parenthood and avid supporter of eugenics, so 
that our sister-queens may ponder the ramifications of their choices.
In 1921 Sanger wrote and said;
"...Eugenics is the most adequate and thorough avenue to the solution of racial, 
political and social problems. (There is)...an ever increasing, unceasingly spawning 
class of human beings who never should have been born at all...(But)...We do not 
want the word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population..."


--- PAGE 364 ---
316
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Also; my qualifying statement is not meant to dismiss the role 
and feelings of a husband and father in this life-or-death equation.
I now wish to bring the seeker's attention to what is perhaps the 
most under-reported, under-emphasized story (next to 
mammograms) related to female breast cancer today; the alleged 
connection between multiple abortions and breast cancer.
Thirteen out of fourteen U.S. studies, and thirty-one out of thirty- 
five studies worldwide have reported the abortion risks to women, 
including the risks found in lab tests done on animals. It appears 
that this vast international research effort uncovered vital facts 
concerning how the act of abortion affects the cells of the breast 
directly — the whole problem being connected to (you guessed it) —  
the hormone-complex estrogen.
Many proponents in favor of abortion rights have attacked the 
merits of this research, saying that it is specious, or at best, 
inconclusive. Well, let's take a look-see for ourselves, shall we?
During the preliminary stages of pregnancy there is an 
enormous surge of the hormone estrogen, particularly a derivative 
called estradiol, which increases some 2000% causing breast cells to 
multiply at a tremendous rate in the first trimester. These cells are 
said to lay the foundation for the production of milk.
Now. These young milk producing breast cells are called 
"undifferentiated cells", and it is they that scientists allege are the 
most prone to developing into cancer. If these immature cells are 
allowed to grow and differentiate into mature, specialized, milk- 
producing tissue, they are least likely to turn cancerous. This is 
because the estrogen levels in a pregnant woman's body begin to 
recede mid-way to the end of the second trimester —  particularly the 
derivative estradiol, due in most part to the elevated presence of 
such hormones as human placental lactogen.
But, (and here's the stinger), when pregnancy is artificially 
terminated through an induced abortion during the first to middle 
parts of the second trimester, scientists have observed that these 
young growing cells (now serving no further purpose), are 
suddenly left in limbo. In a word —  traumatized!


--- PAGE 365 ---
317
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Subsequently, extremely high levels of estrogen (again) 
particularly the high presence of the derivative estradiol, are also 
left in stasis to fester unprocessed and un-con verted.
It is this mixture of traumatized immature breast cells, stewing in 
a brew of radical hormonal chemicals, that is said to set the 
foundational conditions for the inevitable appearance of breast 
cancers. It's no secret that scientific research has shown (and still 
continues to show) that cells in the body that have been subjected to 
trauma —  whether by drugs, radiation, psychologically or 
otherwise —  are extremely vulnerable to becoming cancerous.
Research scientists have always known of the 
abortion/estrogen/breast cancer risk, particularly the 
estrogen/abortion connection, which explains their reluctance to 
recommend it to menopausal women with a record of multiple 
abortions, or a family history of breast cancer.
It's interesting to note as well that so-called women's advocacy 
groups like the feminist N.O.W (National Organization of Women) 
have also known about these scientific facts for years.
Why then have they been so criminally silent on so crucial an 
issue?
In August of 1980, The American Journal of Pathology  released a 
report (pages 497-511) stating that cancer researchers injected a 
number of pregnant rats with DMBA, a known cancer causing 
substance. They then induced abortions in half of the test subjects, 
allowing the other half to carry their pregnancies to term. The 
report stated that among the aborted rats, 77% of them developed 
breast cancer while among those allowed to carry to term, only 5% 
developed breast cancer.
In December of 1993, a report entitled "Breast Cancer Risk 
Factors in African-American Women", appearing in the Howard 
University Tumor Registry Experience,  and published in the Journal of  
the National Medical Association,  confirmed a 50% increased risk 
factor for breast cancer in women under 40 who had aborted.
But check this: it went on to say that black women in their 40's 
who had aborted, experienced a 180% increased risk,  and a 
staggering 370% increase in those over 50 who had abortedl


--- PAGE 366 ---
318
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
To Capsulate...
1. Undifferentiated estrogen is a scientifically established promoter 
of both healthy and cancerous tissue in a woman's body...
2. Estradiol, a testosterone/progesterone derivative, increases 
twenty-fold, or at least 2000% in levels during the first trimester 
of a normal pregnancy...
3. High estradiol levels in a woman's body (along with other risk 
factors) have been proven to act as positive markers for the 
formation of breast cancer —  unless its pre-destined purpose (in 
this case, to assist in the creation of milk-producing cells
and tissue during pregnancy) is allowed to be fulfilled...
4. Artificial (or induced) abortions disrupt the development of 
milk-producing cell tissue in the breasts, which causes trauma 
in these cells, forcing them to remain in stasis within the breasts 
and increasing the risk of their developing into cancerous tissue.
The Melatonin Factor
•
One of the primary reasons for the mass popularity of the product 
melatonin (NA-5-MT), is because geneticists and endocrinologists 
have recently discovered that Caucasians are 60-70% more susceptible to  
cancers of all types without it. But in their zeal to promote this analogue 
product, scientists have ignored the fact that this neuro-transmitter is 
but one part of an overall "melanin-molecular-complex." Isolating it 
into an individual synthetic agent, causes the fragmented part to 
behave just like any other inert drug that enlists a temporary effect. 
The cumulative side effects end up causing greater damage in the 
long run.
But they couldn't care less about that.


--- PAGE 367 ---
319
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The skin cancer epidemic among Earth's Caucasian population has 
intensified greatly, now that the Sun and our planet are experiencing 
mutual polar shifts. These series of natural cosmic events have 
caused extremely high solar flair activity and violent magnetic fluxes, 
which (along with pollution), have eroded the integrity of the outer 
atmospheric mantle of our planet.
Eugenic scientists on the payroll of the Illuminati industrialists are 
accelerating their efforts to discover the necessary methods of 
survival by which to protect themselves, susceptible life-forms and 
eco-systems from the detrimental affects of heightened solar 
radiation fallout —  even to the point of creating underground cities.
But it may already be too late for them (and us). Their 
technological/industrial world seems to have become the means to 
our collective physiological demise as a species.
Example: in so-called "classic blonds" (or what are clinically 
identified by scientists as "susceptible Caucasians"), it was found that 
even something as simple as a night-light on in the bedroom while 
sleeping, reduces the production of breast cancer-inhibiting 
melatonin by 46 percent. Night-lights prevent the necessary increases 
of naturally occurring anti-oxidants that melatonin would normally 
provide to breast tissue cells. This has unknowingly contributed to 
heightening the risks of breast cancer in primarily Caucasian women 
for the past three to four decades. Scientists also found that exposure 
to any type of light at night time, even from something as simple as a 
street lamp filtering in through the bedroom window, reduces the 
production of melatonin as much as a moderate daily use of 80 to 
90 proof alcohol. Alcohol interferes with the liver's ability to process 
hormones and other bio-chemicals, thus causing a drastic reduction 
in available melatonin. It is significantly reduced by prolonged 
exposure to electromagnetic fields as well.
Food products containing beta-blockers also reduce it. Beta- 
blockers are substances that block the absorption of adrenal agents by 
interfering with receptor sites along the autonomic nervous system.
On the other hand, melatonin proliferates in low fat /low calorie


--- PAGE 368 ---
320
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
diets, and is said to prevent cancer by restructuring or regulating the 
way hormones are utilized.
Unfortunately, due to stress, poor diet, over-medication, multiple 
vaccinations and environmental toxicity, black women have now 
become just as susceptible. The integrity of the highly sensitive 
melanin molecule has been gradually eroded by generations of 
exposure to de-naturized food, drugs, polluted water, toxic industrial 
environments and the racially related stress factors associated with 
the 'white supremist' culture of western civilization.
I have always instructed my students that whenever possible, they 
should nurture their own melanin-molecular-complex by eating only 
organic 'ital' foods, reading only by natural light, having a full 
spectrum lamp next to them while working on word processors or 
computers, and to go to sleep in complete to virtual darkness before
11 pm., after they have "recharged" their melanin covering by day in 
the early morning or late afternoon sunlight.
Secretly, the melanin molecule has been the focus of tenacious 
study by European eugenic scientists since 1948, and was found to be 
a crucial component for their survival in the new millennium. The 
word 'eugenics' was coined by one Sir Francis Galton, anthropologist 
and half cousin of Charles Darwin. (No surprise there).
In fact, it's been the great universities of Europe that have hosted 
high level scientific symposiums on the melanin molecule, where 
each year ever-more remarkable revelations were presented about 
what has come to be defined as "creation's molecular black box."
Authorative research papers proclaiming its miraculous virtues 
have existed in the archives of these European universities for 
decades, with contemporary works even declaring its existence in 
outer space  as a living amalgam of protoplasmic molecular black- 
matter (called "cosmids; plasmids and fularenes"; ie " cosmic DNA") 
floating towards us in the near Milky Way. They've also discovered 
that melanin might actually be "conscious" —functioning as the 
foundational intelligence that organizes all of the 
cellular/molecular/atomic components of corporeal life.


--- PAGE 369 ---
321
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
With all of the incredible discoveries noted above, the only thing 
the public hears about melanin is its commercial applications, and the 
many ways that corporate scientists manipulated it to create superior 
sunglasses, astronaut visors, sun-block lotions, skin darkening 
creams, medications, contact lenses and the like.
Other research not discussed in open forum deals with melanin 
and its military applications, as well as its intravenous medicinal uses 
in survival scenarios for Caucasians —  particularly those of Nordic 
descent. Incredibly, with the newest discoveries in genome research 
and melanin, there now exists the capability to transmute a fully 
blond, genetically recessive Caucasoid, into a fully melanated 
Africoid-like human —even with the helixed hair!
Scientific predictions of traumatic Earth changes occurring in the 
very near future, are dictating the lengths to which they are expected 
to go to obtain the very purest versions of it, putting certain plant 
species, primates and other communal animals of this planet in dire 
jeopardy. And believe it or not, that includes humans of color.
Think of it. Weaponized bacteria-like life forms that attack organic  
biological melanin in hue-mans!  A Caucasian endocrinologist with 
whom I became acquainted at the 1995 Whole Life Expo held in New 
York City, made me aware of this frightening fact!
He called it back then flesh-eating bacteria!!
Does all the above sound a little too crazy; just left field of reality?
Well think about this.
Thirty years ago you would have thought me insane if I told you 
that members of this same fraternity of elitist eugenic scientists had 
found ways to engineer cows to give human milk; cloned and created 
"self-shearing" sheep; engineered pigs to grow human hearts or 
fused their genes with that of a tomato; genetically altered silkworms 
so that their bacteria spins thread; genetically altered a spider's web to 
be strong as steel; transplanted a human head ; put the 'anti-freeze 
gene' of Arctic fish into strawberries and other animals to withstand 
cold climates and higher altitudes; put the heart of a baboon into the 
chest of a little black girl; genetically engineered mice with human


--- PAGE 370 ---
322
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
brain cells to produce human sperm; incubated a human baby in a 
sheep's uterus, transplanted it to a gorilla and brought it to term; 
used DNA to pilot spaceships and run their computers, or grafted a 
human ear on to the back of a rat.
But guess what beloved. It's all been donel  And believe me this is 
just the beginning. Based on the above —the worst is yet to come!
Forgotten Words of 'The Messenger'...
•
On many occasions I have mentioned at lectures and seminars 
that cloning had been in effect since the late 1930s / mid-1940s, and 
that work on genetic enhancement technologies through cross­
species experimentation had been an ongoing project of eugenic 
scientists for decades. In fact, the hoopla surrounding the global 
announcement of the Human Genome Project was just a diversion —  a 
way of lessening the impact of what many rebellious scientists on the 
inside were about to expose; that being—the Illuminati's 
accomplishments with such endeavors as 'Project Prometheus', and 
the existence of trans-human experimentation since the late 1940s.
These scientists were about to reveal that cloning and cross-specie 
interbreeding had been so successful, that some of their 
"experiments" were actually allowed to leave the lab! And like the 
assassinated astros-physicists who were about to expose the fact that 
a planet-disrupting asteroid will more than likely impact Earth in the 
near future, and that super-powers were building underground cities 
for elites in lieu of this event for over half a century—many rebellious 
geneticists were either "suicided" or never heard from again.
The parasitic elite's search for new and improved "humanoid 
shells", has taken them to the brink of dimensional worlds that their 
self-serving, self-destructive, infantile spirits will never be able to 
fully fathom, much less fully control.
Incredible as all of the above appears to be, this is not new to black 
people. Or at least it shouldn't be. All too often the problem with us is 
our short memories concerning the teachings and revelations of our 
"barely departed" blessed teachers.


--- PAGE 371 ---
323
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Question. Was it just a coincidence that back in 1959, the 
Honorable Elijah Muhammed spoke extensively on cloning being 
done in the African nation of Angola, chronologically decades before 
the announcement of the Human Genome Project? Was it just a 
coincidence that he exposed the story of the many secret genetic 
experimentations on black people, stating that Yacub had returned 
long before the bloody slaughter in Rwanda took place—  just 
northeast of Angola?
Was it simply coincidence that he divulged the existence of a 
secret order of European eugenisists working on a plan to 
manufacture a hybrid being in Africa; more specifically —  a new 
species of black woman; one that had all the similiarities to our 
beloved archetypal queen, but would be genetically altered to create 
only white babies from her womb?
Was it also a coincidence that the Messenger fore-warned us to 
beware the coming of pseudo-melanated clones, or 'black synthetics' 
being seeded into the black population; that the way to detect such a 
creature was to check the roots of its head hair for a coloring that 
appeared to be grayish-green; that this color betrayed the artificial 
nature of their makeup, which could also be detected in their eyes?
Is it just another coincidence that more and more richly melanated 
babies are being bom with either yellow Nordic blond hair, Scottish 
red hair and/ or pale sky-blue eyes. (See the little cutie in figure 36—a; boy 
with richly melanated skin and pale, sky-blue eyes.)
Aborigines in North America; or "something else?"
Taking these factors into account, isn't it also curious that during 
the slaughter of the Tutsis and progressive Hutus between April and 
mid-July 1994, reports from the bloody scenes stated that many 
times, a majority of the people taking part in the massacres were 
"black" women? Brother Bobby Hemmitt made a plausible 
hypothesis of the underlying situation, when he conjectured that the 
wholesale slaughter of nearly a million  men, women and children —  
all within a time-frame of just four months —120 days! ... (  in a 
territory roughly the size of Rhode Island) was somehow connected


--- PAGE 372 ---
324
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
to covert research and experimentation being done on black people 
and their melanin—  just as Elijah had spoken about in 1959.
Would'nt it be feasible to at least speculate, that apart from the 
obvious genocidal campaigns against African peoples for the land 
and its super-rich resources, that Rwanda, the Congo and other such 
horrific events now taking place in Central Africa, may also be 
masking a covert quality control genetic clean up campaign to 
eliminate evidence of covert experimentations in eugenics —all 
masked as a political and culturally motivated "inter-tribal conflict?"
Or maybe what we are witnessing is a a Global 2000 "population 
elimination" rehearsal staged for future implementation in Asia and 
the Americas from 2012 through 2020?!!
Again; with all of the information related to the incredible 
advancements in genetic manipulation, and the provable capabilities 
of scientists who now "suddenly" have the know-how to create 
trans-human species and the like, one has to seriously question the 
official time-line of alleged "discoveries" in the genetic sciences being 
put at the late 1990s (approximately two years after the massacres in 
Rwanda) —  since the Honorable Elijah Muhammed had already made
Figure 36 a-b — Black baby boy with sky-blue eyes


--- PAGE 373 ---
325
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
mention of these very things in the late 1950s!
Now. I can only guess what the seeker is thinking right now; 
maybe, "poor brother Valentine. He's lost it! He's wandered way pass 
the recognized boundaries of objectivity, credibility, science and 
sanity. So I don't need to read any more of this conspiracy crap."
Beloved, the world hasn't even the remotest clue as to the 
unfathomable depths of atrocities now being committed in the name 
of science by the eugenicists in Africa. Africa and its peoples are quite 
literally the genetic petrie dish for Europe's eugenic parasitic elite. 
According to them, its "slaughter for a better tomorrow."
The following represents "the verbatim" of some of the most 
notable, admitted eugenicists operating in the field today. Their 
ultimate goal —the global depopulation and control of melanated 
(and poor white) peoples, and the scientifically engineered 
superiority and immortality of 'their kind' through the elimination of 
all "useless eaters and non-essential breeders."
S
Zbigniew Brzezinski
(Obama's handler, founding member, Trilateral Commission; member,
Council on Foreign Relations; National Security Advisor to 5 U.S. presidents)...
"...The technotronic era involves the gradual appearance of a more 
controlled society. Such a society would be dominated by an elite, 
unrestrained bv traditional values ..."
*
Dr. Francis Crick
(Nobel Prize Laureat 1962; co-discoverer of DNA - Supported scheme to  
liscense parenthood; to put a tax on children to encourage "only those 
people more socially desirable to have children")...
"....No new-born infant should be declared human until it has 
passed certain tests regarding its genetic endowment, and if it should 
fail these tests, it forfeits the right to live..."
b fi
Dr. Konrad Lorenz
(Nobel Prize for Physiology in Medicine, 1973)...
"...There is a close analogy between a human body invaded by a


--- PAGE 374 ---
326
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
cancer, and a nation afflicted with sub-populations whose inborn 
defects cause them to become social liabilities. Just as in cancer the 
best treatment is to eradicate the parasitic growth as quickly as 
possible, the enzymic defense against the dysgenic social effects of 
sub-populations is of necessity limited to equally drastic measures. 
When these inferior elements are not effectively eliminated from a 
population, then—just as when the cells of a malignant tumor are 
allowed to proliferate throughout a human body —they destroy the 
host body as well as themselves.
*
Dr. Joseph Fletcher
(Harvard Professor; widely known as ‘the Patriarch of Bio-Ethics') 
"...Chimeras (or human/animal crossbreeds) or para-humans, might 
legitimately be fashioned to do dangerous or demeaning jobs. As it is 
now, low-grade work is shoved off on moronic and retarded 
individuals, the victims of uncontrolled reproduction. Should we not 
program such workers 'thoughtfully' instead of accidently, by means 
of hybridization..."
Figure 37. Artist Patricia Piccinini's disturbing depiction of a Chimera...half  
human, half dog; piece done in silicone to show future of runaway scientific  
development. The sculpture is entitled "The Young Family."


--- PAGE 375 ---
327
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
ifi
Dr. James Watson
(Nobel Prize Laureat; Pres. Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory,
New York; co-discoverer of DNA)...
"...If you are really stupid, I would call that a disease...so I'd like to 
get rid of that..."
S
Dr. P.B. Desai
(World renound oncologist in India)...
"...Science is moving at such a fast pace that scientists have proven 
that they can create headless mice through removal of genes in the 
embryo that control the development of the head. But the body 
would have the capacity to keep the organs functional for use as 
transplants...Embryonic stem cells, which hold promise of a cure for 
any organ, is but a slow move toward immortality..."
S
Robert Sinsheimer
( Molecular Biologist; Chancellor Uni. Of Califonia, Santa Cruz;
Initiator of the Genome Project)...
".. .The horizons of the new eugenics are, in principle, boundless. For 
the first time in all time, a living creature understands its origin and 
can undertake to design his future.
What pathologically unconscionable, megalomaniacal egotism! 
That these fascist racists would actually believe they constitute the 
only "living creature" to ever understand their origins "for the first 
time in all time"—speaks to the level of psycho-spiritual depravity 
besetting the collective mindset of these "sophisticated", "civilized", 
"lilly-white-but-purely-insane" members of the parasitic elite.
And the above constitutes merely the extreeme tip of the iceberg 
concerning the levels of participation, commitment and capability 
demonstrated by neo-eugenesists now working on their twisted 
vision of a planet populated by a pure (predominantly white) 
transgenic humanity.
Of the seven "dignitaries" quoted above, three are Nobel Laureats,


--- PAGE 376 ---
328
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
one is the author of the Human Genome Project, another is a co­
discoverer of DNA, and the first (the Illuminatus Brzezinski) controls 
them alll Talk about your usual suspects!
Earlier I made mention of the fact that such men associate with, 
financially support, or directly belong to elitist organizations like 
Transtopia and various other eugenic factions such as The Prometheans, 
who follow a religion of eugenics called "Prometheism" —  what they 
refer to as "the first sovereign Trans-human and Neo-Eugenic 
Libertarian Religious State." Both organizations, and the many others 
like them who adhere to similar 'religious' philosophies, claim to 
embrace a concept called "conscious evolution."
Their ecclesiastical tenets state that God gave them the right to act 
like God; in essence —to be God. They believe that human 
development as a species has stalled and thus degenerated, and that 
higher technology is the key to unscrambling the evolutionary knot 
that has humanity hog-tied and bogged down in a quagmire of 
decadence and self-destruction.
(Hmmm! Sounds like a classic case of psycho-projection to me).
Figure 38 
Seal of the Prometheans


--- PAGE 377 ---
329
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The following is the "Sworn Oath of the Prometheans"...
"...We Prometheans are voluntarily coming together to purposefully direct the  
creation of a new post-human species. A species with higher intellect and beauty,  
for the simple reason that it can be done. This creation is what gives us purpose  
and meaning. No other justification is required for this program to advance our  
Promethean species..."
The members of Transtopia on the other hand, simply state...
"...Transtopia is trans-human; the way it was meant to be; bold, revolutionary,  
uncompromising, dedicated. 'Eritis Sicut Dii'—we shall be as gods..."
A HUMBLE POEM BY YOURS TRULY:
"...A rose by any other name, would prick and stink just the 
same. It's Manifest Destiny boys and girls — new players, 
new aims —same game..!"
Again. Top priority government research projects are preparing 
for the day when cataclysmic Earth and Sun changes (along with 
asteroid impacts and other extra-planetary phenomena) will have 
unleashed uncontrollable cancer-causing environmental factors, 
forcing susceptible Caucasians (mostly of the blond, red-head, blue 
and green-eyed genus, as well as some susceptible fair-skinned 
Blacks) to become dependent upon bio-engineered melanin 
analogues, as well as other artificially manufactured cancer-inhibiting 
derivatives of this molecular chain in order to survive.
An example of this is a product called Melanotan, a pharmaceutical 
derivative presently being used to counteract impotency.
Beloved, if you assume by the above information that I am 
promoting some sort of reverse-racist, un-scientific conspiracy- 
philosophy, or have somehow lost my mind, I ask the seeker to again 
turn his or her skepticism to the continent of Australia and 'connect 
the dots.' Caucasians in this country are repeatedly advised by the


--- PAGE 378 ---
330
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
government itself  over the mass media, not to go outside in the sun 
between the hours of 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. during the heights of their 
summer seasons. Cancer (particularly melanoma) is 45x the global 
average amongst whites in this country alone.
In fact, skin cancers are on the rise for the global Caucasian 
population, despite the development and widespread use of so-called 
melanin sun-block technologies. But then even in this case, the wheels 
of fate and irony continue to turn mercilessly, because newly 
discovered findings by epidemiologists in 2006 concluded that 
chemical materials in the new sun-block lotions, are actually radical 
contributors to the formation of skin cancers in both white and black people!
And planetary conditions only continue to get worse, as witnessed 
by the terrible heat wave that hit Europe in 2002, with temperatures 
soaring to over 115 degrees  in some areas, claiming the lives of 
thousands while leaving thousands of others with the preliminary 
signatures of skin cancer. And the European and American news 
media have given only token references to this unfolding mass- 
tragedy, because they are imminently aware of the billions of dollars 
that would be lost to summertime tourism, should Caucasians truly 
realize how fatally dangerous it has become for them to remain for 
extended periods of time in the Sun.
Co-incidence? Don't count on it!
Item: It is also believed that the heat wave of 2002 was the work of weather  
modification weapons technology transmitted by satellite called "Scalar  
Interferometry", ordered by the Illuminati to force recalcitrant nations opposed to  
the 'Euro' and the European Union (EU) to fall in line...
The artificial melatonin factor has little or no significance to highly 
melanated peoples if they lead a minimally stressful, orthobiotic way 
of life, and consuming it may be genetically harmful and even fatal to 
them in the long run.
Finally (as mentioned earlier), the habit of smoking cigarettes has 
been touted as a leading instigator of breast cancer. It seems that 
certain women carry a specific "cancer causing" enzyme that is 
activated by habitual smoking. The tobacco and tobacco smoke from


--- PAGE 379 ---
r
331
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
commercially prepared cigarettes contain over 3000 poisons -  some of 
the deadliest (besides nicotine) being... carbon monoxide, formic acid, 
carbolic acid, furferal, acrolein, prussic acid, arsenic, inorganic 
mercury, formaldehyde, pyridine and even salt petre and flouride in the  
paper, all of which stimulate, seed and radically promote and/or 
enhance cancerous growths.
It's blood simple; the more a woman smokes, the higher her risk of 
contracting breast cancer; in fact, any and every other form ofcancerl
The Pathological Effects of  
Man-Made Electro-Magnetic Fields...
•
The previously mentioned symptoms stated in the foregoing 
sections represent some of the many side effects that result from the 
chemical and electro-magnetic manipulation of human populations. 
The latter type (electro-magnetic) is based on two determining 
factors; (a) the development of man-made electro-magnetic fields 
and the collateral effects they have on all life-forms —  particularly 
humans; and, (b) the development of strategic methodologies to 
deliver these systems effectively as weapons, in order to control the 
biological and psychological behavioral patterns of human 
populations around the globe. In effect—mind control!
Our main focus of attention in this section will be on the first 
protocol —  the random collateral effects of man-made electro­
magnetic fields on bio-systems, particularly, human populations and 
their direct links to cancer.
With reference to the excessive growth of radio wave intensity; 
since World War II, it's been estimated that electrical power and 
communication systems here in the United States and other 
industrial countries expanded at the rate of 5-10 percent each year 
since then! With the rampant proliferation of commercial 
technologies such as cellular telephones and their towers, satellite 
cable dishes and relay stations, walk-man radios, I-pods, lap-top


--- PAGE 380 ---
332
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
computers and high-resolution TVs, the human population is being 
saturated to the point of suffocation in electro-magnetic smog.
Before 1900, the Earth's electro-magnetic corona was made up of 
the geo-magnetic field and the micro-pulsations that accompanied it, 
the visible light spectrum and the spontaneous random discharges of 
lightning. No one ever suspected what the effects of man-made 
electro-magnetic fields would do to living organisms.
It was eventually discovered that Extremely Low Frequencies 
(ELF) and microwave radiations have the distinct ability to distort 
and pervert genetic material during the process of cellular division. 
During the years between 1940 and 1977 for example, the use of 
experimental microwave technologies was at an unprecedented level. 
Within this same time period, the incidence of primary brain 
tumors increased from 1.70 to 2.00 per 100,000 people.
This is another reason I personally avoid going to large outdoor 
events where people are gathered in great numbers any more —like 
the New Years Day 'ball-drop' ceremony in Manhattan, or the West 
Indian Day Parade in Brooklyn. I was there to see latter event from its 
very inception, and believe me, it's no longer the same. It's been 
totally co-opted by the government and corporate powers that be.
Fact is, the most diabolical and insidious use of microwave and 
ELF weaponry is constantly aimed at such crowds from helicopters 
equipped with portable versions of this technology. They even 
possess the ability to bombard crowds with psycho-disruptive 
frequencies via satellites from outer space!
Though I am not certain, I believe that the best time for them to 
utilize such technologies would be in the latter parts of the day.
I also advise extreme caution for women using cellular telephones, 
as this instrument is a microwave based technology that, among 
other things, transmits on the theta-wave (thought signal) band. Ergo, 
the emitted radiations of your cell phone not only has the capacity to 
cook your brain through your skull,  it can quite literally read your 
mind! Demonstrations have also shown that it's possible to hard boil 
an egg in 35 to 40 minutes between two operating cell phones —  that 
all of the newest cellular phones have been modified to track and


--- PAGE 381 ---
301
_______________________________________TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
eavesdrop on their owners. Someone with the right equipment can 
call your cell phone from anywhere in the world without it emitting a  
ring-tone, while the screen remains blank as if it's turned off.
In other words, your newly modified cellular phone left in idle or 
dormant mode, can be used as a transmitter for a week ; and if 
connected to a power supply, it can provide reception to whomever 
is listening indefinitely. This means that the government (or anyone 
who usurps control of our government) can eaves-drop on anyone, 
anywhere at anytime —  simply through the use of a common cellular 
telephone.
And get this; within the next 5 years (from 2008), most cellular 
telephones will be free. You will purchase a service that is connected 
to a central mega-network, since all of the current cellular networks 
will have merged into one communications oligarchy.
The origin and types of adverse energy that affect mammary tissue 
in women, are more often than not the ELF radiation emitted by 
power lines both above and below the ground. New York State 
conducted a $500,000.00 technical study of power lines and the effects 
of Extremely Low Frequency radiation on living organisms over a 
five-year period of time. The results were released in 1987.
Dr. David Savitz of the University of North Carolina reported that 
20% of childhood cancers appeared to be produced by exposure to a 
3-milligauss power frequency magnetic field. The test proved that 
high frequency fields had significant effects on human behavior,  as 
well as the central nervous system —  stimulating cancer-cell 
proliferation. Needless to say, the results of this test (which were 
dramatically down played) became an overwhelming embarrassment 
to the Public Service Commission.
The following is a list of the biological effects caused by artificial 
electro-magnetic fields and ELF wave pollution ...
- Detrimental affect on growing cells —  specifically, an increase 
in the rate of cancer-cell division...
- Abnormal development in embryos ... (Pregnant mothers,


--- PAGE 382 ---
334
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
stay away from big parades, high resolution TVs, cellular 
phones, towers and power lines)...
- Adverse alterations in neuro-chemicals, resulting in behavior 
abnormalities; e.g. suicide, manic depressive states, drug 
abuse...
- Alterations in biological cycles (e.g. irregular menstrual 
cycles, abnormal embryonic development and erythrocyte 
[red blood cell] division)...
- Stress responses causing a depreciation of the human 
immune (defensive) systems...
- Learning disabilities; memory loss...
A University of Chicago study conducted by Dr. Samuel 
Epstein found that since 1975, there has been a phenomenal 
increase in specific types of cancers due to the saturation of 
man-made electro-magnetic pollution in the environment. These 
were...
* This figure is expected to rise to approximately 48% between the years 1999-2010.
The overall percentage of increase in cancers of all types as of 
2007-08 is yet to be calculated, but conservative estimations put the 
figures at nearly 68% worldwide. These increases are said to match 
the increases of ambient electro-magnetic fields during the past 35- 
50 years, and could also be attributed to a significant rise in the 
quality and types of man-made chemicals added to our food, our 
water and the overall environment.
With all of the electro-magnetic toxicity saturating our daily lives, 
you can bet that the medical church is expecting to see millions of 
"converts" with each passing year —especially women!
Lymphoma; Myeloma; Melanoma  
Breast Cancer*
Testicular Cancer  
Pancreatic Cancer
100%
31%
97%
20%
14.2%
63%
Kidney Cancer  
Colon Cancer


--- PAGE 383 ---
335
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
How Extremely Low Frequencies (ELF)  
and Ultra Low Frequencies (ULF)  
affect Humans...
ELF fields are extremely low frequency magnetic fields with a 
range of 1-100 cycles per second (cps) and have a distinct affect on 
biological systems. Even with their weak power output (that being 
(2 x 10-9 tesla per second compared with a regular horseshoe magnet, 
which is .1 tesla48 per second) they can still significantly distort whole 
biological systems.
When brought into contact with the protein kinase of a cell's 
nuclei, the ELF interacts with the DNA molecule itself. ELF fields can 
"switch on" or "switch off" any gene, once it is tuned in to the proper 
frequency.
Example: one frequency can cause cancer in rats within a matter 
of two days. Another frequency reverses it! One frequency causes 
depression in human beings by stimulating the release of cholinergic 
neuro-peptides in the brain. Yet another frequency causes anxiety, 
while still another can instigate, motivate and control mob behavior.
These effects can be controlled from any point around the globe. 
Extremely Low Frequency fields manipulate bio-systems through 
external magnetic fields that control the biological spin and proton- 
coupling-constants of DNA, RNA, RNA-transferase and hydrous 
(HaO).
All of the above are made possible in part by the insidious 
workings of a naval space-age weapons complex known as 
"H.A.A.R.P."49 First located in Alaska, it is now said to have at least 
eleven (11) additional sites strategically placed around the globe.
This "black-ops" technology (or one similar to it) was also 
implicated as the weather modification system responsible (in part) 
for the devastation brought on by the hurricanes called Ivan and
48 Tesla - a unit of magnetic flux density in the International System equal to one 
weber per square meter. - Amer. Herit. Diet.
49 H.A.A.R.P. - High Altitude Auroral Research Project.


--- PAGE 384 ---
336
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Katrina. It is used in conjunction with the high altitude spraying of 
chem-trails, and can be seen oscillating thru the atmosphere in the 
unnatural 'box-shaped', 'zig-zag' cloud patterns it makes when the 
chem-trails dissipate into a thin film across the sky.
The Bra...
The brassiere, believe it or not, has been also implicated as a 
participant in the growing list of breast cancer causes.
In the health section of the science magazine Discover (August 
1995), a piece entitled Can Bras Give You Cancer?  gave a brief but 
interesting synopsis of a published study, which included some 4,730 
women from around the United States. The most intriguing aspect of 
this study (for me) was the fact that it was not conducted from within 
the sterile halls of orthodox research science.
I tend to give such endeavors a lot more of my attention, 
primarily because of the absence of intellectual elitism and intuitional 
constraints.
The findings of this informal research boiled down to this: the 
more hours a woman typically wears a bra during the day, the 
greater the chances of her contracting breast cancer.
The story as related by the article was centered on Sydney Ross 
Singer, a medical anthropologist and his wife Soma Grizmaijer- 
Singer, a research associate. Mr. Singer himself was trained in the 
science of evaluating the cultural factors and idiosyncrasies that 
underscore health and disease.
One day in 1991, Soma found a lump in one of her breasts. As they 
agonized over what could possibly have caused this potential 
tragedy, they both noticed one evening that her bra contours had 
carved deep and wicked looking red marks around her breasts, 
shoulders, sides and back. While examining these bruises Sydney 
(whose training also included a solid grounding in bio-chemistry) 
came up with a theory.
What if it was the bra that contributed to the problem? He 
surmised that when a woman's breasts are severely constricted by a


--- PAGE 385 ---
337
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
bra, the lymphatic system (and the various ductules that 
honeycombed her breasts) become blocked, and were thus prevented 
from carrying out its function of channeling toxins out of these areas.
Bright boy.
Soma stopped wearing bras, and lo and behold her lump soon 
disappeared. This prompted the couple to conduct a more in-depth 
study of the problem. Armed with this new insight, they went on a 
tour to see whether or not other women had experienced similar 
traumas. They put together a questionnaire dealing with women and 
their bra-wearing patterns, which included such questions as "how 
many hours a day do you wear a bra?" And, "...does your bra ever 
make red marks in your skin?"
Between the years 1991 and 1994 they distributed their survey to 
thousands of women, mostly in five major cities: New York, Dallas, 
Phoenix, Denver and San Francisco. About half of the women who 
answered the survey had been diagnosed with breast cancer, the rest 
had not. The women with cancer were asked to state their dress 
patterns before they were diagnosed.
The survey brought to light some incredible figures. Nearly all of 
the women who contracted cancer (99%) had worn their bras for over
12 hours each day.  This compared to 80% of the women from the 
group that had no cancers. The survey said that women who develop 
cancer of the breasts, were twice as likely to have reported chafing 
and other severe irritations from the wearing of bras.
Not surprisingly, they found that women who wore no commercial  
bras were found to have a cancer rate at least 21 times lower than the 
national average!!
They were careful to say however that they consider their findings 
to be more suggestive than conclusive, for they didn't factor in other 
important circumstances and conditions such as diet, weight, life­
styles, and the host of other suspected culprits such as I have listed in 
the previous sections.
Sydney and Soma Singer's findings can be found in their book 
entitled Dressed to Kill, published by Avery Publications.


--- PAGE 386 ---
338
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
With reference to bras designed and built for "boob 
enhancement"; no matter how lovingly these gadgets mold and 
conform to your upper torso my sister, the purpose of their design is 
to push the sides and lower portions of the breast upward to form 
that "to die for" cleavage, which so many women believe makes 
them more attractive. Maybe it does, but bottom line, lymphatic 
drainage is severely impaired by any form of sustained pressure 
placed against any part of the mammary glands. This grows tumors.
As an example, "the Boost" breast enhancer (depicted in figure 39) is 
nothing more than a return to the styles made popular in Victorian 
England. Funny thing though; the historical life expectancy for most 
of the women of royalty and ladies of the court who wore these 
styles, was approximately 35 years of age.
I wonder why?
Could it have been (among other things) from wearing clothing 
that gave them cleavage "to die for?"
The Crying Shame...
•
Believe it or not, to our ancient ancestors, emotional crying was a 
totally alien activity. Genetically stable ancient cultures did not cry, 
and the new insistence by this culture that men "get in touch with 
their feminine sides" by learning to express "their true feelings" 
more frequently with tears, is ridiculous.
Of course every feminist shrink with a diploma in behavioral 
psychology will want to argue to the contrary, including feminized 
male therapists. And that's okay.
All I ask is that before I am judged too harshly for being 
'insensitive', let's look at the bio-chemical consequences of the 
emotionally teary eye.
There is an important gland of the eye called the lacrimal gland 
located within the upper and outer arc of the orbit, with 12 ductules 
aligned to the conjunctiva wherein anti-bacterial fluid  is deposited. 
Crying becomes a very serious thing when you overstand what is 
taking place, and therefore it should not be taken lightly.


--- PAGE 387 ---
339
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Figure 39
Emotional crying is but one more pathological activity reflective of 
our overall gametic and mental weakness as a species, another 
debilitative habit indicative of our greatly enfeebled lymphatic 
systems, which causes the loss of vital fluids from the body.
The old world European historians could not understand for 
example, why Native American babies never cried, or if they did it 
was so very little. This has always been the way of so-called 
"primitive" tribes from such places as the North Pole, South America, 
Africa and the South Sea Islands. These mothers knew how harmful 
crying was to a baby's little system, and did everything in their 
power to prevent it.'
The western belief which says that everyone needs "a good cry" 
now and then, is a concept based on the ignorance of esoteric 
anatomy. And the claim that it makes one "feel better" afterwards is 
yet another catch-22 myth-conception, since the resulting feeling of 
relief actually comes from a systemic exhaustion caused by the loss of 
vital fluids that (according to endocrinologists) are just as potent as  
blood!


--- PAGE 388 ---
340
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
In effect, you "die" a little each time you cry (just like the menses) 
because you are leaking the liquid nutritive essences that are the 
bio-chemical anchors of your vital life force. True relief comes when 
the mind finally regains control of the body, since the latter was a 
hinderance to the proper functioning of the former.
Thus it can be said that psychogenic lacrimation  (or emotional 
crying) is the pathological response of a mind whose body has been 
made weak by feeble genetics, and vice versa.
A consistently crying baby is the sure sign of dysfunctional 
parenting. Many now believe that crying is an integral part of the 
normal growth process for babies. It helps to "develop the lungs."
But this is idiocy, because most of the time it only represents an 
un-attentive, un-imaginative, desensitized mother whose 
stressed-out child is losing vital anti-bacterial fluids. Herein lies one 
of the paramount reasons why so many teary-eyed stressed-out 
babies are continuously sick with coughs and runny noses.
When a child cries (or anyone for that matter) virtually every cell 
in his or her body is affected. In fact, each time you shed a 
substantial amount of tears you are bio-chemically damaged, and 
you might as well deduct at least 1 to 3 months of balanced health out 
of your life.
Today's scientists also believe that crying somehow rids the body 
of tension and toxins (again, much like a woman's menses), 
comparing it to other excretory functions such as urinating or 
perspiring. But they once again fail to recognize a debilitating 
pathology-in-progress. Such a loss of essential fluids causes the body 
to become unbalanced, resulting in a drastic reduction in systemic 
homeostasis.
As far as urination is concerned, there is a lot less of it when a 
person's kidneys and urinary bladder are functioning properly, and if 
excreted by a healthy body, it would be odorless, virtually colorless, 
and yes, even sterile and therapeutic enough to drink.50
50 The therapeutic practice of drinking one's own urine is called Uropathy. - Author


--- PAGE 389 ---
341
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
If we truly studied the meta-chronicles of our ancestral masters, 
we'd know that even sweating was not considered a "normal" process 
because there is a severe loss of sodium, potassium, zinc, and 
B-vitamins, along with a whole host of other vital micro-nutrients 
from the body.
A B6 deficiency is very common in babies who persistently cry, as 
it is with women as well, along with a great loss of magnesium, 
which is a major ingredient of tears. B6, magnesium and iron are 
essential to proper metabolism. According to Cantrell, the loss of Bf, 
causes a mother to become tense and less patient, looking for ways 
to end her "parental burdens."
This may be one of the reasons why we see so many stressed-out 
mothers spontaneously and unexpectedly kill their children today.
Other precious ingredients lost in the shedding of tears include 
vitamin C, glucose, calcium, urea and cholesterol, the first being a 
vivid clue that crying is an autocytolysic, or cell killing activity. 
Vitamin C loss in a developing baby is a primary reason for our 
culture's sickly infants, and the cause of many "mature looking" 
babies, because vitamin C is an essential constituent of collagen, the 
element that keeps the skin young, smooth and tight. Vitamin C 
fortifies the connective tissue of the cell wall to keep toxins from 
seeping into it, while helping to neutralize those that do get through.
Bone growth formation and tissue healing are also disrupted by its 
loss through crying.
Tears have also been found to contain high levels of prolactin, a 
hormone essential to cell formation and vital to a nursing mother's 
temperament, as well as the nutrient content of her milk.
The Grim Weeper...
•
Crying is thought to be second nature to a woman. Well, maybe 
this is true of the stressed-out women of western civilization, but 
nowhere else. If this has become the norm for eastern cultures as 
well, then look for evidence of stress and dis-tress related to their 
adoption of western dietary habits, social politics and behaviorisms.


--- PAGE 390 ---
342
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Again, a vivid indication of just how pathetic the western mindset 
has become, can be seen in how men are being publicly coerced and 
encouraged by feminist-slanted social psychologists to shed tears as a 
sure way of "proving their manhood." This trend is supposed to 
inspire men to reveal their "hidden vulnerability"; to release stress; to 
get them in touch with their "inner-child" and their "feminine sides"; 
to become more "sensitive" to the "emotional plights of women" —  
blah, blah, blah!!
Strange isn't it—how feminists once claimed that tears from the 
90's-millennium career woman were construed as a sign of weakness, 
while at the same time promoting that tears on a man makes him 
look "sensitive," "vulnerable" and even "more appealing"?!!
What a crock! Any man who falls for such crap and willingly 
participates in this pathological exercise, is gametically perverted and 
most likely an androgyne.
Crying is neither 'masculine' nor 'feminine' —  only pathogenic!
In a man, the lacrimal gland (mentioned earlier) is supposed to 
help him fight any adverse bacterial proliferation to his eyes. It was 
designed to be larger because a man is physically constructed to be 
more active and thus more tolerant of stressful environmental 
situations.
But more and more in recent autopsies it is being found partly 
atrophied or shrunken to the size of a woman's, further proof of our 
specie's progressive descent into hermaphroditism.
Women tend to cry more readily than men due to their delicate 
emotional natures and neural sensitivity. But the way a true gynic 
woman responds to life is largely dependent upon how stable and 
powerful the influence of her man is in her life. And this even goes for 
the most devout lesbian partnerships as well, for even with couples of 
same-sex relationships, one of them still assumes the "dominant" role 
of a male!
By Nature's design, a woman's feelings and actions are in most 
part conscious or unconscious re-actions to the life conditions that 
men create in her world. But this represents only one half the


--- PAGE 391 ---
343
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
dynamic of the human equation.
The above scenario on the fundamental stability in male/female 
relationships, is based on what the woman indicates she needs for 
establishing a comfortable and secure "nest", so that she can build, 
cultivate and nurture the infrastructures of a healthy family and 
society. Her physical, psychological and emotional states are actually 
"residual effects" that reflect the moral, ethical, spiritual and 
intellectual character of first her father, then later—her chosen mate.
Frequent crying can cause enormous injury to a gynic woman and 
her precious germ-plasm, and it is a gametically weak and 
hormonally deranged man who purposefully seeks to make a woman 
cry.
In the ancient Hebrew text known as the Talmud, it states that...
"... A man must not make a woman weep, for God counts 
her tears..."
Gynic women who have nutritionally sound constitutions and 
loving relationships with their men are less likely to suffer from 
psychogenic lacrimation, and are therefore less susceptible to the 
consequences that result in symptoms like P.M.S., nervous tension, 
or depression. Their higher instincts and intuitive intelligence are 
acute, which steers them away from the rumor-mongers, tear-jerker 
movies, romance novels and nerve-disturbing music —all of which 
causes them the kind of unnecessary emotional stress that inevitably 
undermines the integrity of their bodies and their minds.
Women with poor constitutions are emotionally feeble and 
irritable due to under-nourishment and/or enervation from 
debilitating habits. And this is especially true of hormonally 
dysfunctional women who actually instigate arguments, or seek out 
teary-eyed, adrenalin pumping, heart-stopping entertainment so that 
they can literally stress themselves into a "feeling."
This also includes women who purposefully "pine after love" that 
"could have been", and live out their fantasies vicariously through 
such things as gossip, romance novels and the daily soap operas.


--- PAGE 392 ---
344
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Tears and Prolactin...
•
Women who consistently cry have a serious imbalance of 
estrogen, progesterone and more crucially, the hormone prolactin. 
Consistantly crying women are systemically unstable, and this goes 
for estrogen toxic men as well. Prolactin51 as you will see, is 
super-essential to the bio-chemical integrity supporting true female 
instincts. It acts harmoniously only in conjunction with a hormonally 
stable gynic woman, whose body is balanced with endogenous 
(integrus, aromatase converted, or healthy) estrogen.52
Prolactin is a calorigenic, that is, a heat and energy producer. If it 
should become active in a gynandric or masculinized woman, her 
higher levels of androgenic hormones could cause her body to over­
heat, driving her to wear such things as skin-tight jeans or mini skirts, 
because (like a man) it's harder for her to tolerate internal heat.
Prolactin also acts as an anti-diabetogenic; that is to say it helps to 
regulate the production and distribution of insulin while keeping it 
from becoming poisonous to the cells. It is also essential to cartilage 
and collagen integrity, and the lack of it explains why testosterone 
dominant women seem to age so quickly.
The loss of nutrients by a person who continually cries may also be 
compared to the loss one experiences from the stress of sexual 
intercourse. During coitus, prolactin is supposed to help stop cellular 
damage, as the act itself is very stressful on both the man and the 
woman —especially the latter. Men and women who use sex as an 
emotional outlet for stress cause a heavy build up of lactic acid, 
which results in hormonal imbalances that prevent prolactin from 
functioning properly.
Beloved; crying is an effect, and short of doing it to temporarily 
mourn the loss of a dearly departed loved one, or for the immediate
51 Prolactin is better known as "the maternal hormone." - Author
52 Estrogen that is balanced and the dominant influence in the cell-nuclei of a gynic 
female.


--- PAGE 393 ---
345
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
expression of sudden unabashed joy, it does not address the cause of 
any emotional problem. So you can cry from here 'til doomsday; the 
temporary "relief" you feel is actually akin to the exhaustion a body 
experiences due to the loss of precious nutrients. Crying is not the 
healthy outlet or "sensitizing" activity it's promoted to be, and those 
who recommend it are at a loss for more natural, productive ways to 
deal with the true nature of a problem!
It all starts with the mother and the father — particularly the 
mother. This is why nursing is so essential because it is vital to the 
development of a balanced temperament in the infant child. In a 
healthy household there is no such thing as a constantly crying baby! A  
consistently crying child is a sure sign of parental failure on the part 
of the mother, and the direct or indirect influence of an insensitive, 
estrogen-toxic father. It is highly destructive to the cells and the 
child's overall physiological integrity, leaving the baby open and 
susceptible to all kinds of re-occurring "childhood diseases."
Exercise - Exertion - Excitement 
(Exhaustion by any other name)
•
The ritual of exercise as practiced and promoted in North America 
today, is yet another 'drug' being pushed to the unsuspecting 
consumer masses —  particularly women. The very word itself is 
indicative of how feeble our instincts for right and wrong have 
become. It derives from the Latin word exercere, and translates to 
mean... ex— "out of", and arcere— "to restrain."
So loosely translated, the word exercise literally means "out of 
restraint"; (or better yet) —  "out of control!"
The ritual of exercise is and always has been a genetically 
compelled activity for the Nordic man and woman, due to their 
recessive bio-chemistries. This is not my 'opinion', but the findings of 
credible (Caucasian) research scientists, particularly from the fields of 
endocrinology and ethno-biology. References to their works may be 
found in the bibliography.


--- PAGE 394 ---
346
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Academically, the science of endocrinology once taught that the 
reason pale-skinned peoples were genetically compelled to pursue 
such hyper-active rituals as exercise (and warfare), was —for one 
thing—because they have very little heme iron in their bloodstreams 
and thus poor oxygen distribution. It was also found that black 
people (living in colder western societies), also have problems with 
hyperactivity because genetically, they have too much iron but very 
little bio-available vitamin E and D with which to process it properly.
Such imbalances are biological facts based on genetic pathologies 
resulting in (and from) unstable bio-chemistries. This instinctively 
forces the overwhelming majority of Caucasians (and many blacks) to 
want to indulge in adrenalin-pumping activities (e.g. "extreme" 
sports, drugs, alcoholic beverages and other types of self-destructive 
behavior), unconsciously motivated by a genetic imperative to make 
ferrum-oxygenized hemoglobin available to the overall system.
Comparisons between the social activities of ancient eastern 
cultures and today's Europeanized societies by ethno-biologists and 
anthropologists, have observed that one would never have witnessed 
melanated men and women (even the so-called "wild animals" of 
Nature) exert and waste precious life-force energies in their own 
natural environments, the way the hyper-active over-stimulated 
peoples of western civilization do today. Even the Olmec-Mayans 
and their legendary ritual ball games commemorating the Sun's 
passage into the Milky-Way rift, were played by specially chosen 
warriors —  not everyone in the society —with the captain of the 
victorious team being beheaded as a sign of ultimate honor.
This is because the ancient ones (as well as the animals) were 
instinctively cognizant of the toxic nature of such hyper-activity, 
especially when done in relationship with environmental elements 
such as oxygenl If such activities are now being practiced by so-called 
third-world "developing" countries, it is merely a clearer indication 
that McDonald's, Wendy's, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Starbucks,  and 
Burger King  have finally made a perverse impact on the last 5 
generations of these people, and that refined foods have now become 
dietary staples in their misguided lives.


--- PAGE 395 ---
347
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The elder melanated societies of our planet, for the most part, were 
infinitely wiser than we are concerning exercise and well being, and 
their cultural activities once reflected this. In ancient Oriental 
philosophy for example, "exercise" by the average man and woman 
was done through isometrics (like Tai Chi) to prevent a disruption of 
the body's delicate internal equilibrium, especially for females.
But don't be mistaken. Virtually all melanated cultures once had 
their own high adrenalin, testosterone-driven competitive games like 
the ancient Nubians, Carthagenians and Zulus, as well as the 
Tamoanchan (Olmec), the latter-day Mayans and Aztecs. But again, 
these "games" were mostly rites of passage rituals for young men 
coming of age, and nothing even close to what Europeans have 
organized and developed; a testament to how the psychosis of 
"sports fever" has perversely influenced and affected the overall 
behavior of western society today.
You see beloved; a body already in perfect harmony with itself, 
operating in perfect homeostasis with its environment, would never 
seek to destabolize itself with heavy exercising. Only a toxic, agitated, 
enervated body that does not feel balanced, would seek "balance" through the  
performance of stressful exercise!
In fact, older cultures are quite amused at such things as "power 
exercising", "aerobics" and the frequency with which we do them, 
for they consider such activity to be autocytolysic (cell killing) 
nonsense.
In laboratory experiments, white rats were forced to exercise to 
the point of exhaustion to simulate the effects of heavy aerobic 
exercise. The test revealed increased oxidative damage from free 
radicals to the heart, muscles and liver cells. The worst results of the 
experiment showed extensive damage to the rats' mitochondria, the 
energy producing element of the cells; but most importantly —  to the 
nucleus as well! This condition would signify great difficulty for the 
body's overall capacity to rebuild or rehabilitate its cells.
However, when the rats were trained to become accustomed to 
the stress but given large doses of vitamin E, their bodies released an


--- PAGE 396 ---
348
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
enzyme called superoxide dismutase  (a cell protectorant). But the 
amounts produced were not nearly enough to sufficiently protect all 
of their cells.
The research also revealed why a great number of today's career 
athletes do not last very long physically.
The Pathogenic Principles of Accommodation ...
Because a body is forced to become accustomed to something 
doesn't mean it likes what has been forced upon it. In the case of 
exercise, it is merely acting in self-defense to stressful life-draining 
activities, the same way it would if it were subjected to a constant 
abuse of drugs or alcohol —if accommodates it!
Heavy exercise creates a symptom called "oxygen debt", which 
causes an enormous build up of lactic acid that accumulates in the 
muscles and the liver. Lactic acid kills cells. It's the substance that 
causes the muscle stiffness, aches and pains to occur just after 
stressful activity. In this case, if we as humans were able to retain 
higher more efficient levels of nitrogen (N 2) it would slow respiration 
considerably and thus cellular damage.
But we can't, so we suck in higher-than-normal levels of oxygen, 
along with a vast array of accompanying pollutants.
And herein lies the problem.
Oxygen is toxic in concentrated or unbalanced doses. Scientists 
have since confirmed the experiments of Drs. Huber and Senebier 
that showed enzymes are either destroyed or inactivated by oxygen. 
In the 60's and 70's, oxygen was found to produce so-called free 
radicals,53 or randomized elements (by-products) that destroy cells.
But even with the above information readily available to our 
nation's sports scientists, there seems to be this growing fad to push 
oxygen-related products on the general public, claiming that higher 
levels will kill 'harmful' bacteria —the theory being that a highly
53 Free radical toxicity may actually be a bio-chemical phenomenon experienced


--- PAGE 397 ---
349
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
oxidized environment will destroy such things as the so-called 
A.I.D.S. virus, or other such "deadly" micro-organisms that appear to 
be rampant today.
The real reason for the sudden marketing of oxygen-related 
products is perhaps due to the recent reports by environmental 
scientists, which revealed that the planet's atmospheric content of 
breathable oxygen has drastically dropped to unprecedented levels. 
They claim that the oxygen levels of the planet during the time of the 
building of the great pyramid was somewhere around 35% and 
above by atmospheric volume. Today, the average oxygen content of 
the planet fluctuates between 15 and 18%, with levels as low as 12% 
in heavily industrialized cities.
When oxygen is used in an artifically concentrated manner, it 
becomes like any other fragmented compound used in isolated doses 
to enlist an effect. It acts like a drug!
Nordic Caucasoid peoples, more than any other, need this type of 
therapy (again) due to their inability to process what little amounts of 
converted iron their bodies can muster. In fact, to meet their demand 
for this element, public oxygen bars  are now available where people 
pay to breathe "fresh air." In one New York Daily News Op-ed 
interview, the owner of just such a bar likened his establishment to 
the introduction of bottled water in the early 80s.
On the other hand, black folks have the capacity to encompass too 
much oxygen, based on their ability to retain enormous amounts of 
unprocessed iron in the epithelial layers of their skins,54 so this type 
of therapy may in most cases amount to overkill for their bodies.
Cancer growths are formed primarily due to poor oxygen 
distribution, selfish thought, sex "out of season" and eating foods 
with no balanced oxygen already contained within them; or more 
specifically, cooked out of them.
predominantly by Caucasians, due to their lack of melanin and poor oxygen 
assimilation and distribution. - Author
54 Which accounts for the darker colors. - Author


--- PAGE 398 ---
350
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Strenuous exercise or any other type of stress-related endeavors 
result in the auto-oxidation of epinephrine and norepinephrine, 
which in turn results in the appearance of free-radicals and lipid 
peroxidation.55 Cells must have a balance of oxygen, and herein lies 
the key to health. When exercise causes the rise of adrenalin, there is 
the loss of internal control and acidosis overtakes the body. High 
lactic acid levels very often impede efficient oxygen distribution, and 
cells die as a result.
Even in the purest of environments, we would still have to adhere 
to proper behavior in accordance with the personalities of the 
elements, to keep them balanced within ourselves. But everything 
created around us in this civilization has become unbearably toxic to 
life, and everyday the parasitic elite insidiously contributes more and 
more to our 'industrial demise' as a species.
For example, since the advent of World War II, mega-industries 
have dumped over 3/4 of a million assorted synthetic poisons into 
our atmosphere, our oceans and onto our lands. Every man and 
woman alive since 1942 has toxic levels of strontium in his or her 
teeth and bones. The A-bombs dropped by the American European 
to put an end to one war, signaled the declaration of yet another 
more dangerous one; a war that would be destined to claim a 
thousand times the casualties of Hiroshima and Nagasaki per year; 
the war against Nature itself.
Every life-form on this planet has been adversely affected by this 
insane act, and industrialists have been saturating our biosphere with 
tons of toxic pollutants ever since.
Electric towers, telephones, television, microwave antennas, Low 
Earth Orbiting Satellites (L.E.O.S.) and just recently the Navy's 
H.A.A.R.P. installations, have all contributed to screwing up 
whatever small amount of natural energy fields left of the original 
firmament canopy around our planet. As a result, all life-forms on 
Earth (except maybe insects) have become highly susceptible to
55 Fat putrefication.


--- PAGE 399 ---
351
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
distress and diseases. We have refined and de-natured our foods by 
perverting their natural atomic configurations, to the point where our 
bodies no longer recognize the convoluted crap we stuff into them 
daily. This has given free radicals "free-reign" to attack and 
incapacitate the cellular network.
The present forms of "Adamic" humanity are a far cry from the 
days of our ancestors' olive green skins and golden blood.
What a pity.
HERMAN By JIM UNGER
i ! ' ' .................v .  _  jH O W  C O M E  G R A N N IE  V  N E V E R  W A N T S  10
K  U r o * > '« * »  3Y  U r . « H -  > * * * ,  X *  > • *> ’
■  7■  v-;  ... .-7■  • • •  ■ -  -.-7-  • : 7 S H E  W O N  T  8K > E  yJ. '-f A B IK E.’ ....7 - ,_.. D O E S N 'T  ) :lam  , p ia v  ^f\ \  -- BASEBAU! J i
( * -  ■  ' u •  -o
jC (  > f0U3£ E M T0 !  S' 3H t s N 
'•Jfc'St'. fiO B C E T  O N E  E1C W T Y -9I V 1 ‘ A' V 
* * * * •■ > (» ?' 1E W JS  O L D .
" IF  S H E  *0 M O P E  E X E R C IS E , 'jjl Bay S H E  C O U L D  H»E B E E N
01,05 * M U N O B E O  /  ^
Figure 40
Running - Jogging - Dying ...
•
Running daily is insane, especially when done by women in the 
toxic soup of a modern-day polluted and paved city environment. 
Unless you intend to run a marathon, it is a chronic waste of your 
precious life force, and of the greatest detriment to your reproductive 
organs. I've seen runners jogging through the traffic of mid-town  
Manhattan on a humid mid-summer's day , and often wondered if I'm 
the only one left with a functioning brain cell for taking notice of this.
With literally tons of noxious carbon monoxide, lead arsenics, 
sulfides and ammonium oxides permeating the air, why would 
anyone in their right mind even want to walk through this gook,


--- PAGE 400 ---
352
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
much less run through it. Didn't they realize that by running in such 
an environment they are sucking soot into their lungs at 2 to 3x the 
rate, and at twice the average doses?
Runners and all other strenuous sports players suffer from a 
malady called sports anemia, a condition that results from a severe 
drop in iron-rich blood cells. There are two things that cause sports 
anemia—jarring the internal organs and heavy levels of stress.
With heavy exercising of daily 5 to 10 kilometer runs, the blood 
becomes shunted from the bowel area to the muscles and causes a 
breakdown or stripping of the intestinal lining.
The very design of the human body should be a clear indication of 
how difficult running is to the overall anatomy. Gravity puts 
enormous strain on human organs as they are bunched one on top of 
the other, unlike four-legged creatures whose horizontal  designs 
clearly indicate that they were built for running.
If you think about it, walking on two legs is a minor miracle —  as 
biological entities go. It takes the coordination of over 17 different 
brain-to-muscle interfacing functions just for a human baby to take its 
first steps. But to compensate for what the four-legged animal has as 
an advantage, Nature has placed the largest concentration of bones 
(of any mammal) in the foot of the human body.
Item: On certain matters of importance, it's interesting to note how Spirit gives 
you little everyday confirmations of its presence through what you personally 
observe of everyday life. While watching a modern version of the movie The Island  
of Dr. Moreau  starring Marlon Brando, one of the animals-turned-human (the Ram 
I believe) makes an astounding observation related to this very issue. I felt as if he 
spoke directly to me when he said, "... It is truly difficult to walk on two legs..." I 
immediately shouted “Amen!"
Another thing. If jogging is supposed to be so beneficial to the 
human anatomy, why is it that at a critical point in this activity 
precious life giving blood is blocked from the gut to the muscles 
causing at times internal bleeding, the creation of lactic acids,


--- PAGE 401 ---
353
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
cellular exhaustion and a chronic loss of vital nutrients through 
sweating? Such internal bleeding (caused by capillary breakage) 
may go on subtly for days until the wall of the intestines heal. And 
since there are no major pain receptors there, we have no way of 
knowing just how much damage is truly being done 'in the long 
run.'
Studies were also conducted where high levels of vitamin and 
mineral supplements were given to one group of athletes, and none 
to a placebo group. At the end, the blood nutrient levels of both 
experimental groups were checked and it was found that neither one 
had risen. In fact they had both dropped substantially in essential  
nutrient content. The test showed that exercise depletes vital essences 
and that athletes lose significant amounts of the essential nutrients 
and supplements they take in (even in higher than normal doses), 
proving that the ritual of exercise is not natural to Man.
But you would never know this by the way the sports industry 
promotes their "just do it" commercials to you, and the way celebrity 
jocks who are addicted by the rituals of sport (making obscene 
'chedda' promoting sneakers and other paraphernalia) defend it as a 
"healthy" way of life.
In moderation, yes it is. But where in western society would you 
find people who ever pursued destructive activities 'in moderation?'
Case in point: a perfect example of the sports industry taking 
advantage of the public's ignorance was seen in an advertisement for 
Nike F.I.T  athletic apparel (see figure 4l). It was the quintessential 
example of Orwellian doublethink/doublespeak making up today's 
subliminally enhanced, mind-manipulating advertisements.
This particular ad appeared in Essence magazine (July 1997) and 
covered two pages. One side (the title page) said in bold print...
"... Sweat is your body leaking fuel."
How true. The other page shows a female jogger running with 
the Nike emblem on her chest —sweat, strain and dogged 
determination registered on her face. The real assault on the


--- PAGE 402 ---
354
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
reader's intelligence is actually in the smaller, more obscure caption 
printed at the very bottom of the title page, which reads;
"...The only way to stop sweating is to stop running.
Since there's no way in hell that's going to happen, 
you'd better find a way to deal with the tide of 
nutrients running down your back..."
Now; to a conscious sister, this sentence would be a contradiction 
to common sense, for it flat-out tells you what you are doing wrong 
then subtly tells you not to stop doing it!  This caption should be 
enough to alert the intelligent reader that profuse sweating from 
strenuous exercise is perilous, because it results in a drastic 
depletion of vital nutrients necessary to the health and well-being of 
the body. Instead, you are casually told that even though you are
Figure 41
seriously injuring yourself by this activity "... you'd better find a way to  
deal with the tide of nutrients running down your back.”  Of course, in the 
very next sentence they tell the sheeple how to deal with it:
"... which is why we invented Dri-F.I.T, part of a larger Nike F.I.T line 
of athletic apparel. Dri F.I.T pulls moisture away from your skin 
so your clothes dry quicker. So, even though your body continues 
to leak, you're not wearing a soggy reminder on your back..."


--- PAGE 403 ---
355
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Whaaat?!!
Sisters. Brothers. Anyone  out there! Is this getting through at all? 
Especially to you my beloved sisters! Nike is telling you that the only 
way to deal with your vital nutrients leaking from your body, and the 
drastic depletion of your precious life force —  is to wear a T-shirt that  
won' t remind you of that fact!!
Of course, the more insidious message being conveyed here is that 
you have at your disposal a magic elixir by which to ritually remedy 
this—you just drink Gatorade!
That's right; simply buy another 'health' product from one of our 
many subsidiary companies, and you'll return all of the vital nutrients 
that you leaked away and still remain healthy, fresh and dry!
Right?
Wrong! Dead wrong!
New cells are reproduced at a faster rate when your body is 
hyperactive and stressed, which means that because you are losing 
precious nutrients by sweating, the cells are reproducing themselves 
from a depleted mineral and electro-chemical nutrient reservoir.
Item: Each time you agree to strenuous exercising, you injure and destroy
precious cells that your body will have to replace. Cells primarily construct  
themselves from the solar and stellar materials present in the air, which become  
the mineral components of your bloodstream. If these mineral components are  
"leaking" and "running down your back", or are formed from a depleted nutrient  
base caused by the consumption of refined, de-natured foods; or the high  
concentrations of noxious substances that pollute our air, the cells replaced will  
be feeble and short-lived!
In other words, you are aging to death at a faster rate!
Beloved, minerals function as electrical conductors that relay the 
vital forces of life efficiently throughout the body-temple. If there is a 
substantial loss of these conductors through profuse sweating (and 
water loss), a balanced electrical conduction of vital life force to the 
brain is compromised, causing the body to have to compensate by 
leeching minerals from the bones and various vital organs.


--- PAGE 404 ---
356
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
So. How does bleeding internally, losing vital nutrients by 
sweating, bone spurs, oxygen debt, cellular destruction, back and 
knee injuries, sprains, torn cartilages, frayed ligaments (especially 
around the womb), hyper extensions, capillary damage, 
hyper-ventilation and nervous exhaustion add up to health for a 
woman?
Exercise —as it is currently promoted by western civilization, is a 
cytotoxic (cell destroying) activity whose consequences lend credence 
to an old-world adage which says:
"... that which is quick to ripe, is quick to rot!"
Just take a look at the lifestyles of people who live to very 
advanced ages. The Hunzakuts of the Himalayas, who live to an 
average age of 110 years have no social exercise regimens, just the 
simple work they do in their lives everyday, the fresh rain water they 
drink and the simple nutritious foods they eat.
It's logic. If you consistently accelerate the life-processes of the 
body beyond its natural functioning levels, you speed the structure to 
damage and decay at a faster rate, for that which you continuously 
abuse (without sufficient rest and repair), you eventually use up —  
only at a faster rate! (See Herman cartoon strip [figure 40], It says it all.)
The bright "youthful glow" one gets from heavy exercising after a 
certain age, is the same as putting 100 watts of power through a 40- 
watt light bulb. When this happens, the 40-watt bulb will burn 
brighter than its intended capacitance. But, only for a very short 
period of time —  then it explodes!  In effect, the more power used to 
amplify the bulb's output beyond its intended capacity, the shorter 
the lifespan of the bulb.
The principle is the same for the human cellular network.
Commercial exercise spas for the purpose of health is also a farce, 
and is the economic ploy of a huge sports industry to lure us into 
buying the air-jordans, the flashy jogging sweats, T-shirts, walking 
and jogging shoes, the Ben-Gay rubs, the ace bandages, the health 
club memberships, and the wide assortment of pharmaceutically 
sponsored pain-suppression remedies and weight-loss pills.
It is a multi-billion dollar industry.


--- PAGE 405 ---
357
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Add to this continuing employment for those who teach you how 
to exhaust yourself, and you get the basic picture.
"...Beware of Greeks bearing gifts..."
Sports, arduous exercise and other such commercialized life­
consuming activities, were never a popular pastime until the Greeks 
and the Romans incorporated them into their social customs. This 
adopted predilection for repeated self-destructive activity was the 
perfect example of a pathology known to biologists and 
endocrinologists as adverse environmental feedback.
Adverse environmental feedback is a term used to describe how 
biological systems react to cataclysmic Earth-changing events, such as 
the collapse of the compressed hydrogen canopy that once 
surrounded our world. This particular event resulted in the 
perversion of ancient Earth's entire breathable atmosphere, causing 
higher biological forms to suffer carbon dioxide narcosis due to the lack 
of balanced oxygen, hydrogen, helium and nitrogen in the 
subsequent atmosphere. The destruction of the canopy also resulted 
in a greater saturation of poisonous versions of the carbon dioxide 
molecule, as well as adverse doses of solar radiation.
Poor bio-availability of calcium (a primary nutrient lost in sports 
activity) is what occurs due to environmental degeneration, because 
calcium cannot metabolize when oxygen is lost from the cells. 
Calcium is necessary to keep a steady current of electrical energy 
flowing through the brain. Without proper calcium absorption and 
oxygen assimilation, cells die.
When cells die there is no balanced electrical conduction, 
transduction or relay for the processing of higher intelligence. So as 
cells die, so die the higher instincts, which are the by-products of 
higher intelligence. A rise of CO 2 levels in the body (see section 
entitled The Great Pyramid: The Resurrecting Womb)  causes the many 
muscle, cartilage and bone ailments suffered by athletes, and is the 
direct consequence of a polluted atmosphere causing the positive 
ion /free radical/oxygen toxicity that is poisoning their systems.


--- PAGE 406 ---
358
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The sports industry, the FDA, the AMA and the pharmaceuticals 
all work in tandem with one another. One helps you to just do it  'til 
you're stiff, nauseous, sprained, cramped, aching, broken, bleeding or 
heart attacked, while the others supply all the useless medicinals to 
help glue the shattered pieces of your body back together again.
What a racket!
The Commercialization of Female Hostility...
Exercise and "the new woman" is cyto-toxic insanity. Most of this 
nonsense is promoted by women (like the late Jenny Craig) who 
might as well have been bom men. The pity is that some gynic 
women are on the verge of jeopardizing their own precious instincts, 
because they are being convinced to follow these aberrations of 
Nature right into genetic oblivion.
And because of the behavior and philosophies of the new 
90s-millennium woman, the new 90s-millennium man is led to 
believe that women of today have this yearning to be rough, tough, 
athletic and durable. You can plainly see this insane mentology being 
overtly promoted by the new feminist-dominated Holly-weird scene.
Present scripts have women punching men out in toe-to-toe 
confrontations. But let a man punch a woman out, and the cry of 
"promoting violence against women" can be heard from the rooftops 
of every gynandromorphic watchdog defending a feminist cause.
The promotion and acceptance of violence by women against men 
is never considered an issue worth addressing by feminized women, 
men or the feminized media. No one ever speaks about the messages 
being conveyed to little girls through the presentation of such 
advertisements as depicted in figure 42. We've all been desensitized 
and reprogrammed to see it as "amusing" or "entertaining." Kathy 
Bates received an academy award for such a role in the movie Misery.
These gender perversions who call themselves "90s women", or 
"millennium mamas", are no better than the sick and depraved, 
estrogen-toxic males who brutalize gynic women, and the 
glamorization of this new "macho-bitch" that's as-good-as-any-man


--- PAGE 407 ---
359
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
personality by Hollywood (like Xena, the Warrior Princess; Alias;  
Painkiller Jane; Battlestar Galactica, Terminator TV series),  should make 
this point very clear.
Figure 42
But it hasn't. Clueless is a perfect description for the new 'macho' 
women of Hollywood, and the dumbed-down audiences who allow 
themselves to buy into this garbage.
After Linda Hamilton did the movie Terminator 2, I remember 
hearing a few women say that they wouldn't mind having a body like 
she had in the movie. It didn't matter that she looked like a muscular 
boy, complete with well-defined cuts in her arms, abs, trapezius, lats 
and no hips! If as a woman you wished to look like this, it says a hell 
of a lot about your hormonal orientation. If as a man you get a rise 
out of women looking like this, unfortunately my brother, you are not a 
man!
In fact, Linda Hamilton subsequently appeared on Conan 
O'Brien's late night talk-show to tell everyone that she had "cut up" 
simply to look good with Arnold Schwarzenegger, but that she hated 
what it had done to her in the long run. She stated that she began


--- PAGE 408 ---
360
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
behaving the exact opposite, wanting desperately to feel "soft" and 
more like a "real woman" again. She became pregnant thereafter and 
settled into being a wife and mother.
The shame of it all is that every time T-2 is played, the picture of 
Linda Hamilton as she appeared on screen will be the only image of 
her that our children will remember.
Geena Davis is another good example of how the so-called 90s- 
millennium woman publicly sank to an all-time low in female self­
degradation. At an anti-climatic moment in her action movie The 
Long Kiss Goodnight,  she is actually heard saying to the bad guys 
".. .suck my dick!"
Again; Whoopi Goldberg playing a basketball coach in her movie 
Eddie, grabs the opposing coach by his jacket lapels and says .blow 
me." The Hollywood hype on gender-equality by way of reverse role 
play continued, with Demi Moore 'flexing' in her film flop G.I. Jane.
And of course, who could ever forget the macho queen of all ballsy 
babes, Sigourney Weaver, who stared in four (count 'em ) four movies 
as Ripley the Alien killer, a woman who is seen degenerating more 
and more into hard-core 'dyke-dom' with every sequel.
But when all of the above is placed into its proper perceptual 
context, even the visually impaired could see that neo-feminism is all 
about imitation, not innovation-, that in the end, women still cannot 
"do" what men do —  only what they see men do!
Item: Are the Hollywood starlets of today sending a message to their female  
audiences that the new way for women to convey "power" and authority" is to  
give the impression that they have a dick?56 Where are the feminist watchdogs to  
denounce this "degrading" exhibition? Has it now become acceptable and  
appropriate for Sylvester Stallone or Arnold Schwarzenegger to say "suck my clif  7 
If so, then don't be surprised if the new "masculine" super hero of the next century  
for our children—is Ru-Paul!
56 This would be behavior reminiscent of the hermaphrodite hyena. The alpha female of the 
pack grows a vestigial penis, and to show her "dominance," she forces the subordinate female 
members of the pack to lick it as a way of showing respect! Ummmm... - Author


--- PAGE 409 ---
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
361
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Psyche of the Female Body builder:  
(or)
"The Empress's New Clothes"
Figure 43 
Sharon Bruneau
What motivates or compels a woman to disfigure herself? What 
inner torment or aspiration would goad her into seeking "physical 
beauty" outside the parameters of her original archetypal structure?
Questions like these would most likely be dismissed by a majority 
of today's 90s/millennium feminized women, but I would like you 
(the sister-seeker reading this) to seriously think about the following.


--- PAGE 410 ---
362
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Would you still want a man (a real man that is) after he had 
disfigured his archetypal anatomy to acquire an hourglass figure? 
Would you still want him as your lover or husband if he purposely 
developed wider hips with a narrower waist, enlarged breasts, a 
slender neck, smaller shoulders, or delicate arms?
No? Then what in the name of sanity makes you think that a real 
man wants you (as a woman) to disfigure your archetypal anatomy 
until it looks anything like the woman in figure 43; that is —like a 
man's ?
Think about that!
If the above is what you want for yourself my sister, then I suggest 
it's time you checked the current levels of unconverted endogenous 
androsteroids coursing through your bloodstream. Chances are good 
that you have testosterone-toxic proclivities similar to the many 
females who decided to act upon their inner compunctions to 
amplify their muscle mass, in what they eeriely believed to be an 
amplification of their beauty.
You are more than likely a man decorated with a woman's body.
Sisters, I'm no psychiatrist (thank God), but I do believe I can spot 
a working psychosis when 1 see one. And I think I see that the mass- 
mind has been thoroughly duped into accepting and supporting the 
gender-bending behavior and philosophies of those orchestrating 
today's 'second wave' feminism. Female body-building (like female 
ejaculation), for all its popularity and hype, is nothing less than a 
vivid example of gender-psychosis to the extreme.
In my opinion, the social acceptance of female body building as 
being "normal" for women, is a genuine 'life-imitating-art' scenario 
taken directly from that old fairy tale entitled The Emperor's New  
Clothes.
To those unfamiliar with the real fable, it's the story of a spoiled, 
self-indulgent monarch who expects his subjects to say, do and like 
everything he wanted them to. One day in preparation for a gala 
parade and palace festival, he commissioned his royal tailors to make


--- PAGE 411 ---
363
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
him the most unique, most beautiful outfit his kingdom had ever seen. 
He wanted to possess clothing like no one else in the world.
After desperately working for many days, and with the deadline 
for the event rapidly approaching, the royal tailors found that they 
could not think of anything to make for the emperor that he did not 
already own. So when the emperor finally arrived on the day of the 
festival to try on his new outfit, the tailors (fearing that they would 
lose their heads) told the king that his new outfit was indeed unique; 
like no other in the world... because it was invisible!
They even teamed up to lavish great praises upon him, 
complimenting the way he would look "wearing" them, telling the 
emperor that only smart, elegant people could actually see his unique 
apparel —even going so far as 'describing' the outfit.
The emperor quickly stripped down to his birthday suit, and 
demanded to be dressed in these wondrous "invisible" garments. Of 
course, besides being wicked and self-centered, the emperor was as 
dumb as a sack a1  rocks!
With his vanity and his ego inflated by the tailors, he stepped 
outside to lead the parade believing that he had on the most beautiful 
garments in the whole world. Word was also passed along the 
parade-route and throughout the kingdom that only "smart", 
"elegant" people would be able to see and appreciate the emperor's 
new clothing. Since no one wanted to appear stupid, everyone 
claimed to 'see' his garments and loudly cheered him on with lavish 
compliments and praises during the parade.
But the emperor was butt naked. The full monte!
However, no one in the kingdom dared to tell him the truth about 
the "clothes" he was "wearing."
All except a little boy who didn't believe what he was told to 
believe. Instead, he believed in himself and what his eyes truly saw. 
Much to the horror of the emperor and all the brown-nosing subjects 
he mooned along the parade route, the little boy proceeded to "tell it 
like it is."


--- PAGE 412 ---
364
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"Your majesty; your ass is butt-naked!!  Open and shut! Case 
closed!"
In like manner, new wave feminism has become the perceptual 
tailor for modern society, outfitting the mass mind with delusions 
weaved from twisted and perverse concepts of reality. They give 
lavish praises to the "nakedly obvious" pathogenic behavior of 
certain hormonally dysfunctional men and women, and expect us all 
to be oblivious —to lock-step and follow 'suit.'
Case in point.
I was flipping through an issue 
of Flex magazine in the early 90s, a 
monthly publication dedicated to 
extolling the virtues of the hyper­
inflated bicep. What I saw on 
many of the pages had me picking 
my bottom lip off the floor. I knew 
then I was way out of touch with 
the current trends in muscle mags, 
because I personally remembered 
a time when they specifically 
targeted a select group of men; 
men who dedicated themselves to 
the rigorous disciplines of 
competitive body building. I had 
no idea then that these magazines This ...is a woman'!'?'. Yes! Meet 
now made room on their pages to Ms.Nicol Bass - Gynandromorph 
display the mutated torsos of Figure 44
women who decided to take up this "sport."
As I looked at these freaks I couldn't help thinking—what next? I 
knew there was an equal opportunity movement supported by most 
women in America, but this was ridiculous. And the magazine 
lavished great praises on these teratogens, as if what they had 
accomplished what amounted to being an important "evolutionary


--- PAGE 413 ---
365
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
step" or ground-breaking endeavor that represented the next natural 
phase in womankind's overall physical and psychological evolution.
But regardless of what this magazine was trying to promote, I 
knew what my eyes were looking at, and these mutants were no 
longer women. They were hormonally-perverted grotesque 
gynandromorphs. Like the emperor, they were all "butt naked." 
Open and shut! Case closed!
My experience with this particular issue of Flex took an even 
stranger twist, when I happened upon an article by Ms. Sharon 
Bruneau entitled Truth and Consequences. Apparently, Ms. Bruneau (as 
seen in figure 43) was a female "North American Champion" body 
builder, so I decided to see what she had to say.
With the literary license of a tabloid journalist, Ms. Bruneau wrote 
an article whose basic message to the reader was " who should you 
believe, me —  or your lying eyes?"
Ms. Bruneau begins her article by saying...
"... Unfortunately, many women have been dissuaded from body building 
by well meaning but ill-informed people who claim that weight lifting 
made them masculine, muscle-bound or badly injured. Why such myths 
continue is beyond my comprehension, but they do, and they should be 
corrected..."
Wait a minute; did she say "ill-informed people who claim that 
weight lifting made them masculine... muscle-bound?'' Did this sister 
have any reflective surfaces in her own house? Who writes this stuff?!
But before I comment any further on this pathetic attempt to sell 
bullshit as bullion, I would like to include a few more paragraphs 
from her article to give the seeker a more complete overview of just 
how a hormonally deranged mind is apt to think.
Ms. Bruneau continues by elaborating further on the "myths" and 
"misconceptions" concerning the practice of female weightlifting and 
bodybulding. The myths and misconceptions she spoke of in the 
article are written in all capital letters, followed by her comments 
stated directly below them.


--- PAGE 414 ---
366
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Quote...
(a) Body  building  w ill  m ake  a w o m an lo o k like  a m an ...
"Because women have very low levels of the male muscle-building 
hormone testosterone in their bodies, it is impossible for them to 
build the massive muscles a man can. Few women, whether they 
want to or not, can build much appreciable muscle mass, and they 
can do so only through the heaviest and hardest workouts 
imaginable —  believe me!"
(b) Body  building  w ill  m ake  w o m en slow  and  m uscle  bound  ... 
"Innumerable scientific studies have proven beyond a doubt that 
weight training enhances both speed of movement and flexibility. If 
weight training harmed either speed or flexibility, there wouldn't be 
so many women athletes using weights to improve performance in 
sports..."
(c) Yo u'll  get  a h ernia  or  hurt  yo ur  back  lifting  w eig h ts ...
"Very few women get injured while training with weights, as long as 
they warm up carefully before a workout, stay warm while training, 
and use the correct body neck mechanisms outlined for each exercise 
as described and illustrated in this magazine. On the contrary, weight 
training, when performed correctly, can prevent injuries, including 
hernias and back problems ..."
And the article rambled on like this for at least a page and a half 
more. It would take a chapter by itself to fully explain and appreciate 
how Ms. Bruneau and the editors of Flex magazine thought they 
could get away with piling this amount of B.S. under the noses of 
their readers—while trying their best to convincing them they were 
smelling roses. And it must have worked too, judging by the high 
volume of positive responses to this and other such muscle mags. So 
let's briefly review the a-b-c's of Ms. Bruneau's previous statements.
(a) First of all, it's obvious that this woman did not take the time to 
read the very magazine she had chosen to pose and write for, since 
virtually all of the females featured therein, are physically buffed up 
to just one size shy of the Incredible Hulk\ (see figures 45-47). While I


--- PAGE 415 ---
367
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
agree wholeheartedly with her that for women (I mean real women) it 
is impossible to build massive muscles —  who said these magazines were  
featuring real women?  In this day and age it would seem that the 
words 'real', 'woman', and 'man' are being used much to loosely.
(b) In her second statement of fact she uses the words 'body building' 
in her heading, and then deceptively switches to the words 'weight 
training' in the paragraph that follows —as if the two were 
synonymous. But these are qualitatively and quantitatively different 
activities that are meant to achieve two separate results. Here again 
we expose the doublespeak/ doublethink Orwellian mindset behind 
second-wave feminism, as it attempts to convince us that body 
building and weight training are no different. When I walk a mile 
with five-pound weights strapped to each ankle beloved, this is not 
body 'building.' It is weight 'training.' When I lift and curl two and 
three hundred pounds of weight, 4 to 5 hours a day, seven days a 
week, while ingesting muscle-enhancing drinks and steroids (like the 
women featured), this is not weight 'training.' It is body 'building.' 
Period!
(c) Her last paragraph can easily be understood (and thus dismissed) 
if you turn your attention to the sections entitled Testosterone Pathway 
Toxicity, and Running, Jogging, Dying.
Penis Envy: To the Extreme ...
•
The most interesting and revealing segment in this particular issue 
of Flex magazine focused on the achievements of Ms. Sue Price, a 
female "centerfold" body builder who by the very looks of it, 
contradicted and completely discredited Ms. Bruneau's contention 
that females have "too little testosterone" to achieve the muscle mass 
of the deformed creature highlighted in figures 45, 46 and 47—  
Ms. Bruneau included.
The photographic layout of Ms. Sue Price (see captions 1, 2 and 3) 
whom Flex magazine called "...A Core of Confidence", is self-


--- PAGE 416 ---
368
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
evident in its depiction of a female suffering psychogenically induced 
hormonal derangements. But the captions that accompany these 
photographs are even more priceless in value.
Why?
Because her words reveal to the seeker (who is conscious) those 
internal psycho-dynamics that motivate the "inner man" festering 
deep within a majority of today's frightened women; women with 
damaged psyches who set about the task of bringing this hormonally 
perverted alter-ego to the surface.
Read the following words of Ms. Sue Price very carefully my 
sisters, for they harbor a vast depth of psychasthenic implications.
Caption 1 "...Training with weights puts me in touch with my body, its 
different sensations, both good and bad; training puts me 
in touch with my core ..."
If a woman needs to train with heavy weights and perform 
strenuous exercises to put her "in touch with her body", it can only 
mean that "the man" within her body is the actual "me" she's in 
touch with. A genuine gynic woman is automatically in touch with 
her own body through instinct, not a 50 lb. barbell. In this case, the 
so-called "core" that Ms. Price is referring to, is that of her own 
perverted testosterone-toxic masculine nature within ...
Caption 2. "...Body building has given me tremendous confidence—in
the way I move and the way I feel —  powerful.  I feel that my 
body can do things rather than just look good. I feel that I 
can take care of myself..."
Ms. Price claims that body building gives her "tremendous 
confidence" in the way she moves and feels; that is —"powerful." My 
sisters, the only woman that wants to 'look' and 'feel' powerful, is a 
woman that sees her own original archetypal anatomy as being 
'weak' and worthless from the beginning. Because of her hormonally 
perverted psyche, this type of woman is feeling what a man would 
normally want to feel, because by nature, testosterone compels a 
man's inner need to 'feel' and Took' powerful. Testosterone is the


--- PAGE 417 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"Training with weights  
puts me in touch wjlhi  
my body, its different  
sensations, both gpa am  
bad; training pwrne in  
touch with my core."
Caption 1 - Figure 45


--- PAGE 418 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"Bodybuilding 
has given me 
tremendous 
confidence - in 
the way I move 
and the way 
I feel - powerful 
I feel that my 
body can do 
things rather 
than just look 
good. I feel that 
I can take care
of myself.
hormone that allows a man to accomplish this in order to enhance his 
ability to perform physically stressful acts. The true power of a 
woman doesn't depend upon how many muscles she can develop, or 
on how these muscles make her "feel." Only the body of a true andric 
man could naturally Took', 'feel' or express power from this biological 
gender-perspective.
Ms. Price also says that she feels her body can "do things"rather 
than "just look good." Such comments originate from a neurotic 
mind twisted by gynandrous perspectives of reality. What 'things' 
can a body like hers now do that the body of a natural woman can't, 
except to exhibit hyper-developed muscle mass, lift heavier than 
normal weights, or perform feats of physical prowess normally
Caption 2 - Figure 46


--- PAGE 419 ---
371
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
attributed to men. Her comment about "looking good" as this 
grotesque creature she has become, is almost a dead give-away of her 
own self-hatred; her deep-seated psychological disdain of the original 
female form in general, since only men can "look good" with the 
physical endowments she's seen fit to develop.
But above all else, the most revealing line exposing the truth about 
the inner motivations of such women, is the one which says "... I feel I 
can take care of myself."
It's obvious that this woman has harbored great fears of being 
raped, robbed or killed, simply because she is a female. It's more than 
likely that the males throughout her life (father, brother(s), 
boyfriends) did not nurture or establish that vital sense of trust and 
security a young girl needs growing up, in order to develop the 
wholesome sense of self-worth needed to be a healthy, naturally 
gynic adult woman.
Because of this she has learned to trust only herself by providing 
her own sense of "security"; that is — becoming the man herself.
... and lastly...
Caption 3. "... Muscle alerts me to my physical being, to the prowess of my
body. The red lingerie covering the muscle heightens my sense  
of sexual power. I'm feminine but I'm strong; I'm a woman but  
I'm not weak..."
Spoken like a true gynandromorph!
Question: Who else would be turned on sexually by red lingerie 
covering a buffed-up body with hyper-enhanced muscles, except a 
woman who's (a) into cross-dressing men, or (b) a straight-up lesbian?
Yo! Family! Reality check! The very association of "lingerie on 
muscle" conjures up contradictory images in a sane mind.
I have a sneaking suspicion that whoever helped her write these 
captions did so to encourage a sexual response in its lesbian 
readership; or in homosexual weight lifters who might also happen 
to read it, because to real men —this specimen of hormonal excess 
looks exactly like a man in drag!


--- PAGE 420 ---
372
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
"Muscle alerts me to my physical being, to  
♦he prowess of my body. The red lingerie  
covering the muscle heightens my sense of  
sexual power. I'm feminine but I'm strong;  
I'm a woman but I'm not weak."
SUE PRICE
A Core of  
Confidence
Caption 3 - Figure 47
It's The Empress's New Clothes  people, and unless the 'saner 
majority' holds on to whatever is left of humanity's rapidly eroding 
archetypal instincts, principles, perceptions and higher intuition (that 
is —all things associated with hormonally stable homo-sapiens), 
without our notice, we will find ourselves accepting the most deviant 
forms of human behavior as commonplace, and (God forbid) normal.
In truth, I pity this woman and all other women like her (see 
figures 48-50) who bought into the equality myth; women who feel that 
in order to be as 'good as a man' they must alter or grossly disfigure 
their beautiful archetypal feminine anatomies to at least look like one.
The very way Ms. Price's words are structured ... “Vm feminine but 
I'm strong; I'm a woman but I'm not weak..."  shows just how deeply 
entrenched her self-hatred and insecurities (at being a woman) truly 
are; and also, just how confused a woman is apt to behave when her


--- PAGE 421 ---
373
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
hormonal integrity has degenerated to levels that compel her to such 
demonstrative acts of self-mutilation.
'Genus Homo-Anomalous'
He-She, S-him; or —"The Odd and the Fabulous..."
•
My closing arguments in the case of the 'vanishing hetero' will be 
expressed without the written word. Instead, they'll be presented as a 
pictoral exhibit displayed in a gallery of the grotesque; a percession 
of "guys" and "dolls" from the 'flamboyant and fabulous' species 
genus homo-anomolous.  I coined this pseudo-scientific phrase as an 
inoffensive but semantically accurate 'omage to those whose 
characteristics and behavior best exemplify the "odd promenade."
Beloved, a picture is worth a thousand words.
I've also waited for this point in my thesis to introduce the above 
terminology, as the appropriate venue to 'formally' define the 
following examples of souls afflicted by the plagues of gynandry and 
androgyny, and to visually present the ostentatious (albeit creative) 
manner in which they often demonstrate these imbalances.
From Webster's 7th Collegiate Dictionary, the words genus, homo, 
and anomalous are individually defined as ...
Genus - "... A class, kind or group marked by common characteristics;
...an isolated species exhibiting unusual differentiations..."
Homo - "...M an..."
Anomolous -"... Deviating from the normal of common order; abnormal;
inconsistent with what would naturally be expected..."
Extrapolating key points from these formal definations and 
summarizing them into one, I arrived at my own.;


--- PAGE 422 ---
374
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Genus Homo-Anomolous "...A class or group marked by common 
characteristics exhibiting unusual differentiations, deviating from, and 
inconsistent with, what would normally be considered the natural 
characteristics of the species Man..." - Author
During my research into this subject, I must admit that I could not 
help being fascinated by the preternatural reality these souls have 
chosen to participate in. It wasn't ambivalence towards who they were 
or what I saw, but more the way your face looks, and the surreal state 
of awareness your mind falls into when you slowly pass a train 
wreck or serious car crash on the roadway.
It isn't something you want to see, but you just can't take your  
eyes off it!
Another thing I must admit. I truly admire the odd for embracing 
their "odd-ness" and using it to become the best (or the worst) they 
could possibly be. I must also declare that in the categories of the 
"odd and fabulous" the men win it hands down! At least they didn't 
try to mask what they had become. They proudly wore the clothing 
of the sex they mutated into.
On the other hand, despite their all-too-obvious metamorphosis 
into the anatomical shells of men, the women featured in the 
following pages continued to wear the clothing of women, which in 
this case beat out all "the odds", sending them right to the head of the 
class in the school of the chronically self-deluded.
The following "gallery of the grotesque" I have titled "Guys and 
"Dolls—  Mutants on Parade: Evidence of the End of Days."
It's no where near the outlandish spectacle of the Halloween Day 
Parades in New York or Califonia, or the "Paris is Burning" and 
"Wigstock" extravaganzas; but —it makes for one hellova trailer!
See if you agree ...


--- PAGE 423 ---
375
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
The "Guys"...?
Figure 48


--- PAGE 424 ---
376
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
4
Ladies and gentlemen, meet Ms. Tatianna Butler; 
wrestler, actress and bodyguard to the stars 
Figure 49


--- PAGE 425 ---
377
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I


--- PAGE 426 ---
378
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The "Dolls"...?
Figure 51


--- PAGE 427 ---
379
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
9
Figure 52


--- PAGE 428 ---
Ladies and gentlemen,
Meet RuPaul  —  the "Queen Doll " (also in frame # 1)


--- PAGE 429 ---
381
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Ignorance = Consequence
•
I saw a PBS documentary (Channel 21, New York) dealing with 
pre-mature menopause where a young Asian girl was being studied 
by researchers. She was barely twenty years of age and all of her 
reproductive organs showed the decrepitude of a menopausal 
woman in her sixties.
Even with the most sophisticated technology at their disposal, no 
one from the research team seemed to take notice of the fact that her 
hips were as straight as a man's (as was her mother’s)! And the irony 
was that throughout the program, this child is seen jogging and 
participating in high-stress activities, which for all intents and 
purposes should have revealed to any real scientist that she might just 
be suffering from Endogenous Testosterone Pathway Toxicity!
It was obvious from the program that her problem was genetic. 
But also overlooked was the obvious part played by stress, diet and 
the generational progression of such gynecological diseases.
The downplaying of these facts is just wonderful for the practice 
of gynecology however, which in only fifty years time has managed 
to raise the collective earning capacity of this field to one of the top 
grossing professions in the history of modem medicine! Seventy five 
to one hundred years ago this profession would have been rare to 
non-existent, because the majority of women (and I mean real 
women) were still basically in possession of their finely tuned gynic 
instincts. Such women wouldn't even think of spread-eagling 
themselves before some strange man for a "check up", allowing him 
to shove his fist into them to probe around their insides.
This is a perverse practice that has flourished because average 
women of the past five generations have degenerated into feminism, 
progressively becoming intuitively numb and instinctively 
de-sensitized—no longer able or willing to take full responsibility for 
the health and well being of their own bodies.
And the feminists who have helped to propagate this, are the same 
ones who can't explain why it is that the "new woman of today" has 
become so chronically diseased, dropping dead at twice the rate of


--- PAGE 430 ---
382
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
men from cancer and heart attacks, contracting Alzheimer's, 
osteoporosis, and suffering a higher than normal incidence of 
depression-related suicides, caesareans and deaths in childbirth.
Women who are fervent participants in yang-related sports and 
exercises, apparently do not understand, do not know, or do not care 
to know about the fragile nature of a woman's intrinsic design; that 
the uterus is tenuously attached to the abdominal region by way of 
ligaments and fascia,57 while the fallopian tubes and ovaries are 
attached directly to either side of the lateral pelvic wall by suspensory 
ligaments alone. Every time a woman exerts herself by radically 
twisting, bumping, shaking, falling down or jarring her body, she 
breaks capillaries or causes micro-tears in these delicate tissues, 
seriously jeopardizing her precious reproductive system.
But try telling this to gynandrous women who want to box, throw 
themselves flat on to their stomachs  playing volleyball, football, jog, or 
be "buff-up" with well-defined muscles like the abdominal “bricks" 
or "six-packs" that men normally develop, and you can bet they'll 
repeat some sports related "medical fact" they've heard from a 
feminized medical "expert", or simply dismiss it outright.
Beloved; the superficial fascia tissue in the abdominals of a 
stomach-crunching 6-pack woman, become thinly streched around a 
less pliable type of 'scar tissue' that thickens from the wear and tear 
on the muscles, the same as a man who body-builds by stretching the 
fascia, tearing muscle and causing the buildup of denser tissue as it 
heals. But this is not good for the stomach crunching woman, due to 
the anatomical placement of her reproductive apparatus —  that is, 
inside the abdominal region —  unlike the male's, which hangs outside.
Some people even believe that tighter more muscular abs will help 
women to deliver their babies more efficiently. Not so.
Nature purposely made a woman with less dense fascia-to-muscle 
development in her abdominal region, to provide a more efficient
57 Fascia - "... a sheet of fibrous tissue beneath the surface of the skin enclosing 
muscles or muscle groups and separating muscle layers ..." -  Author


--- PAGE 431 ---
383
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
conduit for the blood's distribution of specific hormones, trace 
minerals and nutrients used for both abdominal elasticity and the 
contractions that bring about childbirth.
Each time a woman crunches or flexes her stomach "muscles", she 
injures the reproductive organs that were meant to ride in a soft 
relaxed environment. Her potential eggs are meant to feel psychically 
and biologically content, until the day arrives when one is called 
forth to bring a happy and healthy life into the world. Strenuous 
exercising and yang-related sports activity severely stress the uterine 
lining, and injures the tissue, veins and arteries of the fallopian tubes.
Gynic women do not have taut, striated, hyper-enhanced stomach 
muscles like the gynandrous females featured in figures 43 through 
50. If a woman does exercise herself until she achieves a flat 6-pack 
stomach on the outside, she should see the mutilated mess she's 
created for herself on the inside; first, because her yang behavior has 
suppressed proper (integrus) estrogen production and distribution 
throughout the body; and second, due to the hyper-development of 
her abdominal muscles, the extensibility and resiliancy of the elastin 
fibers of the fascia have become drastically compromised.
The present day emphasis on women having tight abs and "buns 
of steel" is simply further evidence of the growing trend towards 
promoting the virtues of masculine proclivities in today's women. 
This obsessive focus on sports and the social narcissism we all 
participate in today, is the same 'group psychosis' that the Greek and 
Roman elite provoked in their adrenalin-toxic citizenry, just before 
both of their declining civilizations came crashing down.
Abdominals of Steel:
Abominable for Women...
•
A flat hard stomach on a woman also impedes her inferior vena 
cava vein from efficiently carrying de-oxygened blood from the lower 
body (and uterus) to the heart. Also, if a woman's abdominal 
muscles are too taut, the posture she is forced to assume causes her to 
breathe up above her waist in her chest area, rather than from her


--- PAGE 432 ---
384
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
diaphragm and the abdominal area. It causes the pelvic blood vessels 
to be constricted by the less flexible abdominal muscles, due to the 
extra blood and water they accumulate in this area. Tight constrictive 
clothing like designer jeans, daisy dukes, "poon-poon" crotch-cutters, 
certain spandex leotards and the artificial fibers that comprise the 
average panty hose, will cause the above-mentioned symptoms to 
occur as well. Which is why loose fitting comfortable skirts or dresses 
are the optimal clothing for the true woman.
Again —gynic women do not possess the muscle-density in the 
abdominal area to naturally exhibit well defined 'stomach muscles'. 
Doing strenuous sit-ups are very destructive to a gynic's abdomen 
and reproductive organs, because this type of localized stress 
inflames and eventually undermines the fascia layers of tissue in the 
area, thickening abdominal muscle density while causing 
progressively worsening damage to the ovaries, fallopian tubes and 
uterus —  all of which are in some way connected to them.
Overweight can also prevent the vena cava from returning 
sufficient uterine enriched blood back to the heart.
Andric women like those appearing in figures 43 through 50 are 
quick to want to do sports and other muscle enhancing exercises, 
while still others may feel the need to indulge in yang-based stress- 
related bad habits like smoking, drinking, all night partying and 
promiscuity.
But a gynic woman is well aware of her physiological limitations 
because she can just about sense what every cell in her body is doing. 
She instinctively knows that health and longevity begins and ends ivith  
the condition of her womb;  a primary reason why Nature gave her a 
gentler demeanor and speech, along with an instinctive propensity 
towards hygienic and sedentary behavior; compared to that of her 
hyper-active, testosterone driven gynandrous sisters.
The andric woman for instance, seeks doctors for every problem 
that flairs up due to her perverse nature and behavior, for she hasn't 
the first instinctive clue about proper feminine hygiene and its 
intimate connections to the practice of proper gender conduct.


--- PAGE 433 ---
385
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The so-called upwardly mobile career woman with her daily 
lunch time or after-work aerobic step classes, weight training, body­
building and strenuous exercise programs, is most likely motivated 
by gender-feminist ideologies of competition with her corporate 
nemesis —the white "alpha" male. Any female who feels the need to 
enhance her physical features so that they look anything close to 
masculine features, may very well find herself becoming susceptible 
to masculine disorders as a consequence —  all caused by her greatly 
enhanced and elevated levels of endogenous, unconverted 
androsteroids.
Heart disorders like coronaries (pulmonary artery diseases), so- 
called "silent" heart attacks and strokes, ulcers, depression, nervous 
disorders, bone erosion and cancer are soaring amongst the ranks of 
the new workingwoman as never before. It's even been shown in a 
book entitled Degeneration-Regeneration by Dr. Melvin E. Page, that 
most dental disorders in women today are actually caused by 
hyperandricity!58 This alone is a profound indictment against the new 
behaviorisms of the '90s-millennium' woman.
Some are even contracting male-pattern baldness symptoms, due 
to the endogenous incursion of androsterones into the cell nuclei. 
This mirrors the estrogen imbalances of men, which causes them to 
become susceptible to breast cancers, have smaller ears, shoulders, 
penises or testicles, enlarged breasts or wider hips-to-chest size.
Women who continually exercise can also speed themselves into 
early menopause, which is an unnatural occurrence in women 
anyway, and why it is so difficult for them to go through. As 
mentioned earlier, if menopause is a "natural" occurrence for a 
woman, she wouldn't even be conscious it was occurring.
It would be as easy and as natural as breathing.
Poor die-t (by proxy) also adds up to strenuous exercise for the 
body, because the internal organs are continually forced to exert
58 Hyperandricity - Hyper (prefix) = excessive; Andricity = from the word "andro" 
meaning masculine or male-like. - Author


--- PAGE 434 ---
386
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
large amounts of energy to process and purge any and all forms of 
poisonous filth that passes through them and the bloodstream. This 
causes a great deal of erosion and exhaustion to the Bio-Kinetic Life 
Force ( or Ankh-Taa). Healthy eating causes the body to use a 
minimum amount of its precious life force in the extraction, 
transference and assimilation of vital nutrients, while allowing the 
body to achieve optimum bio-stasis and homeostasis for a long, 
happy, disease-free life.
So the definition of good exercise should ideally be based in good 
eating, walking, yoga, cultural dancing, isometrics, a healthy mental 
outlook, and quite simply, the work you would do as your everyday 
ortho-biotic life.
Woe-menopause and the History of  
Eternal Youth Therapy (HRT)
•
Menopause has been the accepted and expected bio-chemical end 
for all women. Even with the new '90s-millennium spin' put on this 
condition by the feminized media (who attempts to paint this critical 
time as something "liberating" and "special")—women have 
admitted to me that they secretly dread the approach of this 
phenomenon. In fact, so replete is this fear nowadays that it has 
allowed for the proliferation of opportunistic commercial endeavors 
by unscrupulous drug-pusher scientists, who ply a dubious trade of 
chemical misery through their development and manufacture of 
"fountain of youth" products, which they claim will stem the 
biological tides of time.
Hormone Replacement Therapy represented just such an 
opportunity for commercial exploitation.
The history of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can be traced 
to the pioneering research of Dr. Serge Voronoff. He first began his 
studies in the 1930s by taking freshly harvested monkey testicles and 
surgically implanting them into a man's scrotum. Needless to say, it 
didn't work. Undaunted however, he expanded his efforts—  this time


--- PAGE 435 ---
387
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
taking monkey ovaries and grafted them into women; again, with 
disastrous results.
Reviewing his laboratory notes would have left no doubt that at 
the time, the worship of Yacub and Dr. Frankenstein was alive and 
well, and flourishing.
After killing many monkeys (as well as people) Dr. Voronoff (who 
later worked in conjunction with the Nazis) re-directed his research 
toward the use of analogue hormones. His experiments ended with 
the advent of World War II.
Or so they say...
The subject of menopause as a commercial/economic issue came 
to prominence sometime in the 1960s. The medical profession began 
its onslaught into the fragile psyche of this nation's self-conscious, 
consumer-oriented female population, with the publishing of a best 
seller entitled Feminine Forever, by Dr. Robert Wilson, a gynecologist 
practicing out of New York. In it he lavished elaborate praises on the 
potential benefits to be had from estrogen replacement therapy, citing 
that it would save women from "... the tragedy of menopause which 
often destroys her character, as well as her health."
He sold over 100,000 copies in the first year of publication.
Throughout his book, Dr. Wilson boldly promoted estrogen 
replacement therapy as the coveted elixir of perpetual youth for 
middle-aged and menopausal women. The strategy worked because 
the youth-fever in the United States rapidly caught fire when 
women's magazines enthusiastically promoted his concepts and 
ideas. It all resulted in a financial windfall for the good doctor, who 
had already set up The Wilson Foundation  — an organization created 
for the express purpose of researching and promoting the 'virtues' of 
estrogen-related drug therapies.
Dr. Wilson sought out and received over 1.3 million dollars in 
contributions for his foundation, from mega-drug cartels such as 
Wyeth-Ayerst, Searle and Upjohn. Saturation advertisement through 
the media whipped up the necessary hysteria to coerce the then


--- PAGE 436 ---
388
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
unsuspecting population of women into accepting the idea that 
estrogen-related therapies would be the 'wonder-drug' that insures 
'freedom and independence' for the newly emerging 'liberated 
woman' approaching the 21st century.
Unopposed Estrogen Therapy...
•
Dr. Wilson was the forerunner in the use of what became known 
as "unopposed" estrogen therapy. He utilized this method liberally 
even though there were no formal research trials or assessments of its 
long-term physical effects. After years of application however, it 
became increasingly apparent that continuous use of unopposed 
estrogen actually shortened the life of its user!  This was the failed 
treatment protocol that led to focusing critical attention on "radical 
estrogens" being a primary cause in breast and cervical cancers.
A 1975 article published in the New England Journal of Medicine  
reported that the rates of endometrial cancer for unopposed estrogen 
consumers, were 71/2 times greater than for non-users; and that 
women who used estrogen therapy for seven or more years, were 
14 times more likely to develop cancers of various types over time.
As a result of this report its popularity waned, forcing the 
pharmaceutical cartels to 'diagnose' HRT, not as a health disaster, but 
as a potential economic disaster.
Consequently, the cartels called for the immediate unfolding of 
another strategy by their research and development branches. After 
all, they already made millions by hooking a lot of desperate women 
throughout the country on their failed wonder drug.
And as you know, when a drug pusher suffers the indignity of a 
soiled product, he makes good by developing and promoting a "new 
and improved" batch (at a temporarily cheaper price), to compensate 
for the monetary losses that came about as a result of the human 
losses.59
59 This is how the tobacco companies have always operated and flourished.
-  Author


--- PAGE 437 ---
389
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
So the pharmaceuticals resurrected consumer confidence in their 
estrogen replacement therapies with their introduction of "newer", 
"safer" products—those comprised of a mixture of synthetic 
progesterone and estrogen together, which allegedly protected 
menopausal women from both cardio-vascular diseases and 
osteoporosis. However, they never gave the same assurances with 
reference to cancer.
Not until Dr. Lynette J. Dumble, Senior Research Fellow at the 
University of Melbourne's Department of Surgery at the Royal 
Melbourne Hospital came forward with the evidence and spoke up, 
did the sordid truth about any and all hormone replacement therapies 
begin to publicly come to light. She stated emphatically that...
"... the sole basis of HRT is to create a commercial market 
that is highly profitable for the pharmaceutical companies 
and doctors. The supposed benefits of HRT are totally 
unproven ..."
And get this. Dr. Dumble believed that HRT not only enhanced 
existing health problems, but also contributed to the acceleration of the  
aging process in women!  It hastened the onset of latent medical 
conditions, as well as severely worsened already existing ones.
In 1995 her honesty was substantiated. A landmark study 
published by the New England Journal of Medicine  involving some 
121,700 women exposed the deadly effects caused by HRT. The 
study ominously warned that women who used HRT to forestall or 
counteract the symptoms of menopause, increased their chances of 
developing breast cancer by 30-40% when taking estrogen for more 
than five (5) years.
Personally, 1 believe it now takes far less time to do significant 
damage, given the heavily toxic environments we are all currently 
subjected to. The report went on to say that women between the 
ages of 50 and 64 risked a 70% chance of contracting cancer after 
5 years of use. The study concluded by saying that women using 
HRT were 45% more likely to die from breast cancer than those who 
choose not to use HRT, or who used it for less than 5 years.


--- PAGE 438 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
Side Effects of Analogue  
Estrogen Therapies (HRT)...
•
Estrogen replacement therapies are a cruel hoax, and after all this 
time the pharmaceuticals know it. What they don't tell us is that the 
human temple possesses remarkable recuperative capabilities, and 
under the divine Laws of Adjustment and Compensation, it always 
finds a way to survive and thrive if given half the chance. And this is 
especially true in the case of menopause.
Even after this condition has set in, there are back-up glands in a 
woman's body that will compensate for the loss of essential female 
hormones; glands such as the adrenals and the pineal. Even the skin, 
muscles, brain, hair follicles and yellow fat will also compensate. 
These sites help the female anatomy to make the necessary 
adjustments by monitoring her hormonal balance after "the pause" 
has set in.
Of course, this can only happen if a woman has been taking proper 
care of herself through ortho-biotic nutrition, a gynic lifestyle and 
disposition, and the purposeful adherence to a wholesome state of 
mind.
Besides the direct link to cardio-vascular (heart) diseases, medical 
science appears to be totally reluctant to admit that HRT is involved 
in other chronic diseases. Dr. John Lee, an independent researcher, 
author and general practitioner, stated that the only in-depth study 
conducted on an HRT subject, appeared in a research paper called 
The Boston Health Study, which was participated in by a large number 
of nurses. But the report suspiciously gave a non-critical, positive 
slant to the estrogen/cardio-vascular link.
Dr. Lee claims that it was totally flawed.
He compiled a list of side effects from HRT that he said eventually 
leads to the appearance of such diseases as ...endometrial cancer; 
obesity; salt and fluid retention; depression and headaches; 
hypoglycemia; the leeching of zinc; the improper assimilation of 
copper; a reduction of oxygen to all cells; a thickening of the bile, the 
bile ducts and the liver; gall bladder disease; an increased chance of


--- PAGE 439 ---
391
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
breast cysts and uterine fibroids; impeded thyroid activity; drastically 
diminished sex drive; severe blood clotting; de-toned heart muscle; 
endometriosis; severe uterine cramping during menses; infertility 
and a severe impediment to osteo-blast (bone making) function.
Of course, with the potential for so many side effects, if the above 
ever become public knowledge, the sharp intractable sword of truth 
would swiftly butcher the already bloated cash cow of the greedy 
pharmaceuticals.
Progesterone:
Pro and Con...
•
Progesterone, derived from progestogen (a "vibrational twin" of 
testosterone) is quite literally the mother/father of all hormones in a 
woman's body. It is said to be the precursor element active in the 
synthesis of adrenal corticosteroids. These are the hormones that 
protect the overall organism during stressful times. It is also 
responsible for the synthesis of all sex hormones in the female. In the 
male this job falls to his precursor hormone androsterone.
Progesterone should therefore be considered a catalytic hormone, 
for it has the capacity to be changed by the hypothalamus and 
pituitary into a variety of other specialized hormone derivatives 
when needed by the body. This makes estrogen a metabolic end- 
product of testosterone converted progesterone.
As mentioned earlier, if you place a model of the progesterone 
hormone beside a model of the testosterone hormone, they look  
virtually identical.  It is the sublime astral-atomic/electro-magnetic 
polar "qualities" of these two catalytic hormones that keep the 
gender-integrity of the male and female principles intact.
Unfortunately for the female however, progesterone (or the lack of 
it) can also become a severe problem as she gets older. As a woman 
ages (especially one leading a stressed out, nutritionally poor 
lifestyle), proper progesterone conversion begins to wane. This has 
led to the experimental use of artificial testosterone analogues on 
menopausal women, who have since reported an almost


--- PAGE 440 ---
392
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
miraculous return of their vigor and sexual ardor. Of course they 
also reported certain 'side effects' such as enhanced facial hair growth 
and a substantial deepening of their voices. So now women in their 
later years can look forward to becoming "she-men" as a way to 
escape the consequences of a lifetime of improper gender conduct, 
psychological stress, and nutritional self-abuse.
A vast majority of today's female reproductive diseases can be 
physiologically traced to a perversion or deficiency of progesterone. 
A staggering 75% of all women in western civilization suffer from 
pre-menstrual syndromes (PMS), while yet another 30% of primarily 
young women (ages 23-28) are now suffering from pre-menopausal 
symptoms. By all indications thus far, the new and improved 
liberated millennium woman (with all of her health-spa exercising, 
women's consciousness groups and fast track careers) is quite literally 
falling apart internally. Unfortunately, the above is rarely if ever 
discussed or considered news-worthy by the perception-molders of 
gender feminism. Nowhere is there any critical dialogue on the 
fateful consequences that result from their ongoing quest to 
'masculinize' the female population! It's just not done. It's just not 
"politically correct." But every day more and more evidence is being 
brought forth to substantiate what I have conveyed to you herein.
Again, the purpose of this compendium is not to proclaim that I 
have any monopoly on truth. It is simply an informal presentation of 
what I consider to be 'exotic', neglected or purposefully suppressed 
facts about the feminine principle seldom given the light of day; 
continuing calculations, assessments and observations of the 
metaphysical enigma called woman, and the ongoing attacks against 
her archetypal feminine nature and instincts taking place today.
Beloved, I have had to up-grade the information offered in this 
thesis several times since I began it in late 1989 early 1990.1 have 
done this to validate the legitimacy of all that I was formally 
criticized for having written or lectured on back then, consisting 
incorporating the mounting scientific proof to substantiate the 
veracity of my empirical claims each passing year to the present time.


--- PAGE 441 ---
393
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
I was mocked and ridiculed because of my progressive viewpoints 
by many feminist-oriented people who saw them as nothing more 
than the grand-standing of a closet misogynist. But as I said at the 
outset beloved, the facts speak for themselves, and today they're not just 
speaking —  they're literally screaming!!
Everywhere there are indications that the proper hormonal 
balance so essential to the health and sustained well being of a 
woman's body, has become perverted or is rapidly disappearing 
from today's female population.
Why is that? No one in the feminist community seems to have a 
genuine answer or is even willing to discuss one.
Young women in their mid to late 20s can now look forward to 
suffering pre-mature symptoms of menopause routinely, and as a 
result, will not ovulate. And because the female anatomy has 
mutated due to environmental degradation and "post-traumatic 
ancient nuclear war stress disorders", without ovulation, no corpus 
luteum results. Without the creation of a corpus luteum no balanced 
gynic progesterone is made. Without balanced gynic progesterone 
conversion, there is a critical deficiency in the production and quality 
of integrus estrogen. And without integrus estrogen, there is a higher 
susceptibility to all of the aforementioned diseases.
Sadly, it's a "catch-22" scenario with no immediate solution.
Now; Please pay close attention 
to the following...
•
The present-day female anatomy (unlike that of her archetypal 
ancestral fore-mothers) has to produce the majority of her integrus 
progesterone through the monthly blossoming of the corpus luteum. 
This is so because her archetypal body-matrix has mutated after 
countless eons of molecular-genetic perversion and adaptation. It has 
degenerated to the point where her once divine ability to initiate 
voluntary ovulation, de-volved to become the in-voluntary tragedy 
now known as the menstrual cycle. A more in-depth explanation of


--- PAGE 442 ---
394
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
this was given previously in the sections entitled Menstruation: The  
Phenomenon of Complacent Pathology,  and Ovulation.
Estrogens have two pathways by which they are metabolized, the 
short or safe pathway and the long cancer-promoting pathway. 
Those estrogens that do not promote cancer (phylo-estrogens) take 
the short path. Organochlorine-based estrogen-mimics, estradiol and 
HRT analogues (all cancer promoters) take the long, slower path.
If enough short-path estrogens are allowed to proliferate in the 
bloodstream, the breast (in this case) is protected because they block 
the pathogenic estrogens from accumulating in the mammary tissue, 
rendering them unable to promote cancer. If not, the estrogen mimics 
and pathogens associated with perverted estrogen production 
accumulate, and cancer ensues.
Another detriment is the here-to-fore unrecognized problem that 
links adverse progesterone levels to osteoporosis. A while back, 
western medicine discovered their first clue concerning the fact that 
integrus progesterone-to-estrogen conversion stimulates osteo-blast60- 
mediated new bone formation. This simply means that healthy 
integrus progesterone stimulates new bone cell and tissue growth in 
women, by rarifying the converted phylo-estrogens into a form 
suitable for efficient calcium absorption to occur.
If osteoporosis is so rampant today, even in young women, it 
could very well mean that women are not making integrus 
progesterone, but an inefficiently unconverted, testosterone- 
dominant derivative species instead. If they were making integrus 
progesterone, osteoporosis could not occur because they would be 
making aromatase-converted testosterone to progestogen to integrus 
estrogen routinely, thus allowing calcium to be properly absorbed.
As mentioned earlier, the presence of unconverted testosterone or 
related radical (endogenous) androgenic materials in the 
bloodstream, inhibit the proper absorption of calcium in women.
60 Osteoblast - "... a cell from which bone develops ..." - Amer. Herit Diet


--- PAGE 443 ---
395
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
This is why gynandrous, testosterone dominant females are most 
susceptible to bone erosion in later years. Again, it is due to the high 
and persistent presence of testosterone (unconverted progesterone) in 
their systems, which destabilizes their integrus estrogen and 
progesterone balance preventing efficient calcium absorption. Gout 
and other arthritic conditions eventually occur in many cases as well, 
since the unprocessed calcium becomes a free-floating radical 
element in the bloodstream —  all due to the higher levels of uric acid 
caused by poor nutrition, which settles into the joints or connective 
tissues of the body.
"Alien" Estrogens...
•
Pathological stress, along with similar dietary habits, can cause 
what is known as anovulatory cycles (or cycles without ovulation). The 
subsequent lack of integrus progesterone that results interferes with 
the production of anti-stress hormones, which in turn allows stressful 
conditions to exact a greater toll on the body. This problem leads to 
severe bouts of P.M.S. in today's overactive career woman, and may 
contribute to wife-instigated domestic abuse—a  phenomenon that just 
about equals that of husband-instigated domestic abuse  according to 
ongoing national statistical studies, but is suppressed by the 
feminized media for obvious political reasons.
Also, we must not leave out adverse environmental factors when 
studying the consequences of an imbalance between estrogen and 
progesterone production. Earth's bio-sphere is literally saturated in a 
toxic chemical soup that permeates our air, our waters and our foods. 
Pesticides and herbicides which include DDT, dieldrin, atrazine and 
heptachlor—industrial by-products like dioxin, sulphides, arsenics, 
zinc oxides, poly-carbonated plastics (like those found in baby bottles 
and water containers), carbon monoxide and PCBs (just to name a 
few) are all destructive to human biology.
Some of the above-mentioned chemical toxins are identified as 
"estrogen-mimics", which cause bio-chemical responses in the body 
just like estrogen. They are highly fat-soluble, not easily eliminated


--- PAGE 444 ---
396
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
from the body, and not bio-degradable. They accumulate in the fatty 
tissues (the brain is 1/3 fat) of both Man and animals.
Science calls these estrogen pretenders "xeno-estrogens" because 
although they are foreign to the human organism, they are still taken 
in and (temporarily) accepted by the body's estrogen-receptor sites. 
This reeks havoc on the bio-chemistries of both men and women.
The global poisoning of women (and men) by these hormone 
mimics can be studied in a book entitled Our Stolen Future, by authors 
Theo Colburn (of the World Wildlife Fund), Dianne Dumanoski (of 
the Boston Globe) and John Peterson Meyers (a zoologist). In this 
work the authors had thus far isolated 51 hormone mimics, each one 
with the singular ability to destabilize the integrity of the entire 
female bio-structure—as well as the male's!
These pretenders have also been found to have the ability to 
reduce sperm production, cause DNA mutations during cellular 
division, and can even cause a re-sculpturing of the convolutions of 
the brain! They are implicated in the occurrence of breast cancer in 
men, and may also be causing severe mutations in the proper growth 
and size of the hypothalamus gland during a baby's development 
in-utero. This problem ends up perverting the endocrine system, 
resulting in the bio-chemical imbalances that lead to homosexuality.
Item: To all the UFO-logists out there: makes you wonder if the rumors  
concerning 'extraterrestrial involvement' in the re-programming of the human  
specie through our genetics, so as to create a more favorable, compatible host to  
breed a new cross-specie entity, isn't just a rumor after all. ©
Hmmm ..! Can anyone say Riley Martin? ©
The worldwide drop in sperm count, as well as the onset of 
pre-pubescent menstruation and breast growth in an increasing 
number of little girls, must be taken as ominous signs that these 
xeno-estrogens are truly exacting a terrible toll on present-day 
humanity—with disastrous consequences to gender-integrity in the 
fore-seeable future.


--- PAGE 445 ---
397
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
The sperm count of the average male living within an industrial 
environment (particularly the Caucasian male) has dropped by 60% 
between the years 1938 and 1990, with accompanying reports of 
genital deformities, reproductive mutations, neurological disorders 
and a significant rise in the incidence of breast, prostate and testicular 
cancers. A study of the effects of pollution on men and women by the 
Malmo University of Sweden in 2005, postulated an even grimmer 
outlook for the female populations of this planet. The research 
suggested that the present global saturation of industrial waste, 
pesticides and other such pollutants, are resulting in the destruction 
of the 'X' chromosomes in males, causing an abnormally higher level 
of 'Y' chromosomes to be present in their sperm.
Testing was done on Swedish fishermen exposed to the above 
types of pollutants, who were found to have a higher level of Y 
chromosomes in their sperm. This of course would result in a dis- 
proportionally higher amount of males being born in subsequent 
generations, if the above environmental conditions were to remain 
persistent.
Nature's Progesterone...
Today, due to the gradual loss of women's ability to produce the 
proper balance of progesterone, estrogen (unopposed estrogen that 
is) is literally running wild. This has created "bio-chemical 
dissonance" — a term used by Sherill Sellman in her article entitled 
"Hormone Heresy", which appeared in Nexus magazine, volume 3, # 
4 (June-July, 1996).
It was made clear from the content of the article that the last thing 
a woman needs is more analogue estrogens from such things as birth 
control pills and hormone replacement therapies (HRT) running 
through her bloodstream. So-called "natural" progesterone is 
completely overlooked or purposely ignored by medical science and 
the pharmaceutical companies, simply because they cannot make 
money from it. Dr. Lee (mentioned earlier) has conducted a 15-year 
research into the advantages of progesterone analogues that are


--- PAGE 446 ---
398
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T I
derived from plants; analogues that he claims to be virtually free of 
any detrimental side effects.61
With reference to this course of therapy, I have personally 
recommended to clients participating in my Life-Path© initiation and 
purification programs (as well as to pre-menopausal women who 
suffer severely from their symptoms), that they temporarily use the 
herbs Sarsaparilla, Wild Yam, Dong Quai and Red Raspberry —in 
conjunction with a strong wholistically nutritional regiment for the 
immediate relief of unbearable suffering for a short while.
The vast majority of women who did so later told me that they 
experienced a near to complete eradication of adverse symptoms 
associated with progesterone/estrogen imbalance.
There even exists a natural trans-dermal progesterone cream that 
can be rubbed onto the skin and absorbed into the bloodstream. 
Natural analogue progesterone is a cholesterol derivative, and is 
synthesized from wild Mexican yams and/or the soybean.
Natural progesterone was first derived from a compound that 
appears in the wild yam called Diosgenin. Diosgenin is like an 
analogue cholesterol that is further converted into an analogue of the 
precursor hormone pregnenolone, which in turn is used by the body to 
produce progesterone. This natural progesterone has a magical 
affinity with the human bio-organism because the active ingredients 
are almost an exact molecular match for human progesterone.
However, scientists claim that the diosgenin of the wild yam 
cannot be converted by the body into the precursor pregnenolone 
due to its lack of specific enzymes, and must be converted in a 
laboratory. This is totally misleading because the necessary enzymes 
are created by the combination of other foods mixed with the 
digestive enzymes of the saliva, the stomach and the intestines.
61 This I accept only with a huge grain of salt,because all analogues are viewed by the 
body as "drugs," which are eventually rejected as a response to the adverse 
cumulative effects caused by their continued use. - Author


--- PAGE 447 ---
399
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART I
There is also an herb called Maca that is alleged to regulate but not 
stimulate ovarian function. This it does by regulating the organs of 
internal secretion such as the pituitary, the adrenals, the pancreas, etc. 
Half a teaspoon 2 or 3 times a day for peri-menopausal women is 
said to be the accepted dosage.
Ms. Sellman also noted that in Asia and South America where 
women eat the wild yam and the non-genetically modified soybean, 
the term "hot flash" does not exist anywhere in their vocabularies.
And isn't it also interesting to note that this miracle substance in 
the wild yam just so happens to be called Dios-genin...?
Dios = God 
Genin = Genic = produced.
In other words "produced by God."
J3J" "..The Creator has a Master Plan-./'J' J3
Shm-m-Hotep Beloved.  
Walk in Light!
?


--- PAGE 448 ---
END OF PART ONE


--- PAGE 449 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Part II
The Politics and Economics  
of Women's Diseases


--- PAGE 450 ---
The Politics and Economics of Women's Disease
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Part II
Section / Chapter Page
Re-Gender-fication... 1
Neo-Feminism: Return of the Amazon ... 3
The Distorted Concepts of a "Matriarchy" and a "Patriarchy"... 5
Equality and the Basic Differences between Men and Women: 
The Forgotten Equation ... 12
The 3 Faces of Eve ... 17
The Four Temperaments of Modern-Day Feminism ... 19
The Rise of Neo-Feminism ... 21
Players in the game: The Pernicious Nature of Weaponized 
Feminism... 25
Weaponizing Emotions... 27
The Feminist fallout... 43
"Black" Feminism: A Moon with no orbit... 44
Divide and Conquer... 52
Body and Soul; A Literary Insult to Ancestral Injury ... 58
Orwell's "1984" Alive and Well in WeZI-ness Propaganda ... 60
Case in Point: The Matter of Clitoral Circumcision
...... 64
Back to the Issue of HPV and Circumcised men ...... 74
Our True Histories Exist as the Unsolved Mysteries of Myth: 
Clitoral Circumcision Continued... 75
A "King's" Ransom: The Destruction of the Black Inner 
Society ... (Beyond Racism and Rhetoric — to Reality) 86
The Psycho-Politics of Number and Race: 
Mammy and the Eugenicist... 89
The Politics of Recessivism; or, The Genetics of Paranoia... 93
Satan: The Ultimate Mix-Master... 97
Praise D'Lord and Pass D'Ammunition... 104
The Chess-board Battlefield —  White Queen to Black King; 
— Check! 110
White Queen to Black Bishop...Check! 113
Operation Queer Queen —
Gloria Steinem, at your (CIA) Service ... 114


--- PAGE 451 ---
White Queen takes Black Queen ... Checkmate! 119
Trends and Split ends ... 127
Epitaph: Highlights of the "Chess match"... 129
Proof of the payoff: Affirmative Action ... 134
Doctor Fem (a fleeting thought)... 139
Forgotten Achievements... 140
Does design denote function ...? 142
Cross-dresser Chic ... 147
Madam Chauvenist; Things that make you go Hmmm... 154
The Myths of "Male Violence" and the Reality
Female Aggression... 156
Perceptual Perversions ... 167
Simian Psychology... 169
To the Mothers of Young Sons... 176
Suffer the Children ... 181
Womb Power, Extortion and the so-called Matriarchy ... 182
Fall of the Motherarchy and the Quest for the Womb-niverse ... 183
Illusion of a Genderized Godhead ... 187
Feminism: "Thanks for the Maladies... " 188
Final Summary 191
Epilogue
Bibliography
Glossary
Index
Pictographic Summary; parts 1 and 2
Special Stars that Shine in my Multiverse (Pictoral)
Bio / Dr Phillip Valentine


--- PAGE 452 ---
"Protocols for Re-Conditioning the Black Mind:
The Infamous Speech of William Frances Lynch" (circa 1712) *
•
* Though the legitimacy of this documaent is in dispute, the legitimacy of its content
is irrefutable!
Gentlemen:
I greet you here on the bank of the James River in the year of our Lord one thousand seven 
hundred and twelve. First, I shall thank you the Gentleman of the Colony of Virginia for 
bringing me here. I am here to help you solve some of your problems with slaves. Your 
invitation reached me on my modest plantation in the West Indies where I have experimented 
with some of the newest yet still the oldest methods for control of slaves. Ancient Rome would 
envy us if my program is implemented. As our boat sailed south on the James River, named for 
our former illustrious king, whose version of the bible we cherish, I saw enough to know your 
problem is not unique. While Rome used cords of wood crosses for standing human bodies 
along its old highways in great numbers, you are using the tree and the rope on occasion.
I caught the whiff of a dead slave hanging from a tree a couple of miles back. You are not 
only losing valuable stock by hangings, you are having uprisings, slaves are running away, your 
crops are sometimes left in the fields too long for maximum profit, you suffer occasional fires, 
your animals are killed - gentlemen you know what your problems are. I do not need to 
elaborate; I am not here to enumerate your problems. I am here to introduce you to a method of 
control.
In my bag here I have a foolproof method for controlling your black slaves. I guarantee 
everyone of you that if installed correctly, it will control the slaves for at least 300 years!  My 
method is simple; any member of your family or overseer can use it.
I have outlined a number of differences among slaves and I take these differences and make 
them bigger. I use fear, distrust and envy for control purposes. The methods have worked on 
my modest plantation in the West Indies and it will work throughout the south. Take this 
simple little list of differences and think about them. On the top of my list is "age" but its only 
there because it starts with an "A". The second is "color" or shade, then there's intelligence, size, 
sex, size of plantations, status on the plantation, attitude of the owners, whether the slaves live 
in the valley or on the hill; east, west, north or south, have fine or coarse hair, or is tall or short. 
Now that you have a list of differences, I shall give you an outline of action, but before that I 
shall assure you that distrust is stronger than trust, and envy is stronger than adulation, respect 
or admiration.
The black slave after receiving this indoctrination shall carry on and will become self- 
refueling, self-generating and self-regulating for hundreds of years, maybe thousands.
Don't forget you must put the old black male vs. the young black male and the young black 
male against the old black male. You must use dark-skinned slaves vs. the light-skinned slaves 
and the light-skinned slaves vs. the dark-skinned slaves. You must use the female vs. the male, 
and the male vs. the female. You must have your white servants and overseers distrust all 
blacks, but it is necessary that your slaves trust and depend on us. They must love, respect and 
trust only us!
Gentleman, these kits are your keys to control, use them. Have your wives and children use 
them. Never miss an opportunity. My plan is guaranteed, and the good thing about this plan is 
that if used intensely for one year, the slaves themselves will remain perpetually distrustful."


--- PAGE 453 ---
Rampant technology has given birth to ultra-materialism.  
The prefix 'mater' in Latin means mother. Thus by  
definition, mater-ialism represents a degradation or  
corruption of the feminine principle. European culture by  
comparison is perversely materialistic, and must therefore  
be considered the pathological offspring of a degenerate  
matriarchal consciousness..."
- Author
At the end of the Eon, the countryside will bristle with  
towers, the crossroads with jackals, and the women will  
grow body-hair..."
- The Vedas
The women will at times be harsh and rough spoken and  
quick to cry.... Sons will kill their fathers and mothers at  
the end of the Eon, women will kill their husbands and rely  
on their sons..."
- Mahabarata (Volume 3)


--- PAGE 454 ---
BOOK IV  
(Part 2)


--- PAGE 455 ---



--- PAGE 456 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
PART II
The Politics and Economics  
of Women's Diseases...
?
'Re-Genderfication'
•
Since its baneful inception in Europe, the so-called 'practice of 
medicine' has plied a lethal trade in pharmaceutical poisons and 
surgical suffering, the likes of which remain unmatched in all of 
human history. Upheld by institutional protocols based on 
inconsistent theories, injurious methodologies and quasi-religious 
superstition, "medical science" nevertheless continues to command 
respect, credibility and trust, primarily through its skillful 
manipulation of human credulity. And for over two centuries now, 
nothing has changed in this scenario except the diagnostic gadgets 
and clever commercial gimmicks used to target the gullibility (and 
the wallets) of an unsuspecting public.
So it should come as no surprise to the seeker when I say that the 
current epidemic of gynecopathic diseases, in and of themselves, are 
not the pre-eminent threat to women. The real menace is in the 
perilous array of poisonous treatments and mutilating surgeries 
vigorously promoted in the media by the pharmaceutical cartels and 
their errand boys in Congress, the AMA and the FDA. And believe it


--- PAGE 457 ---
2
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
or not, this 'corpus medicum' works in conjunction with other multi­
national corporations to create and sustain certain 'quality-of-life' 
conditions that actually allow female diseases to exist and persist.
How is this possible you might ask? Why would women's 
diseases (in fact all diseases) be allowed to exist and persist?
Well the short answer is simple; so that these very same corporate-  
pharmaceutical parasites (along with various private and political interests  
in their employ), can continue to collect their cut of the obscene cash  
dividends made possible by peddling their surgical solutions and toxic drug  
therapies to suffering, exploited, ill-informed women worldwide!  Period.
The long-term answers are a bit more complicated, and will be 
explored as the subject matter unfolds.
Most if not all of the currently popular models of health tailored 
for the 90s-millennium woman, have been structured around a 
'no-pain no-gain'/corporate utopian abstract that had its origins in 
Germany around the early to mid-1800s. This perverse vision of 
women's health began to take hold of the American psyche as a 
result of politically orchestrated social control policies like Title-IX, 
advanced and supported by high-profile feminist organizations, the 
sports corporations and the pharmaceutical cartels. They all 
collaborated in a joint effort with government to bring about a 
psycho-social re-definition of today's woman, through a broad-based 
radical revision of society's (and Nature's) archetypal gender roles.
In other words, the psycho-social re-genderfication process was 
orchestrated to gamer the public's support for a corporate-sponsored 
'feminist ideal', based on what a woman should now function as, 
without any scientific or ethical regard for who she structurally is!
This re-classification of "a woman's place in society", and what she 
is now expected to do within the parameters of these expanded 
definitions, set a whole new pathological precedent for what 
constitutes 'health' and 'well-being' in a woman today.
"Re-gender-fication" has forced contemporary women to have to 
physically and psychologically function at levels far beyond the 
boundaries imposed by the dictates of Natural Law; those sublime


--- PAGE 458 ---
3
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
edicts of Universal Intelligence that manifest internally as a woman's 
higher feminine instincts, and externally as her gynic countenance and 
behavior; Immutable Laws that exist to maintain, nurture and protect 
her psychological integrity and delicate anatomical design.
Who she is within the cosmic scheme of things, and what her 
sacred physiology and characteristics mean in relationship to this, 
have not been factored into her modern-day, corporate re-definition 
of gender-status.
In fact, all such re-definitions peculiar to re-genderfiaction are only 
relevant as they pertain to the European's current world view; that 
is —defining a woman's health according to her ability to keep up 
with modem society's frantic, pathologically un-natural pace; a pace 
set for her by those who stand to gain huge profits from the suffering 
and diseases that inevitably result.
Neo-Feminism:
Return of the Amazon...
•
Which brings us to the who, what and why behind the current 
epidemic of women's diseases; who initiated the re-genderfication 
process (i.e., redefined the gender-status of women); ivhat were the 
mechanisms of re-definition and their purpose; and why was it 
introduced and implemented at the time?
Item: You may logically ask yourself what role has the influence of
gender-feminism played in the sharp decline of women's health, as  
well as the overall health of today's melanated women in particular?  
How can the author say that women's health (overall) have declined,  
when they're living longer statistically in their newly defined roles?
Is this thesis an overt indictment of fault against gender-feminism  
for all of society's ills? Is this just another "chauvinist" attempt to  
legitimize anti-feminist rhetoric?
In answering the above, I wish to make it very clear that although 
this dissertation is dedicated to exploring the subtle intrinsic causes 
behind women's diseases in general, its more specific purpose is to


--- PAGE 459 ---
4
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
bring to light those causative factors prevailing upon the health and 
well-being of melanated women- in particular !
With this in mind I intend to show that the politics and 
philosophies of today's feminism are not only a-typical, un-natural  
and a-cultural to us as a people, but may very well be disguising the 
most insidious psycho-social cancer currently undermining the 
overall health and well-being of today's black woman, black society, 
and perhaps the entire melanated populations of the planet as a 
whole.
To begin with; when examining the subject of gender-feminism 
and women's health (more specifically, 'black' women's health), we 
cannot approach a topic such as this here in America without first 
factoring in that ever-present specter of racism. Although there are 
many who believe (as I also do) that the issue of "black vs. white" 
has been manipulated by psycho-political agents of the parasitic 
elite to distract, dominate and control both populations, and will one 
day become obsolete as a psycho-social disease,62 racism cannot yet 
be disqualified for study as the basic psycho-pathological trigger 
mechanism that has shaped the way "the colors" continue to react 
to one another.
Like it or not, racism is the most accurate compass that a seeker of 
truth can use to begin navigating the fetid swamps of feminism 
today. Which means that as collective autochthonous peoples, we 
must not become distracted by feminist campaigns to stratify us 
along gender lines —  another typical 'divide and conquer' tactic of the 
parasitic elite clearly articulated in the so-called 'Protocols of Willie 
Lynch.'
A serious study of the insidious mechanisms of systemic racism 
and the illuminati, will reveal why feminism was once again 
resurrected to such a high level of political prominence, and how its 
resurgence related to the changing status of the so-called negro 
population at that time. As I see it, the story of 'new wave'
62 When the truth of America's Muurish-''Native American,1 ' Khemetic/Atlantean history is 
revealed. - Author


--- PAGE 460 ---
5
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
feminism's rise to prominence (late 60's to the present) had more to 
do with the completion of neo-colonialist imperatives previously 
instigated by the Illuminati in 1931, than about any movement of 
conscience staged on behalf of "persecuted women" worldwide.
What feminism later became as it began to feed and mutate on the 
monetary life's-blood of its corporate sponsors, may be compared to 
the story of Frankenstein. The "experiment" got out of the 
"socio-political lab", and began reeking havoc on the village. This fact 
may not sit too well with dyed-in-the-wool feminists, or "black career 
women" of the 90's and new millennium who secretly or 
unconsciously support them—but let's take a closer look at the 
evidence, shall we?
The Distorted Concepts of  
"Matriarchy" and "Patriarchy"...
•
But before we delve any deeper into the subject of today's 
radicalized upgrade of feminism, there are a few things that must be 
clarified concerning the socio-political and cultural concepts known 
as "matriarchy" and "patriarchy"—from a metaphysical and meta- 
historic perspective. I believe this is necessary because we've been 
conditioned by new-age feminism to believe that human society is 
nothing more than a hive-minded organism dissected by adversity 
into two opposing gender principles, with one gender "ruling over" 
the other at different times throughout history —the original ruling 
gender having always been women until violently usurped by the 
'madness of men.'
This andro-phobic concept of the human societal dynamic was 
given new life, meaning and purpose with the recent rise of second 
wave/Amazonian/gender-feminism; aka - neo-feminism. Through 
new-age propagandizing and Illuminiti funding, neo-feminism has 
seduced the general public into accepting the notion that the twin 
principles of 'the masculine' and 'the feminine' are at best separate 
autonomous dynamics, fulfilling no other purpose in the overall 
governance and operation of a society, than of those prescribed


--- PAGE 461 ---
6
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
by the current 'gender-in-command.'
But omitted from this oblique re-interpretation of Cosmic Order 
and Natural Law, is the fact that ancient high civilizations have 
always cherished and celebrated the subtle nuances and concrete 
differences of gender, incorporating them into every fabric of their 
cultural perspectives of being, (i.e., Laws, language, family, religion; 
etc.)
In ancient tribal societies for example, the inner dynamics of 
culture were perceived of as female-orchestrated (child care; home 
building and family maintenance; land and crop cultivation; law 
interpreter and law keeper; teaching on fundamental levels; healing; 
rites of passage ritual; etc.) —while the outer dynamics were 
perceived of as being male-orchestrated (herd management; law 
maker and law enforcer; maintenance of territorial boundaries; war; 
politics; crop distribution; protection; teaching on advanced levels; 
tool making; abstract conceptualizations of spirituality; rites of 
passage; etc.).
But the two actually represented an interlocking synergism of 
unity; a healthy "duality of one" —  not separate governing bodies. If 
viewed through a fragmented perceptual lens however, depending 
on which of the two dynamics was being utilized by the collective to 
balance or harmonize the overall operation of a society, at any given 
moment (in any given age or epoch), we would mistakenly define 
that society as either a "matriarchy" or a "patriarchy."
On ancient Earth, astrological alignments and environmental 
conditions (for the most part) also dictated which social gender- 
dynamic would prevail at any given time. If for example cosmic 
conditions dictated a need for more harmony between family 
groupings, marriages, birthing, planting crops, healing, etc., such 
arbitrations and decisions were normally deferred to the elder 
women. If on the other hand the cosmic and environmental 
conditions dictated that the entire tribe/society be uprooted and 
moved (as in wartime), decisions on where and when to hunt, the 
distribution of crop yields, the exercise of political and/or diplomatic


--- PAGE 462 ---
7
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
relationships between tribes —such decisions were normally left to 
the elder men. But we must always remember that in each case, the 
final decisions were arrived at only after mutual discussion and 
agreement between both gender dynamics.
Again, the perception of 'a matriarchy' as the distinct, 
autonomous gender principle acting separately to rule over the 
collective, is based on a fragmented world-view, or how human 
behavior has been described and cataloged for us through the 
psycho-sexual perceptions of the Nordic European. (Read Sigmund 
Freud's A Phylogenetic Fantasy  for an in depth analysis on this 
behavioral psychology as it applies to Nordic, "ice-age" humans).
The above emphasizes an alien concept based in non-abstract 
thinking, and constitutes a world-view based (again) on a "hive" 
mentality, that functions primarily in the insect societies of Nature 
(bees; ants; termites). If at some point a single-gender female 
dynamic appeared to have "ruled" as the distinct governing principle 
for a time, it was most likely a choice arrived at by the collective 
based on extenuating circumstances; the predominant one being that 
the masculine principle had somehow been decimated to the point of 
inaction, leading to drastic conditions that forced the majority elders 
of the feminine principle to step forward and "openly preside" as the 
dominant dynamic.
Meta-historically, a 'gynarchy' (or government by women) is not 
the foundational system of power and authority established at the 
onset of any fledgling human society (be it black or white), no matter 
how ancient —  unless the masculine principle had been severely 
impacted and only young boys remained. In fact in human society, a 
so-called matriarchy could not overtly rule unless the males militarily 
back those females who presumed to rule.
The onset of any collective societal endeavor is a most strenuous 
and difficult time for all concerned. To say that the human female 
was the initiating or driving force and authority in that endeavor, 
would be contrary to Cosmic Law —  especially as it relates to 
Djhwty's Principle of Gender. Again, it would relegate humanity to


--- PAGE 463 ---
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
the social order of insects —  woman to the level of hive-queen, and 
everyone else to the level of drones (all of which would be female by 
the way, or males severely feminized). In the higher orders of the 
cosmic life-spectrum, it just doesn't work that way.
Historically, female ruler-ship was designated by a lineage that 
started with a founding ancestral (conqueror) king. It was his 
bloodline that set the genealogical order for who would rule after 
him in the governing hierarchy. The lineage of ruler ship was set 
through his seed, whether male or female. This is what became 
known as a dynasty. And this applied to the establishment of all 
cultures and civilizations regardless of race—for it is a cosmological 
imperative that the masculine principle is the initiator-principle. Any 
re-arrangement or overturning of this immutable dynamic (again) 
comes as a result of decimation by war, or cataclysmic environmental 
changes.
Today, we add one more corrupting dynamic—feminism.
Dr. Margaret Mead, the eminent American cultural 
anthropologist, famous feminist author and closet lesbian, listed the 
following words among her numerous and popular quotes, after 
critiquing a powerful book by Dr. Steven Goldberg entitled Why Men 
Rule: A Theory of Male Dominance.  Dr. Mead stated that...
"...all claims glibly made for societies ruled by women are nonsense. We have no 
reason to believe that they ever existed. Men everywhere have been in charge of 
running the show...men have always been the leaders in public affairs and the final 
authorities at home ..."
If a female is the presiding ruler of a royal lineage, for example 
Queen Elizabeth and her husband Prince Philip of England, it is 
because she is a direct descendent in the bloodline of that empire's 
founding dynastic king. Any one who marries her could not assume 
the mantle of king, because that would shift the ruling bloodline of 
England to (in this case) Greece —Philip's royal blood lineage, and the 
subsequent dynasties of England would then be ruled from Greece 
by a Greek bloodline. Thus Philip remains a prince in England, while


--- PAGE 464 ---
9
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
his sons or grandsons are eligible to become king. In fact, only 
Elizabeth could make Philip "a king" in England by consent of royal 
decree or proclamation. But in affairs of state, she might still have the 
final say.
Today, the British Empire is still considered the most favored 
empire in all Christendom, thanks largely to its ancient Germanic 
blood-ties with the Vatican and the influence of the Jesuit's German 
Black Pope. The British Empire and its queen are of Germanic 
descent. If the Vatican had 'ordained' Greece as such, the situation 
would have been reversed and Philip would automatically be king.
Our Kemetic ancestors wisely embraced and extolled the subtle 
and overt dynamics of gender in their culture, and showed it 
symbolically in their depictions of life, law, language, scholarship 
and spirituality. When depicting their cosmic principles or royal 
lineages in symbolic imagery for example, the feminine aspect is 
never seen standing in front of, or leading the masculine—unless (for 
example) it is the figure of a cosmic principle like Ast, the keeper of 
the arcane secrets of creation. During a coronation, initiation or high 
ritual, the Nswt Bty (pharaoh) is depicted as entreating this Neter's 
guidance, in order to be "raised" to a higher degree on the "Path of 
the Hidden Light." However, she is seen facing him, not leading him.
Even the great Hatshepsut, when assuming the mantle of rulership 
in Khem for 21 years after the death of her father Tutmose 1, and her 
half-brother/husband Tutmose II, did so by changing her visage of 
authority from that of a queen to a king; donning the clothing, 
ornaments and very beard of her father. Most feminist historians 
conveniently omit the fact that Hatshepsut learned all of her skills at 
politics and rulership from her father!
The word dynasty gives us a clear and concise clue as to the true 
progenitors of a royal blood lineage, and the gender that establishes 
that rulership. The word dynasty derives from the Latin dynastes 
meaning lord, and the Greek dunasteia, meaning lordship. The word 
lord is defined as...
"... A king; a man of high rank; the general masculine 
title of nobility and other rank ..." [Amer. Her Diet]


--- PAGE 465 ---
10
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
A matriarchal dynamic would manifest as the dominant ruling 
principle only after the lineage is initiated by, or established with 
support from, powerful warrior males who either remained faithful to 
her father-king, or are related to her by blood. If the males no longer 
supported this female dynamic —from a physiological standpoint 
alone —the females would be quickly overwhelmed in toe-to-toe 
confrontation.
So-called 'matriarchal rule' is seen played out in the surviving 
vestiges of African and so-called Native American cultures of the 
Americas. But it's interesting to note here —  that as a founding society 
matures and develops in sophistication, enjoying extended time­
frames of peace and prosperity (as provided by the males), feminine 
power automatically grows,  for it is the woman's archetypal nature to 
substantiate and embellish the cultural infrastructures of any society. 
Thus it was from this legacy of ancient Earth, "Clan Mothers" became 
the electors of chiefs and kings for over a thousand years. They 
arbitrated and dictated laws, even giving permission to go to war.
A perverse form of this psycho-social dynamic is on the rise around 
the world today, through a Euro-feminized form of social control that 
is 'fronted' by despotic, feminized men. Yes family, as of 1612, we 
we've been 'ruled' by a "maniacal matriarchal mindset"from Europe 
anchored in the Vatican by way of Germany, France, Spain, The 
Netherlands and Great Britain that (according to Freud's impromptu 
thesis-A Phylogenetic Phantasy)  operates through 'ice-conscious', 
psycho-sexually perverse white males from behind the scenes.
As proof; all of the so-called "draconian laws" now being 
instituted by governments today, which are gradually taking away 
more and more of our individual rights to think and act independently 
(or masculine), are conspicuous clues as to what kind of mindset has 
actually taken over the planet.
These new "laws" are the foundational edicts of a hive society.
Females rule hives; or men who think and behave like them!
This theory is certainly not new, but is now gaining recognition 
and support from an ever-growing number of aware or enlightened


--- PAGE 466 ---
11
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
scholars (both men and women), who are no longer fooled by the 
persecution rhetoric of the feminist.
Even writer/lecturer (and racist) David Icke states in his book 
Children of the Matrix (pg.104) that...
"...We are led to believe this is a male-dominated world, but that is only on the 
surface. Behind the scenes it is really controlled by the negative expression of female 
energy. The extreme male energy is "out there" in front of our eyes in the three- 
dimensional world. It is the macho men with guns and uniforms, the leaders of the 
major banks, corporations, media empires, and the military. But they are put into 
power, the wars created, and the agenda advanced, by the extreme negative aspects 
of the female energy—covert, behind the scenes manipulation. If anything, the 
Illuminati, at the real seat of power, are dominated by the female (energy). The 
negative extremes of the female energy covertly manipulate events and the negative 
extremes of the male energy play them out before our eyes. This is why we think it is 
a male-dominated world. It looks that way, but that is not the whole story.
Is all of the above a chauvinist's "slanted historical viewpoint?"
No beloved. It is a provable truth! But you can bet that the 
Amazonian feminist and her supporters would never admit to it, or 
even allow for an open and sober venue in which to prove it. I have 
always been so sure of the plausibility of the above scenario, that in 
the year 1995 I predicted at a symposium that Hillary Clinton would 
either one day run for the presidency, or be the president of the 
United States. (Not too shabby...)
Again, cosmic alignments and environmental circumstances are 
the naturally prevailing conditions that compel a society to act one 
way or another, setting the stage for which "gender-dynamic" will 
preside. Presently, the white female has risen to power and 
prominence because the white male has violently created the 
technological/environmental conditions that set the stage for a 
radically feminized re-structuring of our society.
And how did he do this?
Simple. Having become fatally addicted to a drug called 
"progress", the white male's psychotic need to control all humanity, 
Nature and planetary resources with predatory economics and 
advanced military technologies, caused him to ironically 'invent' the 
fundamental male principium into obsolescence. This was a natural


--- PAGE 467 ---
12
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
sequence of events pursuant the Universal Law of "cause and effect." 
So although technological ingenuity gave rise to a commercially rich 
industrial age, it consequently destroyed the gender-based inter­
dynamics of cosmic harmony between men and women, by
obtaining for the female a societal safe-haven in which to provide and 
care for herself;  all with support from a masculine-fronted, feminist- 
orchestrated police state. As a result, the archetypal principle and 
purpose of the gender called "man" has degenerated into a social 
redundancy. The contemporary male is now a human drone.
But is this a unique phenomenon afflicting the global societies of 
humanity today? By no means beloved.
There is nothing new under the sun. All life is cyclic, and our 
present psycho-social conditioning reflects this. We can find 
meta-historic evidence to substantiate the fact that ancient human 
history is repeating itself, for it was written in the ancient Adivasian 
texts called The Mahabarata ...
"...Woe unto us all when the tiara rules before the crown ..."
Equality and the Basic 
Differences between Men and Women:
The Forgotten Equation...
•
Unfortunately, due to the limits of space (and time), many 
important items concerning the basic nature and characteristic 
differences between men and women, could not be included in this 
thesis. However, this subject is given a more in-depth scrutiny 
throughout other books of the Re-genesis Chronicles,  particularly The 
Epicene Enigma.  For now, I offer the following commentary as 
supported by the works of many 'recognized authorities/
In this day and age, it is a discarded or down-played truth that the 
center of a women's universe is in her feelings, and the center of her 
feelings —is in her body!  Sadly, the proponents of Amazonian 
feminism no longer consider this archetypal fact relevant in their 
twisted versions of the ideal society.


--- PAGE 468 ---
13
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
As the mater-ial representative of Divine Intelligence, a woman is 
engrossed in the physicality of being. Body-consciousness is her 
primary "perceptual compass", or central point of reference to all 
other forms of self-awareness. Although it is not "politically 
correct" to say such things anymore, in her deepest most archetypal 
nature, a true gynic woman is a seeker after information as opposed 
to knowledge —a "feeler" instead of a "thinker" —a cosmic order- 
follower, not a cosmic problem-solver. These are not criticisms or 
insults, but bio-chemical, bio-psychic, mental, metaphysical, and 
psycho-spiritual facts based on the celestial and terrestrial designs 
of Omniscient Intelligence.
The natural differences in temperament and behaviorism between 
the male and the female, are being callously and foolishly discarded, 
ignored or vilified today. This has resulted in disastrous 
consequences for modern-day women's health, as well as for our 
collective psycho-social and emotional well-being as both a culture 
and a species.
Based on the works of world renowned, well-respected female 
experts in the fields of behavioral psychology, theology, sociology 
and psychiatry—who include internationally known experts such as 
Dr. Cleo Dawson (a psychologist with five university degrees); 
author and psychiatrist Dr. Gina Lombroso; Dr. Helene Deutsch;  
and psychoanalyst Dr. Valerie S. Goldstein—I have decided to 
include this short list of differences (documented by them) revealing 
the many incontrovertible archetypal distinctions between the 'inner' 
make up of a man, and the 'inner' make up of a woman.
The following short list was extrapolated from a work entitled 
How Women Behave,  by J.C. Payette. I did this because we live in a 
feminized society where the individual is no longer taken at their 
word, unless it is "cleared" or substantiated by the recognized 
"experts" or "authorities" who manufacture and preside over the 
thoughts that the 'sheeple' are allowed to think from day to day.
This of course constitutes the foundation of a 'problem stating  - 
'order following' hive-minded society, verses an independent, 
individual, free-thinking problem -solving  society —the former being 
the crux of a matriarchy, the latter a patriarchy.


--- PAGE 469 ---
14
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 0
So according to the above "experts", the following differences are 
biologically and psychologically hard-wired into the instinctive 
behavioral profiles of men and women. They are cosmo-genetically 
innate, and therefore cannot be de-commissioned or repealed by the 
legislated edicts of man or woman-made laws.
By Nature...
Man gives love —  Woman reacts with feelings ...
Man says what he knows —  Woman says what will please ...
Man seeks proof — Woman is credulous ...
Man is stimulated by the mind —  Woman by her senses ...
Man is vulnerable in mind — Woman is vulnerable in body ...
Man is impersonal — Woman takes things personally...
- Woman finds reasoning cold, exhausting, indifferent and disinteresting;
Man finds reasoning warm, exhilarating, absorbing and fascinating ...
- Woman is interested in people and social happenings — Man in science 
and doing things by himself...
- Woman is an egotist... and as such, she must feel as if she is the center of 
whatever happens; everything is in relation to herself andthe feelings in 
her body — Man too is an egotist... and as such he seeks to think, talk 
and re-enact his exploits and
accomplishments..
Man praises — Woman critiques ...
Man may spend nearly his entire lifetime without realizing that he has a 
body — Woman never lets her mind stray very far from the depths of her 
body-consciousness, where most of her motivations to act tend to 
originate...
Man is a creature of habit — Woman must have novelty after novelty; 
sensual stimulation after sensual stimulation ...
Man innovates —  Woman mimics ...
Man is faithful —  Woman is fickle ...
Man is an individualist — Woman is a communalist...
Man tends to take a woman for what she is —  Woman tends to take a 
man to "reform" him...
Man seeks leisure —  Woman disdains it...
Man, as a problem-solver has a flexible mind — Woman, the order- 
follower is more inflexible ...


--- PAGE 470 ---
15
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Money to a Man represents reward, the results of meditation, time, 
earnings, toil, blood and sweat, to be used sparingly or saved, or to build; 
To a Woman, money represents the effects of "feelings" which money can 
create...
When control of a situation is lost, Man becomes angry —
Woman weeps ...
Tell a Man what to get —  Tell a Woman what to give up...
Again, author G.C. Payette states quite frankly ...
"... We cannot reason or use logic with a woman, we can only 
strike a chord in her feelings and try for one strong enough in 
favor of the action we wish her to take, or in favor of the state 
we wish her to be in. We cannot talk with a woman in any 
other language but that which will make her feel. Then when 
we do, the results are just fantastic ..!"
and ...
".... All through the centuries, men have (mistakenly) created
in their own minds, women in their male image and semblance.
Women are not men in part, form, function, mind, essence nor 
behavior. Women are completely different from men
Bravo! Now if only the rest of society would get it, especially the 
feminized woman. But let's see what the previously mentioned pre­
eminent women  in the field of psychoanalysis have to say about 
their sisters ... and by inference, themselves.
Dr. Gina Lombroso ...
?
"...Woman functions with what she is made of—her senses, feelings and computer­
like mind. This is the difference. Man functions with his mind and his reasoning. 
With sex it becomes clearer. When a man has not geared his mind to it, he becomes 
impotent. When a woman has not been stirred emotionally and physically—she 
remains frigid ..."


--- PAGE 471 ---
16
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Dr. Cleo Dawson...
?
"... Never talk to a woman when she is angry; remember she is feeling, not 
thinking..!"
Dr. Valerie S. Goldstein...
9
"... Instead of masculine pride and will to power, women have their own 
specifically 'feminine flaws of sin' ... outgrowths of the basic feminine character- 
structure suggested by such items as triviality, distractibility, and diffuseness; the 
lack of an organizing center or focus; dependence on others for one's own self­
definition; tolerance at the expense of standards of excellence; inability to respect 
the boundaries of privacy; sentimentality; gossipy sociability and a mistrust of 
reason; in short—non-development or negation of self. This specifically feminine 
dilemma is, in fact, precisely the opposite of the masculine ..."
again, Dr. Gina Lombroso...
?
"... (A) woman will even pit her (own) feelings one against the other ..."
We must keep in mind that these professional assessments are 
now considered blasphemous by today's social standards. Still the 
questions remain; has feminism effectively disqualified these basic 
equations of gender by legitimately proving them false; or has it 
simply suppressed and replaced them with artificial, 
philosophically-based statutory constructs of behavior simply to 
give credence (and legitimacy) to its own perverse concepts of 
reality?
Finally, a word from Ms. Olga Silverstein of Vogue magazine 
commenting on what women say they want...
9
"...Women don't want to be dominated and bullied, but neither do they want a 
man to be a baby. They want him to be a man. And then when he is a man, they 
don't like it because he's too controlling and then they're afraid of him. They all 
want heroes, but they want warm, tender loving heroes. Oh what a fantasy they're 
in
......"


--- PAGE 472 ---
17
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
The 3 Faces of Eve...
•
The following assessments of the feminine nature are by no means 
etched in stone, but they do reflect the present behavioral dynamics 
exhibited by a majority of women in our present-day feminized 
society.
Although there appears to be two overt philosophies of feminism 
operating today (that being—gender, Amazonian, new-wave or neo­
feminism, as opposed to equity or "suffragette" feminism), there are 
in fact three distinct "types" of women with four related 
"temperaments" who steer and navigate the courses of the overall 
movement.
These three main types are not exclusive characteristics. They do 
not represent the perpetual behavior of all women. However, all 
women (at one time or another) may have acted upon, or benefited 
from, taking advantage of certain situations using such behaviorisms. 
These identified behavioral types, in their separate categories, are 
considered the primary players in today's feminism. The seeker 
should become aware of them if she or he is to overstand where the 
dual philosophies of present-day feminism derive their motivations.
The following "personality-types" concerning the female gender 
could be considered the learned cultural behaviorisms passed on by 
most dysfunctional societies. They were first identified and examined 
in writing from a black male's perspective (to the best of my 
knowledge) by the African author Chinweizu, in his work entitled 
The Anatomy of Female Poiver; A Masculinist Dissection of Matriarchy.63
He identified the three basic female personality-types as...
"...the matriarchist", "the tomboy" and "the termagant."
63 This book may be difficult to find within the borders of the U.S. It was banned as an import at 
one time by feminist organizations —  I received a copy (one of five smuggled into the 
country) from a good friend Bro. Khaba Sahure. - Author


--- PAGE 473 ---
18
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
The matriarchist,  writes Chinweizu "... is a woman who believes 
that a man's natural God-ordained role in life is to serve some 
matriarch or married mother, and that the best way to get full service 
out of him is to make him think that he is his matriarch's boss."
In other words, she is the nest-queen who trains and quietly rules 
her unsuspecting husband (a la Claire Huxtable). She is a vestigial 
throwback to the time when war or environmental devastation 
decimated the male population, forcing the feminine principium to 
preside. Over time, she has molded the cultural rules and regulations 
to create a "shadow authority" within her society. In the feminist 
scheme of things, she is the fragment that believes her singular view 
should represents the whole (the hive-queen mentality), and sees 
herself as the power behind, on, and sometimes in front of the throne.
Her modus operandi is primarily stealth, manipulation, coercion, 
and a behind-the-scenes-support system regulated by the principles 
of reward and punishment. In this case, think Hillary Clinton.
The tomboy  is a woman who looks at the roles, games and 
activities that both men and women play, and would rather play the 
roles of men. Think Cheryl Miller and Ellen DeGeneres.
The termagant  is a woman "... whether tomboy or quasi- 
matriarchist who insists on showing the man that she, not he, is the 
boss." This type takes sadistic pleasure in harassing and bossing all 
men. Think Rosanne, Whoopie, Betty Freidan and Evilene.
Chinweizu's book is priceless because it exposes the inner 
psychology and outer machinations of the women who make and 
manipulate the matriarchal/feminist world. Many women who told 
me they glanced through it found it extremely unsettling to read. As 
for men's reactions; well (to me personally), it was at once hilarious, 
thought provoking, disheartening and eye opening—all at the same 
time.
Other men who read it admitted to me that his words fell right in 
line with what they had experienced with women at one time or 
another. In fact, many women who did read it said this as well.
According to African author Stanley Maoebuh's comment on the 
back cover of Chinweizu's book...


--- PAGE 474 ---
19
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"... No one (man or woman) can read this treatise and not 
confess to some powerful feeling, either of vengeful 
excitement or violent rage..."
But anyone with a clear insight as to the way things are today, 
could readily see that Chinweizu's words carry a distinct ring of 
truth. He makes it clear on the cover that his work was not meant for 
women, and by all accounts it would appear that I am betraying a 
kind of "unspoken masculine trust" by quoting it in a thesis written 
for and about women. But alas, such is the path of truth.
I have decided to incorporate some of the more relevant 
commentary of his treatise into this work, to broaden the reader's 
perspective and overstanding of what might be considered the subtle, 
underlying reasons behind the perceived conflicts between men and 
women today, examining those learned behaviorisms that may be 
contributing to the detriment of women's overall health worldwide.
Believe it or not, in my search for answers on the metaphysical 
level, I have discovered that a majority of women genuinely do not 
realize that society has forced them into one or more of the behavioral 
categories mentioned above. Or if they did know it, admitted that 
they decided long ago to keep such knowledge to themselves.
The Four Temperaments  
of Modern-Day Feminism...
•
Chinweizu writes that from the very beginning, most women 
throughout history have been of the matriarchist mindset. The 
so-called "tomboy" has also been on the scene as well, except she 
usually changed her ways as she matured, joining the ranks of the 
matriarchist and adopting her particular methods of control. The 
termagant he says is the outright man-hating, temperamental misfit 
festering within the matriarchist's paradise. This type of woman is- 
overtly pissed with the current social arrangements between men and 
women, and scoffs at the 'fagade' of "patriarchal rule." She vents on 
the hapless men she attracts around her, voicing and acting out her 
resentments against the unspoken matriarchal requirement that 
women "pretend" they are ruled by men.


--- PAGE 475 ---
20
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
To Chinweizu, feminism today appears to be a movement 
comprised of bored matriarchists, frustrated tomboys and uptight 
Amazon/termagants —the latter two having their reasons for being 
discontented with the world that the matriarchist has created, 
manipulated and ruled for so long.
In essence, the history and career of present-day Amazonian 
feminism, is said by Chinweizu to have had its psycho-social origins 
in the following behavioral temperaments...
(a) The bored matriarchist (like Betty Friedan or Zsa Zsa Gabor) 
and frustrated tomboys (the "Murphy Browns") who started 
it all ...
(b) The satisfied matriarchists (Coretta Scott King or 
Camille Cosby) and the 'bouggie' elitists like the 
"Claire Huxtables" who opposed it ...
(c) The non-militant tomboys/matriarchists (female buppies 
and yuppies like Oprah, Susan Taylor, Barbara Walters or 
Kathy Lee Gifford) who quietly profited from it ...
(d) The termagants (like Gloria Steinem, Roseanne Barr,
Shulamith Firestone or Bella Abzug) who made a public 
nuisance of it ...
These 4 basic behavioral temperaments synthesized to become the 
dual nature of present-day feminism, and are the presiding templates 
that shaped the psycho-social climate of our present-day feminized 
civilization.
?


--- PAGE 476 ---
21
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
The Rise of Neo-Feminism...
(or New Wave, Amazonian, Gender Feminism)
A Weed by any other Name...
•
According to Chinweizu, Friedanite or Gaborian feminism (neo­
feminism) had its origins in suburbia, where rich white American 
housewives began moaning for "something more than just my 
husband, my children, my money and my house." For them, 
feminism became a vehicle in which to drive their ambiguous desires 
for "something better" than their personal matriarchist paradise.
Psycho-dynamic item number sixteen (16) from the section The 
Forgotten Equation -  "man seeks leisure, woman disdains it" —  most 
accurately captures the reasoning behind this mentality.
These women decided that the only way to achieve "something 
better" (whatever that may have been for them), was to present their 
arguments and demands through a "language of liberation"; to rally 
average women away from their own social strata, and into joining 
an imaginary exodus from some illusory state of unilateral 
oppression.
For these elitist women however, it became a difficult task to 
convince a world of 9 to 5, family managing, hamburger eating, 
T.G.I.F. genuine work-a-day women, that "boredom" and "too much 
leisure-time" (diseases of the idle rich) amounted to being the 
by-products of oppression.
So in classic Orwellian doublethink, these rich society wives 
actually managed to convince the poor and middle class 
workingwomen of the industrialized world that the very husbands  
whose incomes made their 'leisure hell' possible, were actually  (after 
all) oppressing them - and by association -  every other woman!
And with Friedanite feminists hitching a ride on the historical coat 
tails of Suffragette feminism, the tomboys and the termagants soon 
joined in on the liberation parade.
Under the umbrella of Friedanite feminism, the militant tomboy  
(with aspirations to be like a man) could now picket and protest her


--- PAGE 477 ---
22
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 0
frustrations away using the feminist platform to trash men (and gynic 
women), rather than coming to grips with her own imbalanced 
concepts of self.
The non-militant tomboy  evolved to become the closet-yuppie or 
buppie she always was. She stopped picketing and shouting and 
went on to become successful as the businesswoman, athlete, 
musician and entrepreneur. She relished in the friendly corporate 
climate made possible for her by the political machinations of gender 
feminism. When and wherever she decided she wanted to play the 
roles of a man, she wasn't denied. She may storm into any field of 
endeavor primarily held by males, assume the "direct authority" of a 
man, and (according to Chinweizu) still use the sanctuary, skills and 
weaponry of female power (that being—gullibility, fragility, and 
sexuality) to her fullest advantage.
(See the movie Disclosure with Demi Moore and Michael Douglas)
The satisfied matriarchist  on the other hand, would rather not 
make it known to the world (especially the man's world) how much 
power (actual or perceived) she truly possesses in her home and 
throughout society. She prefers to work behind the scenes, managing 
and manipulating her matriarchal environment by supporting the 
perception of a patriarchal rule. Of her role, the saying "... behind 
every great man there stands a greater woman" is accurately applied.
The satisfied matriarchist accounts for the overwhelming majority 
of today's undercover feminists, and unknown to her more radical 
sisters, were the ones most responsible for destroying any chances of 
the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) becoming law. The matriarchists 
knew that this was a detrimental piece of legislation for their way of 
life, because they understood that to legislate equality would have 
put an end to the false perception they created of men as rulers, and 
thus put an end to their rule. To them, legislated equality would have 
meant real work; that is —  doing those things that societies (up to this 
point) had always delegated to their men. They would no longer 
have the choice to work or play in a man's world, or to receive the


--- PAGE 478 ---
23
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
unspoken societal privileges automatically given to most women 
(particularly to wives in the court system).
Such legislation would have made equality mandatory rather than 
elective. They already knew that a woman could do whatever she 
wanted to in this society, and a casual glance at our present state of 
affairs proves this point.
Debbie Raymond, author of the book A Man has the Right to See a  
Naked Body writes ...
"... Women today have never had it so good. We can stay at home and look 
after hubby and the kids. We can go out and get a job. It's all equal 
opportunity...take our clothes off or keep them on; the world is a 
woman's oyster. So what the heck is the problem?"
That may very well be the 65 million dollar question!
The satisfied matriarchist is the woman who raises her daughter in 
the art of man-management and nest-rulership from behind the 
scenes. At the same time she raises her son to be susceptible to such 
rulership when he decides to become a husband. This of course is to 
insure her place of prominence alongside his wife, thus insuring 
security for her future well being as she grows older and is unable to 
take care of herself.
The last psychological behavioral type is the termagant  (my 
favorite). She is the gynandrous Amazon who gets her jollies from 
man-baiting and man-bashing. I like this type of feminist because 
they're out-front and honest about who and what they are. Their 
logic is clear, simple and predictable.
They hate men!
Webster's 7th Collegiate Dictionary defines a termagant as...
"...a quarrelsome scolding woman; a shrew; an abusive woman ..."
The termagant also hates the matriarchist and her social codes of 
conduct, because in her world she isn't about pretending who's the 
boss. She is! Period!
This praying mantis-type woman carries on her man-control 
activities without any shade or modesty. She's the kind that will 
verbally (and sometimes physically) attack and disrespect a man on 
the streets, without any fear of retaliation from his fists. This is due in


--- PAGE 479 ---
24
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
part to the fact that she knows she has the support of estrogen-toxic 
male friends or family members who tolerate or support her 
behavior, and would retaliate for her. Also, she is most likely to be 
about six foot plus pushing 200 pounds, or even more diabolical —  
knows how to manipulate "the laws" of a feminized police state to 
her advantage.
This was the type that sister Shaharazad Ali wrote should be 
"slapped" in her controversial best-seller The Blackman's Guide to  
Understanding the Black Woman.
Chinweizu states that the termagant female claims for herself "...a 
tyrant's absolute freedom of conduct" (like Evilene in the movie The 
Wiz), and would punish any unfavorable reaction however natural 
that she provokes in a man."
The termagant woman hates to lose an argument to men. If she 
perceives that she has lost the verbal (or argumentative) upper hand, 
she'll either want to go to blows, or she'll pout and brood —  quietly 
plotting and scheming a revenge that she will exact at a later date 
when the man least expects it.
Check what Sister Monique the comedienne says about this 
(comparing the argumentative behavior of black and white women) 
during her monologue in the hit movie The Queens of Comedy.
It's priceless!
The termagant is the temperamental type that would wear a mini­
skirt with thong panties, or a see-through blouse and no bra. She 
would wiggle her behind provocatively, and then pretend to be 
angry at any man for responding to her sexual display. To her, such 
men are "dogs" that deserve to be neutered or to have their eyes and 
tongues plucked out.
The termagant is jealous of any physical exhibition of masculine 
power, energy and exuberance, and believes that all men between the 
ages of 15 and 35 should either be spayed or placed under curfew to 
spare women their attentions.
The only males she has around her are lobotomized eunuchs, gay 
men, or "Steve Erkle" drones who respond to her every beckoned


--- PAGE 480 ---
25
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
call. She sees any woman as being a traitor and a whore for having 
social or sexual intercourse with men, unless it is for business 
purposes only, and are (as you may have already guessed) primarily 
overt card-carrying lesbians.
I have included the above descriptions by Chinweizu as a 
precursor to what follows. I believe that for the seeker to better over­
stand the behavioral dynamics of feminism today, a deeper inner- 
standing of the psychology and motivations of the women who 
comprise its ranks, is essential.
Again, by no means do I wish to imply that the above female 
personality profiles represent the behavior or perceptions of all 
women, nor are they characteristics that are etched in stone. They 
simply represent a working composite of the three personality types, 
as well as the four dominant temperaments most inclined to 
sympathize with—or participate in —the dynamics and philosophies 
of today's feminist re-genderfication movement.
Players in the Game:
The Pernicious Nature of Weaponized Feminism...
•
As mentioned earlier, there are actually two types of feminism 
recognized and made popular in the book Who Stole Feminism  by 
Christina Hoff Sommers. The popular type of feminism existing 
before Ms. Sommers' arrival on the scene64 was its American-born 
predecessor the Suffragette Movement, which abruptly gave way in the 
1960s to a reconstituted 'weaponized' version—one infiltrated and 
managed by the undermining tactics of Jesuit-authored Communism.
A technical distinction was drawn between the two for the 
purpose of clarification. The term gender feminist was introduced as a 
tactical upgrade to take the place of what Sommers characterized as 
the equity feminist. According to her, the equity feminist (of Susan B. 
Anthony's "suffragette" stock) is one who believes in...
64 The Susan B. Anthony stock, and later, the Betty Friedan spoiled, rich socialite-type with too 
much money and nothing to do. - Author


--- PAGE 481 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
"... The oral and legal equality of the sexes. An equity feminist wants for 
women what she wants for everyone—fair treatment, no 
discrimination..." Amazonian or gender feminism on the other hand, 
is based on "...an all encompassing ideology that says American women 
are trapped in a patriarchal oppressive system. An equity feminist 
believes things have gotten much better for women; gender feminists 
think it is getting worse ..."
It is this latter statement that betrays the true purpose and origins 
of neo-feminism; who was behind it and how and why the tactics of 
undermining a target population with hateful ridicule and 
degradation became the first strategic step to unilateral conquest.
And the target population? Men— and everything masculine!
But why target the men and everything masculine?
"Elementary my dear Watson" —  to destroy the stability of a  
nation's natural psycho-social infrastructure.
In the Art of War by Sun Tsu, the master militarist explains that the 
most effective tactic for subduing a more powerful adversary is to 
utilize methods of stealth that target the basic psychology of the 
entire population. To do so you need to establish 'in-roads' or 
psychological 'penetration points' to erect a platform from which to 
launch such an attack. The platform has to be one that is familiar to 
the targeted population. It must be reasonable and easy to promote; 
for example, using highly popularized buzzwords such as 'injustice' 
and 'oppression.' Suffragette feminism provided the perfect platform 
from which to stage such an attack. It was still fresh in the minds of 
the general public, having already successfully brought broad-based 
attention to gender-related issues of 'injustice' and 'oppression' of 
women throughout America.
But to utilize such a platform to undermine an entire social 
infrastructure, the underlying philosophical premise of American- 
born feminism had to be 'tweeked.' In a word —  drastically 
overhauled. Thus the attack could no longer simply be against the 
nebulous broad-based principles of 'injustice' and 'oppression.'
A "hard target" had to be designated!


--- PAGE 482 ---
27
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
This aspect of the plan had to be implemented successfully in order 
to undermine and dis-empower the one adversary that would be the 
first line of defense against any all-out attack—frontal or covert; a 
formidable opponent that would fight you the hardest and thus 
prove to be the greatest danger to your plans... the men! So in order 
to effectively neutralize such a threat, the military strategist (using 
psy-op tactics) creates an army from within the target population, that 
the target population wouldn't (in their wildest dreams) believe 
could be turned into their enemy — their women!
Weaponizing Emotions...
Now; pay close attention beloved...
To destabilize an entire civilization using psycho-political stealth 
tactics, a military strategist must accept the fact that he or she is in 
such a campaign for the long haul. Like the frog being slowly boiled 
in a pot that sits on an ever increasing flame, subtlety is paramount if 
the targeted society is to remain unaware of what you are trying to 
accomplish. This takes time and calculated patience.
In Feminism Used To Oppress Men,  George Rolph says that to attack 
the psychology of an entire society as the prelude to it's conquest, you 
must undermine the authority-figure with weapons that don't appear to be  
weapons! Your tactics must engender distrust, anger, apprehension, 
loathing and yes, even outright hatred for the authority figure. One 
such weapon was seen used in the Abu Ghraib prison —a psy-op 
protocol utilizing "stimulus-response-stimulus" techniques. It was 
articulated in an old Soviet brainwashing training manual; that is —  
weaponizing the emotion of degradation. The manual states that...
"...Just as a dog can be trained, so can a man be trained. Just as a horse can be 
trained, so can a man be trained. Sexual lust, masochism, and any other desirable 
perversion can be induced by pain-drug hypnosis and the benefits of Psycho­
politics... The changes of allegiances and sources of command can be occasioned 
easily by psycho-political technologies, and these should be practiced and 
understood by the psycho-political operative before he begins to tamper with 
psycho-political targets of magnitude..."


--- PAGE 483 ---
28
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
In this case, the psycho-political target of magnitude —  was the 
family!
The first stages of the attack began in the early 1970s, after 
"equity" or "suffragette" feminism was thoroughly infiltrated and co­
opted by agents of destabilization, using psycho-political tactics to 
target the first and most powerful line of defense for the archetypal 
family unit —  the man. From the 1970s on through to the present, these 
psycho-political agents were secretly provided the money, the means 
and the platforms from which to launch their vitriolic attack against 
all men, utilizing the media as well as the halls of higher education.
And it has been relentless and ongoing ever since.
A venomous and profound hatred of men was inculcated into the 
psyche of American women over the last 45 years, through the 
emotion-based premise that all men (by way of a long standing 
system of "oppressive patriarchy") were literally ruining the lives of 
all women. Men suddenly found themselves being bombarded in the 
media from all sides as it promoted shame and disdain for 
everything masculine, which eventually achieved the desired 
psychological goal —  a profound sense of degradation.
Men everywhere began assuming a 'collective gender-based guilt' 
for something that 99.5% of them never did—nor would even 
hallucinate about doing; abusing and oppressing their wives, sisters, 
daughters or mothers. And most ironic and dis-heartening of all, is 
the fact that prominent black women (led by change-agents like 
Audrey Lorde, Angela Davis and Oprah), bought into this divide and 
conquer tactic by siding with the very women whose grandparents 
(barely a half-century before) helped inflict untold misery and 
suffering upon their own grandparents and great grandparents.
Black men also began to identify with the persecution rhetoric of 
the white neo-feminist, believing that he too had been somehow 
persecuting and exploiting the black woman, even during their  
collective experience as slaves of these very white women's ancestors!
The psycho-political stratification of African peoples along gender 
lines by the polarizing influence of neo-feminism, had done its job


--- PAGE 484 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
very well. It seeded a heightened sense of fear, distrust, apprehension 
and dis-illusionment in black women, by successfully shifting the 
onus of oppression and persecution from the white parasitic elite, to 
the black woman's archetypal symbol of benevolent authority—the 
black man.
Beloved seeker; the following quotes represent only a small 
portion of the oral ballistics used to attack and undermine the 
archetypal superstructures of a stable society —the family. Intense 
saturation bombing throughout the print and broadcast media into 
every segment of our society (up to and including the educational, 
political, and judicial systems), set the trends that sowed the seeds of 
hatred and distrust of our nation's men; in fact —all men!
I hope that by presenting their words here to the sister-seeker (and 
the brother-seeker as well) it will help to make clear just what we 
consciously or unconsciously agree to support, whenever "the 
women's agenda" of today's feminism is presented to us. Amazonian 
feminists will never tell you out-right what their true aims, goals or 
personal motivations are, my sisters. You must first be subtly 
conditioned to believe that all males are your psycho-political 
adversaries; even worse—your mortal gender-based enemies.
The following feminist authors represent the types recruited by 
Hoover and his corporate bosses at the behest of the Jesuit elite, to 
instigate gender unrest in America; but in a more specific venue 
related to the black male threat —to marginalize, undermine and 
control the 'accomplishments' of the so-called Civil Rights 
Movement; a movement allegedly created and finance from behind 
the scenes very early on by the Vatican, through the leadership and 
guidance of Jesuit priest Father John LaFarge in the late 1920s —  
quietly known as the true "Father of the Civil Rights Movement."
Again; this tactic of working both sides of the adversarial fence, 
can be studied in the work of Sun Wu; aka. Sun Tsu or "Sun Zi", 
whose Art of War  was adopted in the late 1600s as one of the high- 
holy tenets and foundational doctrines of the sinister Jesuit Order.


--- PAGE 485 ---
30
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
In more modern applications, the above tactics have become 
known as the Hegelian Dialectic -or Problem, Reaction, Solution.
The following will also help to explain my personal motivations 
for writing and revising the two parts of this work over the past 17 
years, and why I so passionately believe that the current philosophy 
and social aspirations of neo-feminism (that is, Jesuit-based neo- 
Socialism and neo-Communism as it is subtly practiced through 
feminism today), must be held accountable in large part for the 
deplorable conditions that have emerged to cripple the overall health, 
peace and well-being of black women, men and children; in fact—the 
entire family framework of modern-day American society.
The latter-day more radicalized form of feminism—the form that 
was molded in the likeness of the Willie Lynch Protocols  -  was the 
psychopolitical tactic used to divide black men and women by 
attacking our spirit of collective self-determinism; a spirit since 
crippled by distrust, dis-unity and psycho-social fragmentation, that 
now hovers like a specter over the carnage that is black society today.
Right wing factions of white American society came to believe that 
Martin Luther King was trying to establish a principle of 'black 
Socialism' through the promotion of the Civil Rights Movement. 
They recognized it immediately as such when the new form of 
weaponized feminism enjoined itself to our cause. Those who 
orchestrated the movement from behind the scenes knew that, in 
principle, he was—whether he knew it or not. That's when the subtle 
motives and tactics of the true puppet-master became clearer.
A deeper examination of the philosophical roots of 'new wave' 
gender feminism and its socio-political aspirations, reveals that it is 
loosely based on certain Talmudic social structures interlaced with 
the Roman Catholic monarchal feudalistic system (e.g. Syllabus of  
Errors-Decree Number 80) —a carry-over from the Roman Empire's 
authoritarian "Black Laws" that became the foundation of the 
European slaver system now practiced as "14th Amendment" 
Democracy in the United States.


--- PAGE 486 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
These ancient theo-political philosophies were subsequently 
merged, streamlined and psycho-socially weaponized into what 
become known as the neo-Marxist, Socialist, Communist, Democratic 
movements of recent history; the kind inspired by the works of 
Jesuit-trained Karl Marx and Frederich Engels.
Engels' book entitled The Origins of Family, Property and the State,  
laid the intellectual bridal path for a marriage between 
Marxist/Socialist/Communist ideologies, and the new gender- 
feminist mandate for psychopolitical destabolization. In it he writes... 
"... The first division of labor is between men and women for child rearing ...
The first class antagonism in history coincides with the development of 
the antagonism between men and women, in monogamous marriage, 
and the first class oppression with that of the female sex by the male ..."
and ...
"... Oppression and class systems began when men realized that they were 
fathers (?) and in order to insure that they knew who their children were, 
enslaved women in marriage ..."
So according to gender feminism (as taught by Jesuit Frederich 
Engels), the logical solution to the problems that make up our social 
ills, is for the State to step in and "help" women by...
(a) eliminating all private property...
(b) making divorce easy and in the woman's best interest...
(c) legitimizing " illegitimacy"...
(d) making it unnecessary that a child know who his father is...
(e) forcing women into the work place/or their own good... and;
(f) placing children (an added burden to women's freedom) 
into day care facilities with surrogate mothers (creating 
employment for other women) so that all "class" 
problems would disappear...
Remember beloved, part of the tactics used to psychologically 
destabolize a society for conquest, is to undermine the infrastructures 
of the strongest, most stable foundation it is built upon—the family. 
So, to the gender-feminist psycho-political agent, the words man, 
woman, husband, wife, mother, father, child, brother, sister, son and 
daughter—all had to be socially devalued, decommissioned and re­
classified (through continuous vilification), as nothing more than


--- PAGE 487 ---
32
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
artificial titles based solely on class distinctions created by men!  
Andrea Dworkin, in her work One Blood: Prophesies and Discoveries on  
Sexual Politics - The Root Cause  stated that...
"...The cultural institutions which embody and enforce those 
interlocked aberrations —  for instance, law, art, religion, nation­
states, the family, tribe, or communities based on father-rights —  
these are real and they must be destroyed..."  [Emphasis mine]
And so the attack was launched in earnest, beginning with the 
mass-publication of verbal venom from some of the most aggressive, 
man-hating, psycho-spiritually twisted lesbian "intellectuals" the 
country had ever seen. The destruction of the masculine principle in 
the minds and hearts of women everywhere had begun.
With reference to the institution of marriage for example, radical 
fem-fascist Sheila Cronan had this to say:
. .Since marriage constitutes slavery for women, it is clear that 
the women's movement must concentrate on attacking this 
institution. Freedom for women cannot be won without the 
abolition of marriage..."
In Feminist Politics and Nature, Allison Jagger followed suit with the 
words...
"....Marriage enforces women's dependence on men; it enforces 
heterosexuality and it imposes the prevailing masculine and 
feminine character structures on the next generation..."
It continued with the vitriol of Marilyn French, who states in her 
book The Women's Room...
"...All men are rapists and that's all they are..."
Andrea Dworkin supports this premise saying...
"....Heterosexual intercourse is the pure, formalized 
expression of contempt for women's bodies..."
Susan Griffin from her work Rape: The All-American Crime, says...
"...If the professional rapist is to be separated from 
the average dominant heterosexual [male], it may 
be mainly a quantative difference..."
Robin Morgan, editor of Ms Magazine...
"...I feel that man-hating is an honorable and viable 
political act; that the oppressed have a right to


--- PAGE 488 ---
33
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
class-hatred against the class that is oppressing them..."
As to the principles defined above in categories 'e' and 'f neo­
feminism founder Simone de Beauvoir left no uncertainty as to the 
aims of new-wave feminism where it concerns a mother, child and 
the overall family. In an interview with The Saturday Review, June 14th, 
1975, Ms. de Beauvoir states:
"...No woman should be authorized to stay at home and raise 
her children. Women should not have that choice, because if 
there is such a choice, too many women will make that one..."
Feminist activist Vivian Gomick is quoted in the University of 
Illinois' school publication The Daily Illini, April 25,1981 as saying...
"...Being a housewife is an illegitimate profession. The choice 
to service and be protected and plan towards being a 
family-maker is a choice that should not be. The heart 
of radical feminism is to change that..."
Beloved, where else do we find similar social constructs as those 
articulated above, except in historically feudalistic monarchal Europe 
under the draconian rulership of the Roman State Church and its 
high "Holy" Inquisition; the other within Mein Kampf. You may 
birth the children says the State, but we will raise and indoctrinate 
them while you (both the father and the mother) slave-away in our 
fields of industry.
The Dialect of Sex, written in 1970 by Shulamith Firestone, was the 
first unyielding fem-fascist literary statement dedicated to the cause 
of Amazonian feminism. It is truly the "Mein Kampf" of neo­
feminism. Firestone synthesized her arguments with the neo-Marxist 
philosophy of the family unit saying:
"... To ensure the elimination of sexual classes requires the revolt of the 
'underclass' (women) and the seizure of control of reproduction, 
restoration of women's ownership of their own bodies, as well as 
feminine control of human fertility including both the new technologies 
and all the social institutions of child bearing and child rearing; and just 
as the end goal of socialist revolution was not only the elimination of the 
economic class distinction itself, so too the end goal of the feminist 
revolution must be, unlike that of the first feminist movement, not


--- PAGE 489 ---
34
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
just the elimination of male privilege, but of the sex distinction itself: 
genital differences between human beings would no longer matter  
culturally ..." /Emphasis mine]
She then goes on to declare war on the very sanctuary of 
motherhood itself:
"... The heart of woman's oppression ... is her child bearing and child-rearing 
roles..."
To top it off, Firestone even holds Nature Herself  responsible for 
the oppression of women and states that Natural Law will also have 
to be "de-commissioned" and no longer considered a functional 
reality! Read this insanity:
"... The 'Natural' is not necessarily a human value. Humanity has begun to 
outgrow nature (?); we can no longer justify the maintenance of a 
discriminatory sex class system on the grounds of its origin in Nature/  
Indeed, for pragmatic reasons alone ... it begins to look as if we must  
get rid of it!" (that is; Nature and gender distinction)... [Emphasis mine]
And isn't this precisely what the 'feminized' corporate male and 
his new 're-gender-ized' feminist corporate companion have been 
doing to the planet beloved; systematically destroying the gender 
nuances of humanity? In affect, "getting rid of Nature?"
In her above words, Ms. Firestone admits outright that the 
behavioral distinctions innate to gender have their indisputable origins in  
Nature Itself  which are instinctively and automatically played out in 
the everyday actions of humans and their societies. Yet in her 
calculated madness she states that we have now "outgrown" Nature 
and should therefore "get rid of it!"
My sisters, it must be obvious by now that this woman, along 
with all those who share her twisted views, are totally out of their 
gender-perverted minds!
At least I hope it's obvious to the seeker.
The Amazonian feminist intends to label every difference between 
men and women as "socially orchestrated constructs." She has 
declared open warfare on the true feminine principle, and wishes to 
eliminate any quality-of-life choices a woman would instinctively


--- PAGE 490 ---
35
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
make as a healthy gynic female! She (along with the likes of Betty 
Freidan) views the natural proclivities of the gynic woman as some 
sort of genetic defect that needs to be cured, outgrown or vigorously 
suppressed. She appears to vehemently hate everything that makes a 
woman —  a woman!
It's clear that the gender feminist wants to orchestrate and control 
all women's preferences (see de Beauvoir's statement above) so that 
they make choices based solely on the neo-feminist ethic.65 Heidi 
Hartman states in her book Women and Revolution, that...
"...The 'woman' question has never been 'the feminist 
question'... what we need to understand is how sex 
(a biological fact) becomes gender (a social phenomenon)..."
Gender and sex are not separate, static principles beloved. Gender 
is the highest material expression of the inherently dual 
characteristics of Omniscient Universal Intelligence. The Universal 
Law of Gender compels the manifestation of all organic-based life- 
forms into 3rd density existence, through the 'dipolar' nature of 
sexuality. Sexual intercourse, Man's material medium for organic 
continuation, would not yield wholesome balanced fruit unless the 
proper universal components of gender are present and balanced.
Here we see the homosexual agenda being subtly incorporated 
into the social psyche, to make us believe that it is at par with what is 
"universally natural"; that sex and gender are not related to the 
balanced and wholesome continuity of life, and should be performed 
solely for the sake of mutual gratification with anyone — same gender 
partners especially.
In other words, the ultimate reasons for the existence of two sexes; 
that is —the anatomical and psychological distinctions of gender 
acting in synergy with heterosexual intercourse for procreation —  
should no longer be considered 'necessary.'
This is yet another example of the Euro-centric propensity to 
fragment Nature into convenient little "manageable" components, so 
as to gain intellectual, psychological and commercial control of it 
(divide and conquer/sex from gender), playing itself out again.
65 Which is now based entirely on the European's world view. - Author


--- PAGE 491 ---
36
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
Item: This illuminati farce can also be viewed in a publication of the Matrix series 
by Val Valerian—more specifically, Matrix 5,  where the theme is that sex and 
gender are extraterrestrial inventions created by genetic manipulation; that the 
point of your sexual organs is to create slaves for the real alien ruling class; that 
homosexuality is our only recourse as a species to reclaim our former uni-sexual, 
hermaphroditic spiritual selves. But there are those of us in the underground 
metaphysical community who are of the opinion that the author had no direct 
hand in forwarding this theme...that his publication was co-opted and thus 
corrupted. Either that.. .or Val's been in the closet, and ivaited ’til Matrix  5 to come 
"out"...
Women such as Heidi Hartman are so biologically and 
psychologically unstable that they cannot conceive of, nor accept the 
fact that—cosmic design denotes cosmic function.  They wish to negate or 
disavow their anatomical (gender) differences, and with them, the 
natural feminine behavior that organically expresses itself through 
their higher universal archetypal instincts. They would force true 
gynic women to philosophically and genetically "de-commission" 
that which is universally divine and intrinsic to themselves.
Ms. Hartman goes on to say:
"...How people propagate the species is socially determined ... the strict 
division of labor by sex, a social invention common to all known 
societies, creates two very separate genders; (It) thus helps to direct their 
sexual needs and helps to ensure biological reproduction. In 
more'imaginative' societies ....biological reproduction might be ensured 
by other technologies
So the gender-feminist must support male and female 
homosexuality, as well as test-tube reproduction, cloning, and God 
knows what other type of fascist bio-tech agenda. They make it very 
clear that they rebuke, renounce and revoke all association with what 
amounts to being the natural instinctive duties of motherhood, 
nurturer and wife, and intend to enlist science and homosexuality as 
allies in their quest to destroy what they consider to be "oppressive 
patriarcal rule", and the "nuisances of human family ties."


--- PAGE 492 ---
37
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Ann Ferguson and Nancy Folbre documented ways in which 
women could socially be liberated from men and their own natural 
gender roles and responsibilities. They stated that...
"... Gay and lesbian culture can also be looked on as a subversive force that 
can challenge the hegemonic nature of the idea of the family.  In order for the 
subversive nature of gay cultures to be used effectively, we have to be 
able to present alternative ways of looking at human relationships; 
'The New American Movement Bill of Reproductive Rights  describes an 
agenda for reproductive rights that include abortion, sterilization, abuse, 
the right to parenting (including specific support for lesbian mothers), 
the right to a safe work place and several other demands ..."
Allison Jagger, in her writings to a similar women's study 
program, furthers the Ferguson/ Folbre position by stating that 
the primary aim of the gender feminist is the complete 
annihilation of the present family structure, while turning 
humanity into lower forms of life by eliminating all principles of 
natural gender-conduct regarding sexual intercourse. Read 
this insanity...
"... The end of the biological family will also eliminate the need for 
sexual repression. Male homosexuality, lesbianism, and extra­
marital sexual intercourse will no longer be viewed in the liberal 
way as alternative options; instead, even the categories of 
homosexuality and heterosexuality will be abandoned —  the 
very institution of sexual intercourse where male and female 
each play a well-defined role will disappear. Humanity could 
finally revert to its natural, polvmorphouslv perverse sexuality ...!
Shades of Caligula! Isn't this what we now see occurring as the 
'new morality' puts a strangle-hold on the new millennium?
She goes on to say in her book Political Philosophies of Women's  
Liberation: Feminism and Philosophy...
"... The destruction of the biological family, never envisioned by 
Freud, will allow the emergence of new women and men, 
different from any people who have previously existed..."


--- PAGE 493 ---
38
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
And if you believe the feminist media rhetoric that men are the 
predominant perpetrators of child molestation and incest— think 
again! Like the sexually perverse male organization calling itself 
NAMBLA (North American Man/Boy Love Association), feminist 
hypocrisy is 'outed' by the words of Ms. Susan Cavin, first female 
president of the Gay and Lesbian Press Association (GLPA).
In her work entitled Lesbian Origins, page 57,1989. She states...
"...While incest is generally viewed as dysfunctional for the family— 
and this is true of heterosexual incest—I will argue that at origin, 
homosexual incest plays a functional role in the development of 
the family..."
She didn't say dys-fu nc tional my sisters, she said functional!!
And the psycho-pathologies of feminism have even infected the 
social policies of nations. In Australia for example, when 
recommending a solution to circumvent the possibility of women 
contracting cervical cancer, the government's "Department of 
(Human) Relationships" released a statement suggesting that...
"...Women after the age of 40 should entertain the thought of 
going into a lesbian relationship..."
At a Fall conference held at the Roland Park County School for 
Girls, a private school located in Baltimore Maryland, the 
headmistress Ms. Jeane Brune was reported as saying in their school 
paper AIMS, November 9th, 1998...
"...On health issues, we want a student to talk to a lesbian.
Lesbian issues are integrated into our morals class..."
Finally, if there are any remaining doubts as to the true motives, 
aims and goals of gender-feminism today, the following words from 
a panel on the subject "Lesbianism as a Personal Politic" held in New 
York City during a 1977 "Lesbian Pride Week", and reported by 
Andrea Dworkin in her works Letters from the War Zone-Take Back the  
Day, and Biological Superiority: The World's Most Dangerous and Deadly  
Idea - should put them all to rest for the sister-seeker:


--- PAGE 494 ---
39
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"...Women and men are distinct species or races —men are biologically inferior to 
women: male violence is a biological inevitability. To eliminate it, one must eliminate 
the species/race itself. In eliminating the biologically inferior species/race—Man, the 
new Ubermensch Woman will have the earthly dominion that is her true biological 
destiny. We are left to infer that a society of her creation will be good because she is 
good; biologically good. In the interim, incipient Super Woman will not do anything 
to encourage women to collaborate with men—no abortion clinics or battered 
women's sanctuaries will come from her. After all, she has to conserve her energy 
which must not be dissipated keeping weaker women alive through reform 
measures..."
"...The audience applauded the passages on female superiority/male inferiority 
enthuastically. This doctrine seemed to be music to their ears..."
Ummm. Sounds like a eugenic's wet dream to me. And did we 
not hear similar words spoken by a nut-case named Adolph 
Schickelgruber during the 1940s in Nazi Germany?
And to the hard-core feminist reading this thesis, the following 
words from a work entitled In The Future-If There is One-It's Female,  
by fem-fascist Sally Miller Gearhart, should make you feel warm, 
cuddly and fuzzy all over;
"...The proportion of men must be reduced to, and maintained at 
approximately 10% of the human race..."
To bring it all full circle beloved; I ask that my sister-queens 
carefully examine the state of their individual and collective worlds 
today. Go back a few pages and re-read what was said by these 
"women." See how their viewpoints have suddenly become the 
reality we all live and share today. In this way, I pray that you will 
see why my words throughout this work appear to be so harsh and 
angry at times.
The anger is not directed at my gynic sister-queens, but at the 
gender feminist and her puppet-masters who together have amassed 
the collective power and will to influence all current social policies; 
policies that have set a whole new precedent for legitimizing 
pathological behavior in women, without any forethought of the 
terrible consequences destined to manifest over time.


--- PAGE 495 ---
40
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
My spiritual Goddess Mother Mama Ami-Belle Olatunji (wife of 
the late, great Baba Olatunji, world renowned master-drummer), and 
close friend Sister Tassili Maat both confided to me that no melanated 
woman functioning on the corporate plantations of today, had a 
decisive hand in defining or orchestrating the socio-political and 
economic gender-classifications she presently operates in. She is only 
an involuntary supporter of the system that propagates it.
And I wholeheartedly agree.
The present corporate "achievements" and socio-political 
"advancements" attained by a few black women (like Oprah Winfrey 
or Condoleeza Rice), are actually "behavior-modified zones of 
orchestrated social activity", allocated to them through neo-feminism 
at the behest of the global parasitic elite. Thus, whatever a black 
woman believes she has individually achieved in society by way of 
gender politics today (or any other Diasporic African attaining elitist 
positions of power, male or female), it should now be obvious that 
her actual purpose is to serve as a counterforce to collective black 
achievement and advancement in a productive black society.
Strategically, the black career woman has been forced to act 
(consciously or unconsciously) as a primary impediment to the black 
male's quest to reacquire his rightful provider/protector status —  
primarily for his family, and secondly —in his community and the 
world. She's being placed in positions of "power" to unwittingly act 
as an adversarial bulwark against the black male, and any future 
attempts of his to regain leadership of an independently productive 
black society; a society whose foundations would be rooted in his 
leadership of a healthy, productive black family.66
But 'career' sisters will never see it this way. To them, they've 
worked hard using the white feminist's formula for success —that is, 
delaying the search for husband and family in search of a career - and 
"independence!" Yet now, in the film "Soulmate" by Andrea Wiley, 
we see them crying out that they're all alone and don't know whyl
66 Father as head of overall family (provider/protector) — mother as administrator and 
infrastructural builder (teacher/nurturer).


--- PAGE 496 ---
41
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Typically, the questions and perspective answers posed by this film 
are once again locked into a "Christianized", faith-based analysis that 
exonerates the major roles played by outside forces like feminism and 
the illuminati, putting it on such nonsense as AIDS and 'down-low' 
brothers—blaming the victims yet again for their own victimization.
I myself once failed to consider the subtle but devastating impacts 
related to the psycho-political stratagem of gender-divisive tactics on 
black people, until I read the following by Allison Jagger. It 
confirmed a reality I only suspected concerning the venomous nature 
of feminism, and its insidious influence on black women:
"... The ultimate authority of individual interests comes into question. 
Perhaps people may be mistaken about truth (?) morality or even their 
own interests; they may be systematically self-deceived... Certain 
historical circumstances allow specific groups of women (black women?) 
to transcend at least partially, the perceptions and theoretical constructs 
of male dominance..."
Look carefully at the hidden subtext within these words beloved. 
See how collective black struggle in the 60s now becomes re-defined 
as a "mistaken morality" where it concerns "their (our) own 
interests." See how "certain historical circumstances" (that is, 445 
years of slavery and ongoing atrocities) are now a "mistaken truth", 
and how all of our collective actions for justice and reparations became 
re-classified as "systematically deceived/mistaken seZ/-interests."
And the "ultimate authority of individual interests" is now in 
question? Well —there goes our First Amendment Right to decide 
our own fates as "individual people", my sister! It's called Fascism/ 
Even more insidious is the fact that' individuality' is the quintessential  
psycho-structure driving the fundamental nature and instincts of the  
masculine principle  — that is —nature's primary problem solver!
Thus, attacking the 'ultimate authority of individual interests', is in 
fact ultimately attacking the direct authority (and inherent psychology) 
of the black, individual-natured heterosexual male!
By her statement "...certain historical circumstances allow 
'specific groups' of women to transcend the perceptions and 
theoretical constructs of male dominance", she is inferring that the 
past and present experiences of suffering by black men and women


--- PAGE 497 ---
42
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
collectively as a "race" of people, should now "transcend" and be 
viewed historically as two separate unequal things —two separate 
experiences stratified and articulated along gender lines.
This kind of propaganda is promoted to coerce the black woman 
to "transcend"—  that is —to give up and feel justified in leaving the 
black man's side; to join the white woman in her "feminist cause for 
social justice", since the historic onus of oppression has now been 
psychopolitically switched from elitist white males — to all males'.
After Marcus, Martin and Malcolm, our tacit acceptance of this 
COINTELPRO scheme began to create a corrosive schism between us 
as men and women. And, to widen the gender gap even further, 
socio-political and economic conditions were being put into place to 
ultimately make the black male an unnecessary redundancy to his 
woman, his family, his community, and the overall American society.
The above statements by Allison Jagger are also an insidious 
declaration of war against free-thinking melanated women; in fact—  
all gynic women. Like Simone de Beauvoir, her words also betray the 
fact that new-wave feminists continue to be distressed that a 
significant majority of black women still do not willingly or totally 
support the feminist's sexist agenda! And she states that feminists 
believe this to be so because women (that is black gynic women) are 
still by and large "mistaken about truth."
Question is —who's "truth?" Ms. Jagger is inferring that gender 
feminists consider black gynic women to be too stupid to know 
what's good for them. So due to the "historical circumstances" 
(slavery) that may have caused their stupidity, the white gender- 
feminist has taken it upon herself to correct all previous mistakes, by 
unilaterally acting in the black woman's "best interests" to show her 
that her problems have actually been the black male all along.
In fact, all males!
As a result, the Amazonian 'crusader' aggressively supports the 
political legislation of ideals that continue to re-define and orchestrate 
the behavior of not just black women, but all women—in the gender 
feminist's own twisted self-image and likeness. And, since everything 
in the present human equation (to them) is based on an artificial


--- PAGE 498 ---
43
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"social construct" (e.g. family, sex, culture, manhood, womanhood, 
etc.) the gender-feminists have now appointed themselves the 
liberators of all feminine-kind, questing for the emancipation of all 
women—from their men, their families, their social constructs, their 
culture and their instincts— whether they wish to be 'liberated' or not!
When you take a moment to contemplate the psychotic mindset 
demonstrated by the authors quoted above beloved, one cannot help 
but notice by all of the perverse rhetoric, "concepts", viewpoints and 
ideologies given that, by and large —feminists are truly the most hostile  
and fervid ivoman-haters of all!  They hate who and what  they are!
Think about that, beloved seeker...
The Feminist fallout...
•
The present condition of today's black family and communities 
reflect the pathological effects of the perverse agenda stated above. 
After centuries of traumatic conditioning, the (widowed) black queen 
has been made to believe that (once again) she is alone; that she is "the 
backbone" (according to Chakka Khan's I'm a Woman), the strength, 
the wisdom, and the only one qualified to lead the black family and 
community. Forced out of the sanctity and safety of her home and 
community, which were originally designed and supported by the 
cultural superstructures of the inner society, the black queen has had 
to abandon her original roles as wife, mother, community builder, 
administrative leader, teacher, supporter, nurturer, and counselor of 
her own family and community, to become a fiscal functionary 
supporting not only herself, her family and the goals of the gender- 
feminist, but now the same system of oppression that ultimately 
contributes to the madness currently suffered by her male counterpart 
as well! So what pray tell has changed since the cotton fields?
Qualitatively speaking, what is 'different' for the black woman 
and the overall black community today?
Well, I can volunteer at least one persuasive answer —  and this you 
can check for yourself; the meteoric rise of the black female's physical,  
psychological, and more specifically, reproductive-based diseases!!


--- PAGE 499 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - P A R T  n
Black Feminism: A Moon with no Orbit...
y H A T  A  
fcMINllT l \ o O K *
Figure 1. Casting a "white shadow"


--- PAGE 500 ---
45
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
This particular section was inspired by a series of interesting 
conversations with a very insightful and intelligent sister named 
Nanette Swift. From these discussions came a better understanding 
(on my part) of what drives contemporary black women to 'succeed' 
in the present political, economic, cultural, and psycho-spiritual 
structures of society. These intellectual exchanges were very 
informative. I finally got to hear a young black gynic female speak 
from the heart about the many 'inner issues' that motivate her 
feminized sisters.
First —  I learned that black feminists (as well as many sisters not 
totally aligned with feminism) are of the mindset that because our 
grandmothers and great great grandmothers literally "scrubbed 
floors and cleaned toilets" to help keep the traumatized black family 
together since the days of captivity, they (their great great 
granddaughters) should now be supported by the black male in 
whatever they choose to do with their own individual lives; regardless 
of what it is, and regardless of what it takes to accomplish this.
Second —  As I understand it, to the black feminist, the black man 
(regardless of historic or existing circumstances) has continuously 
abandoned and abused black women, their grandmothers and their 
great grandmothers, turning to rape, murder, womanizing, child 
neglect, Caucasian women, homosexuality, domestic violence, crime, 
drugs, alcohol, and an overall shiftlessness that has forced her to seek 
sanctuary and support in the white outer society. This sanctuary and 
support comes by way of funding from 'women and minorities' 
government-sponsored programs, along with welfare, private 
women's groups and various feminist organizations.
In essence, the black feminist is saying to the black male that it's 
her turn now; that the education and career opportunities made 
available specifically for the black female should be given unilateral 
support by the black male, even though she now has to abandon the 
inner society, him, marriage, the home and the children (or not


--- PAGE 501 ---
46
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
have children at all) — to be in competition with him or whatever else 
is necessary to achieve her individual success as a black (formally 
disenfranchised) woman.67 And...
Third —  Overall, the black (feminized) woman has been thoroughly 
convinced (primarily by the white feminist and her equality 
propaganda) that she will succeed where the black man has failed 
her, himself and his community. In her mind, if she were placed into 
the same arenas of opportunity where the black man failed to 
provide a better life and society for himself and his family, she would 
do a much better job. So it behooves her to take the black man's place 
and lead the abandoned black society, community and household.
Of course the above would all be true and good for these sisters 
to think this way, if the prevailing conditions that caused their 
grandmothers (and grandfathers)  to suffer had significantly changed 
for black women and men. In other words, if things had gotten 
better for the entire society with the addition of all these 
"opportunities" for black women. But as of 2007-08 A.D., it appears 
that nothing has qualitatively changed for the black community as a 
whole, except the fact that black women get to suffer lOx the levels of 
stress that average white women are exposed to, and get to do even 
more work now in the "freedom" that feminism has won for them!
The black male on the other hand, must now contend with the fact 
that job and career opportunities he has been struggling for centuries 
to achieve as a man of color in Amerikka, will now (with the help of 
feminism and the new politically correct socialist mindset prevailing 
today) go to the" minority female", and that she (as a collective
67 This scenario in no way includes sincere black gynic women who were loyal and dedicated to 
the traditional principles of community and family, but encountered circumstance where her 
mate either lost his livelihood, his mind, or his life — or in a worse case scenario — was 
mated to an insensitive ass who showed no willingness to support her and his own children. 
In situations like these, the gynic woman is forced to seek refuge in the outer society, as a way 
and a means of survival for herself and the children. - Author


--- PAGE 502 ---
47
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 2 - "Rising Apart"
sisterhood of women from all "minorities") will more than likely 
make more money than he (as a collective brotherhood) in the long 
run.
Hard to believe? Well the following statistic from the Department 
of Labor in 2005 pretty much says it all:
"... Eighty percent (80%) of black women of child-bearing age 
in this country today, now work outside of the home.. A"
Eighty percent!?
Beloved sisters, can this same astounding statistical percentage of 
national employment be applied to black men of child making age? In 
fact, has eighty percent employment for black people ever happened 
in this country outside of slavery?!
In New York City alone (circa 2004), the headlines of the 
Amsterdam News and New York Daily News screamed "...64% of  
black males unemployed (just) in New York!" Sixty four percent!!


--- PAGE 503 ---
48
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Did anyone noticed anything odd with the numbers on these two 
astounding statistics, or what was actually being implied by them?
Think about it. Just 20% of our sisters were jobless —at home or 
maybe even in school, while 80% of them (with their children in 
daycare) spent the majority of their time outside of the home! 
Conversely, only 36% of black men (just in New York alone) were  
in the job market, while a whopping 64% were at home, maybe in 
school, the military, taking care of children, or out on the streets!
And this was just 3 and 4 years ago respectively. Now things are 
even worse, and the black feminist can't see who or what the real 
problem is?!! Or maybe she does, and just chose to 'racially defect.'
In his quest to re-establish the black family as well as a means to 
provide for them, it's no longer just the Caucasian male and the 
Caucasian (feminist) female that the black male must contend with 
for space in the ever-shrinking arenas of job and corporate-career 
opportunities. He must now compete with his own wife, sister, 
mother and daughter. The odds are now seven to one if you count 
the immigrant factor, instead of two to one. But hey —this is just fine 
with the black feminist.
If black women fail to recognize the inherently malicious, divisive 
policies promoted by neo-feminism, and the corrosive effect it has 
had on the black family structure through the devaluation of the 
masculine principle and the social re-genderfication of the feminine 
principle, we are effectively sabotaging any chances for establishing a 
viable and productive overall society for our children in the 
foreseeable future. (See figure 2)
The black feminist will no doubt say that the above is nothing 
more than male chauvinist rhetoric; sour grapes and jealously for the 
successes that hard working black women continue to make.
Oh really?
Let's be real my sisters.
According to the majority of gynic women (both young and old) 
with whom I have interviewed and consulted during the writing of


--- PAGE 504 ---
49
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
this thesis, to date, the saddest constant of this whole twisted 
"liberation" scenario, is that even now (with all the individual 
advances made by the black "millennium" woman), she still quietly 
complains that virtually nothing has changed for the better in the 
quality  of her life. Again, over 85% of my clientele are women and a 
majority of these sisters would be considered moderately to 
extremely successful. Of all the complaints I hear privately about the 
lives they lead (barring the obvious physical ones)—the feeling of 
emptiness  at being alone tops the list! (Again; see movie Soulmate)
Granted she now has the ability to 'get' and 'do' more things than 
her great, great-grandmother. But when all the "gettin' and doin" 
distractions are put aside, only empty, despondent feelings remain 
because the intrinsic quality of her life is no better. Bottom line she 
feels alone, unfulfilled and exhausted!
Why? Because a woman's hard earned self-won autonomous 
achievements and resources, give her no harmonizing sense of 
satisfaction; the kind of feelings that naturally bring a sense of joy, 
meaning and fulfillment to a true gynic woman; the kind of feelings a 
real woman needs to be whole and truly happy. The young 
"independent" feminized black woman of today is taught to be self- 
centered and to distrust, and cultivates no vision of collective 
purpose that would engender the deepest sense of wholeness and 
satisfaction, working together with the black man to raise a strong 
family, and at the same time, build a productive black society.
From the MSNBC Today Show, I quote from an interview with the 
writer and editor of the book Bitch In The House. It's a multi-authored 
work by various 'high-end' workingwomen, who seem to have 
summarized all of the lamentable points I've alluded to concerning 
the plight of so-called "successful" women, be she black or white.
Cathi Hanauer (the editor) asks...
"...Women today have more choices than at any time in history.  Yet, many smart, 
ambitious, contemporary women are finding themselves angry, dissatisfied, (lonely) 
and stressed out. Why are they so dissatisfied? And what do they really want...?"
What do they really want? I don't think they even know!
Nine times out of ten, virtually all of a "successful" woman's 
complaints have to do with herself and her career, versus her man,


--- PAGE 505 ---
50
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
her children and her immediate or extended families — all of it related 
to the temporary sensations of 'empowerment', self-worth and 
personal gratification that she identifies as having emanated from her 
career. And these are the highly stressed women suffering with the 
fibroids, breast and cervical cancers, high and low blood pressure, the 
chronic fatigue syndrome, depression and early heart attacks.
•
Beloved Sisters: Please Read The Next 2 Paragraphs Repeatedly!
Women today do not overstand that the feminine principle does 
not fulfill her deepest needs by pursuing self-centered, power-based 
material gain. She does not innerstand that the more power she 
pursues and attains, the less love she acquires, and hence —less true 
fulfillment. It is man that pursues power for fulfillment, while woman 
pursues love. Both must surrender the one to acquire the other if they 
wish to achieve a balanced and wholesome relationship dynamic.
If a woman's deepest needs are fulfilled by love, she must surrender 
power; and conversely, as a man's deepest needs are motivated by 
power—to acquire it, he must surrender love. It is the sublimest 
'equilibrium-by-cosmic-synergism' hard-wired into our archetypal 
designs through Djhwty's 7th Principle of Existence —  Gender.
And no matter what "ism" created by man (or feminist) comes 
along to defy or disturb this gender-based equilibrium, if unbalanced, 
it will torture the one who insults it until the offender 
unconditionally surrenders to the dictates of the higher self, and by 
such course, rectifies it. This is why the likes of a Ms. Cathy Hanauer, 
and the 26-odd "power-women" who contributed to her book are, 
and will remain (as they said) desperately unhappy, angry (not 
knowing why), dissatisfied and totally stressed out; never seeming to 
know exactly what they really wanted or why, why after working like 
a man in a man's world all their lives, they still remain unsatisfied 
and unhappy even after having seemingly acquired "everything."
Interestingly enough, when asked what motivated them to 
become "black" feminists, most of the sisters replied "to change 
things for the better." The majority claimed that they don't hate black


--- PAGE 506 ---
51
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
men, but rather, ardently support their sisters' plight for overall 
"equality." When asked what (if any) changes black feminism has 
inspired or effectuated in black society as a whole, when and for 
whom —  all responses were based primarily on the achievements of a 
few 'successful' black women, or they simply could not answer. The 
more erudite among them answered by saying that "the perception 
of a black woman's abilities have changed, and that is a significant 
achievement." They pointed to the fact that "more young black 
women are graduating college today than young black men, and are 
achieving more post-graduate credentials as well. Is that not 
considered a significant change for the better?"
Yes beloved; it would seem so —for the illuminiti! If black female 
achievement at the expense of black male achievement is ".. .a change 
for the better", how does this better our overall society? If the present 
statistics on black inter-personal relationships show that successful 
black women (by and large), choose intellectually advanced and 
financially proficient men to mate with, and black females, white 
males and Asian males continue to statistically out-perform black 
males scholastically, whose agenda is being served?
I was told by a very successful sister in the music business (with 
post-grad credentials) that in many small black women's support 
groups to which she belonged, who meet to discuss the current 
'quality of life' conditions of black women, most of these successful 
sisters lament that they are (by and large) still "slaving", still 
discriminated against, still harassed and persecuted (mostly by 
Caucasian women in supervisory and managerial positions) still 
disrespected, still exhausted, still "poor"(?), still abandoned, still 
alone, still sexually frustrated, still abused —but now suffering (and 
dying) from acute and chronic diseases at 5 to 10 times the national  
average!!
In truth, I sincerely empathize with my beloved sisters, for as 
men, we have failed miserably in coming up with an effective enough 
counter-strategy to relinquish them of the ongoing burdens they have 
had to suffer and bear after the defeat of the Moors, and after losing 
Marcus, Martin, Elijah, Malcolm, Huey, Khalid and Kwame Toure.
Shame on us my brothers. Time to get busy!


--- PAGE 507 ---
52
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T [I
Divide and Conquer...
•
Corporate America has quietly helped to perpetuate the illusion 
that significant changes for the better have occurred in the social, 
economic and political conditions of melanated peoples here in 
America —  particularly for the black woman. This was slyly done by 
amassing collective 'statistics of advancement' primarily based on the 
white woman's record of successes in her "emancipation movement."
As a result, black women (especially those who quietly or 
unconsciously support feminism) have come to believe that the social 
advances and successes of the gynandric white woman, represent the 
same social advances and successes for the black woman!
Funny thing though; with all of the insipid "women's channels" 
now saturating the TV airwaves, I am yet to see just one that deals 
consistently with black issues, or even black women!
The Euro-feminist and her illuminiti/ government sponsors have 
especially fooled most contemporary Caribbean and African woman 
into believing that things are better.68 Her glamorization and 
glorification of American black women's individual pursuits and 
personal successes (like Oprah), have become more relevant than her 
participation in pursuits for black collective success —like those 
historic endeavors that dealt specifically with uplifting all peoples of 
color—such as the Underground Railroad, the Moorish Science Temple of  
America, the Garvey Movement, the so-called Civil Rights Movement and 
even the original Nation of Islam at its inception.
These were revolutionary endeavors organized for the purpose of 
empowerment staged by black collectives, which did more to shake 
and rattle the citadels of white male corporate power than any of the 
current single-handed pursuits by a black feminized sisterhood.
Sadly, all we have to show for the last 40 years of a separatist 
"black" feminism, is a fragmented, self-centered, individualistic black 
society, compounded by a counter-productive waste and 
misdirection of precious black feminine energy.
68 She now promotes her gender separatism abroad ... like Hillary Clinton in Africa for 
example. -Author


--- PAGE 508 ---
53
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
And think on this, my Sisters...
•
There are virtually thousands of women's support organizations 
scattered across the length and breath of this nation —all tailor-made 
to address every female-based conflict or dysfunction. I challenge my 
sisters (or anyone else for that matter) to find as many such privately 
funded or government-sponsored safe-havens tailored exclusively to 
the male anymore, except maybe homeless shelters, domestic violence 
rehabilitation centers4, and prison outreach programs.
In fact, you may also find that many of these so-called "men's 
counseling" organizations are usually attached to female crisis centers, 
with a few of the men's support groups run or administrated by women!
Today men can't even escape to gyms or exclusively male club 
houses to play the games and participate in the activities that once 
afforded them some small measure of privacy and emotional outlet—  
without Amazonian women following them into their locker rooms.
And why is it nearly impossible to find as many exclusively male 
interaction organizations any more?
Simple. In the late 70s and throughout the 80s and 90s, white 
Amazonian feminists launched an all-out attack on exclusively male 
enclaves.69 This forced the re-genderfication of virtually all masculine 
sanctuaries (gyms, clubhouses, weight training facilities etc.) 
throughout America; traditional 'battlegrounds' where men met to 
test the mettle of other men —  simply for the sake of being men!
Typical macho male nonsense you say? Then what do sisters call 
places like Chippendale's, or the Jenny Craig spas, the Pamper 
Parties, the nail salons and the beauty parlors?
Amazonian feminists coerced America into believing that all male 
sanctuaries were "temples of testosterone" dedicated to plotting the 
subjugation of all womankind. At one point in the 80s, these 
gynandromorphic females got Americans to support a female 
reporter's "right" to go into the locker rooms of professional male
69 This is not a naive support of the exclusionary racist enclaves of the white elitist, corporate 
male. - Author


--- PAGE 509 ---
54
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
athletes to interview them, even when they were naked and taking 
showers! When certain athletes protested such audacity by calling 
these women names, and being as disrespectful to them as these 
women were being to the athletes —  the athletes were punished!
Later, the black feminist (with typical second class mentality) 
somehow felt that she too could successfully play the gender-card 
with her inane comments on the Million Man March.
Feminists like Angela Davis for example, who until that time 
hadn't made a major public statement in the media since God was in 
pampers (like a good psycho-political provocateur following orders), 
suddenly pops up out of the woodwork to criticize the march as 
being "exclusionary" and "exclusively male."
Her problem with this? "Why wasn't it a million person march?"
Give us a break my sister!
Where were your cries of 'inclusion' and comments of 'unfairness' 
when your boss Hillary and her cronies were spreading the virus of 
feminism throughout the world —more specifically, at the ear-elusive 
4th International Women's World Conference  held in Beijing, China in 
1995?
It's a well-known fact that many of the stated goals of this 
particular gathering was (1) to eventually eliminate all references to 
gender in Western society, (2) to support and advance the 
homosexual agenda, and (3) by example (in time) eliminate any and 
all references to God throughout the entire world!
Why didn't you cry out with the same indignation for the in­
clusion of black men at that little pamper-party? Shouldn't it have 
been the 4th International "Persons" World Conference?! If so, why 
didn't you call the Press to comment on that?!
It's all too painfully clear who butters the bread of such sisters; in 
fact—the whole sour loaf of black feminism. (See figure 1)
African women are now the specific focus of recruitment for new 
wave/ Amazonian feminism, with Hillary Clinton acting as its global 
fem-bassador. With black feminists like Angela Davis hoisting the


--- PAGE 510 ---
55
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
banner of white feminism aloft worldwide, giving it the impression 
of popular acceptance, support and legitimacy among all black 
women in America, the psychological re-colonization of Africa has 
once again begun in emest; this time —  specifically through its 
women. Many "educated" African women (educated in Europe and 
the U.S. that is) are breathing new life into this poisonous philosophy, 
unaware of its true history and the impending consequences.
But there is hope. Despite nearly forty years of its noisome 
influence, unsung minorities of intelligent insightful women (both 
black and white) are coming forward to speak of feminism's abject 
failure as a human experiment, and it's about time.
Beloved Sister-Seeker...
Do not be misled. The foundational power base of black feminism 
is white feminism (Again, see figure 1). If we use the 445-year 
historical experiences of melanated peoples here in the Americas as a 
reference point for what has shaped our collective identity today, the 
term "black" feminism (in and of itself) would be considered an 
oxymoron; a tragic contradiction in historical and psychological 
terms. Its very existence as a functioning intention of the mind 
constitutes psychic fragmentation and genetic self-denial. It is a 
psycho-political tool of distraction being used to sway us from 
options and goals that could be achieved through collective 
endeavors; most important of which is the return of the archetypal 
black family unit. It fragments and depletes the comprehensive 
strength of melanated peoples, by primarily extolling the virtues of 
individual achievements and gains —to the ultimate detriment of the 
communal nature of woman, the foundational epi-center of family and 
the overall strength and well being of a vibrant black society.
With everyone individually clawing and scratching, bitching and 
moaning about "his or her own thing", our collective power base as a 
people (which, if established, would eventually provide the needs of 
the individual anyway) falls apart.
But don't be mistaken family. I am not promoting socialism,


--- PAGE 511 ---
56
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
communism, or any other form of fragmented European—"isms." I 
am simply trying to focus the lens of insight on those imperceptible 
mechanisms of Cosmic Law that pertain to the principle of gender, so 
that the entire scheme of the feminist agenda may be seen more 
clearly, and thus acted upon more efficiently.
My sisters; the Euro-feminist's primary agenda, her highest 
mission-priority above all else as she does her part in helping to bear 
the so-called "white man's burden" (us), is to pacify the black woman!  
Whether you know it or not, her job is to recruit the black woman to 
work for her and her "silent partner", the white corporate "alpha 
male." Her appointed task is to recruit you away from any collective 
endeavors related to sustained black male and female empowerment, 
and into accepting, supporting and promoting her own version of the 
"liberation agenda."
Oprah Winfrey is the poster-girl for this very scenario.
Beloved. The parasitic ruling class knows full well that if the black 
woman should ever become dissatisfied with the present 
arrangement of society (and gets angry to the point of organizing) —  I 
mean really pissed —  true change begins! This is why billions of 
dollars are made readily available to structure programs that 
minimally cater to whatever immediate personal needs or aspirations 
the black female has today (employment, educational opportunity 
programs, child care, welfare, government funded minority female 
start-up business grants, women's empowerment groups, etc.).
Put it this way. The European power structure would rather be 
stamping out small brush fires (black male protest) than fires that 
could potentially consume the whole forest (black collective protest).
My sister; the very fact that the black feminist has chosen to 
champion her own exclusive gender-experience as something apart 
from our collective 445 year experience as a people in this country, 
plays us right back into that COINTELPRO strategy of divide and 
conquer. With significant support and promotion from the 
resources of European gender-feminists, the black woman's personal


--- PAGE 512 ---
57
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
complaints, sufferings and secret aspirations have become the 
premier topic of conversation (and finance) in the black and white 
world. Her individual gender issues are being promoted as 
"legitimate, historic black causes" worthy of notice and support in 
Caucasian inner circles; especially by feminists who own or manage 
mega-publishing houses. On the other hand, individual black male 
protest is now commercially trivialized and promoted under the 
category of 'hard-core entertainment;' watered down in substance 
and meaning by lower to middle-class white males who —  like racist 
"Slim Shady" Emminem (and the Mossad created Interscope 
corporation)—have stolen the thunder from an art-form originally 
created by young black males to give voice and presence to the 
overall plight of poor melanated peoples, trapped in the war-zones 
of the American Diaspora.
The mutual feelings of family, culture and commitment that 
motivated us to struggle together over issues that affected us 
collectively, no longer apply to the black feminist. Personal issues and 
selectively female causes (all instigated by the same S.O.B.70 we've 
been collectively dealing with for centuries) now take center stage.
And this tragic situation is further exaserbated by the "bling"- 
minded bullshit propagated by irresponsible, sell-out rap superstars 
polluting the social consciousness of our impressionable young 
people today; who but for a precious few project nothing more than 
the shallow, materialistic visions of young self-absorbed black men —  
quintessential examples of a successful covert psycho-political attack 
having ended in the conquest of yet another black awareness, black 
consciousness, black liberation and empowerment movement.
All told, any feminized black woman with enough traumatic 
personal baggage, a pissed-off attitude towards black men in general, 
and a literary talent to render her feelings eloquently into words, can 
easily be published with enthusiastic help from their white mentors 
in the upper circles of gender-feminism.
The following is an excellent example.
70 Standard Operational "Business." - Author


--- PAGE 513 ---
58
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
"Body and Soul"
Adding Literary Insult to Ancestral Injury...
•
I'm not sure how to present this section without further infuriating 
feminists, upwardly mobile millennium career-women, or new age 
lesbians. If they somehow found the courage and good sense to read 
this far —  this far may be all that they'll be willing to tolerate.
I sincerely recommend that the seeker purchase the book Body and 
Soul and study it carefully, utilizing it as a guide on how to recognize 
the insidious psycho-political techniques used by social engineers to 
manipulate and exploit our day to day realities as people of color.
The seeker may also find that its multiple genres (and authors) 
preclude the necessity for critiquing a number of other such works 
with similar themes. This is not to say however, that no other books 
of this type should be read for research purposes.
The following constitutes an empirical, as well as metaphysical 
and meta-historic interpretation of its content.
Body and Soul: The Black Women's Guide to Physical Health and  
Emotional Well-Being, edited by Ms. Linda Villarosa (if not taken too 
seriously) is a fragmented hodge-podge of cleverly presented half- 
truths, misrepresentations and down-right lies, all strung together 
with the ignominious threads of western medical commercialism and 
Euro-feminist diatribe —  in blackface.
Quite truthfully, it is a literary exercise in new-age vaudeville-ism, 
where each act (author) presents a routine of medically sanctioned 
skits, topped off by Euro-feminist punch lines.
And if it is viewed entirely from these perspectives my beloved 
sister-seeker, no harm will come of it.
If, on the other hand, Body and Soul  was written to be taken 
seriously, and is being palmed off as some form of hallowed 
scripture handed down by enlightened feminist prophets in 
possession of the oracles of health and well-being for black women; 
then beloved —  let the reader beware!


--- PAGE 514 ---
59
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 3
That this book was ever compiled and published is a sobering 
testament to why books like The Wounded Womb must be written and 
published. Body and Soul,  written primarily for the young black 
corporate career-seeking woman of the 90's (and beyond), is a glaring 
example of the kind of partisan Euro-feminist/western medical 
propaganda that cannot be allowed to go unchallenged on its 
content. It is specious, fragmented and predictable, and passes its 
disjointed concepts off as whole ideas and themes. It is the kind of 
work that should not be allowed to make a predominant impression 
on the minds our young sisters.
Critical analysis becomes even more essential to us as 'urban 
Nubians', if literature such as this has the enormous resources of 
white mega-publishing houses backing it. This maximizes its 
potential for longevity, allowing it to become a resource guide for 
future generations of young impressionable sisters, just beginning 
their personal quests toward self-realization and enlightenment.


--- PAGE 515 ---
60
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
And it's precisely because of this book's perspectives, its potential 
resource-enhanced longevity, and its psycho-spiritual influence on 
future generations of young impressionable black women, that I've 
decided to write a summary critique of its content.
Or-well's "1984":
Alive and Well in Well-ness Propaganda...
•
Where to begin my analysis was a difficult thing to decide, 
because as mentioned earlier, it is a multi-authored work. This of 
course leaves my critics with the obvious rebuttal; namely —that 
what appears to be the book's blatant contradictions, specious 
medical theories and obvious neo-feminist lesbian leanings, were 
actually the publisher's efforts at presenting a variform of "positive 
solutions and perspectives"; a modern-day literary articulating the 
many and diverse approaches to health available to today's 
"emerging" black woman —all in one convenient publication.
In fact, Ms. Villarosa seemed to want the readers to believe that the 
recommendations of every contributing writer could legitimately be 
used with equal success, no matter which modality they tried —  
wholistic, philosophical or medical. But her attempts to coordinate 
and convincingly present these various subjects and solutions as 
inter-related —  even in a 'logical sequence', looked more like the 
efforts of a frustrated child working on a complicated jigsaw puzzle, 
who eventually tries to force all of the pieces to fit. The final disjointed 
picture yielded confusion rather than clarity—and I personally 
believe that the publishers of this project wanted it to be that way!
Now. It may not be that Ms. Villarosa or the contributing authors 
intentionally set out to misinform (or dis-inform) our sisters. The 
authors themselves may have had the highest aspirations along with 
the best intentions at heart, and sincerely felt that they were 
providing a much-needed service to black women everywhere.
Never-the-less, no matter how noble the intent or naively


--- PAGE 516 ---
61
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
supportive of young black women this work aspires to be on the 
surface, there is the subtle (and sometimes overt) presence of a 
Euro-feminist lesbian agenda percolating throughout. It also follows a 
cleverly worded, implicitly commercial medical script —one that can 
also be read in any pharmaceutical propaganda material written by 
doctors or research scientists trained in the same drug pushing, body- 
butchering concepts of the orthodox medical church.
As an overall work it is replete with contradictions masked as 
cultural, medical, political, historical and creative diversity; all the 
while seducing the unwary reader into accepting the western 
medical/Euro-feminist lesbian world view. And its target audience 
(again)... young, impressionable black women!
To over stand what I mean by the above, the seeker must reflect 
upon the following.
According to the Tavistock71 Institute's group mind consciousness- 
conditioning tactic, conformity nurtures diversity —  and diversity 
masking conformity, together equals "freedom." So if "big sister" 
publishes a book that marries a surgical, drug pushing medical 
agenda, to a grass roots herb promoting wholistic agenda (then 
praises the virtues of both equally), the reader is seduced into 
believing that both principles are harmonious to health.
As a result, medical science conveniently piggy-backs on the 
merits and virtues of wholistic healing. Of course, the high priests of 
the medical church now control both disciplines. In fact, they've even 
coined a catch phrase for it; integrative  medicine.
Clue?
Yes my sisters ... whether intended or not —  Body and Soul reeks of 
mind control tactics. You see the secret to any successful form of 
psychopolitical brainwashing program (a la the Orwellian/Tavistock 
model), is to get the target population to believe that contradiction is 
clarity, conformity is diversity, delusion is misinterpreted truth, etc.,
71 Tavistock Institute in London, England was the first formal institute founded for refining the 
principles of mind conversion and population control. - Author


--- PAGE 517 ---
62
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
etc. The fact of the matter is, after you've read a book of this type, you 
don't know what to think—except what you think  you've been given 
to think about!
And that's the hook. Both sides of the equation (medical and 
wholistic) are slanted to reflect only one side — their  side. So no 
matter what you accept or reject, you have agreed to their viewpoint 
anyway.
The secret to such deception lies in what they do not  say!
Example...
The following nutshelled commentaries (sections a thru e) outline 
only a few of the many Orwellian doublethink / doublespeak 
psycho-political tactics posing as diversity and "progressive 
solutions" salted throughout the book Body and Soul.
(a) To begin with, the first 20 chapters of Body and Soul  are heavily ladened with 
the same "how to succeed at adapting to the western medical and neo-feminist 
mindsets without really trying" rhetoric; where one product-pushing commercial 
solution by western medicine after another, is shamelessly pontificated upon —  
with token references being paid to their version of the "wholistic view." For every 
problem mentioned throughout this work, a medical doctor's diagnosis or 
viewpoint is the primary recommendation to a solution—along with re-cycled, 
gender-feminist "sister-to-sister" (lesbian) support concepts, promoted under the 
heading of "alternative choice." In fact, only three (3) token chapters out of thirty- 
two (32) are specifically dedicated to wholistic principles, and even these are sadly 
anemic in content...
(b) In Body and Sold,  the Orwellian juxtapositioning of contradictory concepts for 
the purpose of making them appear symbiotic, is subtle and clever. Take for 
example the subject of "inter-racial couples" skillfully nestled between the 
sections entitled "Loving Our Men" and "Women Loving Women." Just 24 pages 
from the line "... thanks to the Civil Rights and women's movements, black women 
have entered colleges and the corporate work place in large numbers, coming into 
contact with white men more ..." (pg. 437) — there appears the line "...white slave 
owners also raped black women freely, then justified their inhuman behavior by 
labeling black women as sexually insatiable, always 'wanting it'..." (pg. 461)


--- PAGE 518 ---
63
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Item: Was this author inferring that black women today are now 
"thankful" and even grateful to the Civil Rights and Women's 
Movements for allowing them more "acceptable" access to white 
men? Is she also inferring by these words that black men were 
keeping black women from white men, until Martin Luther King, Jr., 
Gloria Steinem and Angela Davis made it possible for black women 
to go to white colleges and corporate workplaces to be with white 
men? The author writes this even as the statement on page 461 is 
accompanied by a picture from the Bettman Archive showing a black 
woman on the auction block being forcibly separated from her child 
by white men?
Do the letters C.P.S. and B.C.W.72 mean anything to this author?
How can educated black women not see the obvious disparity in 
the first sentence (pg. 437), as well as the similarity to present-day 
psycho-political conditions made mention on page 461?
(c) Body and Soul refers to the use of intuition in its introduction. Metaphysically,  
the principle of intuition represents a hyper-conscious state of knowing that  
whispers through ancestral voices vibrating from within the liquid crystal we call  
our blood. This book deliberately undermines and literally trashes nearly every  
single ancestral principle of culture founded on intuitional insight or higher  
instinctive behavior, while egotistically fostering the idea that it is a work which  
actually "improves upon" their 100,000 year frame of spiritual reference, culture, and  
experience! The insult to our ancestors (and their legacy) is shown in the way the  
authors (and Ms. Villarosa) subtly portray themselves, their "education" and their  
adopted Euro-centric world view, as being quintessentially superior to the  
instincts, organic intelligence and cultural sciences of our ancestral mothers.  
Sacred principles that held a measure of tradition, dignity and esoteric purpose, is  
scholastically undermined or "expertly" explained away with some new more  
"acceptable" modern-day viewpoint—as if the career-minded black feminist of  
today (with her "liberation" and "education") is somehow "smarter," "more  
aware" and "more enlightened" because she is "better educated" and therefore  
"more intelligent" than her ignorant, male-oppressed, clueless ancestral  
mothers...
72 Child Protective Services/ Bureau of Child Welfare.


--- PAGE 519 ---
64
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
- Case in point - 
The Matter of Clitoral Circumcision...
•
As with any ancient therapeutic practice that has spanned the vast 
distances of a hundred centuries, until its original purpose and 
intended use faded from the collective cultural memory of its people, 
and what was once a highly scientific procedure degenerates into 
grossly exaggerated, ever more severe forms of ritual expression—so 
too can the ancient procedure of circumcision be said to have 
severely degenerated through the corrosive temperaments of time; 
exaggerating into what has become ever more heinous forms of 
expression never intended by the fore-mothers and fore-fathers who 
originated its practice.
But what puzzles me most about all of the self-righteous 
indignation expressed against it by feminized Hollywood new-agers, 
feminist activists, anthropologists and ethno-biologists (even 
organizations I greatly respect like Amnesty International) is, that 
none of them has ever given a clear and concise scientific or historic 
reason why diverse remnants of ancient peoples still living around 
the world today, have insisted on continuing to practice such a 
traumatic, life changing ritual in the first place!
All they come up with is the typical neo-fem propaganda about 
male oppression for control and pleasure, or that it is somehow 
deeply connected to an ancient tribal 'patriarchal' practice that no one 
(not even those who practice it) can say why, when or where it began.
So what has caused melanated peoples (those who still basically 
remain unaffected by the corruptive influences of western 
civilization) to continue this blood ritual for over 10,000 years?
A hard habit to break?
As an avid researcher and student of occult anatomy and 
metaphysics, I have the luxury of not being constrained by the 
limited, often restrictive investigative parameters of western scientific 
protocol. A knowledge of meta-chronology and the arcane sciences of 
the ancient masters who taught "The Path of the Hidden Light", has


--- PAGE 520 ---
65
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
helped me to realize after 35 years that the present anatomical 
structures possessed by humanity (both internally and externally), 
are not of the same archetypal anatomical designs and constitution 
once possessed by our far-ancient 'Edenic' mothers and fathers.
In the prologue I briefly mentioned that due to cataclysmic Earth 
changes and ancient atomic warfare (which over time devastated our 
planetary home), eons of atmospheric and biospheric adjustments 
were suffered by the environment, causing the original human 
genotype to be drastically altered at the cellular-molecular-atomic 
levels. This caused severe mutations to their internal and external 
anatomies.
As a result, much of what appears to be "natural" in design and 
function to us (their progeny), are actually the end-results of ages of 
compelled genetic mutations for our adaptation to hostile climates 
and conditions, whereby our damaged and fragmented DNA finally 
settled us into oscillating states of 'pathogenic normalcy.'
And herein lies what may be a tentative clue as to why these 
ancient peoples still feel deeply compelled to continue this practice, 
even when its original purpose has long since been forgotten, and the 
once precise techniques used to carry it out efficiently has 
degenerated into the mutilative rituals conducted in many countries 
around the world today.
Did it ever occur to anyone that maybe, just maybe -  the prepuce 
and the clitoris are fairly nezv additions to the human bio-organism; 
"new" being an average solar return of maybe 175,000 to 250,000 
years? That these "additions" were once considered degenerative 
aberrations and mutations to our remote ancestors' traumatized 
Edenic anatomies; that in their desperation to maintain normalcy, 
they instituted this radical procedure as a frantic, albeit cosmetic way 
of regaining and maintaining temporary homeostasis?
More on this later.
The original ritual, as carried out by those initiated in this ancient 
technique, is presently defined (from a Euro-centric perspective) as


--- PAGE 521 ---
66
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
type-2 clitoridectomy, or excision. Excision is where just the clitoris is 
supposed to be removed along with part of the prepuse. The partial 
or total removal of the labia minora is a latter-day addition to the 
ritual, and was not a part of the original process of our far ancient 
ancestors.
Other processes not connected to the original ritual are technically 
called "type-1 clitoridectomy" and "type-3 infibulation."
Type-1 clitoridectomy entails the removal or splitting of the 
clitoral hood, sometimes called a "hood-ectomy", and can also 
involve the removal of the entire clitoris. In Islamic culture it is called 
Sunna, or traditional circumcision, a term devised in 1946 by the 
Sudanese government to help promote this 'milder' form of the 
process.
Type-3 clitoridectomy (infibulation) is the most severe and 
mutilative form of the ritual. Insultingly named pharaonic circumcision 
because it is "thought" that the ancient Egyptians practiced this form, 
infibulation involves the removal of virtually all of the labia minora 
and the inside of the labia majora leaving the entire area open. 
During the healing process the girl's legs are tied together for a 
period of 2-6 weeks. Nothing remains of the original genitalia except 
for a wall of flesh open from the pubis down to the anus.
This process is carried out by the mother-elder on girls between 
the ages of 3 and 6, and is the version mainly practiced in countries 
conquered by, and/or still under the control of, their Arab 
conquerors.
Feminists call any version of this ancient ritual "barbaric", even 
assigning a catch phrase to demonize it —  Female Genital Mutilation  
(FGM). With this elitist idiom as their crusading banner, these neo­
missionaries now campaign vigorously to educate and convince the 
"backward" and "ignorant" melanted women of the "third world" 
that this is, and always has been, a savage (and more importantly) 
unnecessary ancient custom of their ancestral mothers.
So after all is said and done, according to modem liberated women
like the authors of Body and Soul, our ancestral mothers (women they


--- PAGE 522 ---
67
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
claimed to revere for their wisdom,  strength and integrity) were after 
all only brainless man-shackled idiots, with virtually no personal 
intelligence or instinctive sense of well-being for their own bodies; 
except for what their oppressive men forced them to do when it came 
to this ancient ritual.
In other words, when it came to female circumcision, our ancestral 
mothers —the mothers of one of the greatest civilizations that ever 
decorated this planet, were in reality Earth's proto-masochists who 
were forced into clitoral hell by their men —Earth's proto-sadists.
Of course, the need to research, discover and overstand the true 
biological, cultural, metaphysical and meta-historic reasons why our 
ancestral mothers performed this ritual (beside the ones given by 
such authors as Sidney Schwartz in his book Crossovers: The Origins of  
Homosexuality Revealed),  in virtually all of the ancient high 
civilizations of the melanated world (not just in Africa) for over 10,000 
years—never gave these self-absorbed cultural nihilists a reason to 
pause, reflect and investigate. If they did, they would have found that 
over 80% of African women in such countries as Egypt (Khem), 
Yemen, Ethiopia (Kush), the Sudan, Somalia, Jordan, Mali, Iran, 
Syria, Turkey, Senegal, Saudia Arabia, Tanzania, Indonesia —  
virtually the entire central, northeast and mid-southeastern sections 
of the continent of Africa (see figure 4) —  even parts of southern India 
and South America —still routinely practice the more common, less 
severe forms of female circumcision—and no one gives a second thought  
about it except feminized Europeans!
Again, has it ever dawned on them to contemplate why this ritual 
has remained a staple practice for Earth's most ancient peoples for 
over 10,000 years?  More importantly, feminists never speak openly 
of the fact that tribal grandmothers who still hold true to their ancient 
customs today—women who head female secret societies as old and 
as large as their men, have told these western-educated culture-bigots 
(both black and white) to mind their own damn business,  go back to 
Europe and America, and leave them alone!
Item: The most advanced ancient civilization known to the planet (ancient
Kemet /Egypt), routinely practiced circumcision. Ever wondered why?


--- PAGE 523 ---
68
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
But wait! Here's a little something for feminists to ponder...
•
Wasn't Africa a "MATRIARCHY?!" That's what we're told. If this was the 
case, WOMEN ruled! They held the say-so! T h e n ...iv h y  did female  
circumcision continue ...?
Figure 4.
Ancient petroglyph of male circumcision procedure (c. 4500 B.C.) in Kemet, and a  
map of Africa estimating the various areas (darkened) still practicing the 10,000  
year old ritual of female circumcision.
Maybe in their racist egotistical rush to judgment about the 
ancient customs of indigenous people in general, the feminist 
inquisition (like their Christian counterparts in early Europe, and 
their racist counterparts in the fields of Egyptology, anthropology 
and psychology today) has failed to recognize the lost ancient 
scientific purpose underlying this particular act; especially where it 
concerns the women. Instead, they've choosen to vilify and condemn 
the entire ritual outright, based on the brutal acts of latter-day Arab 
conquerors who perverted the process and original intent of the 
procedure, to control their as yet enslaved black populations.
In fact, it's already been established by so-called ethno-biologists 
that the practice of circumcision on males in ancient cultures, had 
distinctly hygienic benefits associated with it. And this fact


--- PAGE 524 ---
69
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
continues to re-affirm itself in the medical "discoveries" of modem 
science.
Example: A research report published by the Catalan Institute of 
Oncology in Barcelona Spain, revealed that studies conducted on 
more than 1,900 couples from five different countries found that 
among couples where the man was uncircumcised, and had at least 
3-6 partners, the risks of his partners getting cervical cancer were 
virtually doubled compared with partners of circumcised men with 
multiple partners.
The report stated that uncircumcised men were 5x more 
susceptible to proliferating an organism known as the human 
papilloma-virus (HPV), which they pass on to their partners during 
intercourse. The organism is said to cause genital warts in both men 
and women, and is alleged to be a direct link to cervical cancer. It is 
also a precursor to certain cancers of the penis as well.
The World Health Organization claims that over 500,000 women 
contract HPV-related cervical cancer each year. In fact today (in 2008) 
this form of cancer has become so popular that it has spawned its 
own 'anti-papilloma' vaccine line.
•
...At this point, I would like to shift the attention of the seeker 
away from the main topic for just a moment, to embellish upon the 
reasons for the high media attention that the pharmaceuticals are 
giving to the subject of HPV and cervical cancer...
9
In the present climate of neo-feminism and unbridled sexual 
freedom, the so-called "pre-disposition" of women of child-bearing 
ages to contract cervical cancer by way of the 'sexually transmitted' 
human papilloma virus, became such a high-panic item of concern 
promoted by the pharma-corporations during the years 2000 through 
2006 (especially with its 1996 re-classification into the H.I.V-A.I.D.S. 
symptom-complex), that as of December 2006/January 2007, a 
cervical cancer vaccine miraculously (and conveniently) appeared on 
the media stage under the product name Guardasil.


--- PAGE 525 ---
70
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Guardasil is a fast-tracked FDA-approved vaccine that is 
manufactured by the mega-pharmaceutical corporations Sanofi- 
Aventis, Merck, Sharp and Dohme and Glaxo-Smith-Kline. It is the 
first genetically altered live cancer vaccine, and is known to cause 
vasculitis, kidney damage, intestinal fissures and genital lesions.
The Pensacola News Journal  dated June 29th 2006, ran an article by 
author "B.B.R." revealing that an organization named the National 
Vaccine Information Center (NVIC), called for the Center for Disease 
Control's (CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP) to say no to the vaccine's distribution and use. The reason 
they gave is that Merck's clinical trials did not prove their vaccine 
was safe for little girls.
The Vaccine Advisory Panel recommended that a 3-dose series be 
given to girls starting at ages 11 or 12. Females 13 to 26 are also 
recommended to get the series, which could also be given to girls as 
young as 9 with parental consent.
And get this; the vaccine will be mandatory in certain states!
The spin-doctors for the pharmaceuticals have been hard at work 
promoting their noxious filth overseas to the so-called third world. In 
Singapore, the first naive young woman in her country to subject 
herself to the poisoned needle, was a 20 year-old named Nicole Van 
Cuylenburg, who said proudly of her much-publicized decision;
"....I choose to be vaccinated because I think it’s not 
everyday that help is so readily available to you 
for such a preventable cancer, so I think if help 
is available you should step forward and be pro­
active about taking care of your health..."
Nicole goes on to say in the medical press report that she was 
happy to pay the full amount of between 600 to 900 dollars for the  
vaccination!
But what does a woman-child just two years into adulthood know 
about the nefarious inner workings of vaccine politics and world 
population control? In less than a year, I predict a gynecological 
backlash from this Guardasil crap that will rival and surpass the near 
epidemic plagues of autism and Alzheimer's occurring today. Why?


--- PAGE 526 ---
71
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Well historically, think back on that drug experimenting, mind 
controlling, inquisitional abomination of medical church practice 
called psychiatry. Think DPT/MMR shots; the dreaded Diphtheria 
Pertussis Tetanus and Measles Mumps Rubella vaccines, both of 
which contained the neuro-toxic adjuvant Thiomersal. Now think 
aluminum adjuvants in the forms of hydroxide, phosphates and 
fluoride —  all in your water supply and household products.
Thiomersal, formally known as Thimerosal, is an organo-mercury 
based preservative created and developed by Dr. Morris Kharasch, a 
chemist then in the employ of the pharmaceutical syndicate Eli Lilly 
and Company, who registered it under the name merthiolate in 1929.
It was first used in vaccines in 1931, and since then has also been 
added to blood plasma as well as snake and spider anti-venom as a 
bacteriocide.
Thimerosal is approximately 49.6% mercury by weight, and is so 
toxic that it has a bio-hazard listing of "J+" and an environmental 
bio-hazard symbol listing of "N."
In addition to it directly causing what is technically defined as 
Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD), this deadly compound is known 
to induce...
-DNA strand breakage 
-Membrane damage 
-Caspse-3 activation 
-Cellular damage, and Death...
...and all of this after only 3 hours of exposure to the cells. The FDA 
liscenses 30 vaccines, each of which contained this neurotoxin. Fifty 
percent of these vaccines' contents consisted of the ethylmercury 
thimerosal, and it wasn't until 2001 that it was removed from baby 
vaccines. However, it is still used or appears in other intravenous 
medical products, including certain vaccines.
With the multiple-vaccine protocol recommended for children by 
the CDC (12 to 18 in all), just imagine the amounts of brain- 
damaging, consciousness-crippling filth our precious children are 
being shot up with on a daily basis.


--- PAGE 527 ---
72
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Other neurological diseases associated with mercury-laced 
vaccines are Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDDs) and 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Thimerosal may also be found in common consumer products like 
mascara, made by such brand name companies as Maybelline, Estee 
Lauder, MAC, Prescriptives, Max Factor and Cover Girl.
Now; a word on the neuro-toxic adjuvants Aluminum Hydroxide, 
Aluminum Phosphate and Fluoride. Aluminum is highly toxic to the 
system and has been proven to cause...
-Alzheimer's 
-Dementia 
-Anemia 
-Renal Failure 
-Bone and Teeth disorders 
-Pulminary Complications 
-Lymphatic Tissue Damage 
-Contaminates Mother's Milk 
-Impairs Parathyroid Hormone Release 
Among these serious complications, aluminum adjuvants also 
dysfunction the parathyroid glands to such an extent, that they allow 
aluminum to concentrate in high levels within surrounding tissues. 
These concentrations in turn predispose the body to allow for a 
greater uptake of aluminum and lead through the blood/brain barrier. 
It has even been known to induce coma in children as a fluoride by­
product in toothpaste, prompting the FDA to demand a warning 
label from manufacturers of tooth pastes containing fluoride. Other 
consumer products containing aluminum adjuvants are canned 
goods, antacids, baby powder, bleached flour, shampoo, tartar sauce, 
table salt, fruit juice in canned containers, buffered aspirin, anti­
diarrhea products, cooking utensils and foil wraps, tobacco smoke, 
pancake mix and eye drops.
And with all of the above information readily available to public 
officials, Sanofi-Aventis, Merck, Glaxo-Smith-Kline and all of the 
other heartless dollar-hungry vermin of the pharmaceutical cartel, 
together with their cronies at the FDA (the "Fool and Drug 'urn


--- PAGE 528 ---
73
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Administration") still saw fit to create and license the distribution of 
this noxious chemical brew to vulnerable and unsuspecting young 
women and children world-wide.
Of this criminal travesty, NVIC president Barbara Loe Fisher said 
ominously...
"...Merck's pre and post-licensure marketing strategy 
has positioned mass use of their vaccine by pre- 
teens as a morality play in order to avoid talking 
about the flawed science used to get it licensed..."
"Flawed science?" What a pathetically worded under-statement!
The reality is that the FDA, through its dubious "testing and 
approval processes", allowed Merck and the other 'harm-aceuticals' 
to get away with using a "potentially reactive" aluminum-containing 
placebo as a control on most of the trial participants, rather than a 
non-reactive saline solution placebo. The reason they did this is 
because a toxic "potentially reactive" placebo can artificially increase 
the appearance of safety in an experimental drug or vaccine during its 
clinical trial.
Animal and human studies have confirmed that aluminum 
adjuvants zvill cause significant brain-cell damage and destruction. 
They cause encephalitis, that is brain swelling and inflammation, as 
well as inflammation at the injection sites leading to chronic joint 
and muscle pains, fever and fatigue.
My sisters—Guardasil contains 225mcgs of aluminum!
Ninety-five percent of all the clinical trial participants for 
Guardasil reported the following adverse (poisonous) events within 
15 days of vaccination;
Headaches Gastroenteritis Bronchiospasms
Nausea Appendicitis Myalgia
Dizziness Asthma
Vomiting Arthritis
Diarrhea Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
But perhaps the most insidious component in this malefic 
equation, is the fact that Merck never made it public knowledge who


--- PAGE 529 ---
74
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
or how many of the test subjects were 9 to 15 year old girls, in order 
to reveal how they came to the conclusion that 9 to 15 year old girls 
could safely take this filth. According to Merck's product 
manufacturer's insert for Guardasil, there was 1 case of juvenile 
arthritis, 2 cases of rheumatoid arthritis, and 5 cases of reactive 
arthritis out of 11, 813 in one test study; and 1 case of lupus and 2 
cases of arthritis out of 9,701 in another —all of whom received the 
aluminum-laced placebo shots.
Need I remind the sister-seeker that the aluminum adjuvant in this 
Guardasil vaccine is from the same aluminum adjuvant catalogue of 
poisons that cause or pre-dispose the body to the above symptoms?
Just listen carefully to the list of dangerous side effects given by 
the announcer when they play the T.V. commercials for this vaccine. 
At the same time she's talking, see the happy-go-lucky, frolicking 
young women going about their matter-of-fact daily lives; clue-less 
innocents being heartlessly exploited as product-prostitutes of the 
pharmaceutical pimps.
It's positively Orwellian.
Back to the issue of HPV and circumcised men...
?
The doctors claimed that they weren't quite sure why circumcised 
men were far less susceptible to this type of infection, but they 
"suspected" that the surface on the inside of the foreskin is more 
vulnerable to HPV than other penile skin. Of course as a hygienic 
scientist, much of the above arguments concerning what medical 
science defines as the "causes" for reproductive disease (viruses and 
bacteria) do not align with what we know to be the true causes of ill- 
health; that being —  adverse thinking, poor dietary habits, 
constipation, toxemia and enervation.
Now. Given the facts related above, isn't it remotely possible that 
our far-ancient ancestors also knew this? Given the fact that 
polygamy and polyandry were fundamental systems of family 
structure practiced by ancient melanated high cultures, is it not 
logical to conclude that they also knew of the hygienic benefits


--- PAGE 530 ---
75
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
associated with circumcision?
It also occurred to me that since the high priestesses of Amazon 
feminism believe that our society must "...revert (back) to its poly-  
tnorphously perverse sexuality.. ." (Allison Jagger), isn't it reasonable to 
presume that feminists would actually want to promote the virtues of 
this ancient ritual to the general public, simply as an added means of 
protection for their sisters?
"Our True Histories Exist, as the Unsolved Mysteries of Myth" 
(Clitoral Circumcision Continued)
•
To simply condemn female circumcision as being a legacy of 
'historic male oppression", without giving it at least the same basic 
scrutiny that western "science" has given to male circumcision, is 
suspiciously irrational.
Once again. Isn't it feasible to speculate that the clitoris was once 
considered a tragic end-product of mutated genetics by our ancestors 
(like the male prepuce), which compelled our ancient fore-mothers to 
begin this blood ritual in the first place?
Why were you not considered 'a woman', and conversely, not 
considered 'a man' by our near-ancient ancestors, until the clitoris 
and prepuce were removed? Were these terribly painful 
qualifications for achieving manhood and womanhood over the last 
10,000 years of Earth history, remnant-rituals that descended from a 
once sophisticated therapeutic surgical technique done by far-ancient 
high civilizations (circa 75 to 125 thousand years ago), in their 
desperate attempts to preserve an archetypal human bio-template no 
longer seen in our degenerated species today?
This may all sound far-fetched or outlandish to the un-initiated 
ear, but we need to broaden the here-to-fore limited, prejudicial scope 
of Euro-centric 'scientific' inquiry. As melanated peoples robbed of 
our legacies, our identities, our language, our lands, our music and 
our very souls, we must continue the search for our lost "selves" 
within the stolen treasures of ancient stories written by our ancestry —  
for our true histories exist, within the unsolved mysteries of myth!


--- PAGE 531 ---
76
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
By re-interpreting ancient mythological data as potentially 
'undiscovered history', humanity may ultimately arrive at a hidden 
cache of valuable clues that accurately explain the psychological 
motivations behind seemingly 'macabre' ancient rituals still being 
vigorously practiced by melanated peoples around the world today.
In the case of circumcision (both male and female), ten thousand 
years of consistent dedicated practice  should make it blatantly obvious, 
that this dreadfully painful ordeal must have had a far greater 
significance in meaning to our ancient ancestors, than just a simplistic 
symbolism of puberty rites, courage or gender domination.
All too often in the past we have seen how European scholars, i.e., 
archaeologists, ethno-biologists, historians and new agers (et al), 
routinely made the mistake of pre-judging or dismissing the ways of 
our ancestors (with code-words like "developing" and "primitive"), 
only to have to eat their own words when the highly advanced 
intelligence behind such actions, eventually dawned within the 
limited scopes of their racist, myopic reasoning. And this basic mind­
set has not changed with the advent of the racist neo-feminist and her 
views on the rituals of male and female circumcision.
In fact, such prejudices even prevail in my own adopted field of 
the Hygienic Sciences, where white hygienists condemn circumcision 
as a throw-back to "primitive men's savagery"; to the days when we 
were "...naked and running around the Serengeti Plains."
To our "primitive" ancestors (they claim), it was a rites-of-passage 
ritual that bestowed great respect on the man who endured it; that 
the sight of a circumcised penis (especially during war skirmishes 
with rival tribes) was meant to show strength and intimidation to an 
enemy, because a circumcised penis looked "scary" when erect—and 
other such Euro-centric, psycho-babbling clap-trap.
If "primitive savages" were the only ones practicing this ritual, 
how do these neo-racist blockheads explain the fact that the most 
spiritually and intellectually advanced civilization that once walked 
God's green Earth (Kemet/Egypt) encouraged its practice?


--- PAGE 532 ---
77
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
The answer is evident. White hygienists condemn circumcision 
because by and large they are feminists. And most if not all have never 
studied occult anatomy, or the meta-historic circumstances that may 
have led to the genetic crippling and mutation of the anatomies of 
ancient humanity.
At present, all humanity carries the structural evidence of that 
ancient mutation process manifested (in part) as the prepuce and the 
clitoris.
Another thing. Europeans observe the practices and study the 
mythos of so-called "primitive peoples" who were psycho-culturally 
damaged and adulterated by traumatic adaptations to eons of 
environmental cataclysms, ancient atomic wars (and just recently, 
"western civilization"), and believe that these pathetic remnants of 
our once highest most advanced humanity always behaved like this.
Incredible but typical; and yet, just another testament to the 
European's ego-maniacal psychologisms.
As to the rhetoric of historic male oppression over the issue of 
female circumcision, here's what a present day  culture-keeping 
(matriarchial) grandmother of Africa had to say to missionary 
feminists, both on CBS's 60 Minutes  and BBC's Evening News 
report...
"... women didn' t circumcise men —  and our men didn' t circumcise the 
women...!!
Translation: On the ancient tradition of female circumcision—no 
man has ever forced us to be who we are, or to do what we do as 
women... ever —in 10,000 years!
Item: This therapeutic ritual, as traditionally practiced for thousands of years by 
ancient melanated peoples, is in no way similar or representative of the 
contemporary Arab and Coptic-supported slave customs of male genital mutilation 
(the Eunuch), or the practice of infibulation or sewing shut of the vaginal opening 
of female slaves still practiced over the last few centuries after Arab conquest. Such 
acts are exactly what they appear to be ... heinous atrocities!  (See movie entitled 
Trade, staring Kevin Kline)


--- PAGE 533 ---
78
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 0
In truth, I believe this theater of righteous indignation staged by 
Hollywood's 'crusader-clique' around the issue of FGM is grossly 
hypocritical at best, and may even have a self-serving lesbian agenda 
at its core; one that is also connected to the breast cancer epidemic.
Allow me to explain.
Contrary to what lesbian feminists otherwise promote about 
female sexuality, the clitoris is in fact the central organ of focus for 
maximum pleasure and orgasm in female-on-female  erotica, with the 
"G"-spot running a close second. It would therefore stand to reason 
that any ancient tradition that practices the removal of this 
pseudo-masculine appendage, threatens to render barren and 
destitute potentially virgin fields of nubile "sapphic conquests" in 
Africa.
In other words, women without clitorises don't make good lesbians!
The question then becomes—who's interests are really being 
served by attacking this 10,000-year-old practice; especially when 
it's common knowledge that lesbian recruitment and sexual 
conversion are the underlying agendas propagated by these hymen- 
hunters now stalking the black female "game" of Africa?
Hard to believe beloved? Then marvel at the words of feminist 
activist Kathy McDevitt, as she spoke them before the City Council 
in Davis City, Califonia in 1980...
"...We finally realize that recruitment is the only answer; lesbian 
goals must be to recruit more lesbians...”
Still skeptical? Then what about the "Youth Pride Day" 
sponsored by Whitman-Walker Clinic Incorporated that took place 
at Dupont Circle, Washington D.C. on April 18th, 1997? A group 
calling themselves the Lesbian Avengers  handed out brochures to 
teenage girls (ages 13 to 19) entitled "Oral Sex with Women." The 
material included such subject matter as techniques on 'rimming" 
(inserting tongue into anus) with lesbians, and promoted the use of 
sexual enhancement drugs for increased sexual pleasure in women.
To 13 year-olds?!


--- PAGE 534 ---
79
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Or how about Beth Elliot's work Bi-sexuality; The best thing that  
ever happened to Lesbian Feminism,  where she states quite gleefully...
"...Any woman can be a lesbian says the song. Feminism 
is the theory, lesbianism is the practice. And to many 
women, the 'woman's community' is a lesbian community..."
And if lesbian recruitment and conversion are not the 
psychological subtexts lurking within the tenets of feminist 
philosophy, of what purpose is it in the "health curricula" of 
children's schooling? Ms. Jeane Brune, Headmistress for the Ronald 
Park County School for Girls said at their Fall conference, 
November 9th, 1998...
"...On health issues, we want a student to talk to a lesbian.
Lesbian issues are to be integrated into our morals class...''
And the above examples are just insignificant scratches on the 
humongous surface of this topic. I'm sure the seeker can turn up a 
lot more related data if she or he chooses to pursue it.
Like the early Christian crusaders before them, who demonized 
and de-humanized melanated civilizations as godless heathens and 
less-than-human savages (to legitimize the theft and butchery of the 
people, their lands and cultures), the feminist inquisition has used 
their "moral God-fearing campaign" against FGM to begin 
establishing the psychological, cultural and legal framework of a 
"sapphic gynecocracy" on the virgin soils of mother Africa.
And here's something else to think about, beloved seekers!
You want hypocrisy? I'll give you hypocrisy!
Why are these same Amazonian fascists not crusading as 
vociferously against predominantly upper and middle class 
Caucasian women who (with increasing frequency and number) are 
hacking off their own healthy breasts  merely on the dubious 
assumption that they might get breast cancer sooner or later? What 
pray-tell was the "highly civilized" cultural reasoning for allowing 
this 21st century blood-letting practice to begin in the first place?


--- PAGE 535 ---
80
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Was it due to their desperate search for a solution  that they turned 
to their "medical medicine man", who told them that it was their best 
"last resort" —  like (maybe) the ancients who initiated those "barbaric" j 
proceedures now vilified as the practice of circumcision?
And what would highly civilized members of such an "advanced" 
culture as ours call this medically sanctioned form of elective 
butchery? Why, they'd call it Prophylactic Mastectomy, (la - dee  - da)
Where are your protest marches and outcries of righteous 
indignation against this "barbaric act", madam feminist? It's female 
mutilation—plain and simple! Only this 'slice and dice' ritual is 
sanctioned by the legitimatizing idioms of a white medical 
priesthood! And since it's a "medical" ritual mutilation done mainly 
for the "benefit" of 'civilized' white women ...well of course— that's 
different!
And this 'elective butchery' quietly continues to be promoted by 
doctors as a viable option, despite the findings of a 20-year study 
conducted by American and Italian scientists proving that there is 
absolutely no difference in the survival rate between women who 
had mastectomies (prophylactic or otherwise), and those who had 
smaller operations (lumpectomies) to remove tumors and cancers.
So if it's not too much trouble madam feminist, please give us one 
of your customary grand-standing press conferences to announce to 
the world the latent logic behind your tacit acceptance of this 
gruesome practice; what I have come to call F.M.M. —or Female 
Mammary Mutilation.  Tell us why there's no crusading fervor and 
righteous indignation against this bloody little affair?
Perhaps the reason lies in an all-too revealing breast cancer 
statistic. Refer back to part one beloved seeker, in the section entitled 
The Homosexual Factor,  where I make reference to a National Cancer 
Institute report that stated "... lesbian women are three times more  
susceptible to getting breast cancer than heterosexual women."
Conclusion: These hypocrites are not as rabidly judgmental, 
indignant or condescending about prophylactic mastectomies (FMM) 
because they don't want to discount, discredit, condemn or eliminate


--- PAGE 536 ---
81
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
any viable access to options that focus specifically on their personal 
pathogenic needs; no matter how "primitive", "barbaric" or amoral 
this "therapeutic" practice truly is.
In other words, why should lesbian feminists condemn something 
that they themselves (in desperation) may one day have to do?
Now think about this beloved sister-seeker, while you reconsider 
what may have been the compelling motives behind this ancient 
practice; what our far-ancient ancestral mothers must have been 
feeling as their pristine archetypal body-temples began to mutate into 
disease-states never-before experienced by them; the overwhelming 
anguish and psycho-spiritual traumas they must have suffered, and 
the desperate measures undertaken to regain their precious 
anatomical homeostasis once again.
And think about that madam feminist, before you yet again pre­
judge the organic wisdom of our beloved ancestors; or while you're 
taking time out to set an appointment for your "highly civilized" 
"medically correct" and "morally pristine" Prophylactic Mastectomy 
procedure.
Why the prepuce and the clitoris may have became prominent 
and distinct parts of humanity's present anatomic/genetic infra­
structures, is a fascinating subject elaborated on in book 5 of my 
Regenesis Chronicles, entitled The Epicene Enigma.
(d) Even though the work itself (Body and Sold)  is dedicated to women, to 
insinuate that only a strong mother  makes a strong daughter (pg. 423) without 
including the fact that a strong father  together with a loving mother is just as 
essential (perhaps even more so) —is pure wickedness.
Beloved, most women today have been sorely deprived of the true 
essence and quality of a father's love. This has been the basis for 
much of their insecurities and distrust of men, which are amplified 
by feminism to promote the dubious ideology of "women's power 
through independence."
For example, a woman's romantic attachments throughout her life 
(good or bad) are reflections of how she related to her father as a girl.


--- PAGE 537 ---
82
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART n
Researchers have found that women deprived of a father's love 
oftimes find it difficult to respond sexually in marriage, or become 
sexually active very early to compensate for that void of masculine 
approval and affection. A good book to read on the subject of 
daughters and their relationships with their fathers is entitled Women 
and their Fathers: The Sexual and Romantic Impact of the First Man in  
Your Life, by Victoria Secunda. The most interesting thing about this 
publication is that Secunda is a rank and file feminist, which is 
probably why it hit the stands without undergoing the usual 
inquisitional scrutiny of the feminist hierarchy. Imagine a book 
written by a staunch feminist, high-lighting and promoting the 
virtues and necessities of a father (a man) in a female's life.
Why it's positively Orwellian; nothing short of heresy!
In her work, Secunda interviews many women from diverse walks 
of life. Throughout all accounts she shows that women whose fathers 
were absent in their lives felt insecure and un-grounded; not sure of 
where they belonged. They were emotionally unavailable, usually 
having unsatisfying and volatile relationships. They would "test" the 
men in their lives, constantly focusing on the flaws in them, starting 
fights, expecting them to walk out at any given moment, while at the 
same time looking for excuses to walk out on the relationship 
themselves. They had higher anxiety levels, and were quicker to 
experience the debilitating symptoms of depression.
Secunda's work is prodigious in scope because it renders absurd 
the entire feminist notion that "female independence" from the 
psychological, emotional and intellectual influences of men, is the 
ultimate key to their freedom, happiness and overall peace of mind.
On page 212 Secunda describes what could only be construed as 
the underlying psychological motivations of the "converted" lesbian 
mind. Of their fatherless experiences she writes...
"... It seems that the less masculine attention they got in 
childhood, the more they'd seem to identify with and 
imitate men, keeping their feelings hidden, preferring 
casual teasing and unemotional banter to the intimacies 
of feminine soul bearing..."


--- PAGE 538 ---
83
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
In other words, when a girl is denied her father's love, she may 
grow to be more masculine in temperament and behavior. She may 
grow up to become the very thing she's been missing, because a 
loving father solidifies and affirms his little girl's feminine identity. If 
that conditional masculine love is not there, she may compensate by 
becoming masculine herself.
It ain't rocket science.
Father-daughter love nurtures the heterosexual paradigm as well. 
It confirms a young girl's sexual identity. By his love, guidance and 
gentle masculine attention, a good father helps to build his 
daughter's trust in men, preparing her to recognize and choose a man 
with the same life-affirming, positive qualities as he.
The opposite of this has been made all too pathetically apparent by 
those who promote and lead the neo-feminist movement. In an article 
entitled Feminism Deprives Women of Father's Love,  subtitled Creating 
Social Dysfunction,  Henry Makow, PhD (who, from among other 
authors this premise was researched) quotes the words of three of the 
world's most influential women of the 'new wave' gender feminist 
era.
The psychological and emotional consequences of a girl growing 
into womanhood without the guidance and security of a father's 
love, are made all-too apparent in the following;
Marilyn French
( Staunch fem-fascist; author: The War Against Women)
?
".. .My father didn't even exist as a presence in my life.. .He didn't care 
much about us..."
Gloria Steinem
(Founding member /  Icon of today's new wave - gender feminist movement;
CIA operative from 1958 to the present)
9
".. .My father was living in California; he didn't ring up but I would get 
letters from him and saw him maybe once or twice a year..."


--- PAGE 539 ---
84
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Germaine Greer
(As quoted in the book Icons, Saints and Divas: Intimate Conversations with  
Women who Changed the World, by Susan Mitchell)
?
".. .My father had decided pretty early on that life at home was pretty unbearable 
.. .it gave my mother an opportunity to tyrannize the children and enlist their aidto 
disenfranchise my father completely..
What more does one need to hear, or read?
And Lastly...
(e) In Body and Soul, the first paragraph of the section entitled "What We Must  
Do" (pg. 432) is an insult to both black men and black gynic women. This was  
precisely the type of fragmented mentality that was introduced into the Civil  
Rights movement by feminism, which eroded and eventually destroyed  
everything we collectively worked for.
The Orwellian placement of this paragraph is shrewd and 
cunning, for in the paragraph that follows it, we read "... not until 
you love and respect yourself can you have a healthy relationship 
with a man."
No doubt. A statement such as this appears to be plausible and 
irrefutable. But when read in context, we see that it is deceptive and 
fragmentary because nowhere in the work (that I found) is reference 
ever made of how a woman initially learns to love and respect herself, 
in order to have a healthy relationship with a man. Body and Soul  
emphasizes stories about the abuses of men as husbands, boyfriends, 
bosses and fathers. No where does it reinforce the obvious fact that a 
strong and loving father is a girl's first and foremost example of self- 
love and self-respect in her relationship with men.
Or maybe it is in there somewhere, and I just missed it.
The Orwellian/Tavistock (mind-control) placement of this 
particular subject is also perfect because the section "What We Must


--- PAGE 540 ---
85
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Do" (pg. 432) is immediately and ever so conveniently followed (in 
sequence) by the section "Inter-racial Relationships" (pg. 437). 
Co-incidence, my sister queen? I don't think so.
"What we must do" ....."Interracial relationships"?
And the list goes on. The rest of the book is primarily made up of 
medical and 'single-sex' solutions that further promote emotional, 
psychological, cultural and gender alienation. Books such as Body and 
Soul are purposely drafted and designed to have a disjointing 
psycho-political impact. In this case, promoting medical solutions, 
lesbian appeal and interracial relationships as the desired 
alternatives, and in most cases, the priority preferences for young 
impressionable black women.
It's a shame that because of the outright fear of gender-feminist 
reprisal and the curious non-chalance (or apathy) of today's 
upwardly mobile, black professional career woman, no one else 
(male or female) has yet seen fit to call such publications as Body and 
Soul to task.
Pity. Call it a sign of the times.
Summary...
It's obvious that the seeker needed to have read Body and Soul (or 
at least have a copy around for referencing) to more fully appreciate 
the discrepancies being pointed out. Again, I recommend that you 
borrow or purchase a copy and study it from the broader 
perspectives offered. In this way you will learn how to recognize and 
decipher other such deceptive publications for their embedded 
psycho-political content—from those you may already have, or those 
you might purchase at some point in the future.
?


--- PAGE 541 ---
86
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
A "King's" Ransom:
The Destruction of the Black Inner Society...
(Beyond Racism and Rhetoric —  to Reality)
•
Again; in light of the sensitive nature of the subjects we are about 
to discuss, and because of the prevailing climate of 'political 
correctness' currently influencing our social perceptions, I have felt it 
necessary to consistently pre-qualify some of the more poignant 
topics under investigation, with the empirical, metaphysical and 
meta-historic perspectives salted throughout this thesis. Thus, for the 
sake of pre-qualification, I submit that the content of the following 
10 sections may be construed as racist and/or conspiratorial. They 
are not! Those who choose to qualify these facts on grounds of 
conspiracy or 'reverse-racism', are either completely ignorant of the 
true history of this nation, or prefer not to be reminded of the parts 
their ancestors played in bringing about the present conditions 
affecting all autochthones peoples around the world today.
On pre-qualifying the charge of reverse-racism: let it be known to 
those who would file this charge that as a so-called "man of color" in 
this society, I could not technically be classified a racist simply 
because I possess neither the resources nor the power to overtly or 
covertly affect the socio-political, economic and financial status, 
health and psychological well-being of white people at a local level or 
on a global scale. In other words, to be a racist, I must possess the 
power to substantially affect the lives of an entire stratum of people. 
Thus I am not a racist, but more like an unwilling "reactist" to racism.
What ensues is not a pronouncement of judgment upon anyone 
either, although at times it may appear to be. It is simply a 
re-organization of existing facts defined and interpreted from a 
uniquely metaphysical and meta-historic perspective. As a species in 
crisis, we cannot deny our past afflictions with the disease of racism, 
if we hope to overstand the present day causes of women's diseases 
from a wholistic perspective.
The following narrative is based on historical and contemporary 
empirical evidence documented about Europeans —  by Europeans.


--- PAGE 542 ---
87
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
In the early to mid-60s during what was considered the heights of 
the so-called Civil Rights movement, peoples of color began to 
successfully expose the sordid truth behind Amerikkka's brutally 
fascist social policies towards blacks and other so-called minorities. 
This they did before the eyes of an astonished world —on national 
television. It was an extremely embarrassing time for the middle and 
upper class white male power structure of this country, who for so 
long had been spouting holier-than-thou platitudes about the 
'freedom, justice, equality and opportunity' for all in America.
Needless to say, graphic pictures of apartheid here in the United 
States did not make for flattering copy over the six o'clock local and 
international news.
But even more disconcerting (and at times, downright distressful 
to the white upper and middle classes), was the fact that world wide, 
the Civil Rights movement was being consciously perceived as a 
black male leadership movement; a pro-active statement of hope for a 
better world declared and demanded by strong, righteous black men 
on behalf of all persecuted peoples everywhere —  male, female, black, 
brown, red, yellow and white. It portrayed images of intelligent, 
sophisticated and well-organized spiritual black men, successfully 
challenging a despotic all-white male ruling class, for the purpose of 
re-establishing a black infra-structural power base in the Americas.
This brought to the black man recognition, respect, dignity and the 
promise of future economic power, stability, credibility and cultural 
acceptance; that is—from an international standpoint!73
In other words, America's "black evolutionan/ movement" of the 
60s, was perceived by the world as a genuine "people's movement."
But this people's movement also brought them recognition from a 
fledgling gender feminist faction bent on socio-political conquest, 
who had earlier infiltrated the aging suffragette movement with 
secret help and instructions from the Vatican. Together with financial
73 The way it did for the body of good brothers who participated in the Million Man March.
- Author


--- PAGE 543 ---
88
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
help from assorted corporate factions, and coordinated by the CIA 
and FBI, new-wave gender feminism was spawned from the ashes of 
the suffragette movement, and utilized as a covert psy-op 
organization to strategically enjoin its political and philosophical 
objectives to the Civil Rights struggle, and by so doing, undermine 
and co-opt its intended results —  black collective empowerment.
But unknown to the American Republic at the time, both feminism 
and the Civil Rights movement constituted a psycho-political Trojan 
horse being deployed against both blacks and whites in this society.
To comprehend how new-wave feminism was used as a pivotal 
stratagem in defusing the black male's power quest and "power- 
image" during and after the Civil Rights movement, it is essential 
that we overstand the behavioral psyche of the average Caucasian- 
American male at that time; how it was manipulated, and how his 
complete ignorance of the part he unwittingly played in his own 
downfall, helped the overall plans of the Jesuit-led parasitic elite for 
psycho-political conquest of the United States.
Overstand that no matter what we believed "Civil Rights" 
represented for us as diasporic Africans, to the average conservative 
white Anglo-Saxon patriot, this movement always represented a 
socialist empowerment agenda undertaken with the cooperative 
resources of Vatican-neo-con/Communist-Zionist factions, utilizing 
the ignorance and loyalty of the great, great grandchildren of slaves.
With the addition of feminism, the Civil Rights movement was 
'upgraded' into a true psycho-political trojan horse, in that black 
people were once again unwittingly used as pawns in a global 
political chess game staged to ultimately undermine all republican 
forms of government world wide; all for the purpose of erecting the 
future superstructures of a one world fascist state.
Also, refer back to the section entitled "Players in the Game" for a 
full overstanding of the feminist stratagem used by the parasitic elite 
to destroy the gender-based integrity of family in American society. 
This will give the seeker an accurate insight as to how The Civil 
Rights movement (infused with feminism) was also used to


--- PAGE 544 ---
89
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
undermine and destroy any chances for the creation of an 
autonomous and enduring black power base and society here in 
America.
As frustrating and disheartening as it will be for most of us as 
diasporic Africans to realize and accept, especially about a time and 
event considered most sacred in our North American history, in 
reality, the Civil Rights movement (and its leadership) was a "5th 
Column" created together with new-wave feminism by the parasitic 
elite to consolidate black collective participation in the psycho­
political overthrow of a republican system of government. Both 
movements predisposed and conditioned the American psyche 
(black and white) for its eventual acceptance of, and participation in, a 
fascist totalitarian one-world government.
In fact presently, it's post Civil Rights circa 2008 as I write these 
words. If the above scenario is too difficult to believe (too 
'conspiratorial') then I ask the seeker to immediately look around at 
the current socio-political landscape, and honestly tell yourself that 
my words are not accurately describing the hour in real-time!
The Psycho-Politics of Number and Race:
Mammy and the Eugenicist...
•
Yet another pertinent historic reality we forget to include when 
studying the ongoing conflicts between 'black and white'/'man and 
woman' in today's society, is that the 'converted' black female has 
always been considered a more reliable asset to white corporate 
America's social infrastructure, than the black male and (to some 
extent), the white female.
First; because the pre-planned socio-political dysfunctionality of 
the black male forced her to become dependent upon the white male, 
the black woman has been rendered less threatening, and thus a 
more faithful and stable political, economic and domestic fixture; 
second, historically, she's always been of comfort to him and his 
family as a healer in times of sickness; third...she was entertainer, 
psychologist and a breeder commodity for him when his rape psyche


--- PAGE 545 ---
90
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 0
flared up; and fourth... a readily available surrogate to baby-sit wet- 
nurse and raise his young.
And although the above realities are now masked by far more 
sophisticated and subtly entrenched mechanics of racism today, this 
historic dependency-issue still continues to thrive into the 21st 
century. This time, at the economic and mitochrondrial levels.
Endocrine and reproductive research scientists (eugenicists) are 
now confessing to a previously unspoken truth about the drastic 
decline in number of 'pure Caucasian' or 'Aryan-Nordic stock' in 
Europe and America. They cite the evidence of significant genetic 
degradation in the overall physiologies of the global white 
population; more specifically, the drastic decline in the white male's 
sperm count, and the soaring statistical numbers related to white 
female infertility over the past 65 years. Add to this the modem 
trends toward smaller families and delayed motherhood aggressively 
promoted by the neo-feminist movement over the past 45 years —  
along with legalized abortion and the wide variety of birth control 
options — and the situation becomes clearer and more desperate!
So desperate in fact that this may be considered the most 
prominent reason for the current rise in recruitment numbers for 
white supremist/Aryan Nation factions here in America and around 
the world today. The leaders of these groups are acutely aware of the 
grave circumstances facing their genetic phenotype in the following 
decades; again, due in most part to the world's economic instability, 
coupled with the current trends of "race mixing", and the 
overwhelming dive in sperm count and white birth rate statistics 
world-wide.
Now. Whether these birth statistics are natural (self-created and 
self-sustained), or are being artificially manipulated by outside forces, 
is the primary argument of white supremist groups.
The above statements on white birth decline stem from a 2004 
study by Wolfgang Lutz, a professor at the Austrian Academy of 
Science in Vienna, and Brian O'Neill of the International Institute 
for Applied Systems in Laxenburg, Austria —both of whom used


--- PAGE 546 ---
91
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
data compiled by the European Demographic Observatory. These 
two researchers revealed that Europe's Aryan-Nordic population 
would decline by as much as 88 million, if present birthing trends 
continue over the next 15 to 20 years. This decline in population 
growth is technically called "negative momentum", and details of 
the report can be found in the journal Science, March 2003. 
Currently, 1.5 Caucasian babies are born to every European Union 
woman, when two births and more are necessary to maintain a 
positive (as opposed to negative) replacement rate.
But here's the stinger. Lutz and O'Neill also found that even if 
white women were to start having more babies at a younger age from 
today, the tendency toward population decline would continue for decades,  
since there are not enough white mothers to make a substantial difference!
The study also stated that "... the changing roles of women were 
a significant factor in the projected population decline", and that 
most white women were putting off having their first child "...to 
concentrate on their education or a career!" [Emphasis mine]
My friend George Silos reminded me that the birth rates of all 
nations infected by European industrialization automatically 
declined. I tend to disagree, in part because of countries like the 
Philippines for example. These melanated women are highly 
educated and very prominent in professional fields, yet their 
population numbers are skyrocketing. It's a fact that the women of 
such cultures do not subscribe to the western feminist's philosophy 
of abandoning their roles as wife and prolific mother, just to pursue a 
self-serving career. They also marry early, and place a greater 
premium on the institution of family than on the institutions of 
money.
Australia's Caucasian population counts the highest decline in the 
world, where statistics show that the elderly white population is to 
quadruple by the year 2051. By 2002, Australia counted 12 per cent 
fewer younger people ages 25 to 30. They counted 3 per cent fewer 
whites in their 20s overall, and 2 per cent fewer children under the


--- PAGE 547 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
age of 7, signaling record lows of just 1.7 white children per woman. 
Thus it has become all-too tragically clear; the psycho-politics of 
new-wave feminism and its disproportionate influence on the social 
roles of modern women through re-genderfication, have ostensibly 
contributed to a significant down-turn in the collective birthrate of 
the world's white population, which I predict would soon create a 
"circle-the-wagons-against-minorities" psychology in Europe and 
America, as the situation progressively worsens.
But what of the black population?
Well beloved, see for yourself how the psycho-political strategy is 
being implemented in both camps. While outright incarceration, 
police-related homicide, gang murder, disease, drugs, high abortion 
and infant mortality rates have kept the black population numbers in 
check, for the past 45 years little Caucasian girls have been raised and 
educated to be less family and baby-oriented, less fertility-minded 
with state-of-the-art birth control technologies, and more focused on 
being in competition with men, than in being compatible with them.
Thus, among other extenuating environmental factors named 
earlier, "women's lib" and 'the career woman' were implemented as 
psycho-political stealth weapons of population control against whites, 
becoming down-right disasters to Nordic-Aryan population growth.
With the preference by today's "modem millennium white 
female" towards careers, promiscuous bachelorette lifestyles (Sluts in 
the City'), melanated men, abortion, birth control, and of course 
homosexuality—choices made predominantly by feminists, or 
women heavily influenced by the psycho-political tactics of 
feminism—it's easy to see why the pure-blood Nordic Anglo-Saxon 
elite are desperate to try anything to halt (what appears to be) an 
excellerating trend towards their own genetic extinction.
And this "no baby —delayed family" trend of white millennium 
feminist women, has now become the adopted norm for young black 
women of child-bearing ages as well. Consequently, the black birth 
rate has also taken a significant down-turn in the last generation 
and a half of counting.


--- PAGE 548 ---
93
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Thus 'mammy' has now unwittingly joined the eugenicists of the 
parasitic elite, in forwarding their plans for genetic survival through 
global depopulation and totalitarian world order.
Item: To be a competent researcher, one must be ready and willing to investigate a 
subject from all available angles. Thus, we must pursue answers relevant to how 
racism participates in the broader spectrum of causes underlying black women's 
diseases, and its relationship to black socio-political and cultural health. And since 
we have established that "racism" (as a psycho-cultural dynamic and behaviorism) 
is an overt and unique projection of the white male's genetic-survival psyche on to 
the rest of the non-white world, it's necessary to examine what (in particular) may 
be fueling such a demonstrative exhibition of paranoia, and how that paranoia is 
being used by the upper echelon of the parasitic elite to fulfill their ultimate goals.
The Politics of Recessive-ism; 
or, The Genetics of Paranoia...
•
Before we examine the 'politics and economics' of claims by white 
supremists that the rest of the non-white and jewish worlds are out to 
"mongrelize" their pure Nordic-Aryan bloodlines, let's examine 'the 
anatomy and metaphysics' of their belief from a more or less 
empirical perspective.
Other than religion, economics and politics, what drives the 
underlying mentology of a true believer in Manifest Destiny?
The following may shed some light.
On PBS science programs such as Nova and Nature, as well as the 
National Geographic  and Science channels, it's not uncommon to find 
yet another European scientist analyzing and evaluating the 
genetically motivated psychology behind the mating and territorial 
urges of so-called primitive peoples (translation: black and brown 
people), as well as the vast assortment of mammalian wild-life —  
particularly the primates.
But ensconced within their own myopic world paradigm, 
Caucasian scientists seem to 'conveniently fail' to conduct 
comparative analyses on the psycho-genetic history, motivations and


--- PAGE 549 ---
94
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
behaviorisms behind the mating and territorial urges of their own 
"primitive human" genotype; the sons and daughters of the genus 
Neanderthal, what the artificial race classifiers refer to in eugenics as 
the "pure-bred, blue-eyed, Nordic-Aryan / son of Abel" type.
Regarding this; 1 happened to catch a PBS program one evening 
that dealt with the mating and territorial behavior of a large troupe of 
baboons in Africa. As I watched it an interesting thing was revealed 
to me about the mating rituals of the higher primates, and how this 
behavior may help explain the uniquely hostile, savage and at times 
unfathomable behavior whites have displayed toward the larger 
populations of non-white people in the world —even the animal life.
The scientists discovered that no matter how friendly or closely 
related two male baboons were while growing up together, when the 
mating season arrived, bosom-buddies transformed into seemingly 
mortal enemies. They surmised that during the mating season, the 
uniqueness of the DNA in each male baboon compelled them to fight 
for the opportunity to continue that uniqueness in the womb of the 
female.
In other words, the individual molecular/atomic intelligence or 
"consciousness" comprising each animal's signature DNA, psycho- 
genetically or instinctively compelled them to fight their friends (even 
to the death) for the opportunity to continue that individuate 
consciousness into another generation of the species.
With such invaluable information now readily accessible to 
European research scientists (especially when given their propensity 
to compare the behavior of these higher communal primates to 
humans), why is there no efficient broad-based analysis being done 
on the psycho-genetic motivations and behavior of human "whites", 
since it is scientifically established that they represent a uniquely 
recessive strain of DNA swimming around the human gene pool? 
What would be revealed by an in-depth scientific analysis of the 
consciousness of the recessive human gene, and its inherent nature and 
behavior towards other members of the same species?
Would science show that, under the universal imperatives of self- 
preservation, the atypical nature of recessive DNA might compel the


--- PAGE 550 ---
95
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
consciousness of those possessing it to 'instinctively' exhibit 
atypically hostile and aggressive behavior towards dominant strains 
of the same DNA family —just to continue to exist?!
Ergo, like the atypically hostile behavior of the young male baboon 
in his mating prime, are racism and the philosophy of Manifest 
Destiny actually psycho-genetic survival imperatives projected by the 
consciousness of a recessive strain of DNA, in order to maximize its 
opportunities to perpetuate its uniquely individuate consciousness- 
type into future generations of the species?
As incongruous as the above may seem, I believe it is something 
for the vaunted scientists and psychologists of Nature or Nova to 
consider, and something for the seeker to ponder as we segway into 
what my research has revealed to be an extremely volatile topic 
concerning paranoia and the spectre of racism; that of the alleged 
secret war being waged between the Nordic-Aryan white "race", and 
the so-called Turko-Mongol-Khazaarian-Jewish "race."
At this point, the seeker may rightly wonder what the above­
related information has in common with women's diseases; more 
specifically—black women's diseases.
Everything! As the seeker will come to see.
Remember beloved, the primary purpose of this commentary is to 
explore the "anatomy, metaphysics, politics and economics of 
women's diseases", as well as investigate how the issue of racism 
plays into the broader spectrum of underlying factors contributing to 
the manifestation and proliferation of such diseases today.
By studying the anatomy and metaphysics in order to clarify the 
politics and economics of women's diseases, we discover that racism 
(as the projected 'id' of the Nordic Caucasian's genetic survival 
imperatives) is not just the day to day physical exercise of economic 
power and political influence by whites over the darker hued peoples 
of this world. It is far more than that to the Aryan collective.
Racism is a matter of spiritual  and religious  comportment!


--- PAGE 551 ---
96
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART n
In other words, on a hostile "genetically satanic" melanin- 
dominant planet, white genetic survival imperatives have become a 
matter of God's own personal mandate for His "chosen people."
The psychological survival imperatives of the recessive gene have 
evolved to become "God's word", and the consciousness orchestrating 
and coordinating these survival imperatives, becomes God.
This concept may be somewhat difficult for people of color to 
comprehend, because those who possess the dominant specie- 
characteristics of archetypal humanity, are not genetically hard-wired 
to fear (and thus feel) the need to defend against genetic extinction. 
This instinctive fear of genetic self-annihilation is peculiar to but one 
and only one strain of our human family —the recessive ice-aged 
Nordic man. (See A Phylogenetic Phantasy by Sigmund Freud)
Let us now review how this genetically engrained fear has psycho- 
socially manifested itself through 'white-racism-as-culture', and how 
this psychosis is being manipulated along with "black-reactism-as- 
culture" to stratify the overall population into opposing camps—both 
being psycho-politically controlled by the upper echelon's social 
engineers; those controlling things from an even smaller elite inner 
circle behind the global Illuminati!
So how does this single strategy of psycho-political manipulation 
between 'black' and 'white' racial dynamics maintain the parasitic 
elite's overall control of the world's autochthones peoples?
Well; white "projected" fears of extinction (racism), become 
mirrored as black "adopted" fears of living (victimism). Psycho- 
genetic conditioning of the black gene through 465 years of captivity, 
has manifested as our sub-conscious, self-preserving reflexive 
reactions toward the white race; an artificially cultivated instinct of 
fear nurtured and re-enforced over the centuries by inhuman acts of 
brutality, torture, lynching/ murder and genocide —all of which has 
been perpetrated against the greater portion of Earth's genetically 
dominant archetypal strains of humanity.
More on this later.


--- PAGE 552 ---
97
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Satan: The Ultimate 'Mix-Master'...
•
Know this beloved; miscegenation constitutes the 'biblical 
Apocalypse' for Nordic Anglo-Saxon Christians here in America and 
around the world. So says the leaders of the Aryan Nation and other 
so-called white supremist organizations like the Ku Klux Klan.
And in a sense, it is.
White/Aryan Christian church and community leaders of 
influence such as Dr. William L. Pierce, founder of The National 
Alliance and the religious concept "Cosmotheism"; James K. Warner 
of the New Christian Crusade Church; John Harrell's Illinois-based 
Christian Patriot's Defense League (CPDL); George Lincoln 
Rockwell, founder of the American Nazi Party, re-named the 
National Socialist White People's Party; William P. Gale's Committee 
of the States, and Don Black creator of Stormfront.com—represent 
but a few of the white supremist (or white "survivist") factions who 
state with religious conviction that their "pure white" strain of Aryan 
? ? humanity is under attack by the Khazarian jew, with unwitting 
help from the clueless "mud-people" of the black race; that Jesus 
Christ and the biblical patriarchs warned them about race-mixing 
and the jews, and the consequences that would befall the chosen 
white race if they disobeyed.
This deeply-rooted theo-pathological belief that race-mixing is 
somehow tantamount to Satanism, was eloquently articulated in the 
writings and teachings of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon "Jack" 
Mohr, U.S. Army retired (see figure 5), who referred to himself as 
"The Watchman." Colonel Mohr headed up the Christian Patriots 
Defense League (CPDL), the Citizens Emergency Defense System 
(CEDS), and was also the leader of the so-called "Identity Church" 
movement. "Identity" is the code-word for bible teachings alleging 
that Nordic Anglo-Saxon white people are the real chosen people of 
God, with all other non-white races of the Earth being the wretched 
or cursed "mud people" from the tribe of Ham.
In his "From the Watchman's Comer; Spring Intelligence Report-


--- PAGE 553 ---
98
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART 0
2003" article entitled Are Christian Denominations Promoting The  
Luciferian Program?, we read the following excerpts from Col. Mohr 
related to Satanism and the "chosen" status of the white race..;
Col. Gordon "Jack" Mohr 
AUS Retired (1913-2003) 
Figure 5
".. .All evangelical churches and such widly diverse groups as Baptists, Methodists, 
Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadeiphians, Seventh Day Adventists and Catholics, 
etc...are all of the same mind. They all support the Satanism of Race Mixing and 
Mixed Breeding..."
"...All the Patriarchs were white Aryans and their true descendents today, the real 
Israel of the Bible are the white Caucasians. The Celtic/Anglo- 
Saxon/Nordic/Germanic people are the true Israel. Throughout the pages of the 
Bible, God repeatedly told these people not to mix their blood with other races..." 
"...(It is) the Will of Almighty God that the Aryan Nordic Race should remain a 
separate people and not mix with the dark races. The Law of Separation and 
Segregation is God's Law. Those who teach against it are doing the devil's work..." 
"...The great two-horned goat has inscribed on its forehead the five-pointed star- 
symbol of ancient secret societies...The beast sits on the throne of the world and the 
great secret is revealed. The white race of Shem is to be destroyed by mixing with the 
dark races of Ham.. . .  .The bible no where teaches the amalgamation of races. God 
is the author of racial separation. Integration and mongrelization is Satanic. Race 
mixing is Satanic. Christians must choose whether they will support the 
Illuminati/Satanic program to mix up the races, or whether they will obey God and 
His Law of racial separation and segregation. The choice is a simple one: will you 
obey God or the Devil?..."


--- PAGE 554 ---
99
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
To substantiate his belief that the white race is under attack and in 
imminent threat of extinction, Col. Mohr cites the works of a 
prominent researcher, scholar and white separatist named Eustace 
Mullins, author of such works as The 16th Amendment: Vie Law that  
Never Was; The Secrets of The Federal Reserve; The New World Order  - A 
Study In The Hegemony of Parasitism; The Curse Of Canaan; Education for  
Slavery; The Rape of Justice  -  and the work that focuses on the matter 
of white fear of racial extinction by blacks and the "Turko-Mongol 
Ashkenazi-Edomite" — Mullin's New History of the Jews.
On page 5 of 'New History', Mullins quotes the alleged words of 
Rabbi Emanuel Rabinovich spoken before "The Emergency Council 
of European Rabbis" in Budapest Hungary, January 12, 1952. Mr. 
Mullins is said to have given the first copy of this address to a U.S. 
publication called Common Sense,  and it was re-published in the 
September 1952 issue of The Canadian Intelligence Service.
Mr. Mullins also left a footnote in the copy submitted to Common 
Cause, which said; "...This transcription of Rabinovich's speech was 
given to me by a former Bulgarian diplomat who broke with the 
Communist regime and reached Budapest, Hungary, where he hid 
out with anti-Communist friends until March. While there, he 
obtained a copy of this speech and was smuggled to Hamburg, 
Germany, finally making his way to this country. A gentleman in 
Hamburg gave him my name, and he met me and urged me to 
distribute this speech at once. I sincerely hope it will give the 
American people a better picture of the forces arrayed against them."
He went on to say in the book that a double agent who had 
infiltrated the inner circles of the Anti-Defamation League of the 
B'nai B'rith, revealed to him that the publication and circulation of 
Rabinovich's speech had actually caused the Zionists to postpone all their  
plans for World War 3! A man named Henry H. Klein was said to have 
translated the document from Yiddish. Klein died mysteriously in 
New York the day after meeting with an agent of the CIA.
The following excerpt of the speech of Rabbi Emanuel Rabinovich


--- PAGE 555 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART H
can also be found in the book Pawns In The Game,  by William Guy 
Carr, pages 105-106;
"...Greetings, my children: You have all been called here to re-capitulate the 
principle steps of our new program. As you know, we had hoped to have twenty 
years between wars to consolidate the great gains which we made from World War 2, 
but our increasing numbers in certain vital areas is arousing opposition to us, and we 
must now work with every means at our disposal to precipitate World War 3 within 
three years..."
•
"...The goals for which we have striven concertedly for three thousand years is 
within our reach, and because its fulfillment is so apparent, it behooves us to increase 
our efforts and our caution tenfold. I can safely promise you that before ten years 
have passed, our race will take its rightful place in the world, with every jew a king 
and every gentile a slave..
•
"...Our most pressing problem is to inflame the lagging militaristic spirit of the 
Americans...Within five years, this program will achieve its objective, the Third 
World War, which will surpass in destruction all previous contests. Israel of course, 
will remain neutral, and when both sides are devastated and exhausted, we will 
arbitrate, sending our Control Commissions into all wrecked countries. This war will 
end for all time our struggle against the gentile..
•
"...We will openly reveal our identity' with the races of Asia and Africa. I can state 
with assurance that the last generation of white children is now being born. Our 
Control Commissions will, in the interest of peace and wiping out inter-racial 
tensions, forbid whites to mate with whites. The white women must co-habit with 
members of the dark races, the white men with black women. Thus the white race 
will disappear, for mixing the dark with the white means the end of the white 
man, and our most dangerous enemy will become only a memory. We shall embark 
upon an era of 10,000 years of peace and plenty, the Pax Judaica, and our race will 
rule undisputed over the world. Our superior intelligence will easily enable us to 
retain mastery over a world of dark peoples..."
•
"...Our interests in Washington are greatly extending the Point 4 Program for 
developing industry in backward areas of the world, so that after the industrial 
plants and cities of Europe and America are destroyed by atomic warfare, the whites 
can offer no resistance against the large masses of the dark races, who zvill  
maintain an unchallenged technological superiority . . [Em phasis  mine]


--- PAGE 556 ---
101
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Wow! Is this last sentence an underlying reason why the Nigerian- 
born genius, master mathematician and pan-Africanist Dr. Gabriel 
Oyibo was denied the Nobel Peace Prize in physics 4 times by the 
scientific elite of European academia —  even with a stellar 
recommendation from Einstein's protege herself?
Could it be the fact that this lowly member of the cursed "mud 
people" surpassed Einstein's irreproachable genius, by creating a 
mathematical formula succinctly defining the essence of all 
existence —  the illusive "Theorum of Everything" that Einstein 
himself could not accomplish for 30 years, even unto his death —  and 
why they shot a bullet through his living room window? Or why he 
received threatening letters from white supremists stating that "a 
nigger would never receive the Nobel Peace Prize in physics?"
But here's the really strange part. Einstein was a 'German' Jew. So 
who would be most angry with Oyibo, the Aryan or the Edomite?
Regardless, if even a small fraction of a fraction of this alleged speech 
is found to be true, and the Nordic Aryan elite are aware of all this —  
given the benefit of the doubt wouldn't their genetic-based fears be 
well-founded, and their abject hatred of Jews and melanated peoples 
(in this case) be accurately placed?
Desperate people in desperate situations adopt desperate 
measures in the heat of their desperation. And as desperation goes, 
fear of genetic annihilation would constitute the ultimate in desperate.
Fear of genetic annihilation—THIS is the true so-called "white 
man's burden" —  for there is no heavier psychological weight to bear 
than the day to day knowledge that your anomalous existence as a 
unique allele within the archetypal genetics of humanity, could, by 
the inevitable progression of time, be one day consigned to a cosmic 
abyss of perpetual non-existence by the sperm of the 'mud man.'
Now THAT'S fear!
I believe that any group who felt threatened by the prospect of 
being genetically annihilated, and identifies who or what they 
believed to be the force or agent that will bring about this reality, 
would also begin circling their own "genetic wagons" in anticipation 
for the worst.


--- PAGE 557 ---
102
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART n
And if the following words by one Israel Cohen, author of the 
book A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century  are also true, then 
they will lend additional credence to my contention that the entire so- 
called Civil Rights Movement was nothing more than a sophisticated 
psycho-political re-orchestration of ancient Rome's "bread and 
circuses" tactics revisited by the Vatican; an ultimately fruitless 
venture that had absolutely nothing to do with Martin Luther King or 
the so-called 'rights' and 'freedom' of black people.
In 1912, Cohen wrote;
"...We must realize that our party's most powerful weapon is racial tension. By 
pounding into the consciousness of the dark races that for centuries they have been 
oppressed by the whites, we can mold them to our program of the Communist 
Party..."
Note: In retrospect, this may very well have happened, because even one 
of our great and most venerated teachers Dr. John Henrick Clarke 
admitted to us that he too was once seduced and manipulated by the bells 
and whistles of Communist doctrine; thereafter teaching us to beware the 
social and political "isms" of Europeans, because all of them are but 
perverse fractals of the ancient African systems of governance and society.
Cohen continues...
"...The words Colonialism and Imperialism must be featured in our propaganda. In 
America we will aim for subtle victory. While inflaming the negro against the whites 
we will endeavor to instill into the whites a guilt complex for their exploitation of the 
negroes. We will aid the negroes to rise in prominence in every walk of life. In the 
professionals and the world of sports and entertainment..."
Ummm. In the wake of these words, here's a little something for 
our sistas and brothas to seriously ponder upon ...
"Is the Enemy of my Enemy my Friend? Or; is the Friend  
of my Enemy my Friend? Or, is the Enemy of my Enemy  
...my Enemy?!"


--- PAGE 558 ---
103
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART [I
Is Zionism (which is not related to the religious practice and pure 
faith or people of Orthodox Judaism, but is in fact a fascist political 
ideology), working in league with the Vatican princes of Rome, one 
of the intangible factors manipulating the genetic buttons of self- 
preservation within all the so-called "races" of the world?
Given the brief revelations above, would the seeker not say that 
there is justification for the perverse fear and hatred of non-white 
peoples and Zionist jews by the Nordic Caucasoid today, for the 
respective parts he believes each is playing in some methodical and 
protracted plan to systematically assimilate him into oblivion?
Well, given the virtual sea of data that appears to substantiate this 
premise —data that I have not even begun to dent the surface of, 
white panic and paranoia —  that is, white genetic fear of a black 
planet—is wholly justified.
But are the black man and Khazaarian jew the Nordic's only 
problems, or are they also to be found in his own genetic back yard? 
In a 120 page book entitled Hitler as Philosophe: Remnants of the  
Enlightenment in National Socialism,  author Lawrence Birken says that 
to destroy "the race myth" we must first "un-create race." And to do 
this "...we should not be afraid of that dirty little word, 
miscegenation."
Ouch! Just when you thought it was safe, Archie Bunker....
Thus the die is cast for the next 50 to 100 years, and you can see it 
manifesting everywhere. Today, all over the media, there is an overt 
and undeniably aggressive perception-molding campaign by 
Hollywood to push inter-racial relationships as never before; more 
specifically—white males and melanated females.
(See movies Monster's Ball, Mission Impossible 2, Strange Days, National  
Security, Swordfish, The New World; Supernova; Austin Powers'  
Goldmember; Disney's Pocahantas and John Tucker Must Die).
However, some claim that the numerous Hollywood depictions of 
black woman/white man relationships on screen are actually the 
reverse in real life; that there are more black male/white female


--- PAGE 559 ---
104
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART 0
relationships occurring off-screen, further enhancing the sense of 
alienation towards black women in American society. But both racial 
scenarios represent ongoing behavioral symptomologies based on 
our collective diasporic experiences with Willie Lynch.
With continued adaptation and conformity to our 'learned' sense 
of powerlessness and self-destruction, what else should we expect?
Whatever the ratio and numbers for each however, both are too 
high, because they represent the programmed-impulses or 
psychological reflex reactions of diasporic Africans, to the slave- 
perpetuating dictates of the deeply implanted 'Willie chip!"
"Praise D'Lawd and Pass D'Ammunition..."
•
Other than the movie Birth of a Nation, white desperation over the 
prospects of genetic annihilation was never more radically and 
dramatically portrayed than in two novels written by physicist and 
white supremist Dr. William L. Pierce. Dr. Pierce authored the 
infamous Turner Diaries (under the pen name Andrew MacDonald) 
as well as Hunter, both of which advocated the punishment and/or 
murder of inter-racial couples. The book Hunter was said to have 
been inspired by the actions of serial killer Joseph Paul Franklin, who 
targeted inter-racial couples.
In a lecture/interview, Dr. Pierce is quoted as saying...
".. .Why should I not be able to do what is right and natural 
and kill those who commit such an abomination.
Pierce's reasoning that it is "right" and "natural" to kill people who 
mingle their genetics, is yet another characteristic expression of the 
psychotic desperation underlying the actions of the white 
supremist/ survivist elite world-wide. His use of the word "natural" 
is right in keeping with my contention that it is the consciousness of 
the recessive gene that is the underlying psychology guiding and 
motivating the philosophical and theological mandates of Manifest 
Destiny. Again, these are desperate times for race-conscious Nordic/ 
Aryans in an ever- encroaching "black, brown and yellow" world.
European scientists have even turned to advanced methodologies


--- PAGE 560 ---
105
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Dr. William Pierce
(1933-2002)
Founder, National Alliance -Author: The Turner Diaries; Hunter 
Figure 6
such as cloning and the storage of huge caches of frozen sperm and 
ovaries kept somewhere in the Netherlands —  all in a drastic attempt 
to find solutions to circumvent the inevitability of their Biblically 
prognosticated genetic demise.
Desperation has also led to another pathological trend —  that of in- 
vitro fertilizations resulting in "litters/' or multiple births of 3, 6 or 
more children. There have even been reports of egg transplants, as 
well as attempts at whole uterine and fallopian tube transplants into 
Caucasian women.
My sisters, to the Nordic-Anglo-Saxon, the melanated man's 
testicles and the melanated woman's womb are now considered 
virulent biological weapons threatening the future existence of their 
diminishing phenotype. The progressive erosion of genetic integrity 
is a primary reason for their frantic efforts to perfect alternative 
reproductive technologies, as well as weapons of mass destruction  —  
both for the purpose of self-preservation.
For example, the psycho-genetic subtext to the movie Children of  
Men is at once subtle, but then again blatantly obvious. The basic 
theme where every race on Earth (black, brown, yellow and white) 
becomes sterile and unable to procreate, is of course a smoke screen. 
It's the sub-plot that reveals the true mindset of the authors; that 
being—the scientific elite are fully aware that the white recessive


--- PAGE 561 ---
106
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
strain of human DNA is deteriorating, and must recharge and refresh 
itself through the archetypal mitochondria of the black womb.
Of course, this would be the ultimate act of suicide, just as Dr. 
Pierce advocates in his Resistance magazine. Right?
Maybe not. Remember Elijah Muhammad's warning of the genetic 
manipulation and creation of a black woman that bears only white 
babies? Which is why in the movie, the only woman left on our sterile 
planet that can conceive and give birth to a child is a black woman, 
while no indications are given as to who (or what race) the father is —  
a play on the Black Madonna/Immaculate Conception archetype, 
with the hero Clive Owen playing Joseph taking her to Egypt.
The movie Children of Men is in fact a psycho-genetic projection of the  
recessive gene acknowledging its fundamental origins, as well as its  
inevitable demise—the  black womb!
By the way, Children of Men  had all the earmarks of a Tavistock 
social control experiment, most likely made to download a genetic- 
apocalyptic imprint into the collective 'white psyche'; maybe to 
kickstart their self-preservation instincts to procreate at faster more 
prolific levels. The fact that such a story takes place in England is a 
dead give-away that Tavistock had a hand in the storyline.
The genetic paranoia of the elite white Nordic racial strain is all too 
real today. In a relatively short period of time (by cosmic standards), 
their eugenic scientists report that Caucasians might constitute only 
1/300th the population of this entire planet. Which means that 
according to statistical growth trends and their relationship to 
population dynamics (i.e. immigration and emigration), their 
scientists predict that it is entirely possible for Nordic whites to 
be"genetically assimilated" around the world by the year 2100.
This is not racism. This is not "conspiratorial nonsense." This is 
based on their own statistics and scientific conclusions. And it's a very 
real fear on their part! To the eugenicists74 who comprise the 
leadership of the Nordic world elite, this constitutes extinction. 
Another reason their politicians always speak in coded language
74 Eugenicist -"... an advocate or specialist in eugenics ..." - Amer. Herit. Diet.
Eugenics - "The study of hereditary improvement by genetic control..." - Amer. Herit. Diet.


--- PAGE 562 ---
107
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
about the "national fear" of America becoming "a third world 
country." "National fear" translates to mean "global white fear."
Case in point. As of September 2007, the Swiss People's party has 
re-introduced legislation to give judges the power to deport the entire 
family (including all relatives) of any immigrant under 18 found 
guilty of a crime. This in lieu of the blatant display of very large 
public posters depicting 3 white sheep standing on a Swiss flag, with 
one slyly kicking a forth black sheep off of it with his back leg.
The last time such draconian policies were introduced in Europe 
was in Nazi Germany under a law called "Sippenhaft", or "kin 
liability." At this time, similar legislation is being considered 
throughout all the nations of Europe.
"National fear?" Clue?
For further proof of the serious concerns surrounding the issue of 
race and survival in the Nordic-Anglo-Saxon bloodlines, read former 
presidential candidate Pat Buchanan's book The Death of the West.
At the moment of this writing, there are genuine plans and policies 
in progress by the world's parasitic power elite to exterminate in 
excess of 3 to 4 billion people; primarily peoples of color, but in the 
main, people throughout all races and walks of life. These plans can 
be read as they are implied in the projected governmental policies of 
both the 1972 Global 2000 Report, and the new European Union for 
the 21st century, as well as in the writings and lectures of highly 
credentialed University professors like Dr. Eric Pianka, alias "Dr. 
Doom." (See his speech entitled "The Vanishing Book of Life").
All told, there is no doubt about the invisible elite's covert agenda 
on all sides of the so-called 'race war' between the Aryan, the 
Khazarian and the African. According to the research data, there 
appears to be a psycho-genetic survival imperative driving the 
Nordic/ Aryan towards desperate acts of self-preservation, while a 
global socio-political/economic imperative drives the Khazarian to 
re-define the world's racial classifications. Along with the Chinese, all 
are vying for ultimate control of the land, resources, genetics and 
destiny of the archetypal bloodlines of the original African humanity.


--- PAGE 563 ---
108
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
In fact, the Khazaarian Zionist Dr. Henry Kissinger, fugitive war 
criminal with an international warrant for high crimes against 
humanity, left no doubt about the intentions of the parasitic elite for 
peoples of color, when he proposed the following in his 
memorandum to the National Security Council...
bfi
“...Depopulation should be the highest priority of U.S. foreign policy 
towards the third world...for reasons of National Security...because the 
U.S. economy will require large and increasing amounts of minerals from 
abroad, especially from less-developed countries..
Eugenicists call it "A Malthusian Solution." Again Mr. and Mrs. 
NAACP; is the enemy of my enemy my "friend"?
Now; pay close attention to the following...!
At a pivotal point in the Civil Rights movement, the SCLC 
strategists were presented a golden opportunity to use economics as 
a powerful platform from which to expand its political influence, and 
catapult the movement from separate local stages into the national 
spotlight. The opportunity came when Rosa Parks' courage and 
stubborn resolve led to the Mississippi bus boycott.
This brought the black female to the forefront of the popular 
movement in the national media for the first time, and showed her 
equally tenacious commitment to the achievement of our people's 
goals. But keep in mind that outwardly, the movement was still 
perceived by the rest of the world as being inspired, orchestrated, 
supervised and led by the black male. Although Mrs. Parks was 
already a ranking member in the Civil Rights movement at that 
time, and what she did on the bus was actually part of a pre­
coordinated strategy being carried out throughout the state, what 
she symbolized was the depth of collective commitment that existed 
in the overall black community at that time. She revealed the 
foundational strength of the emerging American black society, 
through the quiet power of the spiritual black woman.


--- PAGE 564 ---
109
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
The spiritually committed and dedicated black male, and the 
spiritually committed and devoted black female, working together,  
were too awesome and impregnable a force for the average "dixie- 
singin' son-of-the-south" to defeat by himself.
And he knew it!
In fact, when the undercover neo-feminist first invited herself in 
to "help" in the Civil Rights movement, she personally became 
fascinated with what she witnessed. Despite the obvious brutality 
and suffering experienced by African peoples during this time, she 
saw the cultural sophistication, dignity and steadfast integrity of a 
spiritually mature interpersonal relationship, working from levels of 
cooperation seldom witnessed in her own immediate household and 
social structure. During the height of the Civil Rights movement, she 
saw the entire black family's joint commitment and dedication to the 
fulfillment of a collective purpose. And this commitment seemed to 
transcend all of the poverty, anguish, pain, petty tribal and 
interpersonal differences existing within its rank and file 
membership.
This level of do-or-die commitment and cooperation by "the black 
team" (as a first hand experience), seemed completely alien to the 
white feminist's own cultural psychology. In fact, it could be 
accurately postured that the resurrected and revised tenets of today's 
equity feminism, were first inspired by the Caucasian female's 
observation of the working relationship exhibited by the "black 
team."
Item: Quiet as it's kept, what became "black feminism" actually made it's debut 
on the socio-political scene by way of the Black Panther Party,  and after the 
assassinations of Dr. King and Malcolm X, it filted out to infect the younger 
remaining remnants of the Civil Rights movement and wider black society, 
through feminist intellects such as Audrey Lorde, Angela Davis and Shirley 
Chisolm.
?


--- PAGE 565 ---
110
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
The Chess-board Battlefield—White Queen to Black King...
Check!
•
Keep in mind as well that for the past 500 years, the parasitic 
power structure in Europe and America saw the world in terms of it 
being a chessboard; one where (as Dr. Neely Fuller puts it) every 
move made against the people of every other culture on this planet 
(white and non-white), was considered a strategy for the conquest of 
chessboard Earth.' (Read The Grand Chessboard,  by Zbigniew 
Brzezinski).
To the white male in America, the Civil Rights movement was a 
tactical chess match using Communism and Socialism as a means 
toward socio-political, economic and genetic conquest by the Nubian 
black "King" (Martin Luther), with his Nubian black queen 
supporting him at his side. Thus, this movement had to be countered 
and checkmated at all costs!75.
What it really meant to black folks in the long run however, would 
not be revealed for another 37 years.
In the rules of chess today, the most powerful tactical piece on 
the chessboard just so happens to be the queen. Those familiar with 
the game know that her area of immediate and long-range influence 
on the board is vast, and reaches farther than any other —  including 
the king's. The only piece she may not emulate in movement is the 
knight (horse). For all her tactical power she is still not considered 
"a soldier." However, both pieces (the knight and the queen) define 
the sacred geometry of the 'hypotenuse of the right angle' (3-4-5) in 
their movements. But where the knight can only navigate the outer 
points of the angle (3, 5) the queen defines its totality (3-4-5).
75 In retrospect, I feel that the two weakest points in the overall strategy of the Black king were, 
first ... his deliberate aim and intent to integrate and miscegenate before understanding the 
true nature of his enemy; and secondly — the quest for "civil" rights as opposed to "human" or 
"natural rights/' - Author


--- PAGE 566 ---
Ill
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
What most people are unaware of is that in the original game of 
chess (as invented and played by the ancient Chinese during the 
reign of the Chou Dynasty, 1046-255 B.C.), there was no queen!  The 
addition of the queen came only after the Knights Templars of the 
Holy Roman Church brought the updated Adivasis (or Dravidian) 
version back to Europe from the Moors during the Crusades, and 
substituted her piece for what was originally called The Prime  
Minister. The Prime Minister was considered the pre-eminent 
tactical chess piece in this ancient game of expedience and strategy.
That is, until Vatican-Europe got a hold of the game. The Roman 
Catholic Church (more specifically, founding Jesuit Black Pope 
Ignatius Loyola) changed the Prime Minister's position to that of a 
queen, in honor of the Virgin Mary!
Now. From his position on the chessboard, the knight's purpose is 
to protect the realm (represented by the castle); the spiritual tenets of 
the culture (represented by the bishop); the economy and the 
subjects (represented by the pawns), and the power that rules over 
them all (represented by the king and the queen).
In the years during the Civil Rights "chess game", the white king 
had just about deployed all of his pieces into the battle without any 
appreciable success. Nearly all of his options had been exhausted. 
The battle for "social change versus genetic survival" seemed lost —  
and here's why. The white king deployed ...
- his Pawns ... that is, his media (T.V., newspaper, magazines), 
the red-necks, rabble-rousers, the organized 
radical fringe (K.K.K. etc), and the merchants of 
the "good ole boy" network—but it did not 
break the Black king's resolve ... check!
-his Bishops ... Ahh... but the black "king" (Martin Luther, the 
'reformer') came in the guise of a clergyman. 
So, even the white king's ecumenical allies in the 
Vatican wouldn't dare to have openly sided 
with him, for in the eyes of a scrutinizing world,


--- PAGE 567 ---
112
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
his reign had no "moral" grounds upon which 
to stand —  so, the white church was effectively 
neutralized ... check!
- his Knights ... In this case, the white king's own defenders, that 
is —  his police force and his military. But their 
potential effectiveness was also strategically 
countered, being used instead against the white 
king to 'serve and protect' the rights of the black 
king and his children  (school desegregation); 
again, this tactic was ineffective as well... check!
The white king grew evermore frustrated and desperate. The 
Nubian black king continued to brilliantly check and tactically 
out-maneuver him in a moral, non-violent battle for the 
socio-political perception of right and wrong—all in the media —all 
without firing a single shot! So the white king resigned himself to 
making the only move he could. He knew he had to kill the black 
king, but for now he had to buy some time. So he "castled" himself76; 
that is—he switched places with one of his "rooks" (the castle).
Now, it's  v-e-r-y interesting to note at this point that the word 
rook not only describes a particular chess piece, but according to 
Webster's 7th collegiate dictionary, it also means ...
"... to defraud by cheating and swindling ..."
And defraud, cheat and swindle us he did; for while he hid in the 
shadows of his corporate castle (the Vatican) he hatched a deviously 
ingenious plot to save himself, his "way of life" (Manifest Destiny) 
and "the game" (genetic survival).
In phase one of his plot he stalled and distracted the black king by 
"castling" himself; that is —he put one "rook" up for grabs as bait 
(political promises, illusions of economic parity, equal opportunity, 
affirmative action, equal social status; in other words —the ole' Ali
76 You are allowed to switch places between the King and the "castle" only once per game. 
Normally an opponent would not resort to this maneuver unless the king is in danger of 
being checkmated. - Author


--- PAGE 568 ---
113
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"rope-a-dope"), while at the same time commissioning into service 
his ultimate weapon; the most powerful tactical piece on his side of 
the socio-political chessboard—his white queen!
(See a parody of this in the movie Undercover Brother).
In chess, even though the game would not end if the queen were 
captured or sacrificed, the prospects for victory without her become 
infinitely more difficult to achieve, making defeat all the more 
probable. On the other hand, under Roman church influence, the 
tactical power, worth and capabilities of the queen became so 
encompassing, that even a pawn had the power become one.
So phase two of the plot had the white king taking portions of his 
other castle (that is, the essence of his material economic wealth, 
technology and political power) to begin erecting a 'command 
headquarters' from which his tactical white queen would now 
operate; a socio-political and economic sub-structure akin to his 
power-base; similar, but not exactly equal to his own. This had the 
effect of placing the white queen between himself and the impending 
encroachment of the black king. Within this political and economic 
sub-structure, the tactical white queen was given great wealth and 
here-to-fore unprecedented access to the reigns of power, along with 
a 'revised' social status from which to operate.
White Queen to Black Bishop...Check!
But the single most devastating part of this plot—the most 
insidious and damaging tactic of all phases of the white king's game 
plan —the one not considered by the strategists of the black king 
(which caused the tide of battle to turn against him), was when the 
white king made positively sure that the white queen he 
commissioned and deployed— was not a woman!
Whoa! What was that agin'...?!!
No mistake beloved. You read it right.


--- PAGE 569 ---
114
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - P A R T  0
You see the parasitic elite knew that the black "King" had the moral 
upper hand in this genetic battle for justice and socio-political 
emancipation; that him being a minister as well (the bishop), he held 
a psychologically un-pretentious moral authority over the white 
queen and the good people of so-called "white" society in general.
This is because historically, the black man's relationship with white 
women in early post Moorish America, was not based on the 
trappings of social power-mongering.77and material wealth It was 
based on something more valuable to her nature —emotional power 
brokering, where she played a subtle game of life and death with the 
black male to her own sensual advantage —  ex tor tion for sex.
Based on this history, the white king knew that if the feminist 
white queen had been a real woman, chances were great that the 
Nubian king would eventually turn her, appealing to her through her 
natural feminine instincts for empathy, maternity, sensitivity, 
common sense and yes, most potent of all—her sexuality.
Thus, the parasitic elite and their white king could not afford to 
trust a real woman to go undercover. So they cooked up "Operation 
Queer Queen" and sent in a gynandromorph.
Operation Queer Queen 
Gloria Steinem, at your (CIA) Service...
•
Operation "queer queen" (as I've named it), more than doubled 
the white king's chances for victory over the black king by first ...  
eliminating any and all chances of a black man ever appealing to the 
'natural feminine instincts' of white lesbians; and, secondly ...  
providing time and opportunity for the white king to organize and 
perfect a counter-strategy; a 'neo-social' control strategy that would 
appear to be in line with Civil Rights principles, but would really act 
as a virus slowly infecting the healthy body of the movement; and 
more importantly, the body of the Nubian black team -  the family.
77 In fact, the only time the white female could have exercised any real "power" over the black 
male in those days, was if she threatened to cried rape. - Author


--- PAGE 570 ---
115
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
This new social control strategy, instead of being based on a 
platform of rights for all people (women and men), would instead be 
focused on a single-minded Marxist /sexist philosophy structured 
around a 'plight of the persecuted woman' scenario; all backed by 
Rockefeller and the CIA, while "fronted" by the likes of a Gloria 
Steinem. In fact, in the 1970s, a radical feminist group calling 
themselves "Redstockings" uncovered damning proof of Steinem's 
recruitment by the CIA from her days at the ultra-elite Smith College, 
on through her position as editor at Ms magazine, as well as the 
funding of her organization Women's Action Alliance by Mobil Oil and 
the Carnegie and Ford Foundations. They revealed it all in their work 
entitled Feminist Revolution. (See Village Voice May 21st, 1979).
Which is further proof that the intended purpose of what became 
known as gender feminism from the 60s thru the early 90s, was to 
infiltrate, study, distract, stratify, confuse, sabotage and de-stabilize 
the body and spirit of the Civil Rights movement as a whole; but 
more importantly —  to cause and sustain a cancerous rift betiveen the  
Nubian black king and his Nubian black queen!
Keep in mind that the entire Civil Rights Movement was based 
primarily upon the principles of integration. Therefore, the thought of 
unilaterally supporting or incorporating the agendas of a separatist 
movement like that of the feminists, would not have been deemed 
acceptable, much less logical as a critical contribution by black 
women to a collective cause. This was said to be a main reason why 
there was so much friction between Dr. King and Malcolm at the 
beginning. Malcolm and the Nation preached a separatist ideology.
Women's rights were already an integral part of the priorities set 
forth in the so-called Civil Rights agenda. This was already included 
as a primary issue by our elder church mothers and fathers long 
before any formal bill on women's rights was written. So Dr. King 
had been championing black women's issues long before his 
introduction to the white neo-feminist movement.
It would have been an ideological oxymoron to enjoin the 
separatist policies of latter-day feminism to the Civil Rights 
movement, especially since the white woman's issues with the white 
male power structure, and the black woman's issues with the white


--- PAGE 571 ---
116
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
male power structure, did not originate from within the same 
cultural experience or socio-political context. During these 
evolutionary times, black women's rights meant the same to their 
men that black men's rights meant to their women.
In other words, after 450 years of trial and trauma, black men and 
women were all-too-aware (at that time) just who instigated the 
suffering that compelled their collective pursuits for social justice and 
economic equity in the first place. To us, what was gained by one was 
considered a symbolic gain by all.
Simply put beloved; our cultural, political and economic pursuits 
for justice as a 'race' of people, were never drawn and championed 
along gender lines. This mutant concept was a recent tactic by the 
parasitic elite to augment division, stratification and alienation b\ 
targeting, aggitating and augmenting our post traumatic slave 
psychologies that centered primarily on fear and distrust.
The Caucasian gender-feminist says to the black female "...it's all 
about us united together as women my sisters", when in fact the 
Nubian black queen (eventually) finds out that, bottom line—white 
(gender) feminist "sisters" are just as racist and intolerant as their so- 
called "chauvinist adversaries", when you get too close to their inner 
circles of power. Sisters who finally awaken are those who've come to 
realize that the psycho-political motivation for this "movement" is all 
about the white gynander feminist being royally jealous and 
pissed-off with (1) the Caucasian male for being so selfish in his 
power-mongering; and (2) the Caucasian male for being as much or 
more woman than she; that is, self-serving and wanting to be the only 
one controlling "the black and brown balls" of this planet.78
What the neo-feminist really wants is to share in the white male's 
power structure my sister — not to change the pozver equation!
Please be clear on this. The white gender feminist wants to obtain 
as much power and control over this planet as her white male
78 Read "The Isis Papers" by Dr. Frances Cress Welsing.


--- PAGE 572 ---
117
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
counterpart; in essence —to play as if she had "the balls" too!79 All 
this representing their overall psychogenetic fear of a black planet.
Now. What the gender-feminist and the parasitic elite fail to 
achieve by way of a frontal attack, they hope to gain by subterfuge 
through the recruitment of millions of well educated, career- 
motivated, status-seeking black women (here and around the entire 
third world"). They'll also target the average hard working black 
women who labor daily to maintain the super-structures of white 
supremacy.
However, (once again) the neo-feminist has no intention of changing  
anything - only the chain of "gender command." Once she assumes 
power (as Hillary or her type will one day do) suffering by black 
women in this society will continue, even worsen; only this time 
they'll be told that their suffering is now for the "collective good and 
advancement of all women." The psycho-physiological consequences 
of this can be seen today by way of the meteoric rise of female-related 
maladies; especially the rise in depression-related illnesses, breast 
and cervical cancers, fibroid tumors and ovarian cysts among black 
women.
Black women who unwittingly bought into gender-separatism as 
their ticket to freedom and happiness, have slowly and painfully 
come to realize that no matter how large the numbers written on the 
paycheck from the penthouse plantation —  or how many PhDs and 
high-level careers they achieved —to the Euro-feminist (and her 
'friendly enemy', the white corporate male) she still is and always will  
be their second class girl-Friday  (Oprah, Starr Jones), with the same "third 
class" social position and rights as her dis-enfranchised (black) man!
How many more Oprahs, Whoopies and Condeleezas have you 
seen since the 47-year rise of neo-feminism?
How many do you think you'll see by tomorrow?
Professor Nkiru Uwechia Nzegwu, author of the book Family 
Matters: Feminist Concepts in African Philosophy of Culture,  wrote a
79 The world saw this in the 1996 Olympics. - Author


--- PAGE 573 ---
118
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
poem entitled "Sisterhood", which in essence sums up the true 
working relationship between the white Euro-feminist and the black 
Afro-feminist. Although Ms. Nzegwu appears to be a "feminist" 
herself (in whatever sense she defines that European word and 
concept in relationship to "pan-ancient" African cultures), her words 
are quite relevant to the topic at hand.
See section entitled 'Black Feminism: A Moon with no Orbit' for a 
more in-depth view of the unspoken relationship-dynamic between 
feminism... and "black" feminism.
The time period between the mid-60's to late 80's signified the 
coming to social prominence of the termagant new wave/Amazonian 
feminist. And whatever moral or ethical principles still lingering 
from her true feminine nature, were bought off at an extremely high
Sisterhood
9
.White sister told me 
all women are one 
united in de face 
of chau'vism 
(paa'don my engilis)
I smiled pa...paa
pa.. .tri.. .archy is the cross
women carry, she charged
we must unite
to fight it
with all our might
I laughed...
racked by spasm
my head jerked back
and crazily wobbled
from side to side.
Pampered sister 
titillates herself to frenzy 
wth quixotic tales of
male exploitation 
I..."dumb" black woman 
laughed mirthlessly on 
flicking away tears 
of pain from eyes.
I looked up 
from my chore 
on the kitchen floor 
where, new found sister 
had ordered me 
to be on knees 
to scrub the floor clean 
for the pittance she paid 
on knees:
to scrub the floor clean 
for sisterarchy..."


--- PAGE 574 ---
119
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
price; that being—her appointment as head of the newly formed 
' gyne-cratic' power-elite; an influential political and well-funded 
economic feminist sub-structure established with the unlimited 
resources of the global parasitic elite; all this as "payment for services 
rendered" by a grateful white king.
In effect, the white king had commissioned and deployed the 
perfect strategic weapon and defence system; an antithetically- 
gendered queen who had only the surface visage of a woman, having 
no interest in black rights, the black king or black people for that 
matter. Her actual mission all along was to help destroy the black 
male's image in the eyes of the black female, thus undermining and 
destroying the archetypal bonds of trust and dependency that held 
the black team together as a family; and, to ultimately convert and 
recruit the now widowed and alienated black queen80 —  the deposed 
black king's genetic foundational strength, economic support and 
political power base. In effect; she took the black man's soul!
White Queen takes Black Queen...Checkmate!
•
Now. Based on everything said thus far, it would seem that I 
have continuously contradicted myself by stating that Europe is a 
closet matriarchy, while ascribing the power and control of our 
society to the white corporate male. Again, we must remember that 
our critique is centered on the meta-psychology of a 'glacial 
consciousness' (see: A Phylogenetic Phantasy  by Sigmund Freud), and 
its various expressions through social systems based on genetic self- 
preservation; one that views the world through a psycho-sexual 
lens related to the baser qualities of the feminine nature.
80 Coretta Scott King - when her name is broken down etymologically, something interesting is 
revealed. Coretta means the "little Core"; Core = "the central or foundational part; the 
essential meaning; the enduring part; the gist..." - Webster 
Scott = Scot; Scot means "Contribution". - Webster
When placed together, Coretta Scott King's name literally means "contribution of the 
foundational part of the King." At the time Coretta Scott King was the role model for all black 
women Co-incidence, or the metaphysical orchestration of Divinity? - Author


--- PAGE 575 ---
120
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
Think the schizophrenic Norman Bates from the movie Psycho...
In other words, the heirarchal Nordic Caucasian male views the 
world through the emotional filter of a woman's psyche, which in a 
woman's body is healthy. But when processed through the neuronal 
and hormonal networks of a man, it becomes patently psychotic. 
(Refer back to the section entitled Equality and the Basic differences  
between Men and Women: The Forgotten Equation).
Unlike the abstract-thinking melanated man of ancient times, 
who by nature and culture viewed the world through a psycho­
spiritual lens of "impersonal one-ness" (the "I-in-I"), the European 
man takes things personally (me-ism, or the "me in I") —like a 
woman scorned. To simply question or not accept his logic or beliefs, 
is to say that you must not like him.
"If you don't accept my political philosophy or my religion, you 
don't accept me. So you must hate me (Norman's mother). 
Therefore, before you destroy me because you hate me (and my red, 
white and blue freedoms) I must subjugate or destroy you" 
(Norman the serial killer). (See perfect example-figure 7.)
And he calls this psychasthenic exercise of projected insanity 
upon the non-white world "the spread of Democracy"—which is 
nothing more than an updated term for his psycho-genetically 
atypical survivalist philosophy called "Manifest Destiny."
The above may appear to be an over-simplistic analogy for a 
complicated psychosis, but it is still the basic underlying mentality 
motivating the elitist European male in his overt behavior towards 
Nature and peoples of color around the world today.
Again, see the recently found (1985) 12-page manuscript of 
Sigmund Freud entitled A Phylogenetic Phantasy,  which clearly 
shows that the reasons for the Caucasian's inherent psycho-sexual 
aggressions and ambivalence toward the rest of the melanated 
populations of the world (and the planet itself), are directly and 
indirectly related to his psycho-sexual/psycho-physiological 
evolution in a hostile glacial environment.


--- PAGE 576 ---
121
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 7
That said; let us move on to the next phase of the plan to co-opt the 
unity and cohesiveness of the Nubian male and female team in the 
Civil Rights era; the physical, mental and psycho-spiritual capture of 
the black queen by the white gynander queen.
After the white king eventually killed the black king (in Memphis of 
all places! Kemetic symbolism?), the white queen was given the next 
phase of her assignment; the socio-economic, psychological and 
cultural recruitment of the "widowed" black queen. This was done to 
establish a gender-based dependency "partnership" where she (the 
white gynander queen) would become (by proxy, example and 
sexual orientation) a vicarious "king" for the black queen.
In other words, the white (queer) queen (symbolized politically as 
"the State"), was to temporarily become for the black (widowed) 
queen, what the black king had been to her for so long—provider, 
protector, lover, and emotional supporter.


--- PAGE 577 ---
122
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
And the white gynander queen could do this now that the black 
king was eliminated (Martin)—as was the black prince (Malcolm). 
Such a role would be easy for the white (queer) queen, since by 
nature she was more man than she was woman anyway.
And so it came to pass that the new (widowed) black queen could 
more easily get jobs and minority start-up business loans, where the 
black prince (who-would-be-king) could not; and that the entire 
scholastic infra-structure of the education system in America was 
over-hauled to reflect a more female-friendly learning environment. 
The latter was accomplished through Wilhelm Wundt's creation of 
'Experimental Psychology' for the purpose of social control, which 
when applied to education became known as the "Prussian System."
This feminized system of 'learning-by-indoctrination' effectively 
destroyed the young black male's comprehensive acuity and his will 
to learn, causing him to instinctively rebel and leave the system in 
droves, thus giving the impression that he could never amount to 
anything except a criminal, an entertainer or a sports gladiator. In 
fact, the movement to 're-construct' black boyhood by feminizing all 
of the nation's young men 'because they victimize females by nature', 
was validated by Gloria Steinem herself, when she said...
"...We need to raise boys like we raise girls."
Feminizing the education system further promoted the perception 
that she (the widowed black queen) was the more adept and "more 
responsible" of the two, and therefore the true head and backbone of 
the black family and the overall community.81
But in reality, the widowed black queen was being 
un-ceremoniously de-throned and demoted in overall status to 
'pawn-queen-concubine' within the new socio-economic chess game; 
that is —the new elite feminist sub-structure. She began to take up 
positions beside her new "partner" in the sky-scraper plantations (i.e. 
the corporate workplace) to support the whims, the dictates, goals
81 And most despicable of all the perceptions promoted to the black female, was the idea that 
she no longer needed the black male to be "whole" or successful in life. Also, check who black 
young males in sports "shout out" to on TV when celebrating personal achievements - it's 
always "hi mom.” -Author


--- PAGE 578 ---
123
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
and priorities of the victorious white king. And now, the new and 
improved white queen as well.
She also assumed the position as his newest, most stable political 
supporter, substantive moneymaker and faithful consumer in 
present-day black society. Look very carefully at the young women of 
our last three to four generations for verification of this. Examine well 
the fact that our sisters occupy the largest employment base in the 
now dismantled black society, from entry-level jobs to the corporate 
penthouses. See for yourselves how black women now graduate 
college at more than triple the number of black men, while more than 
quadruple the number of young melanated males are incarcerated!  (1.6 out 
of 2.4 million men in jail and counting as of February 2008).
Accident of fate? Male genetic pre-disposition to criminality? Post- 
traumatic slave dis-order? All of the above?
Don't count on it.! It's Global (Genecide) 2000 on the move.
Search the record carefully and check how welfare was used as a 
safety net and intermediary step to potential 'success' primarily for 
black woman of the lower economic strata, proving that the 
feminized State had become the "provider husband" to the black 
widowed queen, now that the basic family unit and the black male's 
role in it had been systematically dismantled and disqualified.
Check also the purposeful destruction of America's 
manufacturing base, which had served as the black male's 
economic foundation for supporting his cultural and social roles as 
political activist, provider, protector and head of his family!
And finally, check the life-styles that our younger sisters now 
feverishly pursue, and what economic priorities and social activities 
they have been made to believe are most important today; how the 
personal career now supersedes Nature, marriage, children, culture, 
community, family and the home. Notice that the priorities of the 
white corporate (gynander) queen, have now become the adopted 
priorities of the new black (widowed) queen.82
And think about this as well.
82 Notice too, how "alone" the black Queen has become as well. - Author


--- PAGE 579 ---
124
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Remember the "kinky consciousness" that once made vivid 
declarations of our 'black' solidarity, pride and African self-identity 
since the days of Marcus, Malcolm and the Panthers?83 Well, as I re­
write and embellish upon these words from the year 1992 through 
2008 A.D., all evidence shows that it has been completely abandoned 
and actually reversed  by the greater majority of today's young career- 
motivated black queens. So-called "beauty" parlors nation wide clock 
bukoo dollars every week-end destroying the natural textures of our 
sisters' hair;84 not to mention the application of toxic chemicals to 
color the hair, their fingernails and toe nails. Our black (widowed) 
queen has surrender to the recessive "beauty codes" of the white 
(gynander) queen—her archetypal beauty and melanin identity 
sacrificed in a maniacal metamorphosis of apparent self-hatred.
To give the outward appearance and popular perception of success 
and beauty, the black queen chemically fries her hair 'til it's "bone 
straight", "bouncing", "behaving", blond or damn-near blond! Not to 
mention our sisters in Africa and Europe who've been bleaching their 
skins so much, that a severe health warning had to be issued to them 
by the Board of Dermatologists about overdosing on toxic steroids. 
[Interesting note: in ancient Rome, prostitutes wore their hair blond!]
And speaking of black queens. Check the "new" Queen Latifah 
(See figure 8). I've constructed a collage to portray her mutation 
process from "Black Reign-ing" Nubian queen, to mentally de- 
melanated, quasi-recessive "I made it now I'm blond" court jester- 
starting from the top left of the page, over to the right, on down.
In what appears to be a 'screaming declaration' on her "Order in 
the Court" album cover, we see the "queen" depicted with her hair 
on fire in the shape of a crown —  as if to symbolize her abdicating the 
throne by ritualistically burning off the earlier symbols of her black 
royalty (her crowns), then "bleach-frying" her genetically-dominant 
helixed hair into the bone-straight limp locks of the genetic-recessive.
83 “How ya gonna get respect, when ya haven't cut your process yet?" - Hank Ballard
84 In the past, Caucasian hair dressers and beauticians did not need a license to do the hair of 
their white clientele, black beauticians were the only ones required to have such a license 
because of the dangerous chemicals they used to "beautify" their sisters and brothers - Author


--- PAGE 580 ---
125
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Figure 8. What happened to the "queen" in Queen Latifah?


--- PAGE 581 ---
126
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
It's also ironic that our Nubian sister's biggest selling LP should 
have been titled "Black Reign", which seems to have symbolically 
come to a fiery end with her "comeback" release of "Order in the 
Court." Here we have a -perfect example of what I mentioned earlier 
about the white gynander queen having seized control of the mind, 
heart, body and archetypal soul of the "widowed" black queen.
Or perhaps I'm wrong, and she was symbolically burning away 
that ridiculous platinum blond wig she wore to the opening of her 
movie "Hairspray" (bottom left); or that "I look just like these two 
white girls" hair-doo she wore on the cover of September 2007's 
Glamour magazine—which also professes to tell you exactly how to 
"look and feel your sexiest at 20, 30, (and) 40" with "the (straight) hair, 
the skin and the body secrets." It would be interesting to see the 
public's reaction to Claire Danes and Mariska Hargitay (the two 
women on either side of Latifah), if they posed for Glamour wearing 
the royal habiliments that Latifah once wore. If they did of course, 
these women would look patently ridiculous — and even they know this!
So why is it that today's "successful" black woman thinks she 
looks anything but ridiculous to conscious black people, when she 
dons the recessive tresses and habiliments of the Nordic woman?
And think about this as well beloved sisters.
New York shock-jock Don Imus made a racist on-air remark 
concerning the female basketball players at Rutgers University. He's 
heard calling these black young women "nappy-headed 'hoes."
The black community is positively irate. Black feminists slither out 
of the woodwork to voice their indignation.
But here's the thing. Black women appeared to be split in their 
decision over which part of the slur angered them the most—being 
called nappy-headed —  which they deemed to be a racist remark 
against their genetics, and being called 'hoes', an insult to their moral 
character as women. Trouble is, not one of the sisters on the Rutgers  
basketball team had nappy hair.  All of them had the same bone-straight, 
limp, lifeless recessive locks as the one white member on their team!
So what can we glean from all this?


--- PAGE 582 ---
127
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Sadly, it seems that young black girls today take extreme umbrage 
at being called "nappy-headed", which in fact as daughters of 
African descent, THEY ARE! Where just 45 years ago black people 
were "happy to be nappy", today most young black people are so 
estranged from anything even resembling their true selves, that the 
code-words of self-hatred engendered from slavery's legacy are once 
again being re-invested with the potency of their former meanings.
Our fairly recent achievements of racial self-love and self-pride 
have all been tragically negated by 50 years, as "successful" black 
women have ignominiously regressed back into psycho-social 
standards of beauty originally set for black women by the misplaced 
ingenuity of a Walter Sammons (inventor of the hot comb; US patent 
# 1,362,823; Dec. 21, 1920), and Sarah Breedlove aka. Madam C.J. 
Walker—who became America's first female millionaire promoting 
the 'de- melanization' of African women.
Trends and Split Ends...
•
And believe it or not beloved, magazines like Essence are actually 
the white queen's corporate sponsored clearing-houses for black 
fashion. They are utilized to mold and cultivate the social psychology 
and consumer-consciousness of the young black (widowed) queen. 
Essence in particular has been used as the fashion flagship for 
"today's black woman"; the perception molding leader that visually 
stimulates and emotionally influences the way the emerging black 
career woman must look to be considered "successful" in life.
Item: A particularly sobering example of how insane the current pursuit of "black 
female beauty" has become, is the fact that the black cosmetics and hair care 
industry, which promotes the perversion of our sisters' (and brothers') natural 
attributes, sell products that are made almost exclusively by Korean-owned  
companies.  See Aron Ranen's revealing documentary "Black Hair", where he 
exposes the pathetic fact that black women spend billions—that's right family —  
billions every year on hair care products; that even though they constitute only 10 
percent of the population, they buy 70 percent  of all the (straight hair) wigs and 
hair extension products purchased in the United States. Asked how important it is 
that a black woman get her hair 'done', a hair stylist being interviewed


--- PAGE 583 ---
128
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
in the film is heard to say "...It's very important. They'll take they last dime to get 
they hair done. In fact, they'll go hungry before they let they hair look bad..."
Again; where does the vast majority of these collective black 
billions in resources go? To the Koreans.
Beloved sisters; the health of one's hair depends largely upon the 
health of the kidneys. According to Chinese medicine and the 
ancient occult sciences, the seat of our ancestral "chi" (or genetic life 
force) lies in the kidneys! So symbolically, for black hair to 
"bounce", "behave" and be "manageable", is to have killed the 
by-product of your ancestral chi; that is —your genetically dominant  
helixed (kinky) hair!  Sista-queen, bone straight hair is genetically  
recessive hair that is bio-chemically and spiritually "dead" to your 
ancestral consciousness! (There's a hint in there someplace).
Consequently, we see young pre-teen black girls' hair continue to 
break off because their mothers try to imitate the hairstyles of black 
celebrities, who themselves are imitating the hair styles of white 
movie stars and gynandric corporate queens. (Check the dead- 
straight mop-styled hair-do of Hailey Berry in the movie X-Men 3).
It’s also sad to see bald spots and receding hairlines on such young 
sisters in poorer neighborhoods, caused by bad nutrition, hot combs 
and straightening chemicals, as well as by mothers pulling the short 
weakened hair follicles back into very tight buns, corn rows and 
braids. And just as disheartening is the fact that now our beautiful 
sisters are also made to believe that it is "fashionably necessary" to 
wear the weaved-in, scalped-off hair of Asian strangers (traditionally 
imported from Korea) as well as the sheared hair once belonging to 
some unfortunate animall (Another hint?)
The new dress code of the widowed black queen—much like her 
area code, bank code, pin code, and zip code—have all been neatly 
fused together to create a living bar code of sub-conscious identity and 
behavior; an alien "walk-in" personality that directly and indirectly 
imitates the social prerogatives, goals and self-centered behaviorisms 
of the parasitic elite's white (gynander) queen.


--- PAGE 584 ---
129
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Epitaph:
Highlights of the "Chess match"...
•
To summarize the previous ten (10) sections; the white king 
(a.k.a. the Black Pope, Illuminati, Zionist, Aryan corporate elite) 
through the sub-structures he has created for the white gynander 
queen (Amazonian feminism), has once again neutralized the threat 
of the black king; this time by way of the socio-economic, 
psychological and political capture of his black queen. He has once 
again undermined all chances for the black male to unilaterally 
achieve and maintain provider-protector status in a black 
conceived, black created society. More importantly, in the 
chessboard struggle for genetic survival, the white king has 
effectively "checked" and temporarily taken as his unwitting ally, 
the black king's most prized and powerful co-player in today's 
genetic survival game —the educated, corporate black queen.
If you find all of this hard to believe and wish further proof of 
my many previous observations, just get a-hold of the May 2003 
issue of Ebony magazine and turn to page 55. The title of the piece 
reads " Flipside - Why some Sisters only date White Men and Others."
In this article you will come to learn about an organization of 
some 40,000 black women (and growing) who date only white men!  
But as if that ain't enough of a wake up call, you also learn that the 
head of this organization is a man named Steven Glochowsky —  a 
Polish jew!
Ummm. Seems that the speech by Rabbi Rabinovich and the 
fears and accusations of the Aryan elite about the Khazaarian 
conspiracy, may not be so far-fetched after all!
Look around at today's society beloved. Young white women 
have become estranged from their true feminine natures, seeking 
corporate power over family. They're becoming not only less fertile, 
but less willing to be house-wives and mothers, while at the same 
time passing these twisted deportments on to young impressionable 
black women, thereby causing a stepped up climate of competition


--- PAGE 585 ---
130
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
between the black male and the white parasitic elite for control of 
the destiny of the black (widowed) queen into the 21st century.
It has also helped to justify and reinforce the pathogenic mind- 
mapping of the un-conscious black male, warping his perception of 
beauty. In other words, if black women want to look blond and act 
white —what the hell, why not chase the real thing? Proving that 
black males (especially young athletes and entertainers) are just as 
psychotically clueless of their collective responsibilities to their own 
melanated mothers, having no sense of propriety or perspective when 
it comes to their own people's traumatic history and its legacy; not 
thinking twice about whose families will eventually profit from half 
their hard-earned monies, investments and overall wealth.
(Can anybody say Tiger Woods, O.J 'Simpleton', or Seal?)
Be that as it may; without the physical, spiritual and psychological 
bond of the original partnership provided by the black king, the 
material achievements of the black (widowed) queen amount to 
nothing more than fragmented victories singularly beneficial to but 
one and only one thing at this time; the white king and the white 
queen's 'demon-cratic' and 'repug-nican' slave-oriented one-world 
power structure, underwritten by the global parasitic elite.85
And what has the present defeat of the black king meant to black 
society in general? See for yourself.
His legatee —that is, the black prince-who-would-be-king—is no 
longer heir to a vibrant and productive heritage that would have 
rightfully been passed on to him by a reigning black king. The young 
black prince has been exiled to the hostile wilderness of a 
dysfunctional urban wasteland. Without the guidance and 
benevolence of a father-king, his natural genius and abilities for 
creativity and leadership have been "checked" and confined —now 
used as weapons against him, or as consumer-commodities for the 
enrichment of the white male power-elite. Each day the black prince
85All wealth achieved by successful black businessmen and women, athletes and entertainers 
end up enriching the friends and families of their white mates for generations to come.
- Author


--- PAGE 586 ---
131
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
invents new ways to commit cultural, economic, spiritual, and 
psychological suicide with his own inherent "gifts."
The black prince-who-would-be-king has also been forced to use 
his mal-nurtured genius to create a hybrid society akin to family. He 
formed what the oppressor has defined as "gangs" wherein a 
perverse principle of family, authority, rites of passage, culture, 
commerce, protection and the sense of belonging have blossomed; all 
such aspects attributed to the missing father-principle; all this in the 
barren wastelands of desolate urban battlefields.
In other words, he has done in exile what he would have naturally 
(and wholesomely) done, had he been allowed to; as he has done 
since the beginning of time ... he established a society of his own!
But as a result of his perverse survival endeavors, he has once 
again been relegated to the status of "prey animal" by the white king; 
an endangered specie with no other perceived worth than the dollar 
value some corporate pimp affixes to his creative, athletic or sexual 
prowess. He walks a precariously thin line between bit-player and 
non-entity, where he entertains the white king's world as the 
Hollywood-appointed buffoon (Chris Rock; Cedric The Entertainer;  
Chris Tucker; Erkle; J.J. on Good Times; Step-n-Fetch it; Amos n Andy)  -  
the guest fool in today's talk show circus —the video criminal (on the 
six o'clock news 'perp-walk'; 50 Cent; The Game; Tupac; Onyx; Notorious  
B.I.G.; Ole Dirty Bastard; Mob Deep, etc.) —  -or as a high-priced 
gladiator (Michael Jordan; Shaq; Mike Tyson; LeBron James; Barry Bonds;  
Kobi Bryant; Deion Saunders) in the white male's sports86 arenas.
And why have I included such sordid details related to young 
black men as a topic of concern regarding black women's health? 
Because this feminized society would have you believe that your 
problems as a black woman are totally unrelated to the upliftment
86 Sport - It's interesting to note here that the word "sport” comes from the Anglo-Norman word 
"desporter," which meant "to carry away"; "divert"; or "amuse." It did not come to mean 
athletic contest until the 19th century. So in essence, to the White king, "sports" are the tool 
that "amuses" us so as to "divert" our attention, while he continues "to carry away" the 
cultural, economic and intellectual spoils of our Muurish/Khemetic kingdoms. - Author


--- PAGE 587 ---
132
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
and well-being of your black man. They want it imbedded into your 
feminine psychology that women are society's primary victims, and 
as such, you must now consider the singular plight of women first,  as 
opposed to the collective plight of our people; because all men are —  
by nature—society's primary victimizers!
A March 21st, 2007 article in The Chatanoogan" entitled America 
Has Lost a Generation of Black Boys,  by Phillip Jackson said it all. The 
statistics of the carnage wrought against young black manhood are 
horrifying, yet this topic is nowhere to be seen or heard of as a 
priority-one emergency issue on the agendas of America's feminized 
black women, men and their related organizations.
The following should move a gynic mother, wife, sister or 
daughter to desperate tears, if and only if their natural feminine 
instincts and empathy for their sons have not been completely 
eviscerated by the perceptual chainsaw of new wave gender- 
feminism.
Jackson writes...
"...There is no longer a need for dire predictions, hand-wringing, or apprehension 
about losing a generation of black boys. It is too late. In education, employment, 
economics, incarcerations, health, housing and parenting, we have lost a generation 
of young black men...."
".. .Only 35% of black male students graduated from high school in Chicago and only 
26% in New York City, according to a 2006 report by The Schott Foundation for 
Public Education. Only a few black boys who finish high school actually attend 
college, and of those few black boys who enter college, nationally, only 22% of them 
finish..."
"...Young black male students have the worst grades, the lowest test scores and the 
highest dropout rates of all students in the country. When these young black men 
don't succeed in school, they are much more likely to succeed in the nation's criminal 
justice and penitentiary system. And it was discovered recently that when a black 
man graduates from a U.S. college, there is a good chance that he is from Africa, the 
Caribbean or Europe, and not from the United States..."
"...There are more black men in prisons and jails in the United States (about 1.1 
million) than there are black men incarcerated in the rest of the world combined. This 
criminalization process now starts in elementary schools with black male children as 
young as six and seven years old being arrested in staggering numbers according to a 
2005 report "Education on Lockdown" by the Advancement Project..."


--- PAGE 588 ---
133
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
...The rest of the world is watching and following the lead of America. Other 
countries including England, Canada, Jamaica, Brazil and South Africa are adopting 
American social policies that encourage the incarceration and destruction of young 
black men...But still, there is no adequate response from the American or global 
black community..."
"...Worst of all is the passivity, neglect and disengagement of the black community 
concerning the future of black boys. We do little while the future lives of black boys 
are being destroyed in record numbers. The schools that black boys attend prepare 
them with skills that will make them obsolete before, and if, they graduate. In a 
strange and perverse way, the black community itself has started to wage a kind of 
war against young black men, and has become part of the destructive process..." 
"...Who are young black women going to marry?  Who is going to build and  
maintain the economies of black communities? Who is going to anchor strong  
families in the black community? Who will young black boys emulate as they  
grow into men? Where is the outrage of the black community at the destruction of  
its black boys? Where are the plans and the supportive actions to change this?...''  
"...Ironically, experts say that the solutions to the problems of young black men are 
simple and relatively inexpensive, but they may not be easy, practical or popular. It is 
not that we lack solutions, as much we lack the will to implement these solutions to 
save black boys..." [All emphases mine]
Surprisingly, in an unprecedented shift of gender-centric opinion, 
staunch neo-feminist Christina Hoff-Sommers actually agreed with 
the principle arguments articulated above. In her book The War  
Against Boys: How Misguided Feminism Is Harming Our Young Men,  she 
points to the unilateral damage that feminism has wrought upon the 
young males of western society, and the terrible collateral effect its  
been having on the women as a result. The book is a scathing 
indictment of the absolute failure of the philosophy and goals of 
gender feminism, and what it has done to undermine and devastate 
the overall fabric and cohesive infrastructures of a healthy society.
So my beloved sister-seeker, do you still believe that the plight of 
the modern-day black woman originates and operates within a 
psycho-social vacuum? Do you still believe that the wretched and 
abysmal conditions surrounding the average life of the black male, 
are somehow unrelated to the near-abysmal state of physical and 
psychological health afflicting our black female populations in 
America? Something to seriously ponder—wouldn't you say?


--- PAGE 589 ---
134
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
Proof of the Payoff:
Affirmative Action...
•
Those of you who still believe that my criticisms of feminism and 
the roles played by gynandrous European women in helping to 
destroy the afro-centric goals of the Civil Rights Movement, the black 
family and the social status of black men, are all simply the paranoid 
rantings of a misogynist "male chauvinist pig"—go study the 
findings of a federal task force assigned to investigate what was said 
to have been the Civil Rights movement's most important and 
prestigious achievement —Affirmative Action.
Affirmative Action was supposed to have been a policy 
implemented by our government to "level the social playing field" 
for black folks in post-slavery America. In essence, it was to allow so- 
called minorities (the descendants of so-called 'negro' slaves) the 
opportunity to "catch up" to the economic status of the average 
Caucasian male; to get a foothold on the higher part of the mountain 
by allowing black people access to, and participation in, the here-to- 
fore forbidden white sanctuaries of social, economic and political 
power.87
But isn't it strange and surprising to learn that between July and 
October of 1981, oversight hearings before the Sub-Committee on 
Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (House of 
Representatives —  97th Congress), investigating the impact and 
achievements of Affirmative Action on the present day socio­
economic conditions of black people (and U.S. society in general) 
found that over the then thirty-seven (37) years of its existence, 
Affirmative Action had primarily benefited one and only one specific 
group here in America ... white women?!
Check this fact out for yourself, sister queen!
Question. How and why is it, that political legislation supposedly 
won as a direct result of black people's blood, sweat and tears, ends 
up benefiting primarily the white women of this country?!
87 See "Trading Places," starring Eddie Murphy. - Author


--- PAGE 590 ---
135
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
Answer: It was the pay-off! The "thirty pieces of silver" promised 
to the gender feminist for her part in the destruction of yet another 
black liberation movement. This is why in 1997 there was such a 
passionate and concerted effort to abolish Affirmative Action by the 
conservatives of Congress. They weren't primarily targeting the black 
population (there were blacks supporting this as well) so much as 
they felt that they had paid enough "extortion and tribute" to the 
white-wicca lesbian sisterhood of the gender feminist inquisition, to 
(again) keep quiet about the parts they played in the destruction of 
yet another black liberation and social empowerment movement.
From the editors of "Focus in Law Studies", the American Bar 
Association's in-house publication, the question was posed in an 
article entitled Affirmative Action: A Dialogue on Race, Gender, Equality  
and Law in America,  which asked —"Has Affirmative Action been 
more successful in helping to achieve gender equality than racial 
equality?"; to which professional educators from varied disciplines 
offered their expert opinions.
Prof. Donna Maeda, associate professor Dept, of Religious 
Studies, Occidental College had this to say...
?
"...One of the limitations in the way Affirmative Action has worked is the lack of 
attention to intersections of gender, race and class. Thus, women of color are often 
invisible in analyses of the impact of effectiveness of Affirmative Action..
Dr. Paul Finkelman, Prof. of Law, Tulsa University;
?
"...White middle class (and upper class) women have been able to take advantage of 
Affirmative Action in ways that blacks cannot, at least in higher education, as 
Jennifer Hochschild points out. Much of this is class based. Since blacks have been, 
for the most part, cut out of the middle class, there are (significant) resources 
available to white women. Thus I would suggest that the turning point for 
Affirmative Action for white women is quite different than for blacks, and so the 
opportunity to achieve has been greater. White women own great amounts of wealth, 
and of course many wealthy white men have daughters who benefit from class 
background, as well as their relationship to white men. This is mostly not true for 
blacks. In the academic world and in most professions, it may be that white women 
bring, in general, advantages to the table that minorities simply do not have..."


--- PAGE 591 ---
136
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
Jennifer Hochschild, Professor of Government and African 
American Studies, Harvard University: (mentioned earlier)...
?
. .1 think we will not get very far by arguing whether race is a bigger handicap than 
white femalehood...or whether the real issue lies in the intersection of femaleness 
and blackness. For white women, class is less of a concern (for many although not all) 
and race is obviously not a concern—but the complexities of family constraints about 
proper roles are very difficult to overcome. Thus, Affirmative Action may be 
important in order to ensure that white women are taken seriously, and that they are 
able to get jobs given the pressures to follow their husbands..
And finally, Glen C. Loury, Professor of Economics; director of 
the Institute on Race and Social Division, Boston University. This 
black man offered the following:
9
"...The white men who control the various professions in which we all work are, by 
and large, sympathetic to the claims of (white) women. They are married to the 
people making these claims; they see in their daughters, future beneficiaries of a 
more gender-open order. (But) by and large, these white men do not respond with a 
similar intimacy-grounded empathy to the claims of blacks. In my profession 
academic economics, the number of white women has gone from essentially zero, to 
1/3 of most graduate school classes at top universities, and 1/4 of tenure-track 
appointments. The combined number of black and Hispanic Americans awarded 
PhDs in the U.S. in recent years, has hovered in the neighborhood of 20 (out of about 
1000 degrees granted)..
It's interesting that Prof. Hochschild should concede the fact that 
the only real problems white women faced in this society when it 
came to the issue of women's rights in the 60s and 70s, especially after 
the Civil Rights movement, was that they had to overcome "family 
constraints about proper roles"and be able to "get jobs" and be 
"taken seriously" given "the pressures to follow their husbands."
So how in the world could a black feminist believe that the white 
woman's gender status and power-issues with white men, are 
somehow related and in solidarity with the class, race and gender 
issues of black males and females descended from captive Africans of 
the Middle Passage? How could she not see that no matter what our


--- PAGE 592 ---
137
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
inter-personal gender issues toward one another may be, that such 
issues are the chronic symptoms of our collective frustration at 
constantly being thwarted, stone-walled, resisted and suppressed in 
our everyday efforts to live and work with honor and dignity here in 
America; as for example, when a black man, returning home from 
serving his country in battle, was refused the same governmental 
welfare perks afforded to white males at the end of World War 2.
Now. Lest you believe that as a black man I am making excuses for 
the present social dispositions suffered by my brethren and my 
sistren today, I recommend to the reader a book that exposes one of 
the very real and primary reasons behind the bleak socio-economic 
conditions that have continued to plague black society in America; a 
work entitled When Affirmative Action Was White,  by Ira Katznelson 
Ph.D.
Dr. Katznelson is currently a Ruggles Professor of Political Science 
and History at Columbia University. In his work, he shows that the 
socio-economic legislations of the 1930s and the 1940s blatantly 
favored whites over blacks. The so-called "New Deal" and the "Fair 
Deal" for example, actually widened the gulf between whites and 
blacks for good in the United States, and because of these policies, 
blacks became seriously worse off during this period, which set the 
socio-economic tone, trends and conditions currently experienced by 
blacks in society today.
Prof. Katznelson exposes how the Democrat's social and economic 
policies of the 30s and 40s were rigged so that whites got much more 
than their fair share of the social benefits. In post World War II 
America for instance, Prof. Katznelson shows in precise detail how 
the much acclaimed 'Cl Bill' further widened the economic and social 
differences between the races. Of the 3,229 GI Bill-guaranteed loans 
for homes, businesses and farms made in Mississippi in 1947 for 
example, only TWO (2) were offered to black veterans!
He also reveals with disturbing clarity through statistical accuracy, 
the many racist reasons why current generations of blacks are so 
disproportionally poor and dis-advantaged to the number of poor


--- PAGE 593 ---
138
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
whites in America, after being purposefully put at a dis-advantage by 
the unjust socio-political agendas of the 1930s and 1940s. By 1984, 
seven out of ten whites owned their own homes worth on average 
$52,000, but only one in four blacks owned a home worth on average 
less than $30,000.
Throughout his entire work, Prof. Katznelson clearly illustrates in 
dramatic fashion that the current socio-economic conditions suffered 
by a disproportionate majority of blacks in America today, were 
primarily caused by the economic gulf artificially created, placed and 
maintained between the races during the middle of the twentieth 
century.
So I put it before the black feminist once again; with such glaring 
evidence of deceit, theft and pre-meditated wickedness perpetrated 
against our grandparents collectively as a people, how could you 
even think to physically or philosophically disaffect yourself from the 
black man, to align with a "woman" that has absolutely nothing in 
common with your genetic or cultural reality? How could you forget 
yourself and disavow your history by siding with a psycho-political 
ideology that, in the end, primarily dealt with re-structuring and re­
defining the insidious mechanisms of white privilege —  this time, 
primarily for the benefit and empowerment of white women?
Why do you think they would create a socio-economic category 
called "women and minorities?" Why else but to condition the 
mindset of the masses into accepting the idea that the word "women" 
in this phrase, actually meant all women —which would logically 
mean that the remaining category "minorities" — are all black or non­
white men!
Actually, black women (according to the phrase) could vacillate 
between two categories —a minority and a minority female-  the word 
"women" being deceptively reserved as an exclusive category for 
"white" women —but one that black females could technically (but 
nominally) share, merely because of reproductive plumming!
It's 'bodaiciously' Orwellian!


--- PAGE 594 ---
139
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Is it not obvious by now my sister, that the insidious reasoning 
behind creating a socio-economic category such as "women and 
minorities", was to give you the option to choose between the 
liberated "majority" world of white women and privilege, or the 
slave-oriented "minor"-ity world of under-privileged black and 
brown men and women —  the choice being an obvious one.
Is it not clear by now that the real reason for introducing such an 
oxymoronic phrase into the social lexicon, was to radically divide and 
subsequently destroy whatever was left of the archetypal bonds that 
held us together through 465 years of captivity?
Tactic #15 of so-called 'Willie's Protocols' state quite clearly that 
"...you must use the female versus the male and the male versus the 
female." What part of this simple phrase is so hard to overstand?
Think about this seriously, my sister, for when you participate in 
the world (or sub-structure) that the neo-feminist has built, you have 
accepted a share of the payoff; a payoff that represents the dividends 
earned from destroying the stability of your own home, your man, 
your family and your culture; in essence —the archetypal reality of 
your essential feminine self.
Doctor Fem:
A fleeting thought ...
•
One other puzzling paradox of feminism that appears to defy all 
logic (in light of what feminism claims to represent), is their 
mainstream approach to the subject of health and wellness. Staunch 
card-carrying feminists still turn faithfully to a 'chauvinist' medical 
oligarchy to solve the problem of women's diseases. "Liberated" 
women doctors still utilize and promote the same protocols, 
processes and techniques of this "patriarchal", treatment-aggressive 
medical system.
The very foundations of western medicine are historically rooted 
in the soils of inquisitional superstition, military tactics, and a belief- 
oriented myopia unique to their European male counterparts.
Make sense to you?


--- PAGE 595 ---
140
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
Add to this the fact that feminist doctors are trained in the same 
medical church-schools, administer the same poisonous drugs, and 
perform the same god-awful blood-letting rituals of surgery on their 
sisters as do their masculine colleagues.
So what pray-tell is the qualitative difference? That a woman is 
doing this?
Forgotten Achievements:
What the Feminist quietly and conveniently omits ...
Again, I may be wrong but it seems to me that the ultimate goal of 
the Amazonian feminist is not for the ascendancy of true woman 
power, but rather, to usurp and re-classify archetypal roles and 
systems already in place; roles and systems traditionally created and 
developed in the outer society by men —for men.
In other words, the feminist's concept of woman-power is actually 
defined by how well she is able to co-opt, wield and manipulate the 
already existing masculine principles or 'man-power' in place!
Look very carefully at this fact my sisters, for in as much as the 
devout feminist vociferously vilifies the masculine principle, and 
blames him for just about everything wrong in her world, there is 
practically nothing that she touches daily in that world—from the 
bed she sleeps in —to the alarm clock that awakens her —to the light 
switch she turns on —  the bulb and the electricity that courses through 
the bulb —the sewing machine that makes the clothing she wears —  
the radio, the refrigerator, the microwave, her stove, her toaster, her 
television —  the design and construction of the house or apartment 
wherein she lives, to the car she drives or the bicycle she rides, the 
eyeglasses she wrears, the telephone she uses; and yes — the very jobs 
and "career opportunities" she now lays claim to — ALL of these 
things and countless more, were originally imagined, designed, 
developed, created, invented and manufactured by MEN!
And these are undeniable facts. Therefore my sisters, never allow 
gender feminists to vilify the masculine principle in your presence, to


--- PAGE 596 ---
141
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
the extent that you yourself should sub-consciously adopt the 
cynical attitude that "...all men are pigs and dogs." Hey, some of us 
truly are, but account for less than 1%!! But ALL of us? What then 
does this make you? It is you who give birth to men my queen!
Such words as these spew from the cancerous mindset and 
venomous lips of a parasitic cult of rich, elitist, mal-contented and 
mal-adjusted American and European women, who promoted these 
ideologies as their 'feminist doctrines of faith.'
Remember also my sister who is really backing them. (See section 
entitled 'The Queer Queen Factor.)
Now; granted there are arguments which portray quite accurately 
the asinine uses of masculine ingenuity for the creation of weapons 
and industries of mass destruction —  each of such magnitude as to be 
able to negate all of the above achievements within a matter of 
seconds. This is true in every sense of the word, and any movement 
that deals with curtailing or eliminating the excesses of psychotic 
male-orchestrated technologies —  particularly military and medical 
technologies geared towards mass destruction, disease proliferation 
and ecological rape—has my complete and whole-hearted support.
On the other hand, the subject of incredible inventions created and 
developed by black men and women here in America is never taught 
in any European-dominated school system. Nor is it given the highly 
visible commercial attention accorded the 'Einsteins', the 'Edisons' 
and the 'Graham Bells.'
Aside from our melanated ancestors' creation and development of 
the sciences of government and civilization itself,88 there were the 
sciences of mathematics, astronomy, botany, physics, geometry, 
architecture, theology, sculpturing, writing and psychology.
From the nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries, melanated 
men and women have been the creator/inventors or refiners of such
88 Washington, D.C. was originally designed and built by the Moors — Benjamin Banaker-Bey 
(Ben Bey), not L'Enfant. -Author


--- PAGE 597 ---
142
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
things as the traffic light, the heating furnace, the refrigerator, the 
toilet, the fire extinguisher, the lawn mower, the air conditioning 
unit, the helicopter, the fire escape, the ice cream mold, the electric 
lamp, the elevator, the blimp, the clothes dryer, the printing press, the 
horse riding saddle and bridle bit, the corn planter, the shoe lacing 
machine, the coupling mechanism for linking trains, refrigerator 
trucks, the incandescent light bulb, blood plasma, open-heart 
surgery, medicinal and commercial uses for the peanut, automatic 
transmission, the guided missile, the multiple stage rocket, assistance 
in the development of the atomic bomb—and just recently—the super 
soaker water gun, the home security system, the completion and 
validation of the Grand Unified Theorem, the internet and the 
development of the microchip and artificial intelligence.
And the list (literally) goes on and on!
All in all there exists in excess of more than one thousand two 
hundred (1,200) or more patented inventions that were callously 
stolen and used by the global white male's industrial power 
structure, with no moral or ethical regard for monetary compensation 
to the legatee of the many brilliant black men (and women) who 
created them, enhanced them, or helped make them possible.
Again, if there's but one drawback to all of these monumental 
achievements made by the male to "advance" this society, it's that he 
may have un-intentionally invented himself into obsolescence.
Does design denote function...?
•
As it stands today, our gynic sister-queens have been forced into 
'servitude-survival' modes that compel them to keep pace with 
ideologies and behaviorisms that were formulated by gynandrous 
women; women whose feminine instincts are virtually non-existent. 
By them having to join this type of female in the plantation towers (to 
help her pursue her quest for 'equality') our gynic sisters have had to 
perform at paces that far exceed their own bodies' natural anatomical 
limitations!
This crucial fact does not concern the gender-feminist in the least,


--- PAGE 598 ---
143
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
since she has already violated the natural boundaries of gender- 
integrus behavior, causing her to become more masculine by nature. 
She is far less sensitive to her true gynic self, and can barely feel the 
anatomical symptoms of stress more readily felt by her gynic sister.
Her testosterone-poisoned physiology has influenced her thinking 
as well; so much so that she no longer receives input from her 
intuitive 'mother-wit', or even desires to access it. Instead, such 
women demand the right to participate in testosterone driven 
activities like armed forces combat, police and firefighting, pro­
wrestling (see figure 8), football, basketball, ice-hockey, weightlifting, 
boxing, marathons, auto mechanics, aerobics (which are actually 
military boot-camp exercises), etc.
But what the Amazon conveniently overlooks is the fact that the 
above activities evolved into being as a result of the male's 
testosterone driven expression of physical prowess and endurance —  
not the female's! Should a woman persist in taking on such stressful 
courses of activity, by the dictates of Universal Natural Law it could 
only lead to one thing. She has to mutate!.
Sisters caught up in the fever of these types of atypical activities 
are never told this one important fact; for a woman to tolerate and 
sustain the overwhelming physiological and psychological stresses 
brought on by the above activities, she would have to pervert and 
derange the gynic orientation and internal architecture of her 
feminine bio-chemistries and archetypal design! The consequences 
of this would be to drastically alter the internal conditions that 
maintain the homeostasis so necessary to the integrity of a healthy 
body. Beloved, the physiology of a woman was not created so perfect 
and so specialized just to prove that it could be grotesquely mutated 
to withstand enormous amounts of overt, unnecessary stress; 
especially of the types demanded by those activities noted above.
From the natural hour-glass shape of the archetypal woman's 
body —to the lesser density of her epidermal tissue and muscle 
mass; the interior mechanics, structure and composition of her 
reproductive organs; the delicate ligaments holding her ovaries and 
fallopian tubes in place; the utero-vaginal nerves, the softer tissues 
comprising her breasts and the higher pitched, generally softer


--- PAGE 599 ---
144
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T 0
tones of her voice; all these are not just "accidental mutations" of 
the higher primate gene pool.
These are the vivid indicators of a Superior Universal Intelligence  
at work; evidence of Nature Mother's primary purpose for such a 
magnificent construct; limitations intentionally built into the 
original feminine prototype, to guide the overall instinctive behavior 
of such a highly precisioned organism by virtue of its implicit 
design.
In other words, a woman's anatomical design and make-up 
inherently defines her limits to function healthfully at specific 
physical tasks. Since a woman is generally comprised of and 
constructed into a far more delicate biological template than a male, 
would it not stand to reason that her behavior and her activities (or 
"work" and "play") should not exceed those anatomical limitations 
that Nature has set for her — by design?
Item: Some of us looking back at the history of our people's former great 
civilizations (particularly during times of overwhelming trials and tribulation), 
would point to the fact that women have always stepped forward to do battle in 
war, or to assume the overall social and physiological responsibilities of men.
This is absolutely true. No argument there.
But the capability of a black woman to perform and succeed 
under conditions of tremendous stress is not the issue. She has 
courageously proven herself time and time again. In fact, she 
continues to do this very same thing today. But at what sacrifice?
Let me reiterate!
This book was written to show the consequences  that inevitably 
result from a woman's participation in, or exposure to, pathological 
levels of physical and psychological stress; to show how pathogenic 
environments and certain unconscious behavioral patterns mutate 
the physiology (and thus the nature) of a woman, causing her to 
become more susceptible and accommodating of disease.
This above all has been the paramount issue under scrutiny 
throughout this entire work!
I also remind the reader that the above scenario concerning


--- PAGE 600 ---
145
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 9.
Woman wrestling man (Man upside down)
women's 'she-roic' capabilities, has always taken place only when and 
wherever their men were decimated by environmental cataclysm or totally  
defeated in warfare.89 It was not considered natural, "normal" or 
commonplace —  much less intelligent—for women to leave children 
and the protection and security of the village, to fight alongside 
capable warrior men in times of war. Everywhere on the planet this 
fact was understood by all cultures; that is —  the male has always been 
the provider and the protector! Should we now consider this 
consensus consciousness of ancient Earth just another co-incidence or
89 In fact we may see evidence of this decimation and destruction in the ruins of what we call 
"Black Society" today. Check how our sisters have been forced to the "frontlines" of battle for 
the survival of a fragmented black society on the corporate plantations of today . - Author


--- PAGE 601 ---
146
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
accident of Nature as well? Or as feminists like to view it 
historically —  a legacy of the global masculine ego?
Those activities mentioned earlier, the ones now enviously 
coveted by the modem masculinized woman, were all developed by 
the male through motivation from the twin polarities governing his 
archetypal masculine nature; twin polarities that emanate from what 
is most basic in him as his provider/protector instincts; the above- 
mentioned sport and career activities all being yang by nature, and 
thus a direct outgrowths of these instincts.
A man's physiology and psychology (along with his related 
mannerisms and "games") all reflect the basic drives dictated by 
these two gender-imperatives; all the above games and activities 
being formulated by him to test and hone his skills as provider and 
protector for the woman, the child and the society.
But from the 60s to the present, throughout the length and breath 
of our nation, these archetypal instincts of the man have been 
summarily attacked, ridiculed, mis-represented, vilified, discredited 
distorted and then (of all things) co-opted by feminists—evidenced by 
the publishing of many books and assorted literature with such titles 
as "All Men Are Jerks Until Proven Otherwise"  by Daylle Schwartz.
And such venomous literature has become commonplace. So 
much so that now, in some perverse act of role reversal, the feminist 
woman is seen denying her own precious nature and gender- 
instincts, in favor of adopting the very same careers, habits, clothing, 
mannerisms and idiosyncrasies that (according to the above- 
mentioned book), she herself claims to despise in all men!
But maybe this was her goal all along.
Think on that beloved!
9


--- PAGE 602 ---
147
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Cross-dresser Chic...
•
"...A woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man; 
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment; for all that 
do so are abominations unto the Lord thy God ..."
- Deuteronomy 22:5
Figure 10
He, She, S-him —  'Homo-Anomalous'
On the home page of the website www.livingdoll.org/uk, the 
question is posed "..Are men the new women...?"
All I can say is "...how slippery the slope down which we slide, to 
the oblivion of gender suicide."
The seeker may not appreciate my poetry, but I hope he or she 
can appreciate the irony. Even with today's common knowledge of 
the insidious 'gendercidal tactics' practiced by the parasitic elite, 
we've still allowed them to lay claim and take possession of the 
testicles of a significant number of our young black men,


--- PAGE 603 ---
148
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
effectively snuffing out whatever lingering residue of manhood still 
flickering within the deepest recesses of their damaged, mutilated 
psyches.
Irreproachable evidence of the end of days? One would think so.
As a movement purporting to have "defined the times", feminism 
seems to have evolved to become its own contradiction. One such 
paradox is displayed in how the 90s-millennium corporate female is 
made to "dress for success." The image of success in this case, is to 
choose the appropriate "power clothing;" that is—clothing that looks 
remarkably like those of the man. Bottom line, it appears that the 
upwardly mobile career woman of the 90s and the new millennium, 
is a bona fide state-sanctioned cross-dresser.
Item: If I (as a man) were to wear a dress, a skirt, a blouse, bra, panties and make 
up to my place of employment, in most cases I would be fired or recommended for 
psychiatric observation. But today, magazines like Vogue, Essence, Ebony, Elle 
and Cosmopolitan (so-called mainstream, reputable, opinion-shaping 
publications) all advertise cross-dresser chic  as the symbol of "power, status and 
success" for upwardly mobile career women. One wonders how gender-feminists 
have managed to dupe the female consumer public into embracing such a 
degrading image, while still managing to maintain their philosophical  integrity—  
much less a straight face.
A further testament to feminist contradictions has been their 
ability to appear on television, in movies and at open forums to speak 
vociferously about our society's chauvinist policies of degrading the 
image of women, while walking around dressed (in part or totally) in 
the most overt symbols of the very gender they claim perpetuates 
their degradation; that being suit jackets, pants and sometimes even a 
tie.
How more degrading is it to claim that you are repressed by the 
male, and at the same time (in your quest for "freedom") wear his 
pants, his jackets, his vests, his shirts and even his boxer shorts — the 
very clothing symbolically associated with the power and status of a 
man? How much more flattering is it to men that today's women


--- PAGE 604 ---
149
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
show how completely un-imaginative the "90s-millennium feminist" 
can be? I ask the black corporate career woman —does your male 
employer wear a skirt, blouse, panties, pumps or make-up to your 
place of business?90 Of course not. You and everyone else in the 
office would ridicule him. He would most likely be reprimanded or 
even fired by his superiors for not adhering to the "proper dress 
protocol" of the company.
But here's the twist. It's not that his dress, pumps or make up are 
not the proper dress code for the company; it isn't the proper dress 
code for men in the company. Yet and still the women of the company 
could come to work dressed in pants, a vest, suit jacket—even a tie (a 
phallic symbol) —and they would still fall within the proper dress 
code of the company. By all appearances it seems as if the influence 
of the masculine principle is still dominating and winning out.
But of course, appearances are deceiving.
As ridiculous as any man looks dressed up in the habiliments and 
hair-dos of a woman (see figures 9, 10 and 11), it only goes to show 
how numbed and de-sensitized women have become, since they do 
not laugh at themselves and see how ridiculous they look when 
dressed in the styles and clothing of men.
In truth, this is exactly how the majority of women (particularly 
the corporate female) look to those men and women who still possess 
their organic gender instincts — those not blinded by the 'special 
effects' and 'optical delusions' created by the spin doctors of gender- 
feminism perpetuating the equality myth.
A pinstriped suit-jacket, vest and pants, accented by a tie and 
worn by a woman, is nothing less than cross-dressing—plain and 
simple. But society today is so saturated with the gender-bending 
ideologies of feminism, that it has become de-sensitized to the tens of 
thousands of "successful" cross-dressing millennium females who 
are praised continuously for their "cutting edge" style and 
"progressive individualism."
90 He may at home —  who knows? - Author


--- PAGE 605 ---
Figure 11


--- PAGE 606 ---
151
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
De-valuating the Feminine Gender
Penis Envy Chic 
Figure 12


--- PAGE 607 ---
152
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 13


--- PAGE 608 ---
153
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Figure 14
(Becoming the man your mother was)
A perfect example of this can be seen in the November 1996 issue 
of Essence magazine —the one curiously "dedicated to men." On 
page 142 in a side-bar section entitled My Style,  "Chicago 
haberdashery owners tell why they wear the pantsin their families." 
Ms. Deloris Funches and Ms. Marion Lee (see figure 13) explain the 
reasons for their owning 43 men's suits between them, saying
"... We've been wearing men's suits since the eighties. In terms of 
construction and fit, nothing beats them. And talk about sharp. When we 
opened Alto Grande, a big and tall men's boutique in our nephew's 
store, Mario Uomo, wearing our own suits to work seemed like the 
natural thing to do. Of course, there are variations on how we suit up. 
Some days we borrow our whole look from the boys, complete with 
shirt, tie and pocket square. Other times we soften it up by wearing a 
lacy camisole and pretty jewelry. Either way, we try to color coordinate 
when we work together. While men's suits usually cost more than 
women's and have to be tailored for a perfect fit, we consider


--- PAGE 609 ---
154
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T D
buying them a worthwhile investment. Male customers tell us we look 
great, and the women who see us realize it's an option they can try. On a 
good day, we'll sell suits in pairs; one for him and one for her."
Now I ask the seeker to compare the way these gynanders are 
dressed to the way the men in figures 51, 52 and 53 of part one are 
dressed. If you do not see how perverse and ridiculous both the 
"men" and these "women" look as dysfunctional cross-dressers,  
then you have succumbed to the mind-numbing, instinct- 
perverting, psychological conditioning and gender-bending 
philosophies propagated daily by a gender-feminized media.
Madam Chauvinist?
Things that make you go ... Hummm!
•
The movie entitled The Associate starring Whoopie Goldberg was 
yet another in a string of Holly-weird offerings that to date, has 
helped perpetuate cross-dresser chic to today's black woman. The 
billboard advertisement for this movie (see figure 13) had 
Ms. Goldberg decked out in the full regalia of a Wall Street business 
drone, accompanied by the words "...It's a man's world-until  
October 24, 1996.” Evidently, Hollywood wants us to continue in our 
belief that the new symbols of female empowerment are based on 
how well a woman can co-opt and control the existing structures and 
images of white masculine power already in place.
The craziest part of this whole absurd social scenario is, that in all 
of the depictions promoted to us under the heading of "woman 
power", we only see women imitating what men traditionally do. Of 
virtually all the roles thus far assumed by women in the 90s and the 
new millennium, a logical question to ask at this time would be —  
which role was the defining role for the "new woman" —or for any 
woman for that matter?
Other logical questions to ask would be ... what exactly is "woman 
power" in this new socio-political and economic arena of operation? 
Is it simply to show that women can to do "it" better than a man? Do 
what? Does "it" mean to do things that men have been doing all


--- PAGE 610 ---
155
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
along—only this time (according to feminism) hiring women to do 
"it" better?
Item: Does this mean that a woman is simply trading places to maintain the exact 
same "chauvinist systems of oppression" —  only this time, a woman will be in the 
driver's seat? What exactly has changed in the quality of life for the majority of 
both black men and women in western society (in fact, the westernized world), 
since the gender-feminist has seized control of the perception-molding apparatus 
behind power, politics, entertainment, culture and commercialism?
The fashion industry and feminism appear to have struck a 
perverse alliance to promote cross-dressing for women of the 90s and 
the new millennium. All of the latest corporate fashion statements for 
women are merely re-designed variations of the classic Wall Street 
gray flannel businessman's suit. Even if the suit jacket and pants 
happen to button on the "other side", or sometimes has a knee high 
skirt instead of pants, it is still merely a copy of the man's original 
work-a-day monkey suit.
I wonder if my beloved sisters would take a moment to 
contemplate what this phenomenon really entails; viz. —  that socially, 
culturally and psychologically, you are still playing the role of 
imitators, not innovators; that imitation (in this case) is actually a 
perverse form of flattery, and that imitating the roles of men, their 
styles of dress, mannerisms (and recreation) only relegates your 
performance to that of an unconscious supporter of the very system 
of oppression associated with the white corporate male elitist.
Nothing has fundamentally changed. The society that the gender 
feminist appropriated simply changed the image of the oppressor 
from that of the white male to the white female. It has not changed 
the oppressor-apparatus or the foundational origins of that oppression 
(genetic survival; racism; white supremacy); in effect —  Manifest 
Destiny.
Remember beloved sisters, that the old feminist axiom which 
claims "a woman can do whatever a man can do —and better", is an 
out-and-out conceptual lie promoted by the feminist inquisition.


--- PAGE 611 ---
156
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
The truth is, "a woman can do, only what she SEES men do!"
The Myths of
Male Violence and the Reality of Female Aggression ...
•
My position concerning the negative impact of gender feminism 
on the 90's-millennium black woman (her daughters and male 
counterparts) is well documented throughout this thesis. I have 
shown (for those who are open and willing to see) precisely how the 
gender perversion of the archetypal women was planned and 
perpetuated, leading to the erosion and degradation of her archetypal 
family structures, her culture, communities, health, instincts and 
related feminine behaviorisms.
But make no mistake beloved. I am fully aware that feminism, in 
and of itself, did not work in isolation. It was but a tool and a tactic —  
one of many utilized by those in power to manipulate, synchronize 
and control the day to day outcomes of global white supremacy.
Now, in the final stages of this work, I wish to present a couple of 
pertinent examples of just how rampant the ignorance-peddling 
propaganda of feminism has become; how the matter-of-fact day to 
day operations of our society have incorporated so much feminist- 
oriented sexist propaganda against men (and gynic women), that one 
wonders what it would take to revive the collective social mindset 
from its present state of semi-conscious stupor.
I have chosen the works of two authors that I believe to be primary 
examples of this trend —most recently, Ms. Jodie T. Allen and her 
June 23rd 2003 article for U.S. News & World Report  entitled "Are Men 
Obsolete?"; and an earlier offering by Ms. Barbara Smuts in her 
article for Discover Magazine, August, 1995 entitled "Apes of Wrath." 
Theirs are but two of the all-too many blatant across-the-board on­
going attacks on the masculine gender taking place within every 
sector of our society —  as per the psycho-political tactics and strategies 
set forth by the parasitic elite of the global Illuminati. (See section 
entitled Players in The Game)


--- PAGE 612 ---
157
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Ms. Allen begins her article by stating that, not just in Iraq and in 
other Middle Eastern countries...
"... but even in America, men are a perennial and perhaps deepening problem! To 
be sure, men—like women—aren't all alike. They vary greatly in the degree of their 
aggressiveness, need to dominate, and so on. Still, as the social scientists say, certain 
central tendencies' characterize the sexes, and in recent weeks, both Business Week 
and CBS's 60 Minutes have featured stories on the mounting maladies of maleness..."  
[Emphasis mine]
She proudly brings attention to the statistic that girls now out­
perform boys in grades, admissions, student government, and 
extracurricular activities. "Women ... are rapidly closing the M.D. 
and Ph.D. gap and make up almost half the law students," says 
Business Week. But "meanwhile.says  Allen;
".. .boys dominate in such dubious categories as remedial 
education, stimulant-drug prescriptions, and suicide..."
She goes on to say that virtually all of the jobs that require 
"muscles" are either exported to third world countries, or are now 
done by machines, implying that the only thing men contributed to 
this society in the last 2 centuries were grunts, muscles, sweat and 
sperm; which then prompted her to ask facetiously...
".. .What shall we do with all the men...? "
Ms. Allen further implies that men have no foreseeable function in 
the new millennium, and that overall, women tend to excel in non- 
market domains —in such "harmless pursuits" as flower arranging, 
shopping(?) and of course, child rearing. She continued her tongue-in- 
cheek insults by stating;
".. .There remains, to be sure, one large sector in which 
men retain unquestioned domination: crime..."
Of course, no observations were made about contrasting statistics 
that showed the wretched mental and physiological states of today's 
"liberated" career women; or about the glut of single and lonely


--- PAGE 613 ---
158
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
females making up the bar scenes—females searching for meaning in 
their empty lives as they enjoy all the "perks" of their newly won 
emancipation from men, and all things "authoritatively male."
Nor did she mention that the primary reason boys have been 
doing so badly in schools across America over the past 25 to 30 years 
(especially boys from poorer urban neighborhoods), is because the 
entire system of learning in the United States was psycho-politically 
overhauled by a covertly feminized curriculum from the early 1970s 
through the late 1980s. This began with the introduction of the 
German-inspired "Prussian System" in the late 1800s, which was 
then refined into the mentally stultifying modality of instruction 
known as "Outcome-Based Education" (OBE).
The Outcome-Based Education model was deliberately created to 
subvert a young male's natural, innate abilities to develop critical 
thinking and complex problem-solving, in deference to him being 
indoctrinated into a learning model based on non-accountable, vague 
and subjective "emotional enrichment collective learning 
outcomes"—or the feminized model. OBE is an apparatus based on 
mind-structuring by indoctrination that completely disqualifies or 
under-develops a boy's masculine  drives for individual excellence and 
achievement —  unlike the 'old school' curriculums that stimulated the 
intellect and inspired a boy to want to learn, to lead and to excel.
Nor were we told that the sickening statistics she alluded to 
about the state-sanctioned addicting of three generations of boys 
with Ritalin (particularly black boys), are directly connected to the 
satanic profession of psychiatry creating mental diseases out of thin 
air to justify and sustain its six trillion dollar annual income;  that B. 
Brock Chisholm, co-founder of the World Federation on Mental 
Health stated categorically "...the drugging of children was for 
social control, not for better learning environments"; that 
"...schools would better serve their communities as mental health  
clinics rather than as institutions of learning'';  or that the FDA classified 
Ritalin, Anderol and Conserta (drugs prescribed to children) as being 
highly addictive substances  right along with cocaine, heroin and 
methamphetimines; and that what we thought were the so-called 
"gateway" drugs that led to more hard-core subatance abuse in our


--- PAGE 614 ---
159
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
youth, were not alcohol or marijuana after all, but actually the  
prescribed drugs that the children were collecting at pharmacies,  
then re-selling to their peers!
Nor is it common knowledge about the deliberate shifting of 
vital educational and social resources to support failed feminist 
legislation (like Title IX), which literally crippled all male sports and 
related developmental programs across the United States, so that 
white women of Ms. Allen's ilk could continue to suckle freely at 
the golden tit of the Civil Rights cash cow — Affirmative Action!!
As for her quip about male aggressiveness; nowhere is it 
mentioned in her article that a 2001 report on domestic violence 
issued by the Department of Justice, stated that the incidence of 
female-on-male domestic violence has been near or at par with male-  
on-female domestic violence for nearly 10 years, and that the 
statistics were not yet conclusive because men did not readily come 
forth to report such incidences.
Sadly, if Ms. Allen were writing about the above-mentioned 
conditions being a social plague infecting girls, she wouldn't be 
gloating, she'd be hollering bloody murder for immediate attention 
and change to such a sordidly tragic, unjustly "sexist" situation. 
Instead, because it's about young boys and men, she seemed to be 
wallowing gleefully in the sepsis of her own vitriol; gratified at what 
she supposes to be the impending demise of the "alpha male", and 
the triumphant rise of the dominant alpha white female in a brave 
new feminized, emasculated world—her grinning face looming over 
her words on the title page like the Grim Reaper itself.
And the truly sad part of all this is the fact that her article 
appeared in U.S. News & World Report, a major news magazine that is 
distributed around the world! Yet not one of the lobotomized 
eunuchs who pass for men at this magazine had the testicles to step 
to this woman editorially, and shut her feminist diatribe down.
In Apes of Wrath,  Ms. Barbara Smuts presents the theory that 
abusive behavior by human males toward human females should be


--- PAGE 615 ---
160
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
studied and compared to the aggressive behavior of male 
chimpanzees toward female chimpanzees. She contends that if 
science would only study the behavior of these apes and other such 
primates, the public would get a better understanding of why human 
male behavior is so thoroughly screwed up when it comes to women.
On the other hand, women would discover the many ways in 
which they could protect themselves from male abuse; that is—by 
studying what female chimps do to protect one another.
Given the ludicrous premise from which this article was written 
concerning so serious an issue, it's easy to view this woman's work as 
yet another feeble attempt by the feminist propaganda machinery to 
saturate society with more of their perverse psycho-political diatribe 
about the "sub-human" male. It reveals how well the feminist 
inquisition has learned to twist the ongoing studies of western 
science to reflect results that conform to the gender-feminist's 
perception of reality. They manipulate the present tenets of academia 
to coerce the social mindset into dismissing any and all inquiry into 
the prospects of mutual culpability,  which would include historical, 
social and environmental circumstances whenever and wherever the 
subject of abuse arises; be it by male or female.
Throughout her article, Ms. Smuts gives the impression that "male 
aggression" somehow originates in a vacuum, and that "female 
aggression" (if it does exist at all) originates solely as a response to 
male aggression. She fosters the notion that male aggression has no 
external stimulus or peripheral points of reference other than that of 
his own "savage instinctive nature", which is solely based on the 
"territorial urges" of his "Y" chromosome —  like that of a male 
chimpanzee.
In her mind, there is no such thing as female-instigated female 
aggression.
The article reduces the human male to a grunting, 
mono-functional, mentally isolated life form, where the female is 
automatically presumed innocent simply by virtue of her gender;


--- PAGE 616 ---
161
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
dis-associated from any of the aggressive reactions and mannerisms 
displayed by the male towards her.
For example, Ms. Smuts all but glosses over the fact that female 
chimps of certain species (like the Bonobo) are notoriously 
promiscuous, and can take on 5 to 15 sexual partners during her time 
of estrus.
Question: In her attempts to compare the behavior of men and women to
apes, is she condoning or perhaps recommending that such 
behavior be adopted by human females as well—since she calls 
for intensive scientific study on the "coping mechanisms" of the 
female chimpanzee for clues on how the human female should 
act with the human male?
Question: Would violent reactions by a husband to such behavior also be
considered "genetically motivated abusive behavior" by 
Ms. Smuts?
Beloved, I'm not trying to be facetious or demeaning with the 
questions I have posed above. Nor am I attempting to excuse or 
downplay the subject of abusive behavior by men toward women. I 
truly believe such actions to be despicable whenever any man 
physically or mentally abuses a woman. In fact, it is the height of 
psychotic cowardice to purposefully seek such dominance over any 
living creature. But nowadays, it seems convenient and even 
expeditious to omit any references of physical and psychological 
abuses directed toward men by women.  This is especially true of 
psychological abuses by women that go undetected or un-addressed, 
until they explode onto the surface as the violent acts of an "abusive 
male."
For example, women who kill their mates after years of physical or 
psychological abuse are considered victims who heroically lashed out 
in self-defense. In this case, society is conditioned to automatically 
sympathize with the plight of these women, primarily through the 
repetitious reporting of male domestic abuse in the feminized media. 
But society has also been programmed not to give similar


--- PAGE 617 ---
162
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
consideration to the motivation of the man who kills his wife, after 
years of what could have been psychological and physical abuse by the 
woman! These stories get little to no consistent air-time.
Since psychological abuse leaves no immediately discemable scars 
as evidence, a man who claims this kind of abuse is less likely to be 
viewed as a victim by today's feminized society, much less a man.
How convenient that the mechanisms of physical and psychological 
abuses by women against men, and women against women  (especially 
in the corporate work place and in lesbian relationships) are not given 
nearly as much of the overwhelming attention in the mass media as is 
given to the reverse.
Not until recently.
Item: In September of 1997, reporter Dianne Sawyer presented what was titled a 
"shocking" expose on ABC's video news journal "20/20", which revealed that 
"...female instigated domestic violence, is, and has always been, near equal in  
number and frequeticy to male-instigated domestic violence!" It was an incredible 
revelation by the feminized media that left feminists Sawyer and Barbara Walters 
aghast and babbling at each other in disbelief. But the expose' was straight to the 
point citing statistics from a Justice Department report, which stated that this 
phenomenon has remained largely unreported or ignored because men feared that 
the court system in this country would automatically take their children away! In 
fact, the 20/20 report substantiated these fears by showing courtroom sequences 
where women automatically received the benefit of the doubt in virtually all 
domestic abuse situations, even when they were the perpetrators! Why are these 
facts not given the much-needed continuous attention in the media they deserve? 
Why else —  the feminist inquisition of the Parasitic Elite!
And then there are the soaring statistics related to female-on- 
female violence in lesbian relationships, to which Ros Davidson 
writes in her article "Gay on Gay Violence: The Gay Community's 
Dirty Secret —  Domestic violence is finally coming out of the closet", 
Salon Magazine, February 27,1997...
"...A six-city survey conducted by gay activists last year turned up 1,566 reported 
incidents of gay domestic violence, several hundred more than reported incidents of 
anti-gay harassment and violence. People were really surprised, especially around 
lesbian battery..."


--- PAGE 618 ---
163
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"...The notion among feminists, lesbians—among women in general —is that this is a 
male problem. It's part of an older lesbian-feminist paradigm which says that most of 
the problems in the world come from men and if we could isolate ourselves from 
them, then things would be kind of idyllic. It's not true. But people in lesbian 
communities don't want to talk about that publicly. It's like airing dirty laundry..."
From the National Woman's Alliance's "From Silence to Voice: A 
Conference on Partner Violence in Lesbian Relationships" reported 
by Winnie McCory for the Baltimore Gay newspaper, April 16th, 1999, 
we read...
"...While exclusively being a lesbian has little threat of getting AIDS, lesbians have 
their own set of problems. Domestic violence among lesbian partners is so high, that 
workshops on the subject are popping up all around the country..."
And here's another little factoid that Ms. Smuts appears to have 
conveniently overlooked in her "research." From a report in the 
American Journal of Public Health,  volume 85,1995 we find that;
"...Fifteen percent (15%) of lesbians etigage in torture  for sexual fun (sado­
masochism) that included piercing, cutting, or whipping to the point of bleeding with 
their lovers..."
Rhonda Smith's "Lesbians Affected by Domestic Violence", The 
Washington Blade, October 16th, 1998, revealed that...
"...The National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs indicated that of the 3,327 
domestic violence cases self-reported among homosexuals in 12 cities in 1997, about 
half involved lesbian, bisexual and trans-gender women. Fact is, gay men and 
lesbians are more likely to be injured by an intimate partner than a stranger. About 
25 to 33% of all gay male and lesbian relationships involve abuse..."
R. Morgan Griffin, in her article entitled "Bleeding In Silence: 
Sociologist Studies Woman-to-Woman Sexual Violence", Gay 
Health.com, May 10th, 2000, cites the findings of Lori B. Gishick, 
professor of women's studies at Warren Wilson College, North 
Carolina who worked in battered women's organizations and ran 
support groups specifically for abused lesbians. Griffin quotes her 
as saying...
"...The myth that women are not violent is persistent and contributes to a denial of 
women-on-women violence, not only among the general population, but among 
lesbians....We want to believe that our relationships are safe; that we have equality 
(there's that infernal word again), and that we have ideal communities. But it's not 
true..."


--- PAGE 619 ---
164
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
And as for lesbians coming forward to report domestic violence 
on their partners, especially in what is often a small localized 
community, the consequences are emotionally devastating. Such 
women are often estranged. I've heard many stories of individuals 
who say ".. .My friends just turned against me and sided with her..."
An article appearing in the New York Daily News' Thersday 
section entitled "Aggressive! Me?" by Rene Denfeld, seemed to be 
walking an ideological tightrope between 'for' and 'against', 
regarding the truth about female aggression. In it she says "... Listen 
up! Aggressive women are often criticized, but isn't it just part of our  
fighting spirit?"
In other words, women who are aggressive (a feminist code-word 
for 'controlling and abusive' when applied to men) are to be viewed 
as simply exhibiting their "fighting spirits", while aggressive men are 
to be perceived as criminals, "domestic terrorists" or sociopaths.
On the other hand, in a surprising admission by the feminized 
print media, Ms. Denfeld goes on to say...
"... In the 1920s, half a million or so women joined the Ku Klux Klan — nearly half the total 
membership in some states. American (white) women supported the internment of 
Japanese-Americans in re-location centers, cheered on McCarthyism and still 
continue to take part in a spectrum of violent crimes and extremist causes ..."
Isn’t it amazing how gender-feminists seem to conveniently 
"forget to remember" that those women in the 1920s who joined the 
Klan, as well as those who "supported internment", "cheered 
McCarthyism" and "still continue to take part in a spectrum of 
violent crimes", were overwhelmingly white ivomen!
I say this because the word in parenthesis added to the above 
quote ("white") was added by me to make a more accurate 
distinction, and did not appear in the original text of the article. This 
is one of the more insidious Orwellian methods used by feminism to 
include the black woman as her "gender partner-in-crime", simply by 
failing to note such important distinctions of history to the general 
public. It also shows that white people believe they're the only ones 
who read the newspaper, showing (as I mentioned earlier) that the


--- PAGE 620 ---
165
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
word "women" in western racist nomenclature, automatically means 
"white women." (See section entitled Affirmative Action).
What black grandmother do you know helped put Japanese 
people into concentration camps back in the 1940s?
Again; this bears repeating. When Ms. Denfeld says "American 
women", the immediate assumption is that she meant all "American 
women" took part in activities like those mentioned above. This is the 
"perception of inclusion" sold to today's gynic black queen by gender 
feminism (and supported by black feminists) to separate her from her 
black king. It's also a 'freudian' admission by her that whenever they 
speak about "American women" (again), the implied or unspoken 
subtext assumes that they're talking about the only people they 
consider to be American women —and that's white women.
The next lines written by Ms. Denfeld are absolutely devastating to 
feminist-based propaganda and rhetoric on the 'inherent tendencies' 
toward violence in men; observe...
"...There are some general differences in how the sexes are socialized with regard to 
aggression. But these differences appear to be frequently exaggerated. To start with, 
relatively few men actually engage in violent behavior.  Few want to partake in 
sports like boxing, and despite popular images, even fewer are murderers and rapists.  
Aggression is held to be a defining aspect of masculinity, but this perception itself is  
frequently inaccurate ..."
.. .Now! Pay close attention my sisters; Ms. Densfeld continues...
"...At the same time, the public's communication mill —from news coverage to the 
sciences, consistently downplays the myriad forms of female aggression.  In all the 
press coverage on the genocide in Rwanda, for instance, few articles acknowledged 
that women took part. This erasure of women's violence occurs constantly from  
family violence  to terrorism../ The result is that women and men are portrayed as 
polar opposites in terms of aggression, when in fact; we are more alike than we  
think. Those few aggressive women history culls and passes down are unsatisfying 
and are dismissed. If the history of women has truly been lost, as some claim, then 
part of this history is the obliterated records of female aggression..!"
...Women's violence occurs constantly;...irom  family violence to 
terrorism...??!"


--- PAGE 621 ---
166
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Incredible! How did the sharp discerning minds of Ms. Smuts 
and Ms. Allen miss this plump little tidbit of statistical trivia?
It's obvious from Ms. Denfeld's article that gender feminists are 
completely aware of the fact that there are women today 
(particularly the gynandrous Amazonian stock) who are just as 
violent, aggressive and sociopathic as any man, and that the 
perception of female-as-perpetual-victim, is just more of the same 
contrived propaganda garbage promoted by the hormonally 
deranged, prejudiced spin-doctors of the feminist inquisition.
Again, let it be understood that I am in no way minimizing the 
terrible suffering and overall consequences inflicted by abuse against 
women in any form. However, my research into the subject of 
domestic abuse as it applies to male victims, yielded little if any 
detailed data to match the government's own rising statistics of this 
under-reported problem; or of the many reports that I have 
personally received from male clients who were also quiet victims of 
this plague.
Until the report by Dianne Sawyer and Barbara Walters in 1997, 
much of the data related to mutual culpability on the subject of 
domestic abuse was hardly ever given the depth of scrutiny afforded 
to domestic abuse against women. Consequently, women (and 
society in general) have come to believe that domestic violence 
against men is either an exaggeration, a myth, or too infrequent to be 
regarded as relevant, and thus a non-issue.
So although the quantity of information regarding domestic abuse 
against men appears to be high in this thesis my sister, it is merely an 
attempt to compensate for the overwhelming amounts of publicized 
reports targeting men as solitary perpetrators, which has reinforced 
the perception that all men should carry the singular blame for this 
social problem. Information on domestic abuse against women is 
copious and readily available from a wider array of sources than are 
available for male victims, thanks largely to dedicated promotion and 
one-sided support by feminist organizations and their questionable 
relationship with the media.


--- PAGE 622 ---
167
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Perceptual Perversions...
•
As mentioned earlier (in part I), the 
cavalier promotion of violence by 
women against men is now an everyday 
accepted fact of our society. But as any 
depiction of violence against women 
should be considered a despicable act, 
so too must violence by women against 
men (in any form) be denounced by the  
feminists themselves  as despicable
behavior. Instead, it is condoned,
encouraged, and even instigated.
For example, to promote the movie The First Wives' Club, the New 
York Daily News ran a story entitled " ...The Real First Wives' Club:  
Women who've been dumped by their men revealed how they reacted — and  
got revenge!"  by Surabhi Avasthi.
The questions that immediately come to mind are; should this 
type of subject matter in the New York Daily News be considered 
frivolous and "all in fun" as it was presented? More importantly, 
what would have been the implications had this newspaper done a 
story dealing with a reverse scenario? Had the editors who decided 
to print this crap considered whether or not certain criminally 
inclined females reading this garbage, might just have seized upon
this "fun" news item as permission to take it a step further toward
causing injury or worse?
At least that's what the feminists would argue if the editor had 
dared to print an article on how a man might get revenge on a woman.
This concept of a 'First Wives Club' has taken on so much feminist 
backing that as of December of 2006, music and lyrics by the 
legendary Motown songwriting trio Eddie Holland, Lamont Dozier


--- PAGE 623 ---
168
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
and Brian Holland have just been completed for a Spring 2008 
Broadway production of "The First Wives Club."
There is even an online social networking site for divorcees called 
First Wives Worldl
The irony of all this is that the woman who authored the book and 
screenplay, along with other such pop-feminist novels, died recently 
of complications related to (of all things) cosmetic surgery. Friends said 
she went in for yet another of her 'simple chin-tucks', fell into a coma, 
and died soon after.
Wait! A feminist having elective cosmetic surgery?
Seems like an oxymoronic twist of fate to me.
The article even promotes a book written by a woman that gives 
step-by-step instructions on how to take revenge on men. Author 
Regina Barreca's book entitled Sweet Revenge: The Wicked Delights of  
Getting Even,  states at the very beginning "... Women are often 
powerless in these situations, and revenge is the province of the  
powerless." She goes on to say;
"... A lot of anger is like nuclear waste ... You can bury it, but it 
seeps into other parts of your life. Desire for revenge begins in 
the cradle. It's so basic because it's about justice (?). The best 
revenge ... brings closure. Get even. Get over it. Get on with 
your life. It's like prescriptive medication. A little can cure 
you, a lot can kill you and you shouldn't get hooked ..."
This woman sounds like any other low life, shit-for-brains crack 
dealer peddling a behavior-modifying drug. But she gets published, 
promoted and quoted in a major daily rag. Imagine if these quotes 
were taken from O.J. Simpson. Imagine if he wrote this book.
Another article appearing in the New York Daily News (Sept. 10, 
1996) also addressed the issue of female instigated violence. It 
focused on the meteoric rise of females comprising the prison 
populations of this country. Entitled Female Inmate Count Nears  
Record, it documented the record statistical jump in the number of


--- PAGE 624 ---
169
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
female prisoners awaiting trial for everything from prostitution to 
multiple murders. It stated that in New York for example, the inmate 
population is approximately 20,000 to date and that women comprise 
over 10% of that number with the percentage rising steadily every 
year. And these figures did not take into account the fascist, 
draconian "Rockefeller Drug Laws".
If we bring these statistics into conjunction with a projected 
national average, the figures become astounding. This in light of the 
fact that the government estimates a 15 to 25% annual rise in female 
instigated violence nationwide, leading to a staggering 30 to 45% rise 
in the female prison population over the next 10 years!
Incredible.
Simian Psychology ...
•
Back to Ms. Smuts. (Interesting name, considering her article).
To compare the behavior of a wild male ape to that of a man on his 
best day, then tell the public that the way to deal with domestic abuse 
is to study the ways that female apes cope with male apes, in order to 
apply what they do to women experiencing abusive behavior, shows 
how perverse and stupid the feminist academic mindset has become.
What Ms. Smuts insinuates by her commentary is that the human 
male is at best an ape-like creature in the motivations that fuel his 
most basic nature; and because the human female is "not", she hasn't 
recognized the reasons for her problems with him to date! So the best 
thing for her to do is to study the behavior of fellow she-apes to learn 
how best to translate their behavior into a program to cope with the 
aggressive actions of her own "he-ape."
Such an academic premise betrays the German origins of her 
"scholarship", which (again) can be traced back to the late 1800s and 
the philosophies of Dr. Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt, creator of the 
doctrine of "experimental psychology." Wundt hypothesized that 
man was devoid of a soul, spirit and self-determination; that 
internally, man was merely the sum total of his experiences, which 
comes from the external stimuli that bombarded his conscious and


--- PAGE 625 ---
170
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
unconscious minds every day.
In point of fact, the sum total of all scientific "tenets" being used 
today by psychology and it's drug-dealing doppelganger psychiatry, 
are based almost exclusively on the philosophies of Wilhelm 
Maximilian Wundt. Smuts obviously saw fit to base her research 
around Wundt's specious theories and experiments—but more 
specifically — around a disciple of his who expanded his hypotheses 
to include the "psychology" of animals and their relationship to the 
behaviorisms of men—one Dr. Edward Lee Thorndike.
Thorndike is best known in the study of psychology for his famous 
"puzzle-box" experiments, wherein he placed various animals (cats, 
rats, chickens etc.) to see how they found their way out. He was the 
first psychologist to study animal behavior in an experimental 
psychology laboratory, and following the advise of his mentor Dr. 
James McKeen Cattell (Wundt's first American student and first 
personal assistant), he applied his findings to the teaching of children  
in the classrooms.
Thorndike equated children with rats, monkeys, cats, fish, dogs 
and chickens, and formulated "laws" from his research on the 
behavior of these animals, which he then incorporated into the 
training protocols of school teachers who subsequently spread his 
philosophies to every classroom throughout the United States.
In fact, from his research he published a book in 1903 entitled 
Educational Psychology, considered a classic work in its genre.
Thus in brief is the foundational history and dubious legacy of Ms. 
Smut's "scholarship" and "research" into the study of men, monkeys 
and violent behavior. Of course, what escapes critical notice in Ms. 
Smuts "scientific" analysis, is the fact that placing a man on the 
mental and behavioral levels of a lower life form, allows for the 
devaluation of his intrinsic humanity, rendering him less worthy of 
such rights, and thereby rationalizing his elimination (as was done to 
the "Atsi", or Aborigines of Australia, who were once legally 
classified by whites as "natural wild-life" capable of being hunted);


--- PAGE 626 ---
171
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
which in fact has been the psycho-political goal of neo-feminism from 
the very beginning.
Francois-Marie Arouet, better known by his popular pen-name 
Voltaire, said it best:
"...Those who can make you believe absurdities, can make you 
commit atrocities..."
Beloved family; today's woman is being taught that she is 
something “different" and completely "apart" from the consequences 
she may enlist as a member of society. We are made to believe by Ms. 
Smuts' article that as a female, a woman exists in a non-interactive 
behavioral vacuum; that her presence in "man-ape society" does 
nothing to contribute to the actions or reactions of the male.
Ms. Smuts herself must be strickened with a severe case of 
"gender-phobia" predicated on gender self-loathing, much like her 
hero and idol Betty Friedan —the queen bee of contemporary 
feminism. Ms. Friedan admittedly hated her mother, the spoiled 
daughter of a doctor who accurately exemplified the ethnic axiom 
"jewish american princess." She often said that no matter what she 
did to please her, her mother made her feel "...messy, clumsy, 
inadequate, bad, naughty and ugly."
Ms. Smuts' idol spent years in psychotherapy where she said she 
babbled on endlessly about how "...I hated my mother and how she 
had killed my father." She quoted herself as saying throughout her 
20s that "...all mothers should be drowned at birth."
(Hmmm. Sounds pretty violent to me, doesn't she Ms. Smuts?)
But Ms. Friedan saw her mother's behavior in a loveless marriage 
as being caused by frustration and inadequacy due to her lack of a  
career, and the feelings of accomplishment and self-worth that usually 
comes with one. So instead of seeing her parent's marriage as the 
underlying problem, she blamed it on her mother 'having had to 
conform to the traditional feminine role of housewife and mother.'
According to her autobiography, she developed a serious 
inferiority complex and became "... an over-compensator and over­


--- PAGE 627 ---
172
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
achiever." So much so that she would introduce herself at social 
functions with the words "...Hi, I'm Betty Friedan; I graduated 
Summa Cum Laude from Smith College." (Co-incidentally the same 
alma mater as CIA feminist change-agent Gloria Steinem)
Her projected blame on feminine roles in society, led to her writing 
a book that literally trashed the traditional feminine roles and vilified 
the time-honored principles of femininity; a book she titled The 
Feminine Mystique.
From this work we came to learn that behind all of her public 
command, authority and self-assurance, there lurked an intense, 
type-A, hair-trigger 'Madam Hyde.' Which is why Ms. Smuts' 
critique of the so-called 'masculine propensity' for violence against 
women as genetically inherent, is so patently asinine.
In her autobiography, Ms. Friedan described herself as a loving 
devoted housewife and mother who dedicated herself to this 
institution because she didn't want to repeat the mistakes her mother 
had made.
Bull-cookies!
She then pushed the envelope of credibility even further by trying 
to gain public attention and sympathy as a battered wife.
Bull-cookies II! (the sequel).
The problem was that the media never sought out her husband's 
side of the story —which would be typical of the feminized media 
machine to spin-doctor and white-wash the real dirt behind one of 
their most cherished icons and 'fearless leaders.'
In fact, after their divorce, her husband Carl Friedan had to launch 
a website just to tell his side of the story. On it he revealed that this 
heroine of oppressed women, this champion of western civilization's 
down-throdden female masses, was in fact a prescription-addicted, 
quick-tempered, self-absorbed, out-of-control domestic terrorist..
To begin with, Betty was no loving, doting, stay-at-home mom. 
That, Carl said, was a ruse. On the contrary, the Friedan's had a full­
time maid through the entire 19 years of their marriage. It was the 
maid(s) who took care of their 3 children, dressed them for school,


--- PAGE 628 ---
173
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
cooked, cleaned, shopped for groceries— everything. On a scale of 0 to 
10 as a house-wife and mother, Mr. Friedan gave Betty a "2."
Of the bruises she said she sustained from him as a result of 
ongoing abuse, Mr. Friedan offered the doctor's reports which clearly 
stated that her bruises were sustained from his self-defense maneuvers,  
and that by far his injuries were always the worse.
He even cites documented police reports as proof of this.
The following is an account by Mr. Friedan (who ran his own 
advertising agency) taken from an article by Henry Makow, PhD 
entitled "Betty Friedan: The Making of a Woman-Hater", describing 
an event that led up to one or more of the so-called "bruises of abuse" 
sustained by Betty. Mr. Friedan recounts...
"... Quite vivid in my mind is a midnight in about 1967—a year or so before Betty and 
I separated for good. We were living at our Dakota apartment then. Betty disagreed 
with something I said (that's all it took), went into one of her raging uncontrollable 
fits, screaming, her face twisted in hate and insane anger, "You fucking no good 
prick...; you no-good bastard, you fucking bastard" — meanwhile sprinting into the 
kitchen. Back she came straight at me brandishing two large kitchen knives. "You 
fucking god-damn sonofabitch; I'm gonna cut your fucking cock off—your cock it 
doesn't mean a thing to me." At this I calmly picked up a kitchen chair, nailed her to 
the wall like a lion-tamer and took the knives away. And that was just a minor 
incident during that period when her explosive personality was further inflamed by 
the amphetamines she was taking for weight loss, reinforced by alcohol..."
I can almost hear the collective groans of skepticism right about 
now, especially from the few sister-seekers who automatically tend to 
disbelieve such accounts as they are related by men involved in 
domestic abuse cases. Most of the extreme cases of abuse by men are 
repeatedly paraded before the feminized media in horrific detail, 
aggressively reported as tragic events meant to enlist both sympathy 
for the woman and anger at the man. And rightly so, because they are 
tragic and despicable.
But search back in your minds to the day that Lorraina Bobbitt cut 
off her husband's penis and discarded it, saying that her reason for 
doing this was because he "raped her." Did you automatically feel 
empathy and sympathy for him? Or did you like most women in


--- PAGE 629 ---
174
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
America render a snap judgment saying that he probably deserved 
it? Nine times out of ten (if you were honest) you'd have opted for 
the latter.
Why? Because like all women conditioned by feminism to believe 
that all men are "by nature violent and abusive man-apes", you'd 
automatically think he probably got what he deserved. The sentiment 
in this case is drastically reversed; you are conditioned by the 
feminized media to feel anger at the male victim and sympathy for 
the female perpetrator. What if an abused husband would have cut 
off the breasts of his abuser-wife? Where do you think the 
sympathies of a public would lie?
Of course in the end, Mr. Bobbitt was cleared of all charges!
Which again makes it all so deliciously Orwellian!
Thus, for Ms. Smuts to have molded the perception that men are 
violent to women by virtue of some "genetically inherited" nature 
(that is, presuming as she does that we all descended from apes) is to 
betray her all to obvious one-sided, gender-feminist, 
Darwinian/Marxist bias. She writes;
"... Some of the factors that influence female vulnerability to male sexual 
coercion in different species may also help explain variations among 
different groups in the same species. For example, in a group of 
chimpanzees in the Tai Forest in the Ivory Coast, females form closer 
bonds with one another than do females in Gambe. Tai females 
consequently have more egalitarian relationships with males than their 
Gambe counterparts do..
.. Such differences between groups especially characterize humans.  Among 
the South American Yanomamo (tribe) for instance, men frequently 
abduct and rape women from neighboring villages, and severely beat 
their wives for suspected adultery. However, among the Aka peoples of 
the Central African Republic, male aggression against women has never 
been observed. Most human societies fall between these two 
extremes ..."
... and again;
"... How are we to account for such variation? The same social factors that 
helped explore how sexual coercion differs among non- human primates


--- PAGE 630 ---
175
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
may deepen our understanding of how it varies across different groups 
of people. In most traditional human societies, a woman leaves her birth 
community when she marries and goes to live with her husband and his 
relatives. Without strong bonds to closer female kin, she will probably be 
in danger of sexual coercion ..."
If, as Ms Smuts contends, a woman in most traditional societies 
"...leaves her birth community when she marries and goes to live 
with her husband and his relatives", wouldn't the women of this 
new family be more sympathetic to the new bride; since as her article 
contends, all women share "a common bond of abuse" by all 'man- 
apes?' Instead, she states further on that new brides are sometimes 
physically abused and psychologically ostracized by the women of 
her husband's family and tribe!
Curiously, what Ms. Smuts means by her use of the term "sexual 
coercion in different species" is never made totally clear any place in 
her commentary. Was this an across-the-board reference to the 
natural sexual advances usually made by the male of virtually all 
species toward the female to initiate sexual intercourse —  the 
fundamental ritual for procreation and genetic continuance in sane, 
healthy, organic higher life-forms?
Why are her references to "sexual coercion" only directed towards 
it being exclusively an aggressive male behavioral tendency? Are 
human females ever guilty of "sexual coercion" as well? Are all acts 
by human males to initiate sexual intimacy now to be construed as 
"male aggressive abusive behavior" or "sexual coercion" by the 
feminist inquisition? By all the "scientific evidence" presented in her 
article, it would appear so.
Again; the above is not written to minimize in any way the 
atrocious epidemic of violence now taking place in many homes 
across America. Neither am I making excuses or downplaying the 
role of men found guilty of this horrendous practice.
The problem is, as a naturopath, I frequently hear stories from and 
about men terrorized by women, who say how gravely they fear for 
their lives and the safety of their children. Most of them speak of 
intimidation by the women who threaten to report them to the


--- PAGE 631 ---
176
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
authorities as child molesters and batterers —  many times daring the 
men to hit them after they have assaulted them. One gentleman 
recently told me that his mate asked him if he knew that she could 
".. .kill him in his sleep and get away with it."
The only recourse left to such men is to leave their homes and 
families —  sometimes for good.
Again, the following is presented in the spirit of Maat.
To the Mothers of Young Sons...
Please pay close and particular attention to what follows sister- 
queen, because the forces directing the protocols of psycho-political 
control are heavily aligned against your husbands, brothers, cousins, 
fathers, uncles, nephews and sons. If you do not have a male child or 
a father and brother you love and hold dear, you may be tempted to 
believe that what is written below either doesn't concern you, or is 
totally untrue because of what you've been made to believe about 
men being "naturally" violent or abusive.
Much of what follows is based on my research of systems of 
counseling related to domestic violence. What I found was almost 
exclusively designed and targeted at men. The system or protocol 
most utilized was called "The Duluth Model."
This led me to the work of Mr. Thomas Graves, author of The 
Gender-Neutral Model for Counseling and Treatment of Domestic Violence.  
Researching this brought me to some sobering facts about just how 
feminized our systems of outreach and counseling are concerning 
domestic violence issues of all kinds. Graves' work exposed how 
slanted and one-sided the prevailing models truly were.
Example; I learned that the 'Duluth Model' is fundamentally 
structured to propagate and promote the following premises;
- All violence is perceived as essentially male instigated...
- There is an implicit denial, and in practice, an explicit refusal to 
acknowledge any violence done to men, especially by women...
- All responsibility for reducing violence and for creating cooperation is


--- PAGE 632 ---
177
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
assigned to men...
- Blame and shame tactics are seen as the best therapeutic approaches for 
battering men...
- This and other such programs are often presented to men by women in a 
blaming, punitive environment—which is immediately counter­
productive because it re-enforces the man's feelings of guilt and 
inferiority, which are most likely the root causes of his lashing out in 
the first place...
- It promotes one cause for domestic violence, and thus only one solution...
- It completely ignores domestic violence by women, especially in its 
promotion in the mainstream media...
- Therapies are based primarily on feminist ideologies, rather than science...
- Programs are taught or administered by "wounded healers"; in other 
words, women who were once victims of domestic violence themselves...
- It is a gender-polarizing protocol serving to stratify or negate the 
commonality of violence by both genders, and thus serves to perpetuate 
the so-called "battle of the sexes..."
- Joint counseling is not allowed...
The seeker may not immediately appreciate or have a full sense of 
the tragic ironies related to this issue from the man's perspective, 
until what you've been made to believe is a system of justice created 
to help women victims of domestic violence, arrays all of its Gestapo- 
like forces against your own son or brother —and you know he's 
innocent!
Overstand as well that the present feminized system of justice 
administered in family court as domestic abuse cases, primarily 
target so-called blacks, hispanics and poor whites. Only incredible 
sums of money for the best lawyers can manipulate the system into 
rendering a verdict equitable to all sides. Otherwise, the verdict 
almost inevitably favors the woman.
As mentioned earlier, the majority of reported cases of domestic 
violence are turned in by women, and they are automatically treated 
with due diligence as serious criminal cases. But even though it is 
common (but quiet) knowledge that wz/e-instigated domestic abuse 
exists, society ordinarily treats a man's claim with tacit ridicule. He's


--- PAGE 633 ---
178
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T C
looked down upon as a joke. He's seen as weak and "less than a 
man" because he does not conform to the stereotypical images of a 
Rambo or a Fifty Cents.
And these are primary reasons why, according to a U.S. Justice 
Department report—a high percentage of all domestic violence cases  
related to husband abuse never get reported!  Such statistics are kept from 
the general public, leaving us ill-informed and assuming that the 
term "domestic abuse" constitutes the definition of a uniquely male 
perpetrated crime.
Terms like 'gender symmetry' or 'conflict tactics scale', both of 
which scientifically examine the equal culpability of women as active 
or passive aggressors in domestic violence cases, never make it into 
the news rotations of the feminized media's spin machine.
Dr. Linda Kelly, former professor of law at the University of 
Virginia, submitted an excellent research paper dealing with this 
entitled "Disabusing the Defination of Domestic Abuse: How Women 
Batter Men and the Role of the Feminist State." In it she writes...
"..."Domestic violence represents the prized gemstone of feminist theory's 
fundamental message —  that our legal, social, (and) cultural norms are fashioned in 
a manner which permit men to engage in a constant and pervasive effort to oppress 
women by any and every available means. A successful challenge to the Patriarchal 
definition of domestic violence may thus undermine feminism itself. To remain 
true to feminist theory, no aspect of male-female relations can be considered 
without first accepting the male as all powerful and the female as all powerless. 
The gender hierarchy is omnipresent..."
'Nuff said.
And if a man's case ever gets into the legal system {if, mind you), 
such a man faces additional problems, two of which are;
1- He must prove beyond all doubt that he is a victim...
2- If he is forced to leave his home, he must be sure that 
his children do not become the next victims...
Refer back to the words of ultra-feminist Germaine Greer, as 
quoted in the book Icons, Saints and Divas...


--- PAGE 634 ---
179
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
"...My father decided pretty early on that life at home 
was pretty unbearable...it gave my mother an 
opportunity to tyrannize the children..."
Another thing. Modem medicine and the media collaborate daily 
to report on the many physical and psychological conditions that 
would cause people to act violently. One should notice however, that 
most of the reports done on the "treatable" cases of abuse-related 
disorders, are seen tailored toward women and young children 
where therapy is done on an outreach basis. But when reporting on 
the abusive disorders of men, "treatable" cases are normally depicted 
as 'after-the-fact intervention', generally from a psychiatric hospital 
dispensing toxic mind-altering drugs attached to a prison complex!
In the feminized climate currently surrounding this society, it is 
primarily the men who are expected to take full responsibility for 
abusive actions, even at times when the female is the perpetrator, 
and virtually no excuses are tolerated.
Tom Graves shows in his book that virtually all responsibility for 
ending violence, enhancing the sense of trust and safety and 
establishing an environment of cooperation, is almost unilaterally 
assigned to the men. However, when the woman is violent, 
feminized society provides for her an impressive list of "technical 
medical excuses", a number of which were related to me by abused 
men who took this problem to court themselves; excuses like... 
Pre-Menstrual Syndrome 
Postpartum Depression 
Stress 
Depression 
Personality Disorder 
Eating Disorders 
Menopause 
Addictions 
Provocation 
Self-Defense
Childhood Abuse Traumas 
"He wasn't sensitive to my needs; he just wasn't listening"


--- PAGE 635 ---
180
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T n
...none  of which could be used as a defense by your sons, brothers 
fathers or nephews if they were accused of domestic abuse. But the 
above-stated excuses can be read in court papers as actual, legitimate 
"medically technical" reasons accepted by magistrates adjudicating  
domestic abuse cases brought by men against women.
Another thing to think about my sisters—especially when you 
become a grandparent. Under the present feminized system of 
justice, if a woman is violent or abusive in her relationship with her 
mate, she is not automatically stigmatized as being a bad parent. But 
if the man is abusive towards his mate, it is automatically assumed 
that he is a dysfunctional unfit parent, and a danger to his children. 
In this feminized system the letter of the law automatically assumes 
that the children would be better off with the mother or the family of 
the mother, even if she is the abuser.
And here yet again is another sad truth.
Abused men who tell their experiences to family members or state 
services are almost unilaterally met with disbelief, scorn or a type of 
subjective discrimination; a "reverse gender bias" if you will. 
Another reason they remain quiet the majority of the time.
Some of the reproaches leveled at these men are...
"... Man; what did you do? You had to have done something to get her that 
pissed..."
or...
"... You look like you play linebacker for the Giants; you sure she wasn't just 
defending herself..."
.. .and the one most often used;
".. .Why don't you just leave the house man; go somewhere for a while and 
chill...give her a chance to cool off..."
Again; due to the overwhelming focus and attention given to male 
instigated domestic violence scenarios, fairness and accuracy compels 
my Libra nature to include this virtually un-reported (and as a result) 
little known plight of men in The Wounded Womb, who are the silent 
victims of this pervasive social problem as well. I also recommend 
that the seeker purchase a copy of the work entitled Abused Men: The 
Hidden Side of Domestic Violence,  by Philip Cook.


--- PAGE 636 ---
181
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Suffer the Children...
•
Political attempts by ultra-feminism to curtail or repress any and 
all actions considered to be "male instigated, sexually 
aggressive/coercive behavior" and the politically correct climate it 
has created in this country, reached the highest levels of tragic 
stupidity (as well as its lowest, most Orwellian fascist-like potential), 
when the nationwide news services reported that two little boys 
ages 6 and 7, in separate incidences and in separate states, were both 
suspended from participating in their schools' activities for kissing 
their female classmates on the cheek.  One girl, it was later revealed, asked 
to be kissed!
These stories gained national attention prompting an embarrassed 
feminized media to do damage control, in what was an obvious 
attempt to soften or overshadow the highly negative implications 
surrounding these decisions. Oddly, the actions taken by the two 
female teachers (who said they were just following the law when 
they suspended the boys) were never taken into account as being just 
as "inappropriate."
All of this clearly exposed how dangerously paranoid our nation's 
feminized climate has made us, where natural human interactions 
(particularly when expressed by those still cradled in the embrace of 
innocence) are now criminalized.
What are the implications for the future of male children in such a 
socially paranoid atmosphere? Mothers (and fathers) should 
seriously think about this. Would these teachers have exacted such 
severe penalties if the situations were reversed; that is —if the girls 
kissed the boys? Should female teachers such as these, (so obviously 
bereft of common sense, teaching skills and "crisis management" 
capabilities) be questioned about their own deeply rooted gender 
prejudices?
What indeed are the implications for males in a society 
perceptually manipulated by the feminist inquisition?
Maybe a return to the rack, the yolk or the dunking stool?!


--- PAGE 637 ---
182
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T H
Womb Power, Extortion  
and the so-called Matriarchy ...
•
Conspicuously missing from Ms. Smut's commentary is the fact 
that virtually all male children begin their psychologically formative 
years primarily with their mothers!  In our own dysfunctional family 
construct as melanated people, the single-mother-household-as- 
"family" represents nearly 54% of our total societal makeup! That's 
over half of our collective population in this country!
By and large, in the black community, it would appear that a 
woman is the primary frame of reference and influence in the early 
stages of a little boy's life. So what are the domestic environmental 
conditions that change the perception of how the adult male later 
views the female gender in the outer society?
If woman is his first teacher, what has happened to society that 
she is later persecuted by her abusive student? Where, from her 
womb to the impending tomb has she or society failed?
A meta-chronology of 'antediluvian history' has been interpreted 
to show that during different epochs of humanity's existence on 
Earth, women played major roles in being the molders of social 
behavior and ethics, thus setting many of the original precedents for 
male social behavior within these parameters as well. 
Paleo-ethnologists have conjectured that during the times of so-called 
matriarchal rule, the perception of power was psychologically based 
on an "archetypal genetic imperative", where women controlled men 
and society (life and death) by granting or denying access to their  
wombs!
In other words, the power of the womb during matriarchal rule 
inexorably dominated over all, and a girl was taught to recognize this 
fact very early in her life.
During her rites-of-passage ritual, the elder mothers passed on to 
the girl the arcane sciences of the womb and its power to control the 
forces of Nature —  and men. In virtually every indigenous society that 
still exists around the globe, there is an elder "mother-archy" —  that


--- PAGE 638 ---
183
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
is, members of a female secret society that will quietly admit to the 
following fact; that —  throughout the evolutionary stages of human 
civilizations, women have almost always run the fundamental 
operations of culture from behind the scenes, and that more often 
than not, the perception of male dominance was actually an illusion 
strategically given to men by the women!
Even today, girls are quietly taught (as they were then) that male 
behavior towards them is sub-consciously motivated by the fact that 
she possesses the one anatomical instrument by which he may 
genetically continue; that being—her womb!
Thus, by virtue of this all-consuming cosmic drive directing him to 
"duplicate himself", a male will say or do anything (even lie, rape or 
kill) in order to accomplish this archetypal objective; which is — to 
plant the seeds of his own individual continuance! (Review this 
scenario in the previous section entitled The Politics ofRecessive-ism).
This fundamental biological factor, according to the 
feminist/matriarchal mindset is ... (a) the one supreme weakness of 
the male capable of exploitation, and ... (b) the optimal advantage for 
unilateral control that the female ultimately holds over the male.
Bottom line? Without her, he (that is, his individual genetic 
consciousness-entity) -  cannot continue to exist!
Fall of the 'Mother-archy',  
and the Quest for the 
"Womb-niverse"
•
This is why the European male (through his technologies) has 
begun to explore ways to overcome this "womb extortion", and why 
feminists have demanded to have control over all reproductive 
technologies he invents (See Dialectic of Sex, by Shulamith Firestone). 
His experiments in cloning, gametic incubation and other such 
techniques, are already being used to perfect artificial wombs. Fear of 
genetic annihilation is again, a psychosis unique to the white male.


--- PAGE 639 ---
184
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
At the present time, the white male is witnessing a resurgence of 
the overt matriarchal power-structure (as opposed to the covert one), 
in the form of the rise of the white gender-feminist who now 
negotiates her womb-space for an equal share of the political, 
economic and social power he so selfishly and desperately clings to.
For example, the whole abortion rights issue has nothing to do 
with black society. It's actually a rebellion staged by the 'white 
womb' to secure, as well as enhance the political power-base of the 
feminist inquisition. This is why the white male has become so 
"genetically desperate", turning to science for alternative ways to 
insure his individual "psycho-genetic" continuance.
With science at his disposal to freely manifest a multitude of his 
perversely "freudian" psycho-sexual proclivities, the white corporate 
alpha male has managed to finance genetic experiments that actually 
led to the creation of a "pig-boy" (one quarter swine —  three-quarters 
human), an "ape-boy" fetus and a "goat-boy" fetus, all created 
through the use of artificial wombs.
(See figure 37, Part 1; artist's depiction of a half-human half-dog)
Research in cross-specie germination (that is, the joining of 
cultured DNA genetic material from humans to such creatures as 
apes, reptiles, insects, plants, extraterrestrial genetic material and 
other such abominations), is now a major project of the corporate 
scientific conglomerates. These experimentations are taking place at 
the highest levels of trans-genetic research, overseen primarily by 
super-secret organizations of elite scientists known as The Jason 
Society and The Labyrinth Group, both of whom are backed financially 
by the commercial electronic gadgets they create for tech companies 
and the military, and by private corporations from around the world.
Yacub is back,  family; only this time, as the 'creation' he first 
made!
All such techniques are said to be still in their early stages, but the 
artificial incubation of a human fetus brought to full term in an 
artificial womb, is expected to be totally feasible on or before the year 
2015. Human cloning was in its experimental phase during the 1940s, 
and was already a working reality by the 1970s.


--- PAGE 640 ---
185
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Again, herein lies the reason why the gender-feminists are so 
vehement about controlling all new reproductive technologies.91 They 
must maintain "womb superiority."
Another scenario postulated by white supremist factions as you 
already know, is that feminism is controlled by their Khazaarian 
adversaries, and by them seizing control of all reproductive 
technologies, they could effectively manipulate the birthrates of 
entire populations on this planet; more specifically—the white 
populations.
This, they surmise, would spell extinction for the white race.
Thus it may be said that the genetic urge to re-occupy the "womb- 
niverse" by duplicating himself within it, has been the primary force 
sub-consciously and sub -atomically orchestrating all forms of 
behavior by the human male towards the human female. And this is 
basically true of all higher mammals. In fact, this primal cosmic urge 
may be said to be what drives his motivation to achieve ever-greater 
levels of status in the outer society.
This has been the male's primary sub-conscious/sub-atomic 
motivation in the exercise of warfare and exploration; that being —  to 
provide comfort and security for the female in order that he may be 
chosen by her for the utilization of her womb-space.
9
Item: Was there a time in past millennia, when women used this 
knowledge of the womb and the power it entailed to rule over and 
manipulate the day to day workings of society, and with it, the 
behavior of men; much like the Bonobo chimpanzee females?
?
Item: Did the female elite of past matriarchies, through their 
biological ability to incubate life (not create it), propagate the false 
perception to men and society that their gender alone was created to
91 See quote by Shulamith Firestone from The Dialect of Sex — in section entitled "Players in the 
Game1 1 . - Author


--- PAGE 641 ---
186
THE WOUNDED WOMB - PART II
be the highest representations of divinity and Godhead, and thus 
created to rule over the Earth; much like we see this perception (in 
reverse) being perpetrated by the so-called patriarchy today ..?
9
Item: Did the former matriarchies that once ruled the Earth place 
themselves, their homes and especially their children (ages 2-12) off 
limits to men (as was proposed in the teachings of the Washitaw 
Nation), for the purpose of programming the male children (as well as 
the females) with specific behavioral ideologies and cultural ethics 
that reinforced so-called "traditional" roles related to a matriarchy; 
roles which at that time rigidly maintained the social structures, 
morays and concepts of female supremacy (a gynarchy)?
?
Item: In light of this, was there an eventual rebellion against such 
repressive female rule by males of a past millennium, leading to what 
we see today as the present social structures of our so-called 
patriarchal world..?
$
Item: When males were no longer convinced that woman was the 
"Supreme Godhead" and sole "creative representative of God", did 
the eons of former female psychological, social and theological 
manipulation and role-repression of the male (womb extortion) 
tragically end with a counter-repressive vengeance ..?
It would be interesting to see these and other such questions 
posed in public forum, in order for us to intelligently discuss this 
ongoing mis-conception of gender supremacy between men and 
women. Until the culpability of both genders are equally portrayed, 
giving equal scrutiny and criticism for the parts each has played (or 
not played) in the ongoing miseries that plague our world, we will all 
continue to stumble inside the same revolving treadmills of blame, 
prejudice, egotism and anguish —  unerringly headed towards total 
extinction.


--- PAGE 642 ---
187
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Illusions of a Genderized  
Godhead
•
Human perception of a "genderized" Godhead —that is, 
representing the Supreme Cosmic Intelligence as either male or 
female —  has always changed from millennium to millennium.
At specific points in the precession of human civilizations, the 
concept of "God" would be conceptualized as a female principle, 
only to be eventually re-conceptualized as a masculine principle with 
our planet's evolutionary passage from one consciousness time zone 
to the next. This vacillation in human consciousness is due primarily 
to galactic cycles of change where our planet enters the influence of a 
cosmic sentinel (or zodiac constellation) for a period of 
approximately 2,164 years —or 'age' (i.e., the age of Pisces; Leo; 
Sagittarius; Aquarius; etc.).
The light-signature template of each zodiac sentinel orchestrates 
and coordinates the "molecular-atomic orientations of perception" 
within the genetics of humanity, as dictated by the core-galactic 
programming being synthesized, specialized and broadcasted 
through it at that time. (Masculine; Feminine; Equi-genic] —  or 
positive; negative; stasis).
The genderization of Godhead is therefore a perceptual illusion 
usually adopted by fledgling humanities throughout Creation, as a 
particular solar system and its inhabitants journey through various 
cycles, energy phases and positions within a given universe; all to 
fulfill its galaxy's evolutionary mandate in consciousness.
To the ancient masters, the esoteric study and deciphering of these 
celestial sentinels and their influences upon Man and the Earth 
became known as the practice of astrology — arcane knowledge of the 
Creator and creation given only to the initiated. To keep this 
knowledge a secret, they weaved fabulous tales of wondrous "gods" 
and "goddesses" to impart to the un-initiated, who put these stories 
into books, rituals, rites and ceremonies of deific worship that began 
what would best defined as the practice of 'astrolatry.'


--- PAGE 643 ---
188
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T U
The religions of Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and Judaism are all 
examples of systems that profess and preach astrolatry  to the 
masses, while those initiated into the higher Orders of Wisdom and 
Knowledge (Hem Netcheru Tepi, Sufis, Brahmins, Popes, Shamens, 
Rosicrucians, Masons and Qabalists) all acknowledge these sublime 
celestial sentinels as mediums of divine expression emanating light- 
encoded templates of higher insight from the Mind of the Ineffable 
All—commonly called the science of astrology.
Ergo, the worship of a male deity as the singular representation of 
Supreme Godhead, or a female deity as the sole symbolism of the 
Supreme Being, is simply another superstitious mental exercise in the 
legacy of astrolatry, and is as asinine as any man exalting another 
man (Pope) who holds himself (or a symbol of himself) up for others 
to worship as the one and only true representation of God.
And it is just as stupid for a woman to profess the same.
Beloved seeker, both attributes of gender within the human  
equation are micro-cosmic, bi-polar representations of The Amen;  
The Nothing and The One; The Nuk Pu Nuk; The Ain Soph Aur;  
The All-in-All; The Ineffable; The Changeless; The Omnipotent;  
The Omniscient; The I AM THAT I AM;  The Everlasting; The  
Ever-Being and The Ever-Becoming.
Fragmented consciousness-perceptions of a ruling gender 
Godhead have always manifested at one time or another throughout 
the infinite number of adolescent humanities existing in Creation. But 
like the tides of the ocean, such perceptions eventually ebb away, as 
these adolescent humanities mature and evolve to ever higher 
degrees of spiritual sophistication, self-awareness and enlightenment.
Feminism:
"Thanks for the Maladies..."
•
I'm sure Bob Hope didn't have quite this word in mind, but I 
think it's most appropriate as a determinative for what I would like


--- PAGE 644 ---
189
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
to offer as a closing statement. And I believe I've saved the best 
supportive argument by a qualified, unrelated source for last.
The following words are taken from an article entitled The 
Cultural Devastation of American Women  by one Nancy Levant (again) 
author of The Collapse of Intuition,  a non-fiction book detailing the 
decline and fall of instinctual and intuitional abilities in American 
women.
Although her viewpoints comparing the gender-related 
capabilities of spiritual sensitivity between men and women do not 
align with my own, and her personal definition and use of the term 
feminism leaves no doubt that she is a betrayed, frustrated, 
suffragette, there is none-the-less a rich and valuable analysis of the 
pathological afflictions that gender-feminism (what she defines as 
'political feminism') has wrought upon the sanctity of gynic 
womanhood here in America and around the industrialized world.
From the 10th paragraph of her commentary onward, we read...
¥
"...Women who are working 70 hours a week, spending time in board meetings 
knocking out deals, running to gyms, hair and nail salons, and shopping while their 
children are in daycare centers 12 hours a day, are simply incapable of real 
feminism(?). Feminism happens when you develop your female strengths(?). High- 
powered careers, gyms, hair and nail salons, and shopping while their kids are 
sorrow-filled in daycare, all work to create anger and resentments in women. Truth 
hurts, doesn't it? (Well), most self inflicted wounds do...!"  [Emphasis mine]
?
Ms. Levant continues...
"...Political feminism has taken motherhood, nest, the womanly arts of cooking, 
gardening and nurturing away from women. Political feminism has also helped to 
mandate the two-income family by insisting that American women work outside the 
home or be looked down upon by contemporary culture. Political feminism helped to 
build the deplorable daycare industry, which is literally filled with minimum wage 
female employees - thanks a lot!  Political feminism helped to build the illegal 
immigrant and handyman industry - thanks a lot! And political feminism helped to 
build the drive-through junk food industry since working women don't want to 
cook, and therefore don't know how to cook - thanks a lot! Political feminism helped 
to build and grow the mental health/big pharma-industry, which now specifically


--- PAGE 645 ---
190
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
targets women and children as in the New Freedom Initiative on Mental Health. 
Thanks one hell of a lot. AND, political feminism helped to destroy, literally destroy, 
the public education system in the United States of America, which is now a full­
blown dictatorship. How dare you, and how dare you claim to represent freedom  
for women!" [Emphasis mine]
$
"...Many, many contemporary American women are emotional messes. They are 
pathologically vain and materialistic, as clearly demonstrated in their overly 
decorated, sterile homes and landscaped yards; they are grossly self-involved, 
horrible and mean-spirited mothers and wives, and are constantly, incessantly angry 
and neurotic. American women are shallow. They openly accept television, 
Hollywood, and magazines as role models for their daughters and themselves. They 
abuse money and spend thousands upon thousands of dollars annually for beauty 
regimens, diet supplements, day spas, trinkets and gym memberships. Many are 
addicted to a whole array of over-the-counter drugs and beauty aids. This is 
liberation? American women wouldn't understand Feminism or liberation if it 
smacked them in the head. They are so far removed from their spiritual and 
biological natures, that mirrors have become their solace and definition. And the 
results? Take a look at the condition of American children, marriages and home lives, 
and then ask what role political feminism has played to make American women the 
global laughing stock, while their children die spiritual and emotional deaths ..."
Wow! Tell the truth beloved. If I had spoken these very words 
directly to my sisters, would I not have been automatically branded a 
low-life misogynist and typically ego-centric male chauvinist? But let 
an erudite, middle to upper-class popular white woman write such 
words, summarizing (what turns out to be) the entire premise of The 
Wounded Womb from first-hand experiential knowledge, and her 
words enlist an entirely different psychological impact upon the 
seeker —  does it not?
?


--- PAGE 646 ---
191
T H E  W O U N D ED  W O M B - PA R T II
Final Summary....
•
Again. I have had to up-grade the information offered in this 
thesis several times since I began it in late 1989 early 1990. I have 
done this to prove the legitimacy of all that I was formally criticized 
for having posited, written about or lectured on back then; 
continuously upgrading the scientific evidence to substantiate the 
veracity of my empirical claims each passing year to the present time.
Again. I will never profess to having an evidentiary monopoly 
over the basic premise and themes introduced in this thesis. As was 
obvious, I have borrowed extensively from the verbal and literal 
reservoirs of many brilliant men and women, as well as from those 
just south of sanity.
I have also interwoven my own personal (albeit imperfect) 
assessments and interpretation of the subject-matter, using ample 
references and documentation from published scientific data, the 
forgotten meta-chronicles of the ancient cultures, myths and sciences 
of our black autochthones ancestors, European history, and the 
ongoing commentaries of article writers from elite magazines and 
daily news sources —all well documented, substantial proof to 
support my contentions. Whether or not I have succeeded in 
achieving a greater level of clarity and overstanding for the seeker by 
using them, will only be revealed by the unyielding tenacity of time.
Like the Neanderthal and the dinosaur mentioned at the outset— 
should we continue our downward slide on the slippery slopes of 
genetic and hormonal perversity, and not immediately reverse the 
behavioral trends now being practiced by the women (and men) of 
modern-day society, humanity as we know it, is destined to become 
nothing more than a frivolous footnote in the Universal Book of Life.
Dr. Phillip Valentine


--- PAGE 647 ---
END OF PART TWO


--- PAGE 648 ---
Epilogue
• •
It is my sincerest hope that the seeker overstands that these few 
pages could not possibly encompass all there is to know about the 
tragic saga of The Wounded Womb.  My intent was not to dictate 
absolutes or to presume to have the final word on any of the subjects 
discussed herein. In fact —I declare this book to be unfinished  and 
consider it only a beginning; an embryonic idea taking shape in the 
womb of a new consciousness-paradigm, and I challenge the seekers, 
visionaries, adepts and free-thinkers amongst you to nurture its 
potential to a wholesome conclusion.
Remember always that the quest for light is an ongoing journey. 
Throughout time, many words will be read and written, yet much 
will be left unsaid. It is up to you (the seeker) to add your own 
unique chapters to the eternal Book of Life. While in your travels, do 
whatever you can to plant seeds of wisdom in the soil of an open 
mind, so that the fruit of your efforts will nourish those who follow 
upon The Path.
And make no concessions with the truth once you have harvested 
it. Search and re-search; quest and re-quest; ply and re-ply. Never tire 
in your resolve. If in your seeking you have found me wrong, by all 
means tell me so, that I may adjust my sights and thus my direction. 
If in your seeking you have found me right, then by God have the 
guts to say so as well! We will never resurrect and ascend as entities 
of higher consciousness unless, we are willing to cut through the  
bullshit!
Above all be ever-vigilant yet open to the many ways that truth 
may present itself, for it is sometimes difficult to recognize and never 
what you expect it to be. No matter how strange, incredible or 
unbelievable truth appears to be at first sight, do not allow your 
doubts or prejudices to cripple your ability to discern.


--- PAGE 649 ---
Be ever the seeker and free-thinker, but remember always that 
western thought has infected us with the disease of presumption.
Our reality is orchestrated and manipulated—has been since 
childhood. Those who would keep us ignorant, "educate" us. 
Education gives us the presumption of certainty, which leads to a 
false sense of assurance derived from a consumption of facts we 
believe to be the truth.
But always remember beloved that the presumption of knowledge  
is the lock of a closed mind.  It becomes rusted shut with its own 
certainty, and entombs the inquiring light within.
Resurrect then, beloved sister!  Break the lock and free your divine 
light. Return to your throne and reclaim the sacred heritage that is 
your 'Triple-Black Mother-Goddess Head.'
"Nis  ek swtn hint n fr khm "my beautiful black Queen 
please"...
...return to your quintessential self!
Shm-m-Htp / Shm-m-Ra
Dr. Phillip Valentine 
Hry Snw Jhuty Sa Akhu-Ra Mhtp El


--- PAGE 650 ---



--- PAGE 651 ---
LAUNDRY
A Poem by ex-feminist 
Makeda Cannon
I fold m y husband's underwear 
it's a kind of therapy he doesn't 
require it, or hardly desire it but 
it brings such pleasure to me 
see, it's a systematic loving act 
to which I've gradually committed 
it's a glorious benediction in fact 
for which I am  naturally fitted
see, I'm the softer one—the gooey thing 
that like glue holds us two together 
I'm the one who makes possible 
the now until forever
I even sometimes bow to him 
because as a wom an I'm endowed 
with a super-excellent ability to resist 
that tendency to be proud
besides, there are lots of other bonuses; 
he cleans m y kitty's litter 
and does so many other pesky things 
I would hardly ever consider
he puts up with my chattiness 
which I no longer try to hide 
behind a mask of profound intelligence 
or some comparable disguise
he tolerates threats and bossiness 
though he could drop me with a punch 
he even smiles and cheerfully assists 
w hen I burn up all the lunch. And the cat, 
well she just strum s our heart strings and 
gets fur balls to make us nervous for 
bringing tender feelings into our midst


--- PAGE 652 ---
it's her hum ble little service.
There's just one surname in this household, it's 
true see I no longer hyphenate it, for that, 
haunting need for prestige and things, well 
see, men and women differentiate 
but there's quite enough room  for both 
And if ever they are to proliferate
each party m ust m an their post 
And love, God's given it to me to do 
so I m ust be qualified 
God's given me the milky breast 
that's why I bear the child.
Forgiveness —God's given it to me to do 
because I'm qualified 
and to give my love any less than this 
would be spiritual suicide
so I fold my husband's underwear 
it's a kind of therapy 
the doctor's recommended tack 
to develop real humility 
each crease makes a deep incision 
into the cavern of my heart 
and lifts out those impurities 
that could make the two of us part
on a good day, I do ironing 
and though my starching's neophyte 
because I have a good surrender mood 
I know my future's bright
for the Lord says my duty is him to 
please and he is to do the same 
we're not two separate infantries 
serving one another soothes our pain
and despite all the weights I've carried
and the wifely indignities I've known
the fact is I'm still married
and through this relationship I
have grown - for everything I need in
him  he needs something equally as
bad, that's w hy our love so long endures
not like some passing fad
there are so many less important things
I could do if merely financed them, but folding is
my real opportunity to become 
spiritually advanced in this life, 
I'll make the greatest gain in that 
Karmic debt that any hum an 
being can.
I'll be a loving and dutiful wife.


--- PAGE 653 ---
Oracle of the Sacred Woman
As a Sacred Woman...
I exist to represent the highest physical, m ental and spiritual expression of 
fem inine consciousness...
I em body poise, dignity and majesty at all tim es I nurture m yself through the 
nurturing of others ...
I engender the highest respect for m y fem inine self through m y abiding Love of 
all life ...
I 'w o'-m anifest the highest principles of SPIRIT, M IND and BODY, through m y 
alchemic applications of THOUGHT, W ORD and DEED ...
I can never be abused by M AN, W OM A N or CHILD, for I represent the peace 
that is the presence of the Creator Itself ...
I am  aw are of m y divine inherited gift to h e a l... w ith a GLANCE, a SMILE or a 
W ORD ...
I w as created as the original Oracle of H ealing ..; I am  endow ed w ith the authority 
to sum m on and com m and m y elem ental sisters and brothers (ETHER, AIR, FIRE, 
WATER, and EARTH) to assist me, for I am  the G reat-G randdaughter of N ature 
M other Herself...
I radiate m y INNER divinity by adorning m y OUTER being w ith garm ents 
befitting m y royal form  ..; I w ould never consciously seek to dress daily in the 
clothing of m y m asculine counterpart, for then, I SURRENDER MY POW ERS ...
I do not kill anim ated creatures for food; I am  a V egetarian-Fruitarian by m y 
true nature, and I endeavor to lim it the so-called civilized ritual of cooking, for as 
a daughter of life, m y food m ust be ALIVE ..; Life comes only from  Life — Life 
gives only unto Itself ...
I am  ever transform ing m y dom estic atm osphere into varying expressions of 
paradise; m y environm ent m ust radiate m y inner tranquility ... the very w alls of 
m y hom e m ust engender the divine sanctity and safety of the eternal w om b ...
I will ever strive to resurrect, support and give praise to the divinity in M AN, 
created by M other N ature and Father Spirit as m y M ate, m y Lover, m y Provider, 
m y Protector and m y Friend ... and ... I recognize that m y inner balance m ust 
W O-M AN-ifest externally through a loving relationship w ith him , if the true 
potential of m y higher self is to be revealed and realized ...
I seal these living words in Mind, in Heart and in Pen ...
Words by Dr. Phillip Valentine 
Copyright © 1986 by Phillip Valentine Sacred Woman's Signature


--- PAGE 654 ---
The Kosmic Mother
Figure 16


--- PAGE 655 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Metaphysical / Meta-historical
1. The Greatest Story Never Told, Lana Cantrell, published by Biohistorical
Press, Cottage Grove, MN
2. The Mahabarata, edited by J.A.S. van Buitemen, University of Chicago
(Volumes 1-3)
3. Oahspe: A New Bible in the Words of Jehovah and His Angel Embassadors,
copyrighted 1882 by John Ballou - Oahspe Publishing Association, 
New York and London, Anno Kosmon 34
4. Popul Vuh: The Sacred Book of the Quiche Maya, English version by Delia
Goetz and Sylvanus G. Morley - from the translation of Adrian 
Recinos (1950) University of Oklahoma Press
5. The Kybalion, by Three Initiates; copyright 1912, published by Yogi
Publication Society
6. The Secret Doctrine, Volumes I and II (1888), by H.P. Blavatsky
Published by The Theosophy Company, Los Angeles, CA 90007, 
USA
7. The Holy Bible, King James and Gideon versions
8. Necronomicon: (The Book of the Black Earth), copyright 1977 by
Schlangekraft Inc., ISBN: 0-380-75192-5
9. The Matrix Series (Parts 1-4), Valdamar Valerian, published by Leading
Edge Research Group, P.O. Box 481-MU58, Yelm, Washington State 
CF98597-CF
10. The Talmud
11. Old Testament Wisdom, by Manly P. Hall (1987), Second Edition 
Published by the Philosophical Research Society Inc., Los Angeles, CA
12. 'Hie Rig Veda: An Anthology, edited by Wendy D.O. Flaherty, Penguin
Classics, New York, NY
13. The Egyptian Book of the Dead, E.A. Wallis Budge, 1895, reprint 1967
Dover Publishing Inc.
14. Ifa Divination: Communication Between Gods and Man In West Africa, by
William Bascom, copyright 1969, Indiana University Press
15. Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, Stephen Langdon, 1909
16. The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, R.H. Charles;
Oxford, 1913


--- PAGE 656 ---
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B
17. New Handbook of the Heavens, by Bernhard, Bennet and Rice: New York,
1948
18. The Babylonian Genesis, Alexander Herdel; University of Chicago Press
19. The Gods of the Egyptians: Vol. II, E.A. Wallis Budget, 1904 Dover
Publishing Co. N.Y.
20. The Occult, by Colin Wilson (1971), Vintage Books, Random House,
New York
21. Japanese Chronicles of Gods and Sovereigns, by Jimo Shotoki of Kitobatoki
Chikofusa, translated by H. Paul Varley, Columbia University Press, 
N.Y. 1980
22. Isis Unveiled: A Master Key to the Mysteries of Ancient and Modem Science
and Theology (Volumes I and II), H.P. Blavatsky, Theosophical 
University Press, Pasadena, CA
23. Legend of the Jews (7 Volumes), translated by H. Szold, Publication
Society of America, Philadelphia, 1909
24. Initiation, by Elizabeth Haich (1974), Published by the Seed Center, Palo
Alto, CA
25. Tlie History and Practice of Magic, by Paul Christian (Volumes I and II),
Sixth Printing 1972, Published by Citadel Press, Secaucus, NJ
26. The Codex Eshunna -1936 B.C.
27. The Codex Ur-Nammu - 2050 B.C.
28. An Analysis of Ancient Mythology - 3rd Edition, by Jacob Bryant
29. Blacked Out Through Whitewash - Suzar (aka Dr. S. Epps); published 
1999, 2003,2007 by A-Kar Productions; ISBN: 0-9875394-3-9
Scientific
1. The Textbook of Endocrinology, Robert H. William, M.D. with
contributions from 38 authorities, W.B. Saunders Company, 
Philadelphia, 1974
2. Physician's Desk Reference (PDR), 48th Edition 1994, published by Medical
Economics Data Production Co., Montvale, N.J. 07645-1742
3. Gray's Anatomy, Henry Gray F.R.S., edited by T. Pickering Pick,
F.R.C.S., with Robert Howden M.A., M.B. C.M.
4. The Effects of Air Ionization, Electric Fields, Atmospherics and Other Electric
Phenomenon on Man and Animal, by Felix Gad Sulman, M.D.; D.V.M., 
Charles C. Thomas Publisher, Springfield, 111. (1980)


--- PAGE 657 ---
iii
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B
5. The Secret of Life; Cosmic Rays and Radiations on Living Beings, by George
Lakhovsky (1935), Health Research, Mokelumne, CA
6. The Geo-Magnetic Field and Life (Geomagnetobiology), A.P. Dubrov,
Plenum Press, New York, N.Y. (1978)
7. The Medical Implications of Nuclear War -  Institute of Medicine National
Academy of Sciences, Fredric Solomon, M.D. and Robert Q. Marston, 
M.D. editors, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (1986)
8. Tabor's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, by F.A. Davis Company,
Philadelphia, edited by Lleaylon L. Thomas, M.D. MPH (1977)
9. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, by Fritz Fuchs and Arnold Klopper, Harper
and Row, N.Y.
10. The Developing Human (2nd Edition) Clinically Oriented Embryology,
Keith L. Moore, Ph.D., F.I.A.C.; F.R.S.M., W.B. Saunders Company, 
Philadelphia, P. A. (1977)
11. The Mysteries of Human Reproduction, Dr. Raymond Bernard A.B.,
Columbia University M.A.; Ph.D., New York University, Health 
Research, Mokelumne, CA
12. The Birth Control Handbook (1992); Published by Montreal Health Press
Inc.
13. The Virgin Birth — Famous debate between Dr. Herbert Shelton, D.C.
and George Clements (Hilton Hotema), M.D. D.C., Health Research 
Mokelumne, CA (1957)
14. Imprints: Tlte Lifelong Effects of the Birth Experience, Arthur Janov, Ph.D.,
Coward-McCann Inc., New York, N.Y. (1983)
15. The Pregnancy and Birth Book, Dr. Miriam Stoppard, Villard Books, New
York 1986
16. The Isis Papers, Frances Cress Welsing
17. Degeneration -  Regeneration, Dr. Melvin E. Page
18. Breast Cancer? Breast Health; The Wise Woman Way, Susan Wied,
published by Ash Tra Publishing, Woodstock, N.Y.
19. Gem Therapy, A.K. Bhattacharya
20. Racial Adaptations, S. Charleton Corn, Nelson-Hall, Chicago (1982)
21. Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological
Perspective, A. Napoleon Chagron and William Irons, Duxbury Press 
North Situate, Massachusetts (1979)
22. Nutrition and Brain Development, A. Govind Dhopeshworkar, Plenum
Press, N.Y. (1983)


--- PAGE 658 ---
iv
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B
23. The Chemistry of Death, W.E.D. Evans, Charles C. Thomas Publishing,
Spring, Illinois (1963)
24. The Nature of Magnetism, M.I. Kaganov and V.M. Tsukernic, Mir
Publishing, Moscow (1985)
25. The Psychology of Sex, Hilary M. Lips and Nina Lee Colwell, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1978)
26. The Chemistry of Love, R. Michael Liebowitz, Little, Brown and
Company, Boston (1983)
27. Gaia - A New Look at Life on Earth, J.E. Lovelock, Oxford University
Press (1979)
28. Biological Effects and Exposure Criteria for Radiofrequency Electromagnetic
Fields (N.C.R.P. Report #86), by National Council on Radiation 
Protection and Measurements, Bethesda, Maryland
29. RU-486: Misconceptions, Myths and Morals (MIT); The Institute on
Women and Technology
30. Moloys Evaluation of the Pelvis in Obstetrics, Charles M. Steer, Plenum
Press, N.Y. (1975)
31. Evolution or Degeneration - Which?, H.R. Siegler, Northwestern
Publishing House, Milwaukee, Wisconsin (1972)
32. The 7 Mysteries of Life, Guy Murchie, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston
(1978)
33. The Psychobiology of Sex Differences and Sex Roles, Jacquelynne Parsons,
editor; Hemisphere Publishing Corp., N.Y. 1980)
34. Magical Child -  Rediscovering Nature's Plan for our Children,
by Joseph Chilton Pearce
35. Is Menstruation Obsolete? By Dr. Elsimar Coutinho and
Dr. Sheldon S. Segal
36. Brain Sex, by Ann Moir, Ph.D., and David Jessel 
(Dell Publishing; a division of Random House)
Magazine Articles /Journals/Reports
1. Time Magazine (July 1,1996), "Notebook-Health Report"
2. Newsweek Magazine (June 24, 1996), "Does Worry Stunt Girls' Growth?"
3. Commercial Booklet for the Open Center, Spring 1993
4. The New York Voice (May 2, 1996), "Health Problems of Young Women
Athletes" by Dr. Fredrich Frigoletto


--- PAGE 659 ---
V
T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B
5. The Advocate (1993),  "Lesbians and Breast Cancer"
6. The Village Voice (1994), "Embarrassed to Death" by Karen Houppert
7. Bill Brosie Talk Show (1996), "Philadelphia Focus," with guest Ms. Fran
Vesco, President, National Breast Cancer Coalition
8. Discover Magazine (August 1995), "Can Bras Give You Cancer?"
9. Discover Magazine (August 1995), "Apes of Wrath" by Barbara Smuts
10. Nexus Magazine (June/July 1996), "Hormone Heresy" by Sherill Sillman
11. Global 2000 Report (United Nations), 1977, 2000 pages
12. Gynecology: Well-Woman Care (1985), by Ronnie Lichtman and Susan
Papera
13. The Horizon Report (Videograph), "The Human Laboratory"
14. New York Daily News (9-26-96), "Procedure must be Outlawed: The
battle over Partial-Birth Abortion," by Gail Quinn
15. New York Daily News, "Aggressive? Me?" by Rene Denfield
16. The Deconstruction of Gender - A Folio, by Dale O'Leary
17. New England Journal of Medicine 1995 and 1996
18. Essence Magazine (Nov. 1996) 15 Annual Men's Issue: Special Collector's
Edition
19. Marie Claire Magazine (December 1996)
20. Transformation Magazine, "The Magazine created for Men who enjoy
being Women": Issue #12, Spartacus Publishing 1996
21. New York Daily News (9-19-96), "The Real First Wives Club," by Surabhi
Avasthi
22. Flex Magazine (1995)
23. American Pediatrics Journal, December 1997
24. " Girl, 10, Dies of Football Blow"- N.Y. Daily News, Thurs. Sept 5th,
2002"
25. "Breast Cancer Risk Factors in African-American Women" - The
Howard Univ. Tumor Registry Experience - Dec, 1993
26. "The American Journal of Epidemiology , September 2000 (152: 446-
452)
27. New York Daily News (3-6-05), "Movie's Girl Ka-power", by 
Jonathan Lemire
28. "Roids All The Rage"... Corky Seimaszko, Daily News, April 26th, 2005


--- PAGE 660 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B
29. "New Deal —  Raw Deal: How Aid Became Affirmative Action for 
Whites", by Ira Katznelson / Washington Post, Sept. 27th. 2005
30. "A Woman's Curse?", by Meredith F.Small/ The Sciences Jan/Feb
1999
31. "DNA That Accounts For White Skin", by Rick Weiss, Staff writer 
Washington Post: December 16th, 2005
32. "White Privilege Shaped The U.S.", by Dr. Robert Jensen/Prof. of
33. Journalism, Univ. Of Texas - Baltimore Sun, July 19th, 1998
34. Physical Antropology, 04/05 - 13th Edition; Elvio Angeloni 
Pasadena City College; Publishing Date-Nov. 2003 
ISBN: 0-07-286153-3
35. "On Physiological Radio-activity", by Hendrik Zwaardermaker 
Journal of Physiology, May 24th, 1918
36. "The Biological Action of Potassium and Its Radio-activity", by 
Hendrik Zwaardemaker; Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics -1923/ Vol. 21:151-159
37. "Aequi-Radioactivity", by Hendrik Zwaardemaker - American
Journal of Physiology; Legacy Context, Vol. 45/Issue 2/Jan. 1918
38. A Woman's Curse?, by Merideth F. Small, from "The Sciences"
Jan/Feb, 1999
39. "Feminism Used To Oppress Men"; by George Rolph, 6/2/2004 
Additional References...
1. Dressed to Kill, by Sidney and Soma Singer, Avery Publications
2. Our Stolen Future, by Theo Colburn; Dianne Dumaroski and John 
Peterson Meyers
3. The Unseen Hand: An Introduction to the Conspiratorial View of History, by
A. Ralph Epperson (1985), Publicus Press, Tucson, AZ
4. The Iceman Inheritance, by Michael Bradley, Kayode Publications Ltd
(1978)
5. The Blackman's Guide to Understanding the Blackwoman, by Shaharazad
Ali, Published by Civilized Publications - 2019 S. 7th Street, Phila., 
PA 19148
6. The Anatomy of Female Power, by Chinweizu, published by Pero Press,
P.O. Box 988, Festac Town, Lagos, Nigeria (1990)
7. Men's Liberation, Carol Hanisch, Random House, New York 1978


--- PAGE 661 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
8. Right-Wing Women, Andrea Dworkin, London: The Women's Press
(1983)
9. Picking on Men Again, Judy Allen and Dyan Sheldon, London: Arrow
Books (1986)
10. The Psychology of Women (Vol. I & II), Helene Deutsch, Bantom books
New York © 1944-5
11. Why Women Flirt, Kowus Besi Williams, Vanguard (Lagos), March 1989
12. A Man Has the Right to See a Naked Body, Debbie Raymond from The
Independent (London) 1989
13. Why All Men Under 35 Should be Locked Up, by Samantha Norman,
Cosmopolitan (London Edition), August 1989
14. Who Stole Feminism, Christina Hoffman Sommers
15. How Women Behave, G.C. Payette
16. The Origins of Family, Property and the State, by Fredrich Engels
17. Sweet Revenge: The Wicked Delights of Getting Even, by Regina Baneca
18. The Dialect of Sex (1970), by Shulamith Firestone
19. Women and Revolution, by Heidi Hartman
20. Dear Brothers and Sisters, George Silos (copyrighted 1991)
21. The Inside Story of Proctor and Gamble, by Alecia Swasy
22. Body and Soul: The Black Women's Guide to Physical Health and 
Emotional Well-Being - Linda Villarosa, Editor (1994), Published by 
Harper Perennial, New York
23. When Affirmative Action Was White: An Untold History of Racial 
Inequity in Twentieth-Century America, by Ira Katznelson, PhD.
23. The Death of the West, by Pat Buchannan
24. Intercourse, by Andrea Dworkin (1988 The Free Press)
25. Against our Will, by Susan Brownmiller (1975)
26. The Decline of Males, by Lionel Tiger (1999/ Golden Books Pub.)
27. The Women's Room, by Marilyn French
31. The Cultural Devastation of American Women: The Strange and 
Frightening Decline of the American Female (and Her Dreadful Timing) 
by Nancy Levant
32. The War Against Boys: How Mis-guided Feminism is Harming Our 
Young Men by Christina Hoff-Sommers
39. Ruins of Empire by Constantin Francois Volney (First edition; Paris
1791 Jefferson/Barlow; translation Paris 1802)
40. Abused Men: The Hidden Side of Domestic Violence, by Philip Cook


--- PAGE 662 ---
TH E W O U N D ED  W O M B
41. A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century, by Israel Cohen
42. Bitch In The House, by Cathi Hanauer - Published by Harper Collins
43. Why Men Rule: A Theory of Male Dominance, by Steven Goldberg
44. The Forgotten Slaves: Whites In Servitude in Early America and 
Industrial Britain, by Michael Hoffman II
45. They Were White and They Were Slaves, by Michael A. Hoffman
46. Mullin's New History of The Jews, by Eustace Mullins
47. Intimate Betrayal: Domestic Violence in Lesbian Relationships, 
by Ellyn Kaschak (Editor) - Published by Haworth Press, 2002
48. Woman's Share in Social Culture, by Anna Garlin Spencer (1913)
49. Disabusing the Defination of Domestic Abuse: How Women Batter 
Men and the Role of the Feminist State, by Prof. Linda Kelly, PhD
Published by Florida State Univ. Law Review on Domestic 
Violence; Volume 30:791
50. Crossovers: The Origins of Homosexuality Revealed, by Sidney Schwartz
51. Nuclear Witness; Insiders Speak Out - by Leslie Freeman
52. Preventing Breast Cancer - Dr. John Gofman
53. Reclaiming Your Health - John Robbins
54. The Myth that Schools Shortchange Girls: Social Science in the Service 
of Deception-A Critique; by Judith Kleinfeld, University of Alaska
Miscellaneous...
1. American Heritage Dictionary Second College Edition (1982), (1985)
Houghton Mifflin Company
2. Webster's 7th Collegiate Dictionary
3. Black's Law Dictionary - 5th Edition; Copyright 1860 through 1927 by
Henry Campbell Black; published by West Pub. Company 1979
4. Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, Copyright 2001
F.A. Davis Company, Philadelphia
5. Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Black and Minority Health,
Margaret M. Heckler, Secretary, United States Dept, of Health 
and Human Services, August 1985
6. Gloria Steinem and the CIA; New York Times, Feb. 21,1967 and The
Village Voice, May 21st, 1979;
7. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice 
Statistics; Lawrence A. Greenfeld and Tracy L. Snell; BJS Statisticians


--- PAGE 663 ---
ix
GLOSSARY
Adam  /Adamic  — Red Earth; the unregenerate nature of man; prototypical humanity .  
AMENORRHEIC — [amenorrhea] abnormal absence or suppression of the menstrual  
discharge.AMNlOTic FLUID — a serous fluid in which the embryo of reptiles, birds and  
mammals is immersed.
A nalogue — a chemical compound structurally similar to another but different often by single 
element of the same valence and group of the periodic table as the element it replaces.
A ndric — a female possessing the bio-chemistry and quality of behavior and instincts 
representative of the archetypal, integrus male
ANDROGYNOUS — having the characteristics or nature of both male and female; neither  
specifically feminine or masculine; having traditional male and female roles obscured or  
reversed.
A n d r o-p h o b ic - having an intense, persistent, abnormal or illogical fear of men
ARCHETYPAL — [archetype] the original pattern or model of which all things of the same type  
are representations or copies; a perfect example; idea.
A u ra — a subtle sensory stimulus; a distinctive atmosphere surrounding a given source; a 
luminous Radiation.
BIO-STASIS — biological state of equilibrium
BLASTOCYST —  the modified blastula of a placental mammal [blastula - an early metazoan 
embryo typically having the form of a hollow fluid-filled rounded cavity bounded by a single 
layer of cells]
CAUCASIAN —  of or relating to the Caucasus Mountains or its inhabitants; of or relating to the 
White race of mankind as classified according to physical features; of or relating to the White 
race as defined by law: specific, as composed of persons European, No. African or southwest 
Asian ancestry.
CAUCASOID —  a member of the so-called "White" race; a descendant of those who originated 
from Caucasus ancestry; a melanin-deficient humanoid referred to in the Bible as one suffering 
with leprosy (See Book of Leviticus; Chapter 13)
C hauvinist —  [one exhibiting] excessive or blind patriotism; [one exhibiting] undue partiality 
or attachment to a group or place to which one belongs or has belonged; [one having] an 
attitude of superiority toward members of the opposite sex.
CLOISTERED — Secluded from the world in or as if in a cloister.
CONSCIENCE — the sense of consciousness of the moral goodness or blameworthiness of one's  
own conduct, intentions, or character together with a feeling of obligation to do right or be
____________________________________________________T H E W O U N D ED  W O M B


--- PAGE 664 ---
X
THE WOUNDED WOMB
good; a faculty, power, or principle enjoining good acts; the part of the superego in  
psychoanalysis that transmits commands and admonitions to the ego.
COSMIC — of or relating to the cosmos, the extraterrestrial vastness, or the universe in contrast  
to the earth alone; characterized by greatness esp. in extent, intensity, or comprehensiveness.
COSMOPOLITAN — having worldwide rather than limited or provincial scope or bearing; having  
wide international sophistication; worldly; composed of persons, constituents or elements from  
all or many parts of the world.
Diagnosis  — the art or act of identifying a disease from its signs and symptoms;
DIASPORA — migration; people settled far from their ancestral homelands; [the settling of  
scattered colonies of Jews outside Palestine after the Babylonian exile]
DOGMA — something held as an established opinion; a definite authoritative tenet; a code of  
such tenets; a point of view or tenet put forth as authoritative without adequate grounds
ECO-BIOSIS — environmental state of equilibrium as it relates to human interaction
ELECTROTONIC - (Adj. of Electrotonus) -  The alteration in excitability and conductivity of a  
nerve caused by the passage of an electric current.
ELECTROVALENT - (Adj. of Electrovalence and electrovalency) - Valence characterized by the  
transfer of electrons from atoms of one element to atoms of another and the number of electric  
charges lost or gained by the atom in such a transfer.
EMPATHIC — [involving, characterized by] the imaginative projection of a subjective state into  
an object so that the object appears to be infused with it; the action of understanding, being  
aware of, being sensitive to, and vicariously experiencing the feelings, thoughts, and experience  
of another of either the past or present without having the feelings, thoughts, and experience  
fully communicated in an objectively explicit manner.
ENDOGENOUS — growing or produced by growth from deep tissue; caused by factors inside the  
organism or system; produced or synthesized within the organism or system.
EURO-CENTRIC — centered on Europe and the Europeans
EXOGENOUS — produced by growth from superficial tissue; caused by factors (as food or a  
traumatic factor) or an agent (as a disease-producing organism) from outside the organism or  
system; introduced from or produced outside the organism or system; not synthesized within  
the organism or system
Feminism  — the theory of the political, economic, and social equality of the sexes; organized  
activity on behalf of women's rights and interests
Follicle  — a small anatomical cavity or deep narrow-mouthed depression; a small lymph  
node; a dry dehiscent one-celled many-seeded fruit that has a single carpel and opens along only  
one suture.


--- PAGE 665 ---
xi
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Gender  — sex; a subclass within a grammatical class (as noun, pronoun, adjective, or verb) of a  
language that is partly arbitrary but also partly based on distinguishable characteristics (as  
shape, social rank, manner of existence, or sex) and that determines agreement with and  
selection of other words or grammatical forms; membership of a word or a grammatical form in  
such a subclass; an inflectional form showing membership in such a subclass.
Gynandromorph  — an abnormal individual exhibiting characters of both sexes in various  
parts of the body: a sexual mosaic
Gynandromorphic  — of or relating to an abnormal individual exhibiting characters of both  
sexes...
GYNECOPATHIC - diseases or disease conditions occurring exclusively in women...
Gynic — a female possessing the bio-chemistry and quality of behavior and instincts  
representative of the archetypal, integrus woman.
Gynocentric  — the behavior, actions and instincts associated with an integrus gynic woman.
HEGEMONIC — of or relating to a preponderance, influence or authority esp. of one nation over  
others.
HERMAPHRODITE — an animal or plant having both male and female reproductive organs;  
homosexual; something that is a combination of diverse elements.
Hermetic  — of or relating to the Gnostic writings or teaching arising in the first three centuries 
A.D. and attributed to Hermes Trismegistus (Djhwty); relating to or characterized by occultism; 
recondite; belief that Hermes Trismegistus invented a magic seal to keep vessels airtight; 
airtight; impervious to external influence; recluse; solitary.
HOMEOSTASIS — a relatively stable state of equilibrium or a tendency toward such a state  
between the different but interdependent elements or groups of elements of an organism or  
group.
HOMOSEXUAL — of, relating to, or characterized by a tendency to direct sexual desire toward  
another of the same sex.
Hormone  — a product of living cells that circulates in body fluids or sap and produces a  
specific effect on the activity of cells remote from its point of origin; especially one exerting a  
stimulatory effect on a cellular activity; a synthetic substance that acts like a hormone.
Hybrid  — an offspring of two animals or plants of different races, breeds, varieties, species, or  
genera; a person whose background is a blend of two diverse cultures or traditions; something  
heterogeneous in origin or composition: composite; something (as a power plant, vehicle, or  
electronic circuit) that has two different types of components performing essentially the same  
function.
Hygienic  — of or relating to a science of the establishment and maintenance of whole and  
intelligent health.


--- PAGE 666 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Hypothalamus  — a basal part of the diencephalon that lies beneath the thalamus on each side,  
forms the floor of the third ventricle, and includes vital autonomic regulatory centers.
IDIOSYNCRASIES — a peculiarity of constitution or temperament; individual hypersensitiveness  
(as to a drug or food); characteristic peculiarity of habit or structure.
INERT — lacking the power to move; very slow to move or act: sluggish; deficient in active  
properties; especially lacking an unusual or anticipated chemical or biological action; inactive.
INSIDIOUS — awaiting a chance to entrap: treacherous; harmful but enticing: seductive; having a  
gradual and cumulative effective: subtle; of a disease: developing so gradually as to be well  
established before becoming apparent.
INSTINCT — a natural or inherent aptitude, impulse, or capacity; a largely inheritable and  
unalterable tendency of an organism to make a complex and specific response to environmental  
stimuli without involving reason; behavior that is mediated by reactions below the conscious  
level.
INTEGRUS — integral - essential to completeness: constituent; lacking nothing essential: entire.
INTRINSIC — belonging to the essential nature or constitution of a thing; being or relating to a  
semiconductor in which the concentration of charge carriers is characteristic of the material itself  
instead of the content of any impurities it contains; originating or situated within the body or  
part acted on.
Khem et — also known as Egypt; from the original name Khem or Kham, meaning black; ergo the 
"Black Land."
LUTEINIZE — to form corpora luteal (a reddish yellow mass of progesterone-secreting endocrine 
tissue that forms from a ruptured Graafian follicle in the mammalian ovary).
Maat  — the Khemetic principle of balance, justice and harmony.
MASTURBATE — to practice masturbation — the erotic stimulation of the genital organs  
commonly resulting in orgasm and achieved by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of  
sexual intercourse, by instrumental manipulation, occasionally by sexual fantasies, or by various  
combinations of these agencies.
MATRIARCHY — a family, group, or state governed by a matriarch; a system of social  
organization in which descent and inheritance are traced through the female line.
MATRIX — something within which something else originates or develops; a mold from which a  
relief surface (as a piece of type) is made; die; the natural material in which a fossil, metal, gem,  
crystal, or pebble is embedded; material in which something is enclosed or embedded; the  
intercellular substance in which tissue cells (as of connective tissue) are embedded.
MELANATED — an increased amount of black or nearly black pigmentation of an individual or  
kind of organism.
MELANIN — a dark brown or black animal or plant pigment.


--- PAGE 667 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
MERKUT — Mkt. - Khemetic name for a pyramid.
Meta -Historic  (M eta -Chronology ) - A n in terp re ta tio n  o f hum an h isto ry  based o n  th e
ENCODED CALCULUS OF MYTH...
METAPHYSICS — a division of philosophy that is concerned with the fundamental nature of 
reality and being and that includes ontology, cosmology, and often epistemology; abstract 
philosophical studies: a study of what is outside objective experience.
META-PSYCHOLOGY - Philosophical speculation on the origin, structure and function of the 
mind, and on the relationship between the mind and objective reality...
Misandry  - hatred of men
Misogyny  - hatred of women.
MlSOLOGY - hatred of reason, just argument or enlightenment.
Moor  (Muurs) — from the Kemetic word "mau", or cat; Greek "maurus" or black; one of the 
African / Arab and Berber conquerors of Spain in the 8th century A.D.
MORPHALLAXIS - The regeneration of a part or the transformation of one part into another by 
means of structural reorganization, with only a limited production of new cells...
Mutant  — of, relating to, or produced by mutation.
NUCLEI/NUCLEUS — the small brighter and denser portion of a galaxy or of the head of a comet; 
a central point, group, or mass about which gathering, concentration, or accretion takes place; a 
cellular organelle that is essential to cell functions (as reproduction and protein synthesis), is 
composed of nuclear sap and a nucleoprotein-rich network from which chromosomes and 
nucleoli arise, and is enclosed in a definite membrane; a mass of gray matter or group of nerve 
cells in the central nervous system; a characteristic and stable complex of atoms or groups in a 
molecule; esp: ring; the positively charged central portion of an atom that comprises nearly all of 
the atomic mass and that consists of protons and neutrons except in hydrogen which consists of 
one proton only; the peak of energy in the utterance of a syllable.
OBSOLESCENCE — the process of becoming obsolete or the condition of being nearly obsolete
OCCIPITAL — of, relating to, or located within or near the occipital (the back part of the head or 
skull) or the occipital bone
OLIGARCHY —  government by the few; a government in which a small group exercises control 
especially for corrupt and selfish purposes; also: a group exercising such control; an 
organization under oligarchic control
ORTHOBIOTIC —  ortlw; from the Latin meaning "correct"; "upright" ... and bio meaning "life" -  
together meaning "correct living ..."
OXYMORON — a combination of contradictory or incongruous words


--- PAGE 668 ---
xiv
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Paradox  — a tenet contrary to received opinion; a statement that is seemingly contradictory or  
opposed to common sense and yet is perhaps true; a self-contradictory statement that first seems  
true; an argument that apparently derives self-contradictory conclusions by valid deduction  
from acceptable premises
PATHOLOGICAL — of or relating to pathology; altered or caused by disease
PATRIARCHY — social organization marked by the supremacy of the father in the clan or family,  
the legal dependence of wives and children, and the reckoning of descent and inheritance in the  
male line; a society organized according to the principles of patriarchy
PERVERTED — corrupt; improper; incorrect; marked by perversion
PHEROMONE — a chemical substance that is produced by an animal and serves esp. as a  
stimulus to other individuals of the same species for one or more behavioral responses
Pituitary  — of or relating to the pituitary gland — a small oval endocrine organ that is  
attached to the infundibulum of the brain, consists of an epithelial anterior lobe and joined by an  
intermediate part to a posterior lobe of nervous origin, and produces various internal secretions  
directly or indirectly impinging on most basic body functions
Psychasthenic—an incapacity to resolve doubts or uncertainties, or to resist phobias, obsessions,  
or compulsions that one knows are irrational
Psyche  — mind: mental processes and activities; psychological methods; soul; self
PSYCHIC — of or relating to the psyche; lying outside the sphere of physical science or  
knowledge: immaterial, moral, or spiritual in origin or force; sensitive to nonphysical or  
supernatural forces and influences, marked by extraordinary or mysterious sensitivity,  
perception, or understanding
PSYCHO — a victim of severe mental or emotional disorder; especially a psychoneurotic person.
PSYCHOLOGICAL — of or relating to psychology; mental; directed toward the will or toward the  
mind specifically in its cognitive function.
PURDAH — seclusion of women from public observation among Muslims and some Hindus esp. 
in India.
PUTREFACTIVE — of or relating to the decomposition of organic matter; especially the typically  
anaerobic splitting of proteins by bacteria and fungi with the formation of foul-smelling  
incompletely oxidized products.
QUANTUM — quantity, amount; portion, part; one of the very small increments of parcels into  
which many forms of energy are subdivided; one of the small subdivisions of a quantized  
physical magnitude (as magnetic movement).
RETROGRESSION — return to a former and less complex level of development or organization


--- PAGE 669 ---
XV
THE WOUNDED WOMB
RHETORIC — the art of speaking or writing effectively; skill in the effective use of speech; a type 
or mode of language or speech; also insincere or grandiloquent language; verbal 
communication; discourse.
SAPPHIC — of or pertaining to lesbianism.
Sarcophagus  — a stone coffin.
Sentient — responsive to or conscious of sense impressions; aware; finely sensitive in 
perception or feeling.
Specter — a visible disembodied spirit; ghost; something that haunts or perturbs the mind; 
phantasm
SURROGATE — to put in the place of another; to appoint as successor, deputy, or substitute for 
oneself; substitute.
SYNTHESIZE — to combine or produce synthesis — the composition or combination of parts or 
elements so as to form a whole.
TEMPERAMENTS — constitution of a substance, body, or organism with respect to the mixture or 
balance of its elements, qualities, or parts; characteristic or habitual inclination or mode of 
emotional response.
TERATOGEN — monster, deformed or mutated.
TET/D jed  — the column/coffin of Osiris (Ausar) that Isis (Ast) retrieved to free his soul, 
trapped within by his "evil" twin brother Set.
THEOREM — a formula, proposition, or statement in mathematics or logic deduced or to be 
deduced from other formulas or propositions; an idea accepted or proposed as a demonstrable 
truth often as a part of a general theory.
THRESHOLD — the place or point of entering or beginning; the point at which a physiological 
effect begins to be produced; a level, point, or value above which something is true or will take 
place and below which it is not or will not.
VALENCE- The capacity of an atom or group of atoms to combine in specific proportions with 
other atoms or groups of atoms.
Yang — the masculine active principle in nature that in Chinese cosmology is exhibited in light, 
heat, or dryness and that combines with yin to produce all that comes to be.
Yin — the feminine passive principle in nature that in Chinese cosmology is exhibited in 
darkness, cold, or wetness and that combines with yang to produce all that comes to be.


--- PAGE 670 ---
x v i
Index____________
A.I.D.S., 294, 347 (Part II) 69 
Abortion, 185-186, 207, 217, 266, 296, 
309, 313-316 (Part II) 37, 39, 90, 92, 
183
Adipose (fatty) tissue, 63 
Adrenal corticosteroid, 389 
Adrenalin, 47, 73-74, 113, 120, 341, 
344-345,348,381 
Aerobics, 4, 90, 345 (Part II) 143 
Agoraphobia, 34 
Alien Estrogen, 233, 393 
Alimentary tract, 311 
Alzheimer's, 238, 380 (Part II) 72 
America's Pharmaceutical Research 
Companies, 304-305 
American Medical Association 
(AMA), 268, 356, (Part II) 1 
Amino acid, 131,153,237 
Ammonium oxides, 349 
Analogue hormones, 39, 384 
Andric, 3-4, 32-33, 61, 67, 72,107,108, 
109, 111, 113,119,150,169, 222, 236, 
246,258,368, 382 
Androgenic, 38, 47, 74, 78, 106-107, 
113,119, 122-123,150, 285, 291, 300,
308-309,392, (Part II) 10 
Androgyny/Androgynous, 65-67,
105,124,230,235,249,371 
Android Pelvis, 108,112 
Androsteroids, 124,150, 383 
Androsterone, 74, 86, 117, 119, 285, 
383,389
Ankh, 50,118,153,161,166,189,383 
Anorexia nervosa, 86 
Anovulatory cycles, 393 
Anthropologists, 7, 249, 337, 344, (Part 
II) 64
Antibiotics, 169, 233, 294-296
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Anti-diabetogenic, 342 
Anti-perspirant deodorants, 311 
Anxiety, 75-6, 131, 242, 261, 270, 295, 
333, (Part II) 82 
Aquarius, 137, 214, (Part II) 187 
Archetypal, 3, 5-6, 15, 17, 29, 31, 47, 
50, 54, 74, 98-99, 102, 106, 110, 116, 
144,148,154, 190-191,195, 207, 217, 
254, 270, 284, 321,359, 360, 366,370, 
390-391 (Part II) 2, 10, 12-13, 28-29,
50, 55, 65, 75, 81, 96, 101, 106, 108, 
119,139,140,143,156,182-183 
Arsenics, 349, 393 
Artificial Appetite Entity, 289-292 
Artificial womb, 183-4 
Ast (Isis), 1,48,53,135,163,185 
(Part II) 9,116 
Athletes, 72, 80,82,85-86, 92-94, 98-99, 
103,114,151, 296, 346, 351, 355, 364, 
(Part II) 54,130 
Atlantean, (Part II) 4 
Atrazine, 393 
B-complex, 238,313 
B-vitamins, 339 
Bi-polar, 67,131,154,188 
Bible, 51, 115, 133-137, 175, 208, 210, 
212-215, (Part II) 97-99 
Bio-electric conductor, 155,157 
Bio-Kinetic Life, 39, 118-119, 144, 149, 
204, 383 
Bio-plasmic, 232 
Bio-psychic, 33,126, (Part II) 13 
Bio-stasis, 54, 62,195, 219,338,383 
Birth control, 113, 200-201, 239, 276, 
(Part II) 90, 92 
Birth control pills, 199, 230, 239, 259, 
272-274, 294,296,395


--- PAGE 671 ---
xv ii
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Black, 6, 8,15-18, 20-21, 42, 47, 50, 69, 
145,187, 212, 225, 232-233, 235, 251, 
257, 278, 281, 308, 315, 318-322, 328, 
333, 344, 347, (Part II) 4-7, 9, 17, 24, 
28-30, 40-52, 54-64, 67, 78, 84-89, 92- 
93, 95-97,100,102-119,121-124,126-
139,141-142, 144-145, 147,149,154-
156,158,164-165,182-183 
Black feminist/Black feminism,
(Part II) 44-45, 48-50, 52, 54-57, 64, 
109,118,126,137-138,165 
Blastocyst, 158 
Blood sacrifice, 204,242 
Body and Soul, 176, 280, 282, (Part II) 
58-59,61-63,67,81,84-85 
Body building, 360, 362-364, 366 
Boron, 116,150, 253,309,313 
Bra, 61,64,334-336, (Part II) 24,147 
Breast cancer, 6, 38, 46, 64, 78, 152, 
224, 240, 299, 300-309, 311-313, 315- 
317, 328-329, 332, 334-335, 383, 387, 
394, (Part II) 49, 78-80 
Buddhism, (Part II) 187 
Bulimia, 86 
Caesarean, 69, 380
Calcium, 18, 116, 150-151, 155-158, 
238, 242, 252-253, 309, 339, 355, 392- 
393
Calorigenic, 342 
Candida albicans yeast, 293,295 
Carboxymethylcellulose, 264 
Cardio-vascular disease, 386 
Cataclysm, 27-28, 52, 54,110,148,176- 
178,186,189,216, (Part II) 77 
Catalytic hormone, 389 
Catch-22,337,391
Caucasian, (Part I) 12, 14-16, 18, 23,
27, 150, 218, 226, 250, 303-304, 310, 
316-317, 319, 327-328, 343-344, 347, 
394, (Part II) 45,48, 51, 57, 79,88,90-
91, 94, 98, 105-106, 109, 116, 120, 
124,134
Cerebro-spinal, 43-45,143,145,176 
Cervical cancer, 86,173, 246, 386, (Part 
II) 38, 69,117 
Cervix, 129,143,146, 245,302 
Chauvinism/Chauvinist, 94, 143,191, 
221, (Part II) 3, 11, 24, 48, 134, 139,
148,154-155,190 
Childbirth, 69, 73,155,380 
Chinweizu, (Part II) 17-22, 24 
Cholesterin, 243
Cholesterol, 36, 42,46,117,339,396 
Chromosomes, 13,31,395 
Chronic fatigue syndrome, 253, 295, 
(Part II) 49 
Circulatory system, 295, 311 
Civil Rights Movement, (Part II) 29-
30, 52, 84, 87-89, 102, 108-110, 115, 
119,134,137 
Clitoris/Clitoral, 62,113,121-122,124, 
127, 141, 147-149, 246, (Part II) 64-
66, 75,77-78,81 
Cloning, 21, 89, 320-321, (Part II) 36,
105,183-184 
Complacent Pathology, 191, 194, 219, 
392
Compressed hydrogen, 47, 51, 256, 
355
Condom, 168-169,294,312 
Conjunctiva, 336 
Contraception, 178, 203, 207, 239 
Copper, 33,116,313,388 
Corona, 330,383, (Part II) 9 
Corpus luteum, 35, 177, 183, 240-241, 
391
Corpuscles, 117,175 
Corticosteroids, 47,113,120,124, 389 
Cortisone, 73-74, 294, 296


--- PAGE 672 ---
XV111
Cosmic Law, 2, 94, 114-115, 125, 143, 
147,274, (Part 11)7 
Cosmopolitan Magazine, (Part II) 147, 
Creator gods, 48 
Cross-dresser, (Part II) 147,154 
Crying, 295,336-343 
Cytotoxic, 354 
D and C resectoscope, 279 
Darwinian, 249, (Part II) 174 
Davis, Angela, (Part II) 28,54, 63,110 
DDT, 310,393 
Deity, (Part II) 187
Depression, 39, 75, 77, 131, 200, 206, 
215, 246, 253, 268, 276, 294-295, 297,
313, 333, 341, 380, 383, 388, (Part II)
49, 82,117,179 
Diaphragm, 266, 381 
Dieldrin, 393 
Dioxin, 78, 261, 262, 393 
Djed, 157,161,163
DNA, 41, 07, 153, 167, 169-171, 318, 
320, 323, 325-326, 333, 394, (Part II) 
65,71,94-95,106,184 
Dogon, 198, 200, 219-220 
Dong Quai, 396 
Double-speak, 93, 96,98 
Douche, 169 
Dr. Brothers, 248 
Dr. Ruth, 116,168, 248 
Ebony Magazine, (Part II) 129,147 
Eco-biosis, 32, 48
Eggs, 32-33, 45, 62,109,112,166,174, 
176,241,273,381 
Ejaculation, 118,125-127,129-136,138,
140,142-147,149,175,243,360 
Electrical field, 156,158,313 
Elements, 6,17, 41, 49, 55, 73,150,153, 
155,163, 204, 253, 289, 324,344, 346,
348
Ellis, Havelock, 250
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Elohim, 48
Emotion, 33, 42-44, 46, 76, 79, 87, 99, 
103-104,119,124, 153, 191-193, 203, 
216-218, 248, 288-289, 290-292, 313, 
336-338, 340-343, (Part II) 13,15, 27-
28, 53, 58, 82-83, 85, 114, 122, 127, 
158,163,189-190 
Endogenous Testosterone, 379 
Endocrinologists, 114, 201, 229, 316, 
337
Endometriosis, 179, 246, 251-252, 258, 
297, 388
Endometrium/Endometrial, 37, 143, 
199, 209, 238-239, 241, 251, 272, 309,
386,388 
Engels, Frederich, (Part II) 31 
Ennead, 48, 52,188
Epidemic, 6, 78, 97, 99, 142, 167, 224, 
269, 281, 299, 300, 303, 308, 317, 
(Part II) 1,3, 70, 78,175 
Epileptic, 125-126,144,149, 238 
Epinephrine, 73,120, 348 
Epithelial, 33, 347
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), 
(Part II) 22 
Equity feminist, (Part II) 25-26 
Erogenous zones, 61 
Eroticism, 124, 244-248 
Erythrocyte, 219, 332 
Esoteric, 16, 127, 134, 134, 137, 143, 
157, 159, 161, 163, 175, (Part II) 63,
187 
Esoterica, 154
Essence magazine, 351, (Part II) 147, 
153
Estradiol, 36, 38 46-47, 175, 230, 240,
314, 392 
Estrin, 116 
Estriol, 36, 38
Estrogen, 34-39, 41-42, 46, 62-63, 70, 
74, 76, 82, 86, 93,106,113, 119, 123,


--- PAGE 673 ---
x ix
150-152,175,190,199, 205, 224, 230-
233, 238-241, 246, 252-253, 277, 280, 
283, 291, 309-310, 314-316, 342-343,
357, 383, 385-389, 391-396, (Part II) 
23
Estrogenic, 119, 285 
Estrone, 36,38
Eugenicist, 323, (Part II) 89-90, 93,107 
Eugenics, 21, 38, 322, 325-326, (Part II) 
107
Euro-feminist, 1, (Part II) 52, 56, 58-59, 
61,117
Exercise, 7, 39, 71-72, 85-86, 89, 95, 
109, 111, 143,151,173,177,184-185, 
214, 223, 259-260, 286-287, 300, 340, 
343-346, 348, 351-352, 354-356, 364, 
366, 380-384, (Part II) 6, 58, 95, 114, 
120,143,185 
Exhaustion, 119, 141, 175, 206, 219, 
313, 337,343,345,351,354,383 
Exogenous, 107,109,168, 274 
Extortion, 114,135,181,183,186 
Extremely Low Frequency (ELF), 330- 
331, 333 
Fallopian tubes, 165,381-382,
(Part II) 144 
Fascia, 70,141,380-382 
Female Bodybuilder, 359 
Feminist, 5-6, 25, 34, 64-66, 72, 77, 80, 
82-85, 88-89, 91-96, 98-100, 125-127, 
135,138,144,146,148,170,172,175, 
186, 191, 211-212, 218, 221-222, 229,
234, 249, 258, 271, 275, 284-286, 304,
315, 336, 340, 356, 358, 379, 391, 
(Part II) 2-5, 8-12, 17-18, 21-23, 25,
29, 32-35, 38-39, 42-13, 45-46, 48-51, 
53-54, 57-58, 64, 66-68,75-82, 88, 91-
92, 109-110, 114-115, 117-118, 122, 
129,139-141,146,148-149,156,158-
160,162,164-169,175,177,181,183
Ferguson, Ann, (Part II) 37
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Ferro-magnetic crystal, 158 
Fibrin, 236,279,282-283,289,292-293 
Fibrocystic, 300, 310, 313 
Fibroid tumor, 38, 150, 277-283, 285, 
288,290,293, (Part II) 117 
Fibroids, 167, 179, 207, 209, 236, 239, 
251,277-281, 283,288, 290, 388, (Part 
11)49
Firestone, Shulamith, (Part II) 20, 33-
34.183-184
First Wives' Club, The, (Part II) 167 
Follicle stimulating hormones, 35, 239 
Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 113, 152, 261, 265, 272, 356, 
(Part II) 1,70-73 
Fosamax, 152
Free radicals, 157, 256, 345-346, 348-
349
Fuller, Dr. Neely, (Part II) 110 
Gametic, 222, 232, 235, 337, 340-341, 
(Part II) 183 
Garnet, 158
Garvey Movement, (Part II) 52 
Gender, 4, 6, 37-38, 42-47, 55, 62, 65,
67, 70-72, 76-78, 85, 89, 91, 94-95, 97, 
99-100, 102, 107, 112, 116, 118, 147, 
170,194-195, 202, 222, 229, 231, 234,
237, 284-285, 309, 356, 358, 360, 382, 
389, 394, (Part II) 2-9, 11, 16-17, 26, 
28-29, 34-37,40-42, 50, 52, 54, 56, 67, 
76,85,88,116-117,126,133,135-137,
139,143, 146-149, 154, 156-157,160, 
163-164, 171, 176-177, 180-182, 185- 
186,188
Gender-feminism/ Gender-feminist,
6, 25, 68-69, 82, 85, 91,114,147,151, 
249, 259, 270, 275, 284, 382, 390, 
(Part II) 3-5, 21-22, 25-26, 30-31, 35-
36, 39, 42-43, 56-57, 62, 85, 88, 115- 
117,132, 143,148-149, 155-156,160,
164.174.183-184,188


--- PAGE 674 ---
X X
Genitalia, 37, 44, 68, 153, 167, 230, 
(Part II) 66 
Geo-magnetic, 15, 30-31,310,330 
Germ plasm, 106-107, 114, 119, 168- 
169,173-175,308,341 
God, 21, 28, 30, 34, 47-54, 73, 76, 94, 
98, 104, 110, 133, 138-139, 153-154, 
158,161,187-188,190,194, 208, 213, 
231, 281, 326-327, 341, 360, 370, 397, 
(Part II) 18, 36, 40, 54, 76, 79, 96-99, 
140,147,173,186-187 
Godhead, 119,212, (Part II) 185-188 
Gonadotropin, 37, 239-240 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH), 239 
Gout, 393
Gravitational fields, 31, 255 
Great flood, 47
Great Pyramid of Giza, 155-156 
Griot, 233-234 
Gymnastics, 80,124 
Gynaecoid Pelvis, 108 
Gynander, 68, 80, 83,102,109, (Part II) 
116,121-124,128-129,154 
Gynandromorph, 47, 68, 71, 79, 109,
111, 150-151,184, 356, 362-363, 369, 
(Part II) 53,114 
Gynandry/Gynandrous, 31, 33, 62, 
64- 68, 80, 85, 99,102, 106,124-125, 
148,150-151,184, 218, 235, 249, 258, 
278, 286, 308-309, 368, 371, 380-381, 
392, (Part II) 23,134,142,166 
Gynecology/Gynecological, 278, 379, 
64, 81, 168, 236, 242, 244, 277-278, 
281,379, (Part II) 70 
Gynic, 3-4, 6, 25, 30-34, 36-37, 46, 56, 
61-64, 66-67, 72-73, 83,102,107-111, 
119, 124,150-151,184,186-188, 223,
229, 246, 249, 252, 260, 285, 287-288,
309, 341-342, 356-357, 366, 381-382, 
388,391,
THE WOUNDED WOMB
(Part II) 2, 13, 35-36, 40, 42, 45-46, 
48-49,84,132,142-143,156,188 
H.A.A.R.P., 333,348 
Hartman, Heidi, (Part II) 35-36 
Hemorrhage, 204, 207, 210, 226, 245, 
276,293 
Heptachlor, 393
Hermaphroditism/Hermaphroditic,6 
1, 148, 230-231, 300, 340, 389, (Part 
11)36 
Hermetic, 274
Heru (Horus), 53,135,137,163,165 
Het-Heru, 165
Hindu, 127,180,186,236,260 
Hirsutism, 123, 238, 276 
Histamine, 123-124 
Hoffman, Dr. Wendell, 295 
Holographic, 29,118 
Holographic perceptual matrix, 181 
Homeostasis, 28, 32, 48, 54, 119, 345, 
383, (Part II) 65,81,143 
Homosexual/Homosexuality, 103,
105, 308-309, 369, 394, (Part II) 35-
38,45,80,92,163 
Hormonal blood tests, 278 
Hormone replacement therapies 
(HRT), 42, 152, 278, 384, 386-388, 
392,395 
Huber and Senebier, 346 
Hydrogen canopy, 51, 355 
Hydrostatic equilibrium, 33 
Hygiene/Hygienic, 18, 115-116, 168, 
178,184, 206, 254, 271-272, 283, 294, 
382
Hyperemia, 244,253 
Hypertrophy, 116, 253 
Hypothalamus, 35-36, 46, 62,109,117, 
183,193,239-240,293,394 
Hysterectomy, 279


--- PAGE 675 ---
x x i
Immutable Law, 2-3,18,115,163, 214, 
231,253,271,284, (Part II) 3 
Instinct, 1, 3-8,11-16, 22, 24-34, 37, 45, 
61, 64-67, 73, 83, 102, 106-108, 112, 
119, 121-122, 124-125, 169, 177-180,
184,187,195, 217, 256-257, 259, 270, 
285, 288, 342-344, 355-356, 366, 370, 
379, 382, 390, (Part II) 2, 13, 34-37,
43, 63, 67, 94-96, 103, 106, 114, 122, 
132,142,144,146,149,154,156,160,
188
Intercourse, 43-44, 116, 143-145, 149, 
173, 175-176, 203, 210, 312, 342, 
(Part 11) 24, 32,35-37, 69,175 
Intramural fibroids, 277-278 
Ionosphere, 51, 256 
Islam/Islamic, 55, 186, 222, 237, 260, 
(Part II) 53, 66,187 
Isometrics, 345, 384 
Jagger, Allison, (Part II) 32, 37, 41-42, 
75
lewish gene, 303
logging, 4, 349-350, 354, 365,379
Kali Chloratum, 282
Kali Mur, 282
Kali Muriaticum, 282
Keloiding, 288
Kersee, lackie Joyner, 99,113,151 
Khemet/Khemetic, 158, 217, 260, 
(Part II) 4,131 
King James, 213
King, Coretta Scott, (Part II) 20,119 
King, Dr. Martin Luther, (Part II) 30, 
63,102,110,112 
King's Chamber, 155,157-158,160-161 
Ku Klux Klan (K.K.K.), (Part II) 97,
111, 164 
Lacrimal gland, 336, 340 
Lactic acid, 151, 242, 342,346, 348, 350 
Laparoscopy, 279 
Latex, 267,312
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Latissimus dorsei, 108,113 
Law of Reciprocal Maintenance, 149 
Laws of Adjustment and 
Compensation, 388 
Lecithin, 116, 243,253 
Lesbian, 103-105, 139, 308-309, 340, 
369, (Part II) 8, 24, 32, 37-39, 58, 60- 
62,78-82,85,114,135,161-163 
Leucorrhea, 237, 243-244, 252-254 
Leucorrhea, cervical, 254 
Leucorrhea, uterine, 253-254 
Leucorrhea, vaginal, 254 
Leucorrhea, vulva, 254 
Liberation, 69,249, 276, (Part II) 21, 38, 
48,56, 64,135,158,189 
Libido, 39, 241 
Limestone, 156-158 
Lorde, Audre, (Part II) 28,110 
Low Earth Orbiting Satellites 
(L.E.O.S.), 348 
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 240 
Lymphatic system, 149, 311, 335, 337 
Magen David, 154 
Magnesium, 116,191, 339 
Male-pattern baldness, 383 
Mammary glands, 64, 121, 310-311, 
336
Manganese, 116, 238,313 
Marx, Karl, (Part II) 31 
Marxist, (Part II) 30-31,33,174 
Masturbation, 113, 115-120, 124, 147, 
149, 245
Matriarchy/Matriarchist, (Part II) 5-7, 
13,17-23,119,181,183,185 
Matrix, 12, 19, 48, 118, 154, 157, 167- 
168, 180-181, 204-205, 207, 216-217, 
289,391 (Part II) 10,36 
Melanin, 13-16,18, 42-44, 48,180,182-
183,195, 310, 316, 318-319, 322, 327- 
328,347, (Part II) 96


--- PAGE 676 ---
x x ii
Melatonin, 13-14, 23, 316-317, 328 
Menarche, 220,225
Menopause, 37-38, 42, 116, 142, 152- 
153,174,176, 207, 217, 219, 227, 236,
238, 267-270, 280, 308-310, 379, 383- 
385,387-388,391, (Part II) 179 
Menses, 75, 176, 200, 207, 211, 220, 
224, 242-248, 252-254, 259, 266, 270,
275,278,313,338,388 
Menstrual toxin, 242 
Menstruation, 156, 179, 191-192, 194- 
195,199-200, 204-208, 210, 212, 216-
217, 224-225, 232, 236, 238, 241, 243- 
243,247-248, 250, 254, 256, 260, 271- 
272, 392,394 
Mer-kut, 154 
Micro-pulsations, 330 
Microwave, 312-313, 330, 348,
(Part II) 140 
Millennium, 65-66, 68, 71, 75, 96,113, 
151,177,191,215, 224, 239, 242,250- 
252, 286-287, 318, 340, 356, 358-359, 
383-384, 390, (Part II) 2, 5, 37, 48, 58,
92,147,149,154-157,186 
Million Man March, (Part II) 54, 87 
Minority, 184 (Part II) 46, 56,122,139 
Mitochondria, 35-36,46, 74,107, 345 
Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase 
(MAP Kinase), 303 
Moon-time, 193-198, 255 
Moors/Moorish, (Part II) 51-52, 111, 
114,141 
Morceanu, Dominique, 80 
Muurish, (Part II) 4,131 
Mut, 217-218
Mutants, 46, 363, 372, (Part II) 116 
Myolosis, 279 
Myomectomy, 279 
Myometrium, 143,155
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Myth, 16, 117, 120, 195-196, 213, 286, 
337, 363, 370, (Part II) 75, 103, 149,
156,163 
Nagasaki, 51, 348
National Breast Cancer Coalition, 299- 
300
Native American, 27, 197, 218, 337, 
(Part II) 4,10 
Natural Law, 191, 274, (Part II) 2,  6, 
34,143 
Naturopath, 18, 206, 283 
Nazi, 384, (Part II) 39,97,107 
Nefilim, 48
Neo-feminist, 3, (Part II) 28, 35, 60, 62, 
76,83,90,109,115-116,133,139,172 
Neophyte, 158 
Nesting instinct, 30 
Neter/Neteru, 48, 52-54, 188, 195, 
(Part II) 9 
Neurohumors, 35 
Neurotic, 368, (Part II) 189 
New American Movement Bill of 
Reproductive Rights, (Part II) 37 
New York Voice, 85 
Norepinephrine, 348 
Olfactory receptors, 188 
Olympics, 80,82,109,151, 259,
(Part II) 116 
Onanism, 115-116,120,122,124,147 
Organochlorine pesticides, 310 
Ortho-biogenic, 177, 243 
Orthobiotic, 4, 25, 54, 61,177, 220, 274,
288,328,384,388 
Orwellian, 92, 96, 98, 225, 351, 365, 
(Part II) 21, 61-62, 74, 82, 84, 139, 
164,174,180 
Osteo-blast, 388, 392 
Osteoporosis, 68, 150-152, 238, 246, 
380,387,392


--- PAGE 677 ---
xxiii
Ovary/Ovarian, 3, 35, 37-38, 44, 112, 
163,165,174-177,183,199, 207, 227,
230, 238-241, 244, 272-273, 283, 302,
309-310,312,380,382,384,396, (Part 
II) 105,117,144 
Ovulation,37, 174-177, 179-181, 183, 
185-186, 192-193, 216, 239, 241-242, 
244-245,247,270, 274,391-393 
Oxygen, 18, 32, 64, 70, 113, 204, 344, 
346-348,354-356,381,388 
P.M.S., 75,192, 206, 242, 251, 270, 272, 
283,297,341,390,393, (Part II) 179 
Parathyroid, 155, (Part II) 11 
Parks, Rosa, (Part II) 108-109 
Parotid, 123
Patriarchy/Patriarchal, 212, 324, (Part 
II) 5-6, 10, 13, 20, 22, 26, 28, 64, 97- 
98,140,185-186 
Patrick, Sandra Farmer, 99,101-102 
PCBs, 393
Pedunculated fibroid, 279 
Peri-Menopause, 269-270 
Peroxidation, 348 
Pheromone, 116,177,185,188, 201 
Phosphates, 116, 243, (Part II) 71 
Phosphorus, 16,169,242,253 
Photon, 183 
Phylo-estrogens, 392 
Pineal, 11-15, 17, 19, 22-23, 28, 120- 
121, 135-136, 154-155, 157, 160-161, 
182-183,388 
Pituitary, 35, 37, 46, 62, 109, 117, 135, 
140, 155, 157-158, 160,182-183, 193, 
239-240,293,396 
Placebo, 239,351, (Part II) 73-74 
Plague, 4, 167, 177, 208, 210-211, 215, 
246, 260, 371, (Part II) 70, 159, 166, 
186
Plasma, 18, 36,118,169, 254, 289, (Part 
II) 71,142 
Poly-carbonated plastics, 393
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Polyester, 264
Potassium, 116,136,169,186, 253, 339 
Potassium Chloride, 282 
Potassium Chloridum, 282 
Pregnancy, 38-39, 47, 69-70, 72, 78, 
143,175,254,314,316 
Premarin, 39
Prepubescent/Prepubescence, 82, 
114, 225-226, 232,394 
Primal creative power, 216 
Progesterone, 34-37, 74, 119, 150, 152, 
201, 205, 241, 246, 291, 308-309, 342, 
386,389-393,395-396 
Prolactin, 339, 342
Prophylactic mastectomy, 303-304, 
(Part II) 80 
Psychogenic lacrimation, 338 
Puberty, 23, 38, 81, 86, 109, 114, 225- 
227, 233,235,249,253, (Part II) 76 
Pulmonary artery, 383 
Purdah, 185-188,190, 260 
Putrefactive bacteria, 167 
Pyramid, 54,153-157,161, 347,355 
Quartz, 158 
Queen Nefertiti, 110 
Queen's Chamber, 155,157-158 
Racism, 25, (Part II) 4, 86, 90, 93, 95-96, 
107,155 
Radiation poisoning, 310 
Radio wave density, 312 
Rites of passage ritual, 29,345,
(Part II) 6,76,182 
Ritual, 10, 29, 158,176-177, 185, 190, 
194-196,198, 212, 216-218, 254, 260, 
304,306,310,343-345,351,353, (Part 
II) 6, 9, 64, 66-68, 75-77, 80, 94,124, 
140,175,182,187 
RNA, 41,153,333,
Rudimentary, 15,147-148 
Sabbath, 256-257


--- PAGE 678 ---
x x iv
Sacrum, 157,160-161,163-164 
Sagittarius, (Part II) 187 
Saline infusion sonohysterography, 
278
Sanctum sanctorum, 141,153 
Sapphic, (Part II) 78-79 
Sarcophagus, 158 
Sarsaparilla, 396 
Searle, 385
Sedentary, 4, 30,184, 382 
Senile dementia, 75 
Sentient life, 154 
Set, 163,257
Shakespeare, William, 213 
Shaman, 196
Skirt, 61, 63-66,102, 342,381,
(Part II) 24,147,149,155 
Sommers, Christina Hoff, (Part II) 25, 
133
Spandex leotards, 381 
Spasmosis, 125,141,143-147 
Sperm, 32, 42-43, 45, 62, 120, 144-146, 
149, 154, 168-169, 174-176, 182-183, 
186, 230, 247, 320, 394-395, (Part II) 
90,105,157 
Spermatotoxins, 168,174, 254 
Steinem, Gloria, (Part II) 20, 63, 83, 
114-115 
Sterilization, (Part II) 37 
Sternocleidomastoid, 109,113 
Stroke, 301, 383 
Strug, Kerri, 81-82, 99 
Submucous fibroids, 279 
Subserous fibroids, 279 
Sulphides, 393 
Superoxide dismutase, 345 
Suspensory ligaments, 380, 382,
(Part II) 144 
Sweating, 339, 351-354 
Talmud, 341, (Part II) 30
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Tampon, 169, 260-265, 267, 294 
Tantra/Tantric, 145,147,175-176, 244- 
246 
Tao, 32
Teratogens, 362
Termagant, 18-21, 23-24, (Part II) 118 
Testosterone, 3, 30-31, 33, 35, 42, 44,
46, 62, 72, 74, 76, 86, 106-107, 113, 
118-119,151, 224, 241, 246, 283, 300, 
342, 345, 360, 364-366, 379, 382, 389, 
392, (Part II) 53,143 
Testosterone-toxic, 31, 360, 366 
Therapeutic, 292, 338, (Part II) 64, 77, 
81,176 
Thermal bio-stasis, 62 
Thermal fatigue, 173 
Thyroid, 110-111, 131, 155, 238, 302,
310,312,388 
Title IX, 84, 94,100, (Part II) 2,158 
Torrance, Gwen, 80, 82, 99,112-113 
Toxic Shock Syndrome, 264 
Trans-dermal progesterone, 396 
Trapezius, 109,113,357 
Tri-cyclen, 113 
Trokosi, 190 
Turner Syndrome, 31 
Ulcers, 383
Ultra Low Frequencies (ULF), 333
Ultra-feminist, 5, (Part II) 178
Unopposed Estrogen Therapy, 386
Upjohn, 239,385
Ur, 29, 39, 257
Uric acid, 393
Uropathy, 338
Vagina/Vaginal, 39, 44, 62, 6970, 128,
141,143, 146,167-168, 173-174, 245, 
253-254, 262-264, 266, 278-279, 294- 
295,297,302,312, (Part II) 77 
Vena cava artery, 70,381


--- PAGE 679 ---
XXV
Vestige/Vestigial, 121, 133, 147-149,
358, (Part II) 10,18,67 
Villarosa, Linda, 280, (Part II) 58, 60, 
63
Vitamin, 223-224, 236, 252-253, 308-
310, 339,344-345,351 
Vitamin C, 339 
Vitamin D, 310, 344 
Vitamin E, 253,310,344-345 
Vogue Magazine, (Part II) 16,147 
Vulva, 139,148,253-254 
Wall Street, (Part II) 154-155 
Wild Yam, 396-397 
Winfrey, Oprah, (Part II) 40, 56 
WNBA, 88,103
Womb, 28, 44-45, 66, 78, 82, 107, 112, 
114,141,143,146,155,158,163,165- 
166, 169.173. 176. 191-192. 215-516.
THE WOUNDED WOMB
218, 229, 245-246, 258, 266, 279, 288- 
289, 321, 354-355, 382, (Part II) 1, 59, 
94,105-106,181-186 
Women's World Conference, (Part II) 
54
Wyeth-Ayerst Company, 39 
Xeno-estrogens, 233, 393-394 
Yang, 31-34, 42-43, 70-71, 106, 117, 
121-122,146,163, 258, 291,382, (Part 
II) 146 
Yanomamo, (Part II) 174 
Yeast infection, 38, 63, 265, 293 
Yin, 32-34,36,42,44,119,121,146,163 
Yulatex, 267 
Zinc oxides, 393 
Zona pellucida, 183 
Zwaardemaker, 186


--- PAGE 680 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3 
Figure 4
Figure 5 
Figure 6
Figure 7
Figure 8
PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY
[Wounded Womb Part l]
•
Calcified Pineals (Pinealoma/Saggittal Image)
Collaborative Hypertext of Radiology/ARRS Goldminer 
Female Hormonal Cycle - Bender: Obstetrics For Pupil 
Midwives (2nd edition) by S. Bender 
Premarin: copyright Wyert-Ayerst Company 
a thru e...
-Bessie Big Beaver (Cheyenne Indian with baby),
Photographed by Fannie Stroh, 1920 
-Zapotec Women; National Geographic (Nov. 1994)
-Woman of Kabul, Afghanistan in sleeveless Chadre 
(National Geographic, Sept. 1968, Vol. 134, No. 3)
-Essence Magazine (Oct. 1996), Photos by Horace C. Henry 
-Kodak Royal Gold Advertisement - Flamingo Dancer 
-Woman Pounding Grain, West Africa; Photo by Claude Sauvageot 
-Essence Magazine (July 1996), Fashahnn Dress 19 Collection;
Jewelry Aya Azielant; Wardrobe of Sis. Charlene Muhammad;
Gown and headpiece by Audrey Nelson
-Nana Tassili Mata Atma Maat- Master Artist/Craftswoman/Oracle 
-San Carlos Apache Woman and Child; Talking Drum Magazine 
-Seminole Women 19th Century dress styles; Talking Drum Magazine 
-Krishna devotee mother and child; from Back to Godhead Magazine 
-Russian Orthodox Nun; National Geographic (June 1994)
-Balinese girls in regalia of their ancestors; from Back to Godhead Magazine 
■ Gwen Torrance - Time Magazine (1996)
- Kerri Strug - USA Weekend (Feb. 21-23,1997);
Photo by Paul Sutton Duomo
—  Lisa Leslie - The New York Daily News, June 13,1997; Photo by Jon Naso
—  Running Females - Getty Images.com


--- PAGE 681 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Figure 9 — Women's Boxing; from El Latino Americano News, USA (April 1996) 
Figure 10 — Sandra Farmer Patrick for Reebok International Ltd. from 
Marie Claire Magazine (June 1996)
Figure 11 — (a and b )Mayes' Midwifery: A Textbook for Midwives, 
by Rosemary E. Bailey (9th Edition)
Figure 12 — Bust of Nefertiti - museum of Cairo - From website 
africanadventure.com 
Figure 13 —  Picture of statue from Hindu temple in Karnataka, India; c.1200 CE 
Figure 14 —  Female Prostate; copyright, Fox Internet Services 
Figure 15 — Location of female prostate - Illustration by Suzann Gage LAC;
RNC; NP: from A New View of a Woman's Body, c.1981 by Federation 
of Feminist Women's Health Center 
Figure 16 — Ejaculating Woman - From Dr. Suzy's Squirt Salon: The Secrets of  
Female Ejaculation, by Dr. Susan Block; "Rain Forest Treat"
Figure 17 —  The Uterus; from Bender: Obstetrics for Pupil Midwives, by S. Bender 
(2nd Edition)
Figure 18 —  Great Pyramid - Subterranean Chamber; from The Orion Mystery 
by Robert Bauval and Adrian Gilbert; Illustration by Robin Cook 
Figure 19 — Sacrum; from Grey's Anatomy; Classic Collector's Edition 
Figure 20 (a) King's Chamber structure By Audrey Besterman;
Figure 20 (b) Djed Illustration by Dr. Phillip Valentine
Sacrum from Gray's Anatomy/ Alar from Mayes' Midwifery, 
by R.E. Bailey; Cadeuces from gettyimages.com/Uterus from 
Mayes' Midwifery (ibid)
Figure 21 —  Pelvis, Sacrum and Uterus w/ Eye of Heru and Eye of Ra; Illustrations 
by Dr. Phillip Valentine; Sacrum copied from illustration in Gray's 
Anatomy; Classic Collector's Edition by Dr. Henry Gray 
Figure 22 —  Djed, Pelvis, Sacrum and Uterus w/ Eye of Heru and Eye of Ra;
Illustrations by Dr. Phillip Valentine 
Figure 23 — Mirror of Het-Heru - Illustration by Dr. Phillip Valentine


--- PAGE 682 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Figure 24 — Avocado and Ankh illustrated by Dr. Phillip Valentine; Impregnated 
Womb from Mayes Midwifery, by R.E. Bailey 
Figure 25 — Mayes' Midwifery: A Textbook for Midwives, by Rosemary E. Bailey 
(9th Edition)
Figure 26 — Purdah: Veil of Ast - "Muslim Woman"
Photograph by Chester Higgins, Jr. (1990)
Figure 27 —  Women of The African Arc Calendar; copyright 1995 
Daily News (June 12,1997)
Figure 28 —  Arab woman in Mems-like head dress; from
The American Heritage Dictionary 2nd College Edition,
Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston 
Figure 29 —"Early Puberty"; cover Time Magazine (October, 2000)
Figure 30 —  Today's Black Woman Magazine
Figure 31 —Tampax Box - Trademark of Tambrands Inc., Palmer MA 
Figure 32 —  Illustration of Fibroid Tumors; from The Society for Interventional 
Radiology
Figure 33 — 'A Man...'; from lronman Magazine, August, 2005 
Figure 34 — 'A Woman?'; from www.femflex.com and www.upcheer.com 
Figure 35 (a, b) —  Black boy w/ sky-blue eyes/ Internet download-Author unknown 
Figure 36 —  Chimeras in silicone - "The Young Family": by Australian artist 
Patricia Piccinini 
Figure 37 —  Seal of The Prometheans; www.transtopia.org 
Figure 38 — The "Boost" Bra; Marie Claire Magazine (1997)
Figure 39 —  Herman Cartoon Strip; Sunday New York Daily News 
Figure 40 —  Nike - "Sweat, Body, Fuel" from Essence Magazine (July 3,1997)
Figure 41 — Strip by Gallo, Nezu York Daily News (September 21,1997)
Figure 42 — Sharon Bruneau 
Figure 43 —  Nicole Bass
Figure 44,45, 46 —  Sue Price - from Flex Magazine (1992 or 1993);
Photos by Robert Reiff


--- PAGE 683 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
Figure 47,48,49 — "The Gals'' -1. Nicole Bass; 2. Lenda Murray;
3. unknown grotesque; 4. Tatianna Butler (ebonyamazon.com)
# 5 thru 9 - Female weightlifting grotesques at upcheer.com 
and awefilms.com 
Figure 50,51, 52 -  "The Guys" - (1) RuPaul (2) Unknown transvestite;
(3) Unknown Tranie (4) Harmonica Sunbeam (5) "Marilyn"
(6) Amanda Lapore (7) Jimmy James (8) Flotilla DeBarge 
(8) Pricilla Drag (9) RuPaul


--- PAGE 684 ---
THE WOUNDED WOMB
PHOTOGRAPHIC SUMMARY
[Wounded Womb - Part 2]
•
Figure 1 —  Black Power vs Woman Power; Whoopie the feminist; from "Steinem;
How the CIA used Feminismto Destabolize Society, by Henry Makow 
Figure 2 —  "Rising Apart" - Cover Newsweek Magazine 
Figure 3 — Cover - Body& Soul: The Balck Woman's Guide to Physical Health 
And Emotional Well-Being, by Linda Villarosa, Editor 
Publisher; Harper Trade New York, NY USA, 1995 
Figure 4 —  Map of areas in Africa still practicing female circumcision;
From Tahirih Justice Center/wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:fgm_map.gif- 
Figure 5 —  Picture of Colonel Jack Mohr; from scripturesforamerica.org/
Figure 6 — Picture of Dr. William Pierce/Books: Turner Diaries and Hunter
From Encyclopedia of Modem Political Biography (2004) Oxon Helicon 
Publishing Lmtd. 604 ISBN 978-1859862735 and wikipedia.org/William 
_Luther_Pierce
Figure 7 — "They Hate Us For Our Freedom" - Picture from Rense.com 
Figure 8 — Queen Latifah Collage: Album covers from www.queenlatifahmusic.com 
Opening to Hairspray (same); Cover Glamour Magazine, Sept. 2007 
Figure 9 —  Woman wrestling man -from African Adventure/ebony amazon, com 
Figure 10 —  He-She-Shim; From picture gallery - internet bulk mail 
Figure 11 — Man in Bridal or Cotillion Gown (Ibid)
Figure 12 —  Women in men's clothing - Harper's Bazaar (April 1994),
Photo by Michel Arnaud 
Figure 13 — Poster for movie Tim Associate, staring Whoopie Goldberg 
Distributed by Buena Vista Pictures/Hollywood Pictures 
Figure 14 — My Style - Essence Magazine (Nov. 1996)
Figure 15 — Poster for The First Wives Club; Photograph by Pat Carroll 
Figure 16 — The Kosmic Mother, Artwork by Dr. Phillip Valentine


--- PAGE 685 ---
■


--- PAGE 686 ---
Special Stars that Shine  
in my Multi-verse ~


--- PAGE 687 ---
Hip-Hop choreographer to 
the Stars; My handsome Sun 
Amen Ra
Proud Poppa and Momma with our beautiful 
daughter Shemika on College Graduation day...
With my Wife, Soul-Mate and Sister-Companion: 
sojourners on the Terrestrial "Path of The Hidden 
Light"together - Dr Nalani Sot Nty Ra Valentine


--- PAGE 688 ---
Hangin' out with a music icon; songstress extraordinaire Mavis Staples  
(left) of the legendary Staples Singers and her sister, after she sang with 
our special hand-picked "Cosby Choir" featured on "The Cosby Show"
Backstage at the popular sit-com "Moesha" visiting with my Spiritual God 
Daughter, the vivacious, talented and lovely Brandy Norwood...


--- PAGE 689 ---
At my home (and Healing Temple) with super-prolific author and popular T.V. 
talk-show star Sister Iyanla Vanzant, keynote speaker at our "Kosmic Mother 
Symposium", co-hosted by my beautiful daughter Shemika-Mylene Makeda V.


--- PAGE 690 ---
With my best man, radio personality extraordinaire Imhotep Gary Byrd (left); 
Matron of Honor Harriet (Novalinda) Martin (far right) and my second wife 
Queen Afua (my left) on our wedding day...
Hosting the venerable comedian, author, actor and world-renown health 
and political activist-icon, Brother Dick Gregory, keynote speaker at our 
"2nd Gathering of The Masters Symposium", Atlanta, Georgia, where we 
also celebrated our elder's 67th Earth-Day with a dairy-free Vegan cake...


--- PAGE 691 ---
At my home and temple with a visit from one of my greatest heroes, the 
venerable, incomparable master-teacher himself - Dr. John Henrik Clarke,  
hosting him at a private symposium entitled "One to One: An Evening 
with the Great Master". A most remarkable and unforgettable experience...


--- PAGE 692 ---
With my friend and sister-warrior 
in the struggle - the unconquerable 
Shaharazad Ali, author of "The 
Black-Man's Guide to
Understanding the Black Women" 
and "Are You a Slave" at our 
Manhattan Community College 
symposim "An Evening with 
Shaharazad Ali..
At my home and temple with the 
world renowned lecturer, historian, 
powerful master-teacher and 
black community icon - 
Dr. Leonard Jeffries, keynoting 
one of the many "Gathering of 
the Masters" symposiums...


--- PAGE 693 ---
A delightful visit to our home from our beloved God-Daughter, the beautiful and 
talented Grammy Award winner Lady-Bug Mecca of Digable Planets fame...
An extra-special visit to the Park Place Brooklyn location of our former Heal 
Thyself Temple from the one and only musical genius himself, 23-time Grammy 
Award and Oscar winner, Bro. Stevie Wonder and his beautiful family...


--- PAGE 694 ---
A surprise visit to one of my lectures from the father of G. A.G.U.T —  "God 
Almighty's Grand Unified Theorum"; the remarkable, indomitable genius; 
my good friend Professor Gabriel Oyibo; the pre-eminent mathematician 
who discovered the Universal Mathematical Equation for all Existence —
G i j , j = 0 —the elusive " Theorum of Everything", which Einstein failed to 
achieve in 30 years of attempts, and which superceded his "Special" and 
"General" Theories of Relativity, formally codified in the equation E=MC2


--- PAGE 695 ---
With the Emperor Sergeman, who graciously invited me to take a picture 
with him because his lovely wife (seated to his left), thought we looked 
as if we could be brothers. What do you think...?


--- PAGE 696 ---
Setting the all-time 'Conscious Underground' lecture/seminar recond for teaching 
in one day. I spoke eleven and three-quarters hours straight. Place: The Valley of  
the Kings, Crenshaw Mall Los Angeles, Califonia. Topic: "Somatic Death"
P.S. Major props and praises to the 250 or so remaining brothers and sisters who 
attended that day from the beginning to the very end. Your kind patience, attention 
and 'intellectual fortitude' gave me the strength of will to make it through our 
memorable one-of-a-kind journey together.
Dua-Hotep
FINI


--- PAGE 697 ---
Shm m Htp  
Shm m Ra


--- PAGE 698 ---
PHILLIP VALENTINE 
Snw Djhuty Sa Akhw-Ra Mhtp El
Hygienic Scientist; Naturopath; Metaphysician;
Clinical Hypnotherapist; Polymath; Lecturer; Free-Thinker...
•
...is  the founder, director and pastor of the Temple of the Healing Spirit—Self-  
Healing Education Center, Institute for Self-Mastery;  and just recently, The 
University of Kemetian Sciences.  A certified member of the International 
Association of Counselors and Therapists (I.A.C.T.), he received his 
doctorate in Hygienic Health Science and Classical Naturopathy from The 
Life Science Institute of Texas, now merged to the Fit for Life  Sciences 
Institute —College of Natural Health in Canada.
A former member of the American Natural Hygienic Society, Valentine is 
currently a hygienic science and metaphysical health consultant to doctors 
and lay practitioners as far away as Azania (South Africa), Canada, 
Trinidad, Jamaica, England, Ghana, Japan and the Philippines.
-For five (5) years, Dr. Valentine served as co-director of the Heal Thyself  
Natural Living Education Center  in Brooklyn and helped create, format, refine 
and teach the 21-Day Therapeutic Fasting /Juice Feasting Program — the 
first of its kind to become widely popular with New York's African 
American community. He also inspired, co-created and helped develop the 
now popular "Sacred Woman" philosophy —protocols of life, health and 
metaphysical well-being for women, which led to the publishing of a 
wonderful book by the same name.
-Dr. Valentine established the former School of Arcane Sciences  for advanced 
studies in metaphysics and the occult, and is best known for his ability to 
decipher and teach the subtlest principles of metaphysics and its application 
to health, healing, and everyday life, in ways that may be understood by 
both the advanced student and the beginner-apprentice.
-Brother / Reverend/Doctor Phillip Valentine (aka. Snw Djhuty Sa Akhw 
Ra Mhtp El and 'Baba Senu'), has been an honorary guest speaker to the 
United Nations by invitation of the then Pan-African Congress of Azania 
(South Africa), where he spoke on the future of health for Africans at home 
and in the Diaspora. He was a committee member and advisor to the 
Pan-African Review for Scientific Research and Political Studies, where he 
served as an honorary health consultant to its membership.


--- PAGE 699 ---
NOTES


--- PAGE 700 ---
NOTES


--- PAGE 701 ---
NOTES


--- PAGE 702 ---
“Reality Re-Think”
The Wounded Womb (parts 1  and 2) is the 4th in  
a series of 7 works in progress titled The Re-  
Genesis Chronicles.  It is a treatise dedicated to 
exposing the hidden truth behind the ongoing 
epidemic of women’s diseases presented from 
spiritual, metaphysical, meta-historic, scientific 
and empirical perspectives seldom articulated by 
contemporary “new age” authors.
The question of why modern women suffer so frequently from 
a wide range of diseases formally unknown to their great 
great-grandmothers (particularly reproductive diseases) will never 
be answered by the present diagnostic (and treatment) protocols 
practiced by western medicine Contrary to medical propaganda, the 
primary reason women suffer so pervasively from reproductive 
diseases in modern society is not due to “ dysfunctional genes",  
“infectious diseases”,  or “mutating viruses.”
These are nothing more than symptoms or ‘effects’,  not causes'.  
The unknown variable underlying the reproductive plagues of the 
90s-millennium woman, along with her other seemingly unrelated 
physiological and psychological disorders, is our collective ignorance 
or outright denial of the principle of proper gender conduct!
Proper gender conduct is the ‘humanistic science' cultivated by our 
progenitor ancestors that, sadly, is no longer valued or even considered 
a necessary requisite for the overall health and well-being of men 
and women in a civilized society. As a consequence, women of today 
have succumbed to the ravages of reproductive-based diseases behind 
the consistent bombardment of social engineers promoting the twisted 
viewpoint that they can (and should)  do anything a man can do! However, 
they are never equally informed of the consequences that such behavior 
inevitably exacts upon the female physiology and psychology.
The concept “design denotes function" and all it logically implies, 
is also ignored as a viable clue to the mystery of why the female 
anatomy ( in particular) is now in a protracted state of “anatomic 
rebellion” against the perverse, unnatural behaviorisms exhibited 
as the “freedoms” of the so-called “90s-millenneum liberated woman.” 
Public awareness of the Immutable Laws of Universal Intelligence 
implicit in the design and functions of the human anatomy, along with 
their direct relationship to proper gender conduct as the ‘fail-safe 
behavioral instinct’  guarding the overall physical health and psychological 
well-being of women, would most likely force an unwanted reality check 
of the “equality" propaganda sold in this age of Amazonian feminism.

