=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr-Willis-Nathaniel-Huggins-1886-1941-Historian-Activist-and-Community-Mentor.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 23
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:47:12.992360
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 23 
  
 
Dr. Willis Nathaniel Huggins 
 (1886-1941): Historian, Activist, and 
Community Mentor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“…Clarke's intellectual development began in the spring of 1934 when he met two of his three 
"greatest teachers," Arthur Schomburg  and Willis N. Hu ggins..." The role of  Huggins invariably 
followed Schomburg's. Huggins "taught me how to understand the political meaning of 
history..."The history club, however, did meet on regular bases every Sunday morning at the Harlem 
YMCA. The lectures and discussions seemed to be based on prior study and preparation. (54) Most 
of the sessions featured lectures by Dr. Huggins. In one o f his autobiographical narratives, Clarke 
proclaimed that the Harlem History Club was his first university. (55) “ 
“Willis N. Huggins, the founder and director of the Harlem History Club , had arrived in New 
York in 1922 as an accomplished educator and journa list with considerable university training. A 
man in his mid thirties, he had taught in a historically black college, and a Chicago public high 
school and he had published two newspapers. (56) He made ends meet as a New York high school 
teacher. While teaching, he became involved in the Garvey movement and in Ethiopian and Haitian 
international politics. Most importantly, he joined the Pan African historiography projects with 
historians such as W.E.B. Du Bois and Carter G. Woodson. He also worked closely wi th Charles S. 
Johnson who later became the first black president of Fisk University.”  
From:  
John Henrik Clarke: the Harlem connection to the founding of Africana Studies, Carruthers, Jacob H  
[Links, emphasis mines] 
“Huggins unlike most of the other university -trained scholars developed regular relationships 
with self -taught scholars and seemed to have great appreciation and admiration  for Arthur 
Schomburg. Schomburg had been a contributor to his newspaper and supported his efforts to 
persuade the public school system in New York to include Africana studies in the curriculum.”  
John Henrik Clarke: the Harlem connection to the founding of Africana Studies, Carruthers, 
Jacob H


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 23 
  
Willis Nathaniel Huggins (1886-1941): 
historian, activist, and community mentor. 
Ralph L. Crowder* 
Source: http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Willis+Nathaniel+Huggins 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
On Tuesday, July 15, 1941, New York City detectives supervised the recovery of a male body 
from the Hudson River near 72nd Street. After contacting the Missing Persons Bureau, it was 
determined that this unfortunate person was Dr. Willis Nathaniel Huggins. His sister, Mrs. 
Roberta Goldsby and his wife, Rosetta, identified the body at the city morgue on Wednesday 
morning. Huggins had been missing since December 23rd and last seen by friends and relatives 
at his home located at 1890 Seventh Avenue. He was reported to have $500 in his wallet at this 
time. This was not unusual, since Huggins owned the Blyden Bookstore and had been associated 
with several independent Black publications. The only clues to his whereabouts was an overcoat 
that had been found on the George Washington Bridge and a letter that Huggins sent to his wife 
stating that "Something is going to happen." At the time of his disappearance, Huggins was 
teaching history and economics at Bushwick High School in Brooklyn and serving as Assistant 
Principal at Harlem's Union High School in the evening. (1) 
 
The Harlem community was both shocked and saddened to hear confirmation of Huggins's 
death. In the past six and half months, his disappearance had been a hotly debated mystery. The 
press, his family, and his lawyer all publicly de clared that Huggins had committed suicide. His 
students at the Blyden Society and the street community believed that Huggins had met with foul 
play from a gangster element due to unpaid business lo ans. The competing versions of his death 
have not been reconciled nor does firm documentation exist to disprove either version. Huggins 
had been associated with the Garvey movement si nce 1919 and recognized as a dedicated and 
talented "Race Man" by Harlem's leadership for more than two decades. In addition, he was the 
former president of the New York branch of the Asso ciation for the Study for New York Life 
and History; the executive secretary for the Friends of Ethiopia In America ( FEA); a tireless 
advocate for including African and African American history  in public school curriculums; and 
an articulate voice for the Black history movement. In addition, he had a network of national and 
international friends and contacts that included: J. A. Rogers, Carter G. Woodson , W.E.B. Du 
Bois, Arthur A. Schomburg, Charles S. Johnson , Claude McKay ; Jesse E. Moorland , Amy 
Jacques Garvey , Dantes Bellegarde (the Haitian Ambassador to the United States ), President 
Stenio Vincent of Haiti ; Ras Desta Damtew of Ethiopia, and scores of former students in West 
Africa, Ethiopia, and London. On the community level, his leadership of the Blyden Society 
facilitated the education of such noted self -trained historians as John Henrik Clarke and John G. 
Jackson. These accomplishments and his mentorship of a generation of young self -trained Black 
historians have sadly been neglected and forgotten by contemporary scholars of the African 
American experience. This paper will rescue and briefly discuss the life and contributions of this


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 23 
  
Black activist intellectual from his family roots in Alabama to his mysterious death in the early 
1940s. (2) 
 
 
THE EARLY YEARS 
 
 
Willis Nathaniel Huggins was born February 7, 1886, in Selma, Alabama. His father, Reverend 
A. Z. Huggins, was a respected Baptist minister. As a youth, Huggins received his first education 
at the Selma Training School. The Huggins family then joined the wave of Black migrants to the 
North and moved to Washington, D.C. Huggins, an excellent student, attended Armstrong High 
School for colored youth. During his senior year he won a scholarship to Columbia University. 
His outstanding academic record and probably one of th e Black faculty members who graduated 
from Columbia facilitated this connection. The M Street School, later renamed Dunbar High 
School and Armstrong's sister institution, had a gr eat track record of placing its top students in 
Ivy League  and other prominent private white schools. Under the leadership of Anna J. 
Cooper this tradition flourished. In 1906, Cooper was forced out as principle of M Street High 
after supporting an educational curriculum that favored Du Bois' ideas of liberal arts education 
over Booker T. Washington's industrial education during the 1904 -1905 academic year. Huggins 
must have benefited from this tradition when he landed a spot in the Columbia freshmen class of 
1910. (3)  
 
Huggins earned his B.A. fro m Columbia in 1914. After graduation he became Chairman of the 
Department of History, Alabama A & M College, Huntsville, Alabama. While teaching history 
in Alabama, he develope d a reputation as a community activist. Huggins led local protests 
against the showing of D.W. Griffith's Birth of a Nation, organized the Alabama chapter of the 
National Urban League, and supported educational activities for Black youth. Through the 
assistance of Chaning H. Tobias, assistant to the National Director of the Colored YMCA, and 
wealthy white contributors, Huggins helped establish a Black YMCA just four miles from the A 
& M campus. The relationship with Tabious eventually led to a friendship with John G. Jackson, 
the nephew of Tabious. In a few short years, Huggins and Jackson would become close friends 
and fellow advocates for the Black history movement. (4) 
 
 
LIFE IN THE WINDY CITY 
 
 
In 1917, Huggins moved to Chicago, Illinois. He began teaching at Wendell Phillips  High 
School and stayed at this post until 1922. During his summer breaks, he returned to Columbi a to 
work toward a Masters degree. Huggins completed this degree in 1919. He also attended classes 
at Northwestern's Modill School of Journalism while teaching in Chicago. During his Chicago 
years, he contributed articles to New York Age, the Norfolk Journ al and Guide, the Baltimore 
Afro-American and the Pittsburgh Courier . Although Huggins's name is not mentioned in the 
John E. Bruce Papers, he must have made contact with Bruce, a  nationally respected Black 
journalist who voiced similar race sentiments in his columns and independent publications. It is 
not unrealistic to conclude that this prospective contact put Huggins in touch with Arthur


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 23 
  
Schomburg. Schomburg and Bruce were clos e associates who were always on the look out for 
talented young Black thinkers who could join their campaign for the popularization of African 
American history and after 1918, the Garvey movement. (5) 
 
 
As the spirit of the New Negro  Movement sweep across African America, the Black 
community's sentiments for self -defense and retaliatory violence were particularly alive in 
Chicago. These forces exploded in Chicago's race riot of 1919. Huggins sought to contribute to 
this passion for racial renewal and self -definition by publishing and editing the Seachlight and 
the Upreach Magazine. Both publications were started in Chicago and co ncentrated on providing 
information for teachers and social workers who were attempting to teach African and African 
American history in schools and independent study groups. Huggins relocated to New York City 
in 1922 and was assisted in his efforts to kee p the Upreach alive by Arthur Schomburg, Charles 
S. Johnson and John H. Pernell. (6) 
 
 
THE HARLEM STRUGGLE: CONFRONTING THE SCHOOL BOARD & THE ITALIAN -
ETHOPIA WAR 
 
 
In 1924 Huggins was selected for a teaching position in the New York City public school 
system. Black educators in the city system were quite rare, according to the New York Times, 
since Huggins was only the sixth African American to be hired by the Board of Education. 
Almost immediately, he sought to have African and African American history included in the 
curriculum of the public school system and struggled with the Board of Education to approve 
this initiative. Schomburg and Joel A. Rogers supported his efforts but the board rejected  their 
proposals. They then held community history classes at the Harlem YMCA located on 135th 
Street and occasionally in their private homes. In 1925, Huggins studied geography, history, and 
French in Europe. He received certificates from the Guilde Inter nationale and Oxford University 
for his efforts. In addition, Huggins traveled throughout Europe and recorded his observations on 
European race relations. (7) 
 
 
In 1932, Huggins became the firs t Black student to earn a Ph.D. from Fordham University. He 
had attended Fordham from 1925 to 1932 and his dissertation was entitled "The Contribution of 
the Catholic Church to t he Progress of the Negro in the United States." For the next eight years, 
Huggins dedicated himself to the defense of Ethiopia, The Blyden Society, and his efforts to 
promote the serious study of African history. (8) 
 
 
On the evening of March 7, 1935, the P rovisional Committee for the Defense of Ethiopia 
(PCDE) held its first public meeting at Harlem's Abyssinian Baptist Church. This organization 
was a "united front" of Garveyites, communists, journalists, streetcorner orators, liberal Black 
organizations, socialists, clergymen and Africana scholars who were seeking to mobilize 
community outrage into a disciplined forc e to support Ethiopia and challenge American 
neutrality to the Italo-Ethiopian war. Huggins was one of six speakers that thrilled a crowd of


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 23 
  
approximately 3,000 who filled Harlem 's largest Black church in spite of foul and 
inclement weather. Four months later, the PCDE in cooperation with the American League 
Against War and Fascism , sent Huggins to Geneva, Switzerland "with a petition from the 
concerned black and white masses in the United States." His task was t o "urge the League (of 
Nations) to adopt strong measures to restrain Italian aggression, to assure Ethiopia of its support, 
and to send a neutral commission to East Africa to report on the boundary disputes between 
Italian and the Ethiopian governments." P rior to leaving, Huggins, Schomburg, and some of his 
closer Black colleagues formed the FEA and Huggins was designated the executive secretary. 
Apparently this was an effort to further legitimize Huggins's leadership credentials and deepen 
the organizational base representing African American and particularly Harlem's Black 
community. (9) 
 
 
Huggins was a perfect choice for this international assignment. He had recently completed his 
doctorate at For dham University, he had often lectured on Ethiopian history at the Harlem 
YMCA, and his bookstore was a storehouse of Africana information. He was known for 
promoting African Studies  in the public school system, and he had publicly challenged the 
school board's failure to institute courses on African civilizations. As a Garveyite, his ties to 
Ethiopia were solidified during the glory days of the UNIA influence upon the Harlem 
community. Huggins had coordinated a Harlem visit of Ethiopian diplomats while the delegation 
was in the United States on official business and, in 1932, he had developed a friendship with 
Ras Desta Damtew, the governor of Sidamo Province and son-in-law to Emperor Haile Selassie. 
In addition, from the PCDE's inc eption in February 1935, Huggins had been praised for his 
dedication, hard work, and his ability to coordinate Black and interracial organizations concerned 
about Italian aggression toward Ethiopia. (10) 
 
 
In route to Switzerland, Huggins conferred with Ethiopian officials and European supporters in 
London and Paris. In Paris, Huggins met with Minister Tecle Hawariate, and in London, he met 
with William H. Moody, a Jamaican national and director of  the League of Colored Peoples of 
the World, Wargneh Martin, the Ethiopian minister to Great Britain , and Quaker leaders who 
were considered influential with the British parliament . Huggins was able to meet with the 
Ethiopian minister to Britain through exploiting his contacts with C.L.R. James, the Trinidadian 
activist and founder of the London -based International Afr ican Friends of Abyssinia, Amy 
Jacques Garvey, and Lapido Solanke, leader of the West African Students Union. After meeting 
with Minister Martin on August 7, 1935, Huggins received the Ethiopian 's government 
authorization to solicit "medical supplies, nurses, doctors, veterinarians, and other trained 
civilian personnel." Martin also encouraged Huggins to campaign for a "publi c loan arranged 
through ... a reputable banking house." All African Americans who decided upon relocation 
would be "expected to join the government's effort to build the Ethiopia of the future." Martin 
concluded a public interview by stating "Dr. Huggins h as my full approval to proceed in the 
organization of such activities in connection with committees which may be arranged." (11)  
 
On August 15, 1935, after conferring with Ethiopian representatives in London and Paris, 
Huggins spoke before a committee of t he secretariat of the League of Nations. His presentation 
called for the League to intercede and restrain Italian aggression and prevent any invasion of


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 23 
  
Ethiopia. Huggins began his plea to this international body by declaring, "Africans and persons 
of Afri can descent throughout the world, have always looked with pride at the Empire of 
Ethiopia, which alone of all ancient empires of black men in Africa, still maintains its 
independence." The concentration of Italian "men and munitions on the Ethiopian frontier" 
according to Huggins, "is viewed with righteous indignation by the blacks of the western world 
that are bound by racial kinship to the ancient and illustrious Ethiopian people." He further 
argued that an invasion and defeat of Ethiopia would threaten world peace, encourage the spread 
of fascism, make a mockery of Christian principles, and "increase the guilt of moder n Christian 
nations" who had participated in the historical rape of Africa and the enslavement of "millions of 
her children." Huggins called for the League to "act decisively and resolve the Ital o-Ethiopian 
dispute peacefully." His presentation was concise; it linked the destiny of Ethiopia with the 
African Diaspora and clearly identified Italy's aggression as a critical ch allenge to the League's 
goals of maintaining world peace and justice. (12) 
 
 
When Huggins returned to Harlem in late August 1935, he launched a campaign to organize 
African American communities throughout the country. The national office of the all Black FE A 
was established on Harlem's Seventh Avenue and by December, the organization reported 106 
local chapters in nineteen cities. In addition, the FEA had affiliated itself with a collection of 
national and international organizations that included: the Assoc iation for the Study of Negro 
Life and History; the Ethiopia Research Council; the American Pro -Falasha Committee; the 
Universal Ethiopian Students' Association; the International African Friends of Ethiopia 
(London); La Revue de Monde Noir (Paris); the Women's International League for Peace and 
Freedom (Geneva); and Jeunes Ethiopienes ( Addis Ababa ). During the first months of Italy's 
invasion of Ethiopia, Harlem's activist community acknowledged the FEA as the most important 
of the "black Ethiopian aid societies." In additio n, through his presentation to the League of 
Nations, his efforts to organize African American support of Ethiopian resistance, and by 
winning the endorsement of Ethiopian ministers, Huggins had ushered Black America into an 
unprecedented era of international influence and diplomacy. (13) 
 
 
In November 1935, George Schuyler, the conservative Black journalist, praised Huggins and the 
FEA. "Dr. Huggins is a cultured, accomplished, brilli ant and honest Negro," according to 
Schuyler, "who for very long has seen clearly the fundamental issues at the bottom of world wide 
imperialism from the view point of the Negro." As Huggins was praised in Black newspapers, 
celebrated on the lecture circui t, and daily noticed by Harlem's working class, he gradually 
opposed communist involvement in the Ethiopian aid campaign. He had previously established a 
working relationship with the communists during his association with the PCDE. As his 
commitment to "united front" politics declined, old tensions that characterized the clash between 
Garveyites and the New York Marxist community led to communist efforts to discredit Huggins. 
He had solid nationalist credentials stretching back to early years of the Garvey  movement and 
he enjoyed the support of moderate Black organizations such as the NAACP and the National 
Urban League; however, Huggins was vulnerable on the use and allocation of the funds collected 
by the FEA. (14)


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 23 
  
"The extent of fund raising by the FEA," according to the Pan -African scholar Joseph E. Harris, 
"is undocumented. Minutes and reports for the organization are unavailable, and public reports 
on money collected or supplies sent to Ethiopia are few." Huggins may have funneled FEA funds 
through the Ethiopian consul -general, the American Red Cross , or several of the other 
organizations affiliated with the FEA  including the International Friends of Abyssinia, the Save 
the Children Fund, the American Pro -Falasha Committee, and the Ethiopian Research Council. 
By the spring of 1936, the United Aid to Ethiopia, a collection of Harlem's Ethiopian support 
organizations, and the work of Robert F. S. Harris, secretary of the biracial Committee for 
Ethiopia, overshadowed the activities and notoriety of the FEA. Willis Huggins was a 
flamboyant and controversial figure in the efforts to rally and organize African American support 
for Ethiopia's defense, however, his shortcomings on the fund raising issue do not undermine the 
critical role that he and the FEA played in the history of African American's attempt to focus 
international and national attention upon the plight of the Abyssinian struggle to confront Italian 
aggression. (15)  
 
THE BLYDEN SOCIETY: HUGGINS AS A MENTOR TO JOHN G. JACKSON & JOHN  
HENRIK CLARKE 
 
 
One of the most overlooked and under appreciated aspects of Huggins's life was his role as 
leader and mentor of the Blyden Society and the Harlem History Club. With few surviving 
primary sources, scholars are largely dependent upon oral int erviews and piecing together small 
historical leads to understand the significance of these Harlem institutions. When Huggins began 
to teach African and African American history courses at the Harlem YMCA this gathering was 
first called the Harlem History Club. Huggins had an established community reputation as an 
Africana scholar; he was a vocal advocate for incorporating African and African American 
history in the New York City Public School curriculum; his bookstore had been a gathering 
venue for Black h istory enthusiasts and self -trained Black historians; Harlem's legion of street 
orators also frequented the Blyden Bookstore to read, purchase or simply discuss an assortment 
of classic and new publications; and Huggins had an impressive following of young  Black 
thinkers who knew him as a teacher and administrator in the night school program at Harlem's 
Union High School. All of these factors made the Harlem History Club an immediate success 
and the perfect intellectual resource for Black working-class youth and older community activists 
who could not afford a formal college education or attend day -time high school programs 
because they conflicted with their job obligations. 
 
 
Harlem also had a tradition of supporting independent literary clubs, booklovers ga therings, and 
public forums that encouraged debate and discussion of political, economic, and social issues 
that captured the community's attention. Huggins continued this legacy by contacting and 
encouraging his many colleagues and associates to lecture and participate in the weekly activities 
of the Harlem History Club. In addition, his roots in Garvey's UNIA, the experience of 
publishing and editing Black periodicals in Chicago and New York City, and the rich 
international contacts cultivated through his association with Ethiopian defense efforts during the 
Italo-Ethiopian war provided an impressive list of potential Black history supporters to stimulate 
the minds of his community students.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 23 
  
 
 
Two long -term friends and self -trained Black historians who work ed closely with the Harlem 
History Club and supported Huggins's efforts to popularize African American and African 
History were Arthur Schomburg and Joel Augustus Rogers. Prior to moving to Harlem, Huggins 
had been friends and associates with both of these men since his publication of independent 
Black journals in Chicago. All three men were important collaborators in th e international and 
domestic efforts to galvanize a united front for the material and political support of Ethiopia 
during the 1930s. They also lectured on Pan -African and African topics at the 135 th Street 
Library, Book Lover's Clubs, the Harlem YMCA, and at local UNIA forums during the glory 
days of the Garvey movement in the 1920s. Both Rogers and Schomburg admired the persistence 
that Huggins demonstrated in his failed attempt to persuade the Ne w York City Public School 
board to add Black history courses to city's high school curriculum. Huggins represented a solid 
contact for Rogers and Schomburg within the university -trained Black academic community that 
respected the contributions and intellec tual achievements of self -trained Black scholars. In 
addition, these two self -trained scholars believed that Huggins lacked the pretentiousness and 
erudite behavior that lay intellectuals often assoc iated with their university -trained colleagues. 
(16) 
 
As the Harlem History Club grew, Huggins changed the organization's name to the Blyden 
Society. This name honored the great Pan -African scholar activist Edward Wilmot 
Blyden (1832-1912). Although Blyden had been dead for more than a generation, his well 
articulated views on religion, education, and Pan -Africanism were still fresh in the minds of 
Black scholars throughout Ameri ca, the Caribbean, and Africa. Blyden's two most important 
publications, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race (1987) and African Life and Customs 
(1908), were among the assigned readings. This decision also aligned his research collective with 
the Blyden Bookstore, a community enterprise owned and operated by Huggins. He identified 
outstanding students and began to hold smaller sessions on African history, historical research 
techniques, and the craft of writing history at his home. The only known addres s of the Blyden 
Society was 1890 Seventh Avenue; this was also Huggins's home address. In addition, meetings 
of this research group met at the Blyden Bookstore, located at 2296 Seventh Avenue.  
 
The Blyden Bookstore and Huggins's home were also situated nea r the locations of Harlem's 
celebrated street orators and the former and current offices of Harlem's radical publications. In 
the 1930s, contingents of street speakers were concentrated on Lenox and Seventh Avenues. 
According to one observer, "The speakers  on Lenox Avenue were considered to be junior to or 
'undergraduate' speakers" while "the speakers on Seventh Avenue were the senior ... speakers --
the elite." These men stood on street corners expounding on relevant topics that related to 
working-class residents. They created an outdoor venue that allowed knowledgeable and 
articulate orators to criticize Harlem's middle -class leadership. Regardless of their topics, street 
orators demonstrated an exc ellent command of history and especially used African American 
history to underpin and legitimize all of their arguments. Young and aspiring working class 
students who studied under Huggins were certainly impressed with the vocal and powerful 
presentations of such fabled Harlem street orators as Arthur Reed, Ira Kemp, Ras DeKiller, Sufi 
Abdul Hamid, Carlos Cooks, and Richard B. Moore.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 23 
  
 
 
Sprinkled through this outdoor theater of street orat ors were the current and former offices of the 
Negro World , the Messenger, the Challenger, and the Crusader newspapers. These weekly 
publications and their editors were keenly aware of the Blyden Bookstore, and the work of Willis 
Huggins as a master teacher, an independent journalist and publisher, and a mentor to aspiring 
self-trained historians. Students affiliated with the Blyden Society were motivated and inspired 
by a community envir onment that encouraged creative thinking, political activism, 
oratorical skills, and the importance of mastering history as a serious tool for the interpretation 
and analysis of social problems. (17) 
 
 
John Henrik Clarke (1915-1998) and John G. Jackson (1907-1993) are excellent examples of the 
type of students who were recruited by Huggins and studied under his direction during the life of 
the Blyden Society. Both of these men were young and aspiring southern migrants who relocated 
to Harlem in the 1920s and the 1930s. Jackson was born in Aiken, South Carolina  on April 1, 
1907 and dropped out of Schofield School in Aike n after finishing the seventh grade. He 
completed one year of high school in Augusta, Georgia and then joined the wave of southern 
migrants moving to New York City at the age of fifteen. He arrived in Harlem during the same 
year that Huggins established th e Blyden Bookstore. Similar to many other young Black men 
without the support of family and lacking a formal education, Jackson worked his way through 
New York's Stuyvesant Hig h School . Even with the pressure of working part -time and low 
paying jobs, Jackson excelled academically at Stuyvesant High School by winning a scholarship 
certificate for proficiency in English Composition during his senior year in 1925. After finishing 
high school Jackson periodically registered for Creative Writing courses at City College and 
published articles in the Truth Seeker Magazine and the Negro World. (18) 
 
 
Jackson arrived in New York City at the height of the Garvey movement and the excitement  of 
the Harlem Renaissance. It is not clear when Jackson and Huggins first met but there are some 
historical clues that provide an early connection between the scholar and his fu ture student. 
During the years between 1925 through 1930, Jackson lectured at the Ingersoll Forum and the 
Harlem Unitarian Church, two of the many community venues that provided public forums for 
self-trained Black historians. Huggins certainly knew of the se locations and possibly made his 
first connection with Jackson during one of his presentations on Egypt's contribution to world 
religion. It is also possible that Jackson's maternal uncle, Channing Tobias, arranged a meeting 
between Huggins and young Jac kson. Tobias and Huggins had known one another since 1914 
when they both worked together to establish a YMCA facility for Black youth in Huntsville, 
Alabama. Tobias served as an assistant to Dr. Jesse E. Moorland, head of the YMCA's work 
among urban Blacks . He also was a Phelps -Stokes Fund director, chairman of the NAACP's 
board and according to Richard Bardolph, a "perennial intermediary between Negroes and the 
White House." This appeared to be an excellent contact but Jackson has been quick to point out 
that "Tobias was a conservative man that was reluctant to assist the career of a young radical." 
(19) 
 
Considering Jackson's appraisal of his connected uncle, it is more likely that he and Huggins met


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 23 
  
at the Blyden Bookstore or he may have been introduced b y Arthur Schomburg who was a 
regular fixture at the 135th Street Branch Library of the New York Public Library . This facility 
was Harlem's primary research center and Schomb urg was the curator of Division of Negro 
History, Literature, and Prints located on the library's third floor. Jackson, similar to other self -
trained scholars, spent his free hours researching in the library's Africana collection and 
soliciting advice and suggestions from Schomburg. This relationship was the more likely 
connection to Huggins and Jackson's participation in the Blyden Society. (20) 
 
 
Jackson was only twenty -five years old when he began to work closely with Nathan Huggins. 
They collaborated on research projects, an assortment of publications, and developed a close 
personal relationship. His research interests included the United States and the Caribbean but 
Africa and its i nfluence upon the history of religion became his area of concentration. In 1934, 
he and Huggins co-authored A Guide to the Study of African History. Following this effort they 
jointly published An Introduction to African Civilizations (1937). From 1938 to 1941, Jackson 
authored three pamphlets which received wide acclaim among Harlem's Street Scholar 
community. These included Christianity before Christ  (1938), Ethiopia and the Origin of 
Civilization (1939), and Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth (1941) (21) Just prior to Huggins's 
death, Jackson was clearly his star student and an important contributor to the popularization of 
African and African American history. 
 
 
Similar to many other aspiring Bl ack intellectuals and artists, Jackson had often held unrelated 
jobs to his academic interest to meet his personal expenses and assist his family. This situation 
eventually led him into labor politics. During the 1930s, Jackson became a member of District 
65, Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store Union. This organization eventually affiliated with 
the National Council of Distributive Trades. For more than twenty years , Jackson batt led 
company bosses and served as a catalyst for his fellow union colleagues. As the Black history 
movement matured during the 1970s and 1980s, Jackson's admirers within traditional academic 
circles orchestrated faculty appointments for him. From 1970 -1974, Jackson served as a 
Lecturer, Black Studies Department, Newark College of Arts and Sciences, Rutgers University. 
During this period he published Introduction to African History (1970), and Man, God, and 
Civilization (1972). In 1975 Jackson relocated to Chicago. Largely through the support and 
encouragement of Professor Jacob H. Carruthers, a Jackson disciple and younger colleague, he 
received an appointment as a Visiting Professo r, Center for Inner -City Studies, Northeastern 
Illinois State University , in Chicago. After a prolonged illness and declining health throughout 
the late 1980s, John G. Jackson died in 1993. (22) 
 
 
John Henrik Clarke migrated to Harlem in 1933 at the age of eighteen. He was born in 1915 in 
the small town of Union Springs, Alabama  and raised in Columbus, Georgia . He was one of 
thousands of Black southerners who looked forward to a better life in the North. His 
sharecropping parents had little hope for economic success during the Depression and were 
unable to financially support their son's desire to continue his education past the eighth grade. 
Clarke was always considered bright and intellectually g ifted by his family and the network of 
extended kin and friends that were his love ones in his community. Nonetheless, the segregated


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 23 
  
South and the anti -Black violence that was prevalent in Georgia in the 1930s restricted any 
advancement for a poor but amb itious Black youth. Clarke and his boyhood friend, James 
Holmes, decided to hobo their way to New York City by riding an unattended railroad boxcar. 
(23) 
 
In February 1933, Arthur Schom burg and Ulysses S. Poston, former associate editor of the 
Negro World, engaged in a public confrontation that caught the attention of the New York Age. 
During the celebration of Negro History Week a community forum on Abraham Lincoln was 
sponsored by the Carlton Avenue Branch of the Brooklyn Colored YMCA. As the hour -long 
presentation progressed, Schomburg characterized the Civil War President "[as] a man without 
prejudice ... very interested in our people. It was because of [Lincoln's] unbiased attitude toward 
the black race that today many of the southern states  have not seen fit to honor his memory." 
Poston was chairman of this event and a recognized lay historian since his days with the Garvey 
movement in 1922. He undiplomatically challenged Schomburg's interpretation of Lincoln and 
contended that Lincoln "was weak of character as far as colored people  were concerned. If it had 
been left to [Lincoln] it is more probable that we would still be slaves." Poston further stated, 
"Lincoln favored the African Civilization Society which openly expressed hostility to the Negro. 
Lincoln only freed us to win the w ar." According to Poston, Blacks should honor " Charles 
Sumner, [William Lloyd] Garrison and [Frederick] Douglass. Schomburg emotionally responded 
to his younger critic by calling him a "communist." He informed the audience that he would have 
nothing further to say on the subject and left for his Brooklyn home. The events of this 
controversy were covered for several  weeks in the Black press. Some reports labeled Poston's 
remarks as an attempt of a " neophyte critic ... to dispute" the wisdom of a proven historian. 
While Poston called Schomburg a "reactionary" w ho sought Lincoln's " canonization." (24)  
 
It is not clear if young Clarke attended the Brooklyn forum on Abraham Lincoln but certainly the 
extensive coverage by Harlem's newspapers att racted his attention to the debate between Poston 
and Schomburg. During his school days in Georgia, Clarke had shown an interest in African 
American history and had read Schomburg's important essay entitled "The Negro Digs Up His 
Past" prior to relocating to New York City. This article appeared in Alain Locke's The New 
Negro, an edited text that was published in 1925 during the heyday of the Harlem Renaissance. 
Clarke had a brief association with the Young Communist League  and developed a friendship 
with Henry Winston, a young Black activist with the Brooklyn Communist Party  and future 
theoretician who would publish Strategy for a Black Agenda. This friendship would last for 
several years but according to Clarke, he "always had a difference of opinion" with what he 
called "party cultism. I resen ted the fact that Karl Marx had all the answers," Clarke declared, 
"and that nothing else was to be considered. I always had conflict with that" position. Clarke 
continued to explain this tension in the following manner:  
    During this era, I began an examination of the position of the world 
  in relationship to what it could do for my own people. A small 
  antagonism between the left and myself, began to emerge based on the 
  fact that I saw no contradiction on placing the love of my people 
  first. I basically believed that, ultimately, a sharing society would 
  have to come into being to have any society at all, because capitalism 
  is without humanity, without heart, and without con- cern for people. 
  People who are willing to work should have a decent way of life for 
  having done so. My beliefs came out of my experience as a sharecropper 
  in Alabama and Georgia. I didn't need to read Karl Marx to think this;


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 23 
  
  it just made sense. (25) 
 
 
Clarke met Schomburg and Willis Huggins during his many researc h visits to the 135th Street 
Library. His initial interest in the library's Africana collection may have been heightened by the 
debate over Lincoln's position on African Americans but he also knew that these older scholars 
respected and nurtured his desire  to understand the contribution of Blacks to the course of world 
history. He became one of the youngest members of the Blyden Society and spent all of his free 
hours listening to lively debates at the Harlem YMCA, the Blyden Bookstore, and the third floor 
of the 135th Street Library. During this period he also became close friends with John G. 
Jackson, who Clarke characterized as a Huggins "protege". Jackson's research, according to 
Clarke, emphasized the role of religion and the interplay of history as a p ower in human 
existence. John ... had taken the origins of the Christ myth, and the African origin of the Legend 
of the Garden of Eden  and presented these works in the Chapel of the Harlem Y.. .." This 
presentation motivated Clarke to deliver a lecture called "An Inquiry into the Ethnic Identity of 
Jesus Christ" to his Bldyen Society colleagues and teachers. Out of this mate rial, Clarke would 
find both the historical data and creative energy to publish a short story entitled "The Boy Who 
Painted Christ Black." (26) 
 
 
In addition to Schomburg, Huggins, and Jackson, Clarke also met and befriended Kwame 
Nkrumah, the future president of Ghana; Claude McKay, the well -known Harlem poet and 
novelist; William Leo Hansberry , an expert on  Ethiopian history and Howard 
University Professor; and J. A. Rogers, the self-trained historian and close friend of Huggins and 
Schomburg. Also the great pacifist, John Hayes, an d C.L.R. James, Huggins's friend and fellow 
Ethiopian advocate, would periodically visit and lecture at the Blyden Society when their travel 
schedules brought them to New York City. (27) 
 
 
Clarke viewed his association with the Blyden Society as "literally a graduate level history 
department with some of the most important figures in black history right ... in the middle of 
Harlem." He described Huggins as a "great master teacher" who "talked not just history" but 
taught him "the political meaning of history ." However, it was Schomburg and Clarke who 
developed a father-son relationship that flourished during the last four years of Schomburg's life. 
Clarke believed that Schomburg was "never too busy to talk to" him. During the four years they 
were close, "he s howed me how history was stolen" and shared primary documents to reinforce 
this perspective. He rarely refused a speaking engagement when Clarke solicited Schomburg's 
expertise as a lecturer for the many community groups and clubs that filled his life duri ng 
Harlem's Depression years. Clarke also debated historical topics with Schomburg as he regularly 
walked his senior mentor back and forth to the subway before and after his working hours at the 
135th Street Library. According to Clarke, Schomburg saw in h im "a kind of potential and 
something special." He encouraged Clarke to "first study European history in relationship to the 
history of African people and their culture; and said that " he "would never fully understand the 
history" of Blacks until he "had studied world history." When Schomburg died on June 10, 1938, 
Clarke was profoundly saddened by his death but committed his life to carry on the research and 
mission that was instilled  in him by this generous and caring self -trained Black scholar. Nearly 
two and half years later, Clarke felt the sting of death and the loss of his second mentor, Willis


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 23 
  
Huggins, just a few days before Christmas 1940. These two scholars provided an intelle ctual 
environment and the personal motivation that eventually made Clarke and important figure in 
Harlem's literary world and the probably the most respected self -trained Black scholar of the 
second half of the twentieth century. In 1992, Clarke reflected upon his association with 
Schomburg and Huggins by stating:  
  I followed these men with great devotion, and read most of the books 
  they recommended. See, when I look back on it, I now realize that I 
  was learning from these masters outside of college, certain things no 
  college would ever given me, all of which I have since tried to give 
  my students. I am talking about not just the recitation of facts, but 
  what it means in relation to the world. (28) 
 
 
After the death of Huggins in December 1940, C larke's interest in African American history was 
seriously challenged by a prospective career in literature. During the 1940s Clarke became close 
friends with the author and essayist, John O. Killens and an active member of the Harlem Writers 
Guild. He als o began publishing a syndicated book review column for the Associated Negro 
Press. In 1948, he published his first book, Rebellion in Rhyme, a collection of poetry. During 
the same year, he drafted the highly successful short story entitled "The Boy Who Pa inted Christ 
Black." This publication was eventually translated into fifteen different languages with a positive 
reception in Europe and the Orient. In 1949, he co -founded the Harlem Quarterly with Ernest 
Kaiser, Benjamin Brown, Julian M. Mayfield, and Kil lens. By the end of the decade, Clarke had 
become a featured writer on African American and African subjects for the Pittsburgh Courier 
and the Ghana Evening News. (29) 
 
 
From 1950-1964, Clarke began to emphasize his interest in Black World History. Althoug h he 
held no formal university degrees, this period witnessed his progression into the mainstream of 
Black academic life. He served as the book editor for the Negro History Bulletin and Associate 
Editor of Freedomways: A Quarterly Review of the Negro Freed om Movement. In 1958, Clarke 
published his second book, The Lives of Great African Chiefs. He also became a frequent 
contributor to the Journal of Negro History, Negro History Bulletin, Freedomways, Phylon, and 
Presence Africaine. (30) 
 
 
By 1964, Clarke's reputation as a teacher, lay scholar, and public orator began to attract attention 
outside of the Black community. With the advent of President Lyndon Johnson's anti -poverty 
program, Clarke was appointed Director of the Heritage Teaching Program affiliated with the 
Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited , a government funded initiative. The public exposure  of 
this position and the mounting pressure of the Black Power Movement created opportunities in 
New York's white academic community. In 1966, Clarke became a Lecturer specializing in 
African history, at the New School for Social Research. New York University also tapped Clarke


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 23 
  
to teach African American and African history in the Head Start Training Program. From 1964 to 
1980, Clarke became a major force in the efforts to legitimize African American history as an 
accepted academic discipline. His close association with Malcolm X, mentorship to the leaders 
of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee , and the personal ties he established with 
younger Black historians opened doors to the college lecture circuit. (31) 
 
 
This period also witnessed an increase in Clarke's scholarly output. He edited the following 
books during the 1960s: Harlem, A Community in Transition (1964); Harlem, U.S.A. (1965); 
American Negro Short Stories (1966); William Styron's Nat Turner: Ten Black Writers Respond 
(1968); and Malcolm X: The Man and His Times (1969). Clarke closed the 1960s by becoming a 
co-founder of the African Studies Her itage Association in 1969. He also worked as an advisory 
editor for Black Scholar while authoring scholarly articles for Negro Digest (re -named Black 
World), Crisis, Core, the Massachusetts Review, and scores of popular articles that appeared in 
the Black press. In 1968, Clarke served as Special Consultant and Coordinator of the 
CBS Television series Black Heritage: The History of Afro-Americans. (32) 
 
 
In the 1970s, Clarke served on the advisory boards of the Western Journal of Black Studies; First 
World; Black Books Bulletin; and the Journal of Inner City Studies. These publications reflected 
one dimension of the explosion in Black Studies that rocked the foundations of traditional 
academia. In 1970, the University of Denver  awarded him a Honorary Doctorate of Humane 
Letters for his contributions to Black history. He also edited Slavery and the Slave Trade (1970); 
Harlem: Voices From the Soul of Black America (1970); Black Titan: W.E.B. DuBois (1971); 
and Marcus Garvey  and the Vi sion of Africa (1973). As the public and students demanded 
additional materials related to African American and African history, Clarke edited the reissuing 
of J. A. Rogers's two volume text, the World's Great Men of Color, first published by Clarke's 
former mentor in 1946. Throughout the decade, Clarke presented a legion of conference papers 
and traveled to numerous colleges championing the necessity for young students to study African 
and African American history. (33) 
 
 
With such an active schedule, the d ecade of the 1980s was bound to take a toll on Clarke's 
health. He continued his extensive commitments to professional associations and freely assisted 
young doctorial students who solicited his advice or simply wanted an interview for their 
research. Clarke retired from Hunter College as a Distinguished Professor, Department of Black 
and Puerto Rican Studies, but continued his college and community lecture schedule. During this 
era, Clarke played an important role in the formation of the Association for the Study of 
Classical African Civilizations and the National Council for Black Studies. In 1985, his nonstop


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 23 
  
schedule led  to a stroke. As he recovered, Clarke completed his fourteenth book entitled The 
African World at the Crossroads: Notes for an African World Revolution (1991). Declining 
health finally terminated the life of this activist scholar in July 1998. Clarke's lif e and 
contributions were a testimony to the dedication of forgotten self -trained Black historians who 
envisioned African American history as an accepted discipline and an important tool for the 
empowerment of an oppressed people. (34) 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION: THE MYSTERY OF HUGGIN'S DEATH 
 
 
When Willis Nathaniel Huggins disappeared on a cold winter night in December 1940, the 
Harlem community and Black America lost a truly unique Black scholar. Huggins had battl ed 
racism within the mainstream academic community and became the first Black student to finish a 
doctorate at Fordham University. He simply refused to accommodate himself to the traditional 
isolation of a southern Black college and the limited opportuniti es of the segregated South. 
Huggins established his permanent home in Harlem and eventually joined the small community 
of Black educators who were employed by the New York City's public school system.  
 
Throughout his life, he sought to address community an d race problems while carving out a 
professional career. This sentiment was first expressed in his efforts to promote Civil Rights 
issues and the establishment of a YMCA facility for Black youth in Huntsville, Alabama during 
his short tenure as a faculty m ember at Alabama A & M College. In Chicago and Harlem, 
Huggins established independent Black publications, contributed articles to the regional Black 
press, and joined the small group of Black book store owners who campaigned and promoted 
reading and alter native publications that challenged the prevailing scientific racism of his time. 
During the mid 1930s, when Ethiopia was struggling against Italian aggression, Huggins became 
an i nternational leader for the defense and support of Ethiopian sovereignty and an articulate 
voice for international Black solidarity. 
 
 
Huggins also was a dedicated participant in the Black history movement. He supported the 
efforts of Carter G. Woodson and the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History by 
leading the New York branch of this organization. However, it was through his teaching skills


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 23 
  
and community mentorship that Huggins made his greatest contribution to the popularization and 
professionalization of African American and African history. 
 
 
Shortly after being hired to teach by the New York Board of Education, Huggins launched a 
campaign to introduce African and African A merican history courses into the public school 
curriculum. When this effort failed, he established an independent research collective first called 
the Harlem History Club and then renamed the Blyden Society. In the eight years that he was 
associated with t his organization, Huggins trained, promoted, and encouraged talented younger 
Black intellectuals who lacked the financial resources to attend traditional university programs. 
During this period, Huggins co -authored two books on African history financed the  publication 
of several smaller pamphlets that addressed African and African American historical themes, and 
linked together his community students with some of the best self -trained and university-trained 
Black intellectuals of the 1930s. At least two stu dent members of the Blyden Society, John 
Henrik Clarke and John G. Jackson, became prominent self -trained Black historians who 
continued long after Huggins's death to make important contributions to Black historiography, 
teaching on the university and community level, and to the popularization of African and African 
American history, especially within Black urban communities. 
 
 
The untimely death of Willis Huggins still reminds one of Harlem's unsolved historical 
mysteries. Huggins was only fifty -four years old when he allegedly committed suicide by 
jumping from the George Washington Bridge. He was employed by two New York City high 
schools, for almost twenty years he had been the proprietor of the Blyden Bookstore, he had 
established reputation as a communit y activist and international advocate on behalf of African 
independence, and he was a respected educator who was considered a master teacher by a legion 
of community students. Huggins embodied many of the characteristics that Harlem residents 
considered essential for a "Race Man." 
 
 
It took more than six months for his body to be accidentally recovered by police authorities. This 
circumstance indicates that there was a calculated effort to keep the body submerged probably 
through the use of weights. The Hugg ins family quickly endorsed the suicide theory while those 
who lived and worked among Harlem's street community believed that their beloved teacher was 
killed by gangsters who had grown weary of unpaid business loans. Regardless of these 
competing theories  of Huggins's death, Harlem prematurely lost an exceptionally dedicated 
educator and an activist scholar who passionately believed that critical thinking and intellectual 
achievement was not reserved for the privileged in society.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 23 
  
 
 
* Ralph Crowder is a mem ber of the Department of Ethnic Studies, the University of 
California at Riverside. 
 
 
(1) "Negro Educator Is Found Drowned," New York Times, July 19, 1941; "Body Identified,"  
New York Sun, July 19, 1941; "Educator's Body Taken from Hudson," New York World -
Telegram, July 19, 1941; "Body in Hudson Is Negro Educator," New York Post, July 19, 1941; 
and private discussions with John Henrik Clarke, Atlanta, Georgia, November, 1993. Bushwick 
High was a predominately white school while the evening program at Harlem's Union High 
attracted older Black students who were completing their high school degrees while usually 
working full -time jobs during the day. The Blyden Bookstore, a popular gathering spot for 
Gaveyites and book lovers, was located at 2296 Seventh Avenue. Additional backgro und 
information on Huggins can be found in The Crescent, Vol. 13, No. 3 (November, 1938), 38; 
Rosario De Paul, "Negro Gets Catholic Doctorate," The Colored Harvest Harvest (October -
November, 1932), 9; and Florence Murray, editor, The Negro Handbook (New Yo rk: Wendell 
Malliet and Company, 1942), 8. John Henrik Clarke, a member of the Blyden Society and a 
Huggins student, believed that his mentor was killed by gangsters do to unpaid business loans. 
This information came from several discussions with Clarke du ring the 1970s through the early 
1990s. 
 
(2) Contemporary scholars have recorded Huggins's role in the African American support for 
Ethiopia during the Italian invasion. The best sources for further information on this topic are 
Joseph E. Harris, African -American Reactions to War in Ethiopia, 1936 -1941 ( Baton Rouge : 
Louisiana State University Press , 1994) and William R. Scott, The Sons of Sheba's Race: 
African-Americans and the Italo -Ethiopian War, 1935 -1941 (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1993). Scott's Chapt er IX: Harlem Mobilization is especially useful to position Huggins's 
activities within the divergent collection of Marxist, nationalist, and traditional community 
organizations. Both of these sources fail to discuss or acknowledge Huggins's influence upon  a 
legion of self -trained Black scholars. Joel A. Rogers, Carter G. Woodson, and W.E.B. Du Bois 
supported Huggins's efforts to pressure the New York City board of education to include courses 
on African civilization within the high school curriculum. Arthu r A. Schomburg, Charles S. 
Johnson, and Rogers had supported and published articles in the Upreach Magazine and the 
Searchlight while Huggins was living in Chicago. Both publications were edited and financed by 
Huggins. Claude McKay, an important novelist and poet, often collaborated with Huggins on his 
views of racial affairs and politics in Europe. Jesse E. Moorland and Schomburg were celebrated 
bibliophiles and supporters of the Black history movement along with Du Bois, Woodson, and 
Rogers. Huggins had strong ties in Haiti through his relationship with this country's President 
and diplomatic representatives to the United States. This relationship was cemented during


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 23 
  
Huggins's 1934 visit to Haiti. Huggins began to develop an international network of conta cts in 
1919 while he was closely associated with Garvey's Universal Negro Improvement 
Association (UNIA). In 1919, he coordinated a Harlem visit of Ethiopian  dignitaries and 
diplomats while on official business in the United States. In 1933, he also befriended Ras Desta 
Damtew, the governor of Sidamo Province and son -in-law to Emperor Haile Selessie. See Scott, 
113; many more of Huggins's international contact s are discussed in Huggins and John G. 
Jackson, Introduction to African Civilization with Main Currents in Ethiopian History (New 
York: Avon House Publishers, 1937), and the New York Times, July 19, 1941  
 
(3) James G. Spady, "Willis N. Huggins: Educator, D iplomat, and Historian," Black History 
Museum Newsletter, Vol. 1, No. 8 (1971), 1 -10. This detailed but undocumented article and 
several newspaper clippings covering the life and death of Huggins are located in the Arthur 
Alfonso Schomburg Vertical File, S chomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York 
Public Library, New York, New York; and Louise Daniel Hutchinson, Anna J. Cooper: A Voice 
from the South (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution  Press, 1981), 67 -84. 
 
(4) Spady, "Willis N. Huggins," 1 -2; and personal discussions with John G. Jackson, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, March, 1976. It is unclear when Jackson and Huggins first met. Jackson 
was born in Aiken, South Carolina on April 1, 1907. He attended the Schofield School in Aiken, 
dropping out after finishing the seventh grade. He then completed one year of high school in 
Augusta, Georgia and then relocated in New York City at the age of fifteen in 1922. He 
completed his secondary education at New York City's Stuyvesant High School winning a 
scholarship certificate for proficiency in English Composition in his senior year. Jackson m ay 
have met Huggins at history discussions sponsored by Harlem's Blyden Bookstore or through 
association with the Upreach Magazine. Both businesses were established and managed by 
Huggins. The Negro World announced the appearance of Upreach Magazine on Aug ust 14, 
1920. Jackson also periodically attended classes in creative writing at New York's City College, 
wrote articles for the Truth Seeker Magazine and lectured at the Ingersoll Forum and the Harlem 
Unitarian Church. These venues could have also provided  an opportunity for Huggins and 
Jackson to have met. It is also possible that Chaning Tabius introduced young Jackson to 
Huggins in an arranged personal meeting. Huggins was twenty one years older than Jackson and 
clearly played the role of a mentor and ol der but wise friend. For additional details see jacket 
notes, John G. Jackson, Man God and Civilization ( New Hyde Park, New York : University 
Books, Inc., 1972) and Tony Mar tin, Literary Garveyism: Garvey, Black Arts and the Harlem 
Renaissance (Dover, Massachusetts: 1983), 37 and 170. 
 
 
(5) Spady, "Willis N. Huggins," 2; Ralph L. Crowder, " John Edward B ruce, Edward Wilmot 
Blyden, Alexander Crummell, and J. Robert Love: Mentors, Patrons, and the Evolution of A 
Pan-African Intellectual Network," Afro-Americans in New York Life and History, Vol. 20, No.


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 23 
  
2 (July, 1996), 59 -91; and Elinor Des Verney Sinnett,  Arthur Alfonso Schomburg: Black 
Bibliophile & Collector (Detroit: The New York Public Library and Wayne State 
University Press, 1989), 39 -72. Additional information on Bruce  and Schomburg's attempts to 
locate young Black talent can be found in Crowder, "From Slavery to Freedom: John Edward 
Bruce's Childhood and Adolescence," Afro -Americans in New York Life and History, Vol. 26, 
No. 1 (January, 2002), 39 -74 and Ralph L. Crowde r, John Edward Bruce: Politician, Journalist, 
and Historian of the African Disapora (New York: New York University Press , forthcoming 
winter, 2003). 
 
 
(6) Spady, "Willis N. Huggins," 6 -7; Charles S. Johnson (1893 -1956) received a Ph.d. in 
Sociology from the University of Chicago in 1918. He also served as the Executive Director of 
the Chicago Commission on Race Relations after the Chicago riot of 1919. In the capacity, he 
directed the commission's classic study, The Negro in Chicago: A Study in Race Relations and a 
Race Riot. In 1921, he moved to New York City to become the director of Department of 
Research and Investigations, the National Urban League. In 1923, he assumed ed itorship of 
Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life, published by the League. Through this journal he 
promoted African American history and culture throughout the 1920s. In 1928, he left New York 
City to become chairman of the Social Science Department, Fisk University. From the 1921 
through 1938, Johnson and Arthur Schomburg were close friends and advocates for the Black 
history movement. Although primary records do not speak to his association with Huggins, they 
shared a passion for Black history and the des ire to further develop a primary and secondary 
curriculum that promoted African American history and culture for Black youth. For further 
information see: Preston and Bonita H. Valien, "Charl es Spurgeon Johnson (1893 -1956)," in 
Rayford W. Logan and Michael R. Winston, Dictionary of American Negro Biography (New 
York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1982), 347 -349; and Sinnette, Arthur Alfonso Schomburg, 
111-112, 136, 149, 188, 196 and 192 -193. Huggins 's Searchlight was a weekly similar to the 
Chicago Defender that was published for only two years. The best source to understand the 
emergence of the New Negro Movement in post war Chicago is William M. Tuttle, Jr.'s Race 
Riot: Chicago in the Red Summer of 1919 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1970 and 1996), 
208-241. 
 
(7) Spady, "Willis N. Huggins," 7-8; New York Times, July 19, 1941; and Huggins and Jackson, 
An Introduction to African Civilizations, review selectively. 
 
 
(8) Scott, The Son's of Sheba's Race, 243.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 23 
  
(9) Scott, The Sons of Sheba's Race, 112-113. These events were also covered by the Baltimore 
Afro-American, July 27, 1935, the Norfolk Journal and Guide, August 3, 1935, and James R. 
Hooker, Black Revolutionary: George Padmore's Path from Communism to Pan-Africanism 
(London: Pall Mall, 1967), 40-41. The five other speakers at the PCDE gathering were Alfred L. 
King, a UNIA leader, Joel A. Rogers, self-trained historian and journalist; James W. Ford, 
Harlem's premier Black communist leader, Arthur Reid, a well known Harlem nationalist, 
Garveyite, street orator, and president of the African Patriotic League; and Reverend Adam 
Clayton Powell, Jr., Abyssinian's associate pastor and community activist. For additional 
information on the Harlem's tradition of "united front" politics review Ralph L. Crowder, "'Don't 
Buy Where You Can't ': An Investigation of the Political Forces and Social Conflict Within the 
Harlem Boycott of 1934," Afro-Americans in New York Life and History, Vol. 15, No. 2 (July, 
1991), 7-44. 
 
(10) Ibid., 111-114. 
 
(11) Ibid., 113-114. The statements from Minister Warqneh Martin and Minister Tecle 
Hawariate are republished in Huggins and Jackson, An Introduction to African Civilization, 89-
91. Hawariate was also a Delegate to the League of Nations and probably assisted Huggins in the 
final wording of his statement to the League. 
 
(12) Huggins and Jackson, An Introduction to African Civilizations, 91-93; Joseph E. Harris, 
African-American Reactions to War in Ethiopia, 64-65; and Scott, The Sons of Sheba's Race, 
113-114. 
 
(13) Joseph H. Harris, African-American Reactions to War in Ethiopia, 65; William R. Scott, 
The Sons of Sheba's Race, 114-115; and the New York Times, October 6, 1935, 10. 
 
(14) The Pittsburg Courier, November 23, 1935, 10; Harris, African-American Reactions to War 
in Ethiopia, 66; and Scott, The Sons of Sheba's Race, 115-116. 
 
(15) Harris, African-American Reactions to War in Ethiopia, 66-67; and Scott, The Sons of 
Sheba's Race, 116. 
 
(16) For an overview of the relationship between university-trained and self-trained Black 
historians read Ralph L. Crowder, "Chapter V: The Popularization of African American History: 
John Edward Bruce as Historian, Bibliophile, and Black History Advocate," in Crowder, John 
Edward Bruce: Politician, Journalist, and Self-Trained Historian of the African Diaspora (New 
York: New York University Press, 2004), 91-133. 
 
(17) Benjamin Bowser, "Portrait of a Liberation Scholar," The Afro-American History Kit, 1992


--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 of 23 
  
(Washington, D.C.: Associated Publishers, Inc., 1992), 5-6; and W. Burghardt Turner and Joyce 
Moore Turner, editors, Richard B. Moore, Caribbean Militant In Harlem: Collected Writings, 
1920-1972 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988), 30-31. For additional information on 
Harlem's street speakers during the 1930s read Ralph L. Crowder, "'Don't Buy Where You Can't 
Work': An Investigation of the Political Forces and Social Conflict within the Harlem Boycott of 
1934," Afro-Americans in New York Life and History, Vol. 15, No. 2 (July 1991), 7-44; Roma 
Barnes, "Harlem Street Speakers in the 1930s," in Christopher Mulvey and John Simons, editors, 
New York: City as Text (Basingstoke: MacMillan, 1990), 106-130; Claude McKay, Harlem: 
Negro Metropolis (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1940); Wilbur Young, "Activities of 
Bishop Amiru Al-Mu-Minin Sufi A. Hamid," and "Sufi Abdul Hamid: The Black Hitler of 
Harlem," Federal Writers Project, Negroes in New York City, 1939-1941," Reel I; and Winston 
James, "Being Red and Black in Jim Crow America: Notes on the Ideology and Travails of Afro-
America's Socialist Pioneers, 1877-930," Souls, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Fall 1999), 45-63. 
 
(18) Ralph L. Crowder, "John G. Jackson: Labor Activist and World Historian," Minneapolis 
Spokesman and Recorder, July 26, 1979; and book jacket notes, John G. Jackson, Man, God, and 
Civilization; and conversations with John G. Jackson, February, 1977. 
 
(19) Richard Bardolph, The Negro Vanguard (New York: Vintage Books, 1961), 184-185 and 
conversations with John G. Jackson, February 1977. 
 
(20) Schomburg's relationship with the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library is 
detailed in Elinor Des Verney Sinnette, Arthur Alfonso Schomburg: Black Bibliophile & 
Collector (Detroit: The New York Public Library & Wayne State University Press, 1989), 131-
160; and conversations with John G. Jackson, February, 1977. 
 
(21) John G. Jackson and Willis Nathaniel Huggins, A Guide to the Study of African History 
(New York: Federation of History Clubs, 1934); Jackson and Huggins, An Introduction to 
African Civilization (New York: Avon Publishers, 197, Reprint: New York: Negro Universities 
Press, 1969); Jackson, Christianity Before Christ (New York: The Blyden Society, 1938, 
Reprint: Chicago: Third World Press, 1978); Jackson, Ethiopia and the Origins of Civilization 
(New York: The Blyden Society, 1939); and Jackson, Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth (New 
York: The Truth Seeker Press, 1941; Second edition, 1976). 
 
(22) Crowder, "John G. Jackson: Labor Activist and World Historian," 3; and conversations with 
John G. Jackson, February 1977. Jackson's Introduction to African Civilization (New Jersey: 
Citadel Press, 1970) and Man, God, and Civilization (New Hyde Park, New York: University 
Books, Inc., 1972) are generally considered his most popular and financially successful 
publications by self-trained Black historians and those university-trained scholars who are aware 
of his contributions to the Black history movement.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 of 23 
  
 
(23) Barbara Eleanor Adams, John Henrik Clarke: The Early Years (Hampton, Virginia: United 
Brothers and Sisters Communications, 1992), 21-22. 
 
(24) The New York Age, February 18 and 25, 1933 quoted in Elinor Des Verney Sinnette, 
Arthur Alfonso Schomburg, 174; and Tony Martin, Literary Garveyism: Garvey, Black Arts and 
the Harlem Renaissance (Dover, Massachusetts, 1983), 71-72. Schomburg's "The Negro Digs Up 
His Past," first appeared in Survey Graphic, Vol. 6 (March 1925), 670-672 and then reprinted in 
Alain Locke, editor, The New Negro (New York: Albert and Charles Boni, 1925), 231-237. 
 
(25) Barbara Eleanor Adams, John Henrik Clarke: The Early Years, 24-26; and Henry Winston, 
Strategy for a Black Agenda; A Critique of New Theories of Liberation in the United States and 
Africa (New York: International Publishers, 1973). 
 
(26) Adams, John Henrik Clarke: The Early Years, 26-27 and 31. 
 
(27) Ibid., 26; Benjamin Bowser, "Portrait of a Liberation Scholar," 6; and conversations with 
John Henrik Clarke, October, 1988. 
 
(28) Adams, John Henrik Clarke: The Early Years, 27-31. 
 
(29) John Henrik Clarke, Rebellion in Rhyme (Prairie City, Illinois: The Dicker Press, 1948); 
Abraham Chapman, Black Voices: An Anthology of Afro-American Literature (New York: The 
New American Library, 1968), 631-632; John Henrik Clarke, editor, Malcolm X: The Man and 
His Times (New York: Collier Books, 1969), 357; and Harold Cruse, The Crisis of the Negro 
Intellectual (New York: William Morrow, 1967), 219. 
 
(30) Champman, editor, Black Voices, 631-632 and Clarke, editor, Malcolm X, 357. 
 
(31) John Henrik Clarke, editor, Malcolm X: The Man and His Times, 357; and conversations 
with John Henrik Clarke, October 1988. Some of the first generation of post-Civil Rights 
movement historians that Clarke counseled included James Turner, Tony Martin, Sterling 
Stuckey, Vincent Harding, Mary F. Berry, John Blassingame, Edgar Toppin, John H. Bracey, Jr., 
Leonard Jeffries, Jacob H. Carruthers, Hollis R. Lynch, Ivan Van Sertima, Anderson Thompson, 
Asa Hillard, and Ralph L. Crowder. This only a partial list of those scholars who solicited 
Clarke's assistance and scholarly advice. 
 
(32) "John Henrik Clarke: Distinguished Professor Emeritus of African World History, Hunter 
College, C.U.N.Y., New York," Twentieth Anniversary Conference and Special Tribute to Dr. 
John Henrike Clarke, African Heritage Association, April 38-30, 1988, 2. For Clarke's role in the


--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 23 of 23 
  
African Heritage Studies Association review Clarke, "The African Heritage Association: Some 
Notes on the Conflict with the African Studies Association and the Fight to Reclaim African 
History," Issue: A Quarterly Journal of Africanist Opinion (1969), 5-11 and Cyprian Lamar 
Rowe, Crisis in African Studies: The Birth of the African Heritage Studies Association 
(Washington, D.C.: African Heritage Studies Association, 1988. 
 
The full citations for Clarke's edited volumes published in the 1960s include: Harlem, A 
Community in Transition (New York: Citadal Press, 1964; enlarged edition, 1970); Harlem, 
U.S.A. (Berlin: Seven Seas Publishers, 1965); American Negro Short Stories (New York: Hill 
and Wang, Inc., 1966); William Styron's Nat Turner: Ten Black Writers Respond (Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1968); and Malcolm X: The Man and His Times (New York: Macmillan, 1969). 
 
(33) The full citations of for Clarke's edited volumes published in the 1970s include: Slavery and 
the Slave Trade, edited with Vincent Harding (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 
1970); Harlem: Voices From the Soul of Black America (New York: New American Library, 
1970); Black Titan: W.E.B. DuBois, edited with the editors of Freedomways (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1971); Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa (New York: Random House 1972); and 
World's Great Men of Color, Vols. 1 and 2, by J. A. Rogers, revised and updated edition with 
commentary, (New York: Collier-Macmillan, 1972). 
 
(34) John Henrik Clarke, The African World at the Crossroads: Notes for an African World 
Revolution (Trenton, New Jersey: African World Press, 1991). 
 
Ralph L. Crowder*

