=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Education-for-a-New-Reality-in-the-African-World-by-Dr-John-Henrik-Clarke.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 55
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:02:45.714088
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
1 
 
  
Education for a New Reality in the African World was prepared for The Phelps-Stokes Fund and 
delivered on November 14, 1994 in a ceremony at which Dr. Clarke was presented with their 
highest award, the Aggrey Medal, for "recognition of his unique contribution to our knowledge 
and understanding of African civilization."  
 
Few scholars and teachers have pursued their field of research and public discourse with more 
passion and dedication than John Henrik Clarke. Dr. Clarke has sought to win for Africa its 
"respectful commentary in the history of the world." Although this essay is intended to point to 
the educational challenge facing people of African descent as they approach the information 
age of the 21 st Century, the discussion Dr. Clarke offers is center ed on perceiving more 
completely the place and contributions of African people to human progress. Fundamentally, 
what Dr. Clarke argues is that despite the historic denial of Africa's true history in western 
scholarship, which was used to justify the rape and plunder of the continent and the suppression 
of African culture through and slavery and colonial oppression, Africa's gift to world society has 
been unique and permanently enriching. The tragedy is that the truth about Africa's role in 
human progress h as been so effectively suppressed that not even the African world is fully 
convinced of its reality. This is why the main focus of Education for a New Reality in the African 
World "must have as its mission the restoration of what slavery and colonialism took away."  
 
From the Foreword by Gerald LeMelle, The Phelps-Stokes Fund director of Africa Programs 
PDF DESIGN AND 
CONVERSION 
FOR DOWNLOAD 
RBG STREET 
SCHOLAR


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
2 
 
SOURCE PAGE HOME 
 LINKS: 
Part 1   A Single Focus With Many Dimensions 
Part 2   The Significance of the African World 
Part 3   The African Holocaust—The Slave Trade 
Part 4   African Historiography 
Part 5   The African World Revolution 
Part 6   The Rationale for Pan-Africanism 
Part 7   Washington, DuBois, and Woodson 
Part 8   The Challenge Facing the Scholar of African Descent 
Part 9   Education for a New Reality in the African World 
Part 10 Conclusion 
 
 
Live TOC 
Part 1 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 3 
A Single Focus With Many Dimensions ................................ ................................ .............. 3 
Part 2 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 6 
The Significance of the African World ................................ ................................ ................ 6 
Part 3 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................17 
The African Holocaust—The Slave Trade ................................ ................................ ..........17 
Part 4 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................22 
African Historiography ................................ ................................ ................................ .......22 
Part 5 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................27 
The African World Revolution ................................ ................................ ............................27 
Part 6 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................29 
The Rationale for Pan-Africanism ................................ ................................ ......................29 
Part 7 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................31 
Washington, DuBois, and Woodson ................................ ................................ ..................31 
Part 8 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................36 
The Challenge Facing the Scholar of African Descent ................................ .....................36 
Part 9 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................40 
Education Is Power ................................ ................................ ................................ .............40 
Part 10 of 10 ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................46 
Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................46 
Struggle is the Highest Form of Education ................................ ................................ ...46 
Our Dilemma: The Dream Was Not Dreamed For Us ................................ ....................48


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
3 
 
 
Part 1 of 10 
A Single Focus With Many Dimensions 
A Single Focus With Many Dimensions 
Education for a new reality in the African world must 
have a single focus with many dimensions that take into 
consideration the fact that African people are universal 
and the most dispersed of all ethnic groups. African 
people can be found in more parts of the world than 
any other ethnic group. Africa, of course, is their 
homeland, but through curiosity, need, forced migration 
and serving as mercenaries in the armies of other 
nations, Africans have migrated throughout the world 
and in many ways they relate to all the ethnic nations of 
the world. To this end I invite you to read three differen t 
special issues of the Journal of African Civilizations , 
edited by Professor Ivan Van Sertima, "African 
Presence In Early Asia," "African Presence In Early 
Europe," and "African Presence In Early America," because there is a need to locate 
African people on the map of human geography and to restore African people to the 
respectful commentary of history. 
If Africans are to be judged by the current headlines in the newspapers the judgment 
will not be in their favor —with the murder of Africans by Africans in Rwanda, with a 
nation like Nigeria, which could have been Africa's finest example of a functioning 
African nation, turning inward on itself, and a nation like Ghana, where Nkrumah took 
Africa for her political walk in the sun, now a nation of Jesus freaks selling the land, 
including the gold mines, to foreigners. Without some understanding of how Africa was 
programmed into this disaster, the picture of Africa, of course, would not be favorable. If 
one took the time to look beyond the headlines and discover why and how the African 
dream was turned into an African nightmare one might have some understanding of the 
African crisis and some human sympathy. 
In the years after the emergence of Kwame Nkr umah, l957 -present, Africa was 
programmed to fall apart. The two generations educated after the independence 
explosion were educated to imitate Europeans in the handling of power. Figuratively 
speaking, the European political coat will never fit the Afric an body. Africans were not 
educated to take over Africa by Africans using African methodology. Nearly every 
African head of state today has an African body and a European mind. Those trained in 
the United States have only a variation of the European mind. Because African people 
the world over are a ceremonial people, they often engage in ceremony and miss the 
substance. This is why in substance, the civil rights movement was basically a failure,


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
4 
 
the Caribbean concept of federation and unity was also a failu re, and the Organization 
of African Unity was the saddest failure of them all. Until we are adult and face the 
reality of why these failures occurred we will not be prepared to establish an educational 
program that would enable us to face the reality of th e immediate tomorrow of African 
people. 
The main focus of an education for a new reality in the African world must have as its 
mission the restoration of what slavery and colonialism took away. Slavery and 
colonialism took from African people their basic c ulture, their language, their concept of 
nationhood, their manhood and their womanhood. They mutilated and tried to destroy 
their traditional culture and reduced Africans to beggars at the cultural and political door 
of other people while neglecting the jo b of restoring their own culture, the main thing 
that could have sustained them. 
The Africans needed a value system of their own design. Most important in the 
education to assume the responsibility of nationhood, Africans needed to be educated 
to be the managers of the wealth producing resources of their own country. All over the 
African world we need fewer parades, fewer demonstrations, fewer pronouncements, 
less hero worship and more closed door meetings to plan the strategy of African 
survival throughout the world. We need to study how other nations rose from a low to a 
high position in the world and did what we still have to do. 
Both my colleagues and my students have grown weary of my using the case of the rise 
of modern Japan. They say the Japanese are  racists. They are, but they did for 
themselves what we still need to do —they retained their culture. They did not let the 
conqueror interfere with their way of life or tamper with the concept and image of god as 
they conceived god to be. Throughout the wh ole of the African world most Africans who 
call themselves civilized, and here I have to question their definition of the term, worship 
a concept and image of a god assigned to them by a foreigner. Because the Japanese 
refused to allow their conquerors to do this to them they recovered from defeat and rose 
to a position in a world where their former conquerors are asking them for space in their 
commercial world. 
The Japanese did this without demonstrations, shooting a gun or asking the permission 
of their c onqueror. They did this because they could talk strategy among themselves 
and not have anyone run to their conqueror and betray the strategist. They realized 
something that the people of the African world have not yet realized. There is no way to 
move any people from a lower to a higher position unless they are willing to accept 
some form of collective discipline. You can not move an unruly mob into anything but 
chaos. Sometime we are democratic among ourselves and not able to get anything 
done because we are not able to decide what needs to be done. 
Europeans and white people in general have become masters of image control and 
mind control, which is sometimes one and the same. The most devastating of all 
European image control is their control over the defi nition and the image of God. Very 
few black ministers or laypersons dispute the white picture of Christ painted in Europe


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
5 
 
1500 years after Christ was dead. Most people in the civilizations of the world generally 
look at a spiritual deity that resembles the mselves, mainly the father in their home, be 
this right or wrong. Why are we an exception? 
Let's look briefly at what this image does to our mind and the mind of our youth. The 
image of Christ, the son of God is one color, policemen are the same, judges in  the 
courts, in most cases, are the same. What are these images saying to our youth —that 
the color they wear is incapable of holding power. When one goes to the black church 
and looks at the Sunday school lesson, all the angels shown there are white. These  
pictures tell your child that he or she is not capable of being an angel. 
If you are now asking the question, what has this to do with education for a new reality 
in the African world, then you need to ask the question until you find the answer. Why 
not answer the question with a question to yourself: Am I not as worthy of exercising 
power over myself, within my family, within my community, within my nation, as anyone 
else? If I am not prepared for it, do I have the mental capacity to prepare myself for it ? 
Do people holding power have a mental capacity in excess of mine? If so, why? We live 
in a society that programs us into doubting our capacity to be the masters of ourselves 
and the circumstances under which we live. The rulers of this society and other 
societies have made a mystery of the ruling of nations. They say outright, or imply, that 
this is an achievement beyond our capacity. 
If we had a thorough knowledge of our history for just one thousand years before the 
slave trade, we could put this matter  to rest. There were great independent states along 
the coast of East Africa before they were destroyed by the Arab slave trade. There were 
great independent states in the Congo before they were destroyed in 1884. There were 
great independent states in inner West Africa that lasted one hundred fifty years into the 
slave trade period. One independent state, Songhay, ruled exceptionally well by 
Africans, conducted trade in the Mediterranean and in southern Europe, had a great 
university, Sankore, at Timbuctoo  and a university city devoted mainly to education. 
While the ruling family was of the Islamic faith, this was not an Arab achievement; there 
were no Arab teachers at the University of Sankore or Jenne. 
This is why throughout this paper I will be consisten tly referring to the fact that we have 
to look back in order to look forward. The past illuminates the present and the present 
will give us some indication of what the future can be. Education for a new reality in the 
African world has to be three dimensional in its approach. 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
6 
 
 
 
Part 2 of 10 
The Significance of the African World 
The Significance of the African World 
A distinguished African American poet, Countee Cullen, 
began his poem "Herita ge" with the question: "What is 
Africa to me?" In order to understand Africa, we must 
extend the question by asking, "What is Africa to the 
Africans?" and "What is Africa to the world?" With these 
questions we will be calling attention to the need for a 
total reexamination of African history. Considering the 
old approaches to African history and the distortions and 
confusion that resulted from these approaches, a new 
approach to African history must begin with a new frame 
of reference which will help us bet ter analyze the issues 
of slavery, colonialism, imperialism and nation -building 
among black people. 
We must be bold enough to reject such terms as "Black 
Africa" which presupposes that there is a legitimate, "White Africa." We must reject the 
term "Negro A frica" and the word "Negro" and all that it implies. This word, like the 
concept of race and racism, grew out of the European slave trade and the colonial 
system that followed. It is not an African word and it has no legitimate application to 
African people. For more details on this matter, I recommend that you read the book, 
The Word Negro —Its Origin and Evil Use , by Richard B. Moore. In a speech on "The 
Significance of African History," the Caribbean writer, Richard B. Moore observed: 
The significance of African history is shown, though not overtly, in the very effort to deny 
anything worthy of the name of history to Africa and the African peoples. This wide -
spread, and well nigh successful endeavor, maintained through some five centuries, to 
erase African history from the general record, is a fact which of itself should he quite 
conclusive to thinking and open minds. For it is logical and apparent that no such 
undertaking would ever have been carried on, and at such length, in order to obscure 
and bury what is actually of little or no significance. 
The prime significance of African history becomes still more manifest when it is realized 
that this deliberate denial of African history arose out of the European expansion and 
invasion of Africa which began in t he middle of the fifteenth century. The compulsion 
was thereby felt to attempt to justify such colonialist conquest, domination, 
enslavement, and plunder. Hence, this brash denial of history and culture to Africa, and


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
7 
 
indeed even of human qualities and cap acity for 'civilization' to the indigenous people of 
Africa. 
Mr. Moore is saying, in essence, that African history must be looked at anew and seen 
in its relationship to world history. First, the distortions must be admitted. The hard fact 
is that most of what we now call world history is only the history of the first and second 
rise of Europe. The Europeans are not yet willing to acknowledge that the world did not 
wait in darkness for them to bring the light, and that the history of Africa was already old 
when Europe was born. 
Until quite recently, it was rather generally assumed, even among well educated 
persons in the West, that the continent of Africa was a great expanse of land, mostly 
jungle, inhabited by savages and fierce beasts. It was not thought o f as an area where 
great civilizations could have existed or where the great kings of these civilizations 
could have ruled in might and wisdom over vast empires. It is true that there are some 
current notions about the cultural achievements of Egypt, but Egypt was perceived of as 
European land rather than a country of Africa. Even if a look at an atlas or globe 
showed Egypt to be in Africa, the popular thought immediately saw in the Sahara Desert 
a formidable barrier and convenient division of Africa into t wo parts: one (north of the 
Sahara) was inhabited by European -like people of high culture and noble history; the 
other (south of the Sahara) was inhabited by dark -skinned people who had no culture, 
and were incapable of having done anything in their dark a nd distant past that could be 
dignified by the designation of "history." Such ideas, of course, are far from the truth, but 
it is not difficult to understand why they persisted, and unfortunately still persist, in one 
form or another in the popular mind. 
To understand how these ideas came about we must examine African history and its 
relationship to world history before and after the slave trade and the colonial period. 
Then we must deal with a recurring theme in the African peoples struggle to regain a 
definition of themselves and their role in world history—Pan-African Nationalism. African 
people are both jealous and envious of other people who possess a culture container 
called, nation. They want the same thing for themselves and all African people on the  
face of the earth. African political activists are asking, and trying to answer the question: 
"How did we become so scattered and fragmented and how can we unite to save 
ourselves?" The formula that a large number of African people agree on most is Pan -
African Nationalism. This formula bridges all political lines, religious and cultural lines, 
and geographical boundaries, or should do so. 
The following definition of Pan -Africanism and its meaning is extracted from one of my 
books in preparation, Pan-Africanism: A Brief History of An Idea in the African World . 
"Pan" movements are not new in the world. These movements existed long before the 
use of the preface "Pan" was a part of a group's organizational name. Any movement by 
an ethnic group to recover and re claim their history, culture and national identity, after 
slavery, war or migration, forced or otherwise, can be called a "Pan" movement.


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
8 
 
The largest number of these movements existed in the United States, a nation of 
immigrants. In this country these move ments were mainly historical and cultural 
societies whose objectives were to preserve the history of the United States and the 
respective history of each immigrant group. 
Pan-Africanism, often thought of as a movement conceived and developed by Africans 
living outside Africa, was in fact, a world -wide movement, affecting Africans in every 
part of the world. Generally, we think of it as a twentieth century phenomenon. In fact, 
this world-wide movement used different approaches, depending on the political cli mate 
in the countries where African people lived in large numbers. In Africa itself, Pan -
Africanism was often expressed through armed resistance to slavery and colonialism. 
There is need for an operational definition that will explain Pan -Africanism's many  
manifestations in different places, under different circumstances. All over the world, 
Africans have been fighting to restore what slavery and colonialism took away from 
them. No matter what their circumstances, their objectives have been the same. Slavery 
and colonialism strained, but did not completely break, the cultural umbilical cord 
between the Africans in Africa and those who, by forced migration, now live in what is 
called the Western World. A small group of African American and Caribbean writers, 
teachers and preachers, collectively developed the basis of what would be an African -
consciousness movement over one hundred years ago. Their concern was with Africa in 
general and Egypt and Ethiopia, and what we now called the Nile Valley, in particular. 
In the years before emancipation of the slaves in the United States and in the 
Caribbean Islands, these "free" blacks had barely mastered their conqueror's language. 
However, in spite of their lack of formal training, their first writings reflected a conce rn 
for Africa as their homeland. W.E.B. DuBois , the great African American scholar, and 
elder statesman among African Americans, describes the situation in this manner: 
From the fifteenth throug h the seventeenth centuries, the Africans imported to America 
regarded themselves as temporary settlers destined to return eventually to Africa. Their 
increasing revolts against the slave system, which culminated in the eighteenth century, 
showed a feeling  of close kinship to the motherland and even well in the nineteenth 
century they called their organizations "African" as witness the "African Unions" of New 
York and Newport, and the African Churches of Philadelphia and New York. In the West 
Indies and Sou th America there was even closer indication of feelings of kinship with 
Africa and the East. 
In referring to the importance of African people in world history, he tells us that: 
Always Africa is giving us something new.. On its black bosom arose one of the  earliest, 
if not the earliest, of self -protecting civilizations, and grew so mightily that it still 
furnishes superlatives to thinking and speaking men. Out of its dark and more remote 
forest vastnesses came, if we may credit many recent scientists, the f irst welding of 
iron, and we know that agriculture and trade flourished there when Europe was a 
wilderness.


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
9 
 
He notes further that: 
Nearly every human empire that has arisen in the world, material and spiritual, has 
found some of its greatest crises on the continent of Africa. It was through Africa that 
Christianity became the religion of the world. In Africa, the last flood of Germanic 
invasions spent itself within hearing distance of the last gasp of Byzantium, and it was 
again through Africa that Islam came to play its great role of conqueror and civilizer. 
Egypt and the nations of the Nile Valley were, figuratively, the beating heart of Africa 
and the incubator for its greatness for more than a thousand years. The human traffic 
from the South renewed the creative energy of Egypt and helped it meet one of the 
greatest challenges in history. She gave birth to what later became known as Western 
Civilization, long before the greatness of Greece and Rome. 
In essence, Pan -Africanism is about the restoration of A frican people to their proper 
place in world history. The Arab slave trade in East Africa (that started before the trans -
Atlantic slave trade in West Africa) shattered the foundations of African nations and 
cultures. These catastrophes would scatter Africa n people to the four corners of the 
earth. Further, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Europeans began to colonize 
most of the world: they not only colonized the world but they colonized information 
about the world. And in order to create a rational e for the Atlantic slave trade, Africans 
were left out of the respectful commentary of history. 
The objective of Pan-Africanism is not only the restoration of land and nationhood: it has 
as one of its aims the restoration of respect. The major PanAfricanis t theoreticians —
W.E.B. DuBois, H. Sylvester Williams, C.L.R. James and George Padmore —gave the 
concept form and substance. This concept was old before they were born. The main 
roots of Pan -Africanism (both action and social thought) were nourished by the e vents 
of the fifteenth century —the second rise of Europe, the beginning of the trans -Atlantic 
slave trade and Western colonialism. During the period referred to here, Africans lost 
their nation-structure, war was declared on their culture, both by the Euro pean and the 
Arab and the African was removed from the commentary of world history. 
The three major religions of that day, Judaism, Christianity and Islam found a rationale 
for slavery that they could live with. Slavery was practiced and the Africans were 
scattered throughout the world as though they were a people outside of the grace of 
God. Because Africans lost more than any other people in human history have lost, they 
have more to restore than any other people. Although some things will never be 
restored. In the Arab slave trade, that started before the rise of Islam, and the European 
slave trade, that started in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and the colonialism that 
followed, Africa has suffered through more than five hundred years of foreign 
domination. 
These Europeans and Arabs impressed upon the African mind the fact that Africans 
could not manage nations. Most Africans in Africa and throughout the world do not know 
enough about their history to know that they managed nations, exceptionally well, for


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
10 
 
thousands of years, before the first European wore a shoe or lived in a house that had a 
window. 
Education for a new reality in the African world will have to begin with a total view of the 
role of Africans in world history and their interaction with societies, nations and cultures 
down through the ages. It is generally conceded in most scholarly circles that mankind 
originated in Africa; this makes the African man the father and the African woman the 
mother of mankind. This is where we begin our assessment of the role of Africa and its 
people in world history. 
Early men in Africa became geniuses at surviving under harsh circumstances. Present -
day archaeologists have dug up and preserved the evidence of their achievements. 
They found that they made  hooks to catch fish, spears to hunt with, stone knives to cut 
with, the bola with which to catch birds and animals, the blow -gun, the hammer and the 
stone axe. In his pamphlet, "The African Contribution," the writer John W. Weatherwax 
gives us this additi onal evidence: today's cannon, long -range missiles, ship propellers, 
automatic hammers, gas engines, and even meat cleavers and upholstery tack 
hammers have the roots of their development in the early African use of power. Africans 
gave mankind the first m achine; it was the fire stick. It is the making of tools that sets 
man apart from, and in a sense, above all living creatures. Africans started mankind 
along the tool -making path. Canoes made it possible for man to travel farther and 
farther away from his original home. They began to explore the many rivers in Africa like 
the Nile, the Congo and the Niger. It was in this way that the early peopling of Africa 
started and that organized societies began. At some time years later, Africans, driven by 
curiosity or some force of nature, began to leave Africa in large numbers. They became 
the most widely dispersed of all people. Evidence of their presence, at some time in 
history, has been found in nearly every part of the world. Africa was already old when 
what we now call Europe was born. The Ghanaian historian, Joseph B. Danquah, called 
attention to this fact in his Introduction to the book, United West Africa or Africa at the 
Bar of the Family of Nations, when he said: 
By the time Alexander the Great was sweepin g the civilized world with conquest after 
conquest from Chaeronia to Gaza, from Babylon to Cabul, by the time this first of the 
Aryan conquerors was learning the rudiments of war and government at the feet of 
philosophic Aristotle; and by the time Athens w as laying down the foundations of 
modern European civilization, the earliest and greatest Ethiopian culture had already 
flourished and dominated the civilized world for over four and a half centuries. Imperial 
Ethiopia had conquered Egypt and founded the XXVth Dynasty, and for a century and a 
half the central seat of civilization in the known world was held by the ancestors of the 
modern Negro, maintaining and defending it against the Assyrian and Persian Empires 
of the East. Thus, at the time when Ethiopia  was leading the civilized world in culture 
and conquest, East was East but West was as yet to be held. Rome was nowhere to be 
seen on the map, and sixteen centuries were to pass before Charlemagne would rule in 
Europe and Egbert becomes first king of Engl and. Even then, history was to drag on for 
another seven hundred years before Roman Catholic Europe could see fit to end the


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
11 
 
Great Schism, soon to be followed by the disturbing news of the discovery of America 
and by the fateful rebirth of the youngest of world civilizations. 
The French writer, Count C.F. Volney in his book, Ruins of Empires , made a similar 
statement after observing the evidence of what was once a great Ethiopian Empire. This 
was his observation: 
A people now forgotten discovered, while oth ers were yet barbarians, the elements of 
the arts and sciences. A race of men now rejected for their sable skin and frizzled hair 
founded, on the study of the laws of nature, those civil and religious systems which still 
govern the universe. 
The present search for the place of African people in world history and the Black Power 
Revolution that produced the Black and Beautiful concept out of which the Black 
Studies Revolution emerged, is part of a chain reaction to the absence of African people 
from the acce pted commentaries of world history. This also means that we, as an 
African people, rejected the rejection referred to in Count Volney's observations, and we 
are now demanding that other people acknowledge our contribution to world history, 
and their indebtedness to us. 
It can be said with a strong degree of certainty that Africa has had three Golden Ages. 
The first two reached their climax and were in decline before Europe as a functioning 
entity in human society was born. Africa's first Golden Age began at the beginning—with 
the birth of man and the development of organized societies. 
In his book, The Progress and Evolution of Man in Africa  Dr. L.S. B. Leaky states, "In 
every country that one visits and where one is drawn into a conversation about Africa, 
the question is regularly asked, by people who should know better: 'But what has Africa 
contributed to world progress?' The critics of Africa forget that men of science today, 
with few exceptions, are satisfied that Africa was the birthplace of man himself,  and that 
for many hundreds of centuries thereafter, Africa was in the forefront of all human 
progress." 
In the early development of man, the family was the most important unit in existence. 
Through the years the importance of this unit has not changed. Th e first human 
societies were developed for reasons relating to the needs and survival of the family. 
The early African had to make implements with which to catch fish and animals for the 
family table. He searched for new ways of building shelter, gathering  and raising food, 
and domesticating animals. Our use of fire today simply continues the process started 
by the early Africans—the control of fire. 
With the discovery of metals and how to use them, all Africa took a great leap forward. 
Man had learned how to take iron from the ground and turn it into spears and tools. Iron 
cultures spread rapidly across Africa and there were very few parts of Africa that were 
not influenced by these iron age cultures. Iron cultures had their greatest development 
in the area of Africa that is now the Eastern Sudan, in the great city -state of Meroe. The


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
12 
 
use of iron accelerated every aspect of African development and introduced a new 
danger—the eventual use of iron weapons in warfare. 
The Nile River became a great cultural high way, bringing peoples and culture out of 
inner Africa. These migrations by river led to the establishment of one of the greatest 
nations in world history, Egypt. In his book, The Destruction of African Civilization, Great 
Issues of A Race From 4500 B.C. to  2000 A.D ., the African American historian, 
Chancellor Williams, refers to Egypt as "Ethiopia's Oldest Daughter" and calls attention 
to evidence to prove the southern African origin of e arly Egyptian people and their 
civilization. 
Egypt first became an organized nation about 6000 B.C. Medical interest centers upon 
a period in the Third Dynasty (5345 –6307 B.C.) when Egypt had an ambitious pharaoh 
named Zoser, and Zoser, in turn, had for hi s chief counselor and minister a brilliant 
commoner named Imhotep whose name means "He who cometh in peace." Imhotep 
constructed the famous step pyramid of Sakkarah, near Memphis. The building 
methods used in the construction of this pyramid revolutionized  the architecture of the 
ancient world. Egypt gave the world some of the greatest personalities in the history of 
mankind. In this regard, Imhotep is singularly outstanding. In the ancient history of 
Egypt, no individual left a deeper impression than the c ommoner Imhotep. He was the 
world's first multi-genius. He was also the real father of medicine. In his book, Evolution 
Of Modern  Medicine Sir William Osler refers to Imhotep as "the first figure of a 
physician, to stand out clearly from the mists of antiquity." 
The period in Egyptian history from the Third Dynasty to the first invasion of Egypt by 
the Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings, in 1700 B.C. is, in my opinion, the apex of the first 
Golden Age. The western Asian domination over Egypt lasted about one hundred  and 
twenty years and was ended by the rise of Egyptian nationalism during the Seventeenth 
Dynasty. During this period the pharaohs at Thebes consolidated their powers and 
began a united campaign to rid lower Egypt of the Hyksos invaders. When the invaders  
from western Asia were finally driven out by the Pharaoh Ahmose I, the splendid 
Eighteenth Dynasty was established and Egypt's second Golden Age began. Egypt's 
Golden Age did not belong to Egypt alone but included other nations in Africa, mainly 
Kush and Ethiopia (which at certain periods in history were one and the same). These 
nations farther to the south were the originators of the early culture of Egypt. Egypt at 
this juncture in history was no longer dependent on her cultural parent and was once 
more the most developed nation in the world. 
Again rulers of monumental status were coming to power. Two of the best known rulers 
of this period were the female pharaoh Hatshepsut and her brother Thothmose III. Great 
temples were built throughout the country, and the consequent employment of hundreds 
of artists and craftsmen prepared the way for the artistic glories which were still to 
come. 
During the reign of Thothmose II, the influence of Egypt was once more extended to 
western Asia, now referred to as the Mi ddle East. The age of grandeur continued. This


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
13 
 
age underwent a dramatic and lasting change in 1386 B.C. Around that time, Queen Tiy 
of Egypt gave birth to a boy who was first named Amenhates after this father. Very little 
is known of his childhood except that he was sickly from birth and developed an interest 
in art, poetry, and religion. His closest companion was said to be Nefertiti, who later 
became his wife. 
Akhenaton, often referred to as the "Heretic King," is one of history's most extraordinary 
monarchs. Thirteen hundred years before Christ he preached and lived a gospel of love, 
brotherhood, and truth. He has been called the world's first idealist; the first temporal 
ruler ever to lead his people toward the worship of a single God. 
When Akhenaton cam e to the throne more than 3000 years ago, Egypt dominated the 
world. 
Egypt's Golden Age gradually waned and the pride and splendor that had marked the 
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties gave way to internal strife and confusion. Wars of 
conquest and colon ization had drained much of her military and economic strength. In 
the meantime, as the nations to the south grew more powerful, they became predatory 
toward Egypt, which had once been their master. 
The nation that is now called Ethiopia came back upon the  center stage of history 
around 960 B.C. It was then represented by a queen who in some books is referred to 
as Makeda, and in others as Belkis. She is better known to the world as the Queen of 
Sheba In his book, World's Great Men Of Color J. A. Rogers gives this description: "Out 
of the mists of three thousand years emerge this beautiful love story of a black queen, 
who, attracted by the face of a Judean monarch, made a long journey to see him..." In 
Ethiopia, A Cultural History, Sylvia Pankhurst tells the  story of this journey: "The history 
of the queen of the South, who undertook a long and arduous journey to Jerusalem, in 
order to learn of the wisdom of King Solomon, is deeply cherished in Ethiopia as part of 
the national heritage, for she is claimed as an Ethiopian Queen, Makeda, 'a woman of 
splendid beauty,' who introduced the religion and culture of Israel to her own land." 
By the tenth and the ninth centuries B.C., Egypt had been weakened by outside attacks 
and by bitter disputes between its priests a nd the royal families. This had allowed the 
Kushites to the south to gain a measure of independence. They now had the confidence 
to move northward and conquer their former masters. In spite of the war of conquest, 
these Kushite (or Ethiopian) kings brought  Egypt her last age of grandeur and social 
reform. There is a need to make a serious study of this act of internal African 
colonization and what it achieved at the end of the Golden Age for the two great nations 
of Egypt and Kush. 
These Kushite kings resto red the declining culture and economy of Egypt and took it to 
unprecedented heights of leadership in the way it cared for its people. Though a colony, 
Egypt was once more a world power.


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
14 
 
The Assyrian invasion of 671 B.C. drove the Kushite forces to the sout h and began the 
harshness and misrule that destroyed the grandeur that once was Egypt. Egypt 
continued to decline while a young nation on the other side of the Mediterranean —
Greece—began to gather its power, around 500 B.C. In the year 332 B.C., Alexander 
the Great, a student of Aristotle, invaded Egypt. This was the first purely European 
invasion of Africa. The aftermath of this invasion, and the new European interest in 
dominating the trade of the Mediterranean world, led to the Punic Wars and the invasion 
by the Romans. 
In Egypt a strong and shrewd young girl tried to deal with the plight of her country under 
the threat of Roman domination. Her name was Cleopatra. 
In the sixth and seventh centuries A.D., Roman rule began to lose its hold on North 
Africa a nd the Middle East. African genius for state building and for bringing new 
societies into being was reborn in the Western Sudan (inner West Africa), where the 
third and last African Golden Age began. 
The first of the great empires of the Western Sudan to b ecome known to the outside 
world was Ghana. It began as a small settlement during the second century of the 
Christian era. It would later develop into a state with a known history of more than a 
thousand years. In Europe and in the Arab countries, Ghana wa s known as the country 
rich in gold. This was a natural attraction for the Arabs and later the Europeans. The 
country reached the height of its greatness during the reign of Tenkamenin, one of its 
greatest kings, who came to power in 1062 A.D. The king liv ed in a palace of stone and 
wood which was built to be defended in time of war. The empire was well organized. 
The political progress and social well-being of its people could be favorably compared to 
the best kingdoms and empires that prevailed in Europe at this time. The country had a 
military force of 200,000 men. 
In one of a number of holy wars, or Jihads, Ghana was invaded by the Almaravids 
under the leadership of Abu Beku of the Sosso Empire in 1076 A.D. This conquest 
brought an end to Ghana's age of prosperity and cultural development. The character of 
the country was slow to change. Nearly one hundred years later the Arab writer El Idrisi 
wrote of it as being "the greatest kingdom of the Blacks." In a later account, El Idrisi 
said: "Ghana...is the mo st commercial of the Black countries. It is visited by rich 
merchants from all the surrounding countries and from the extremities of the West." 
In 1087 the country regained its independence, without regaining its old strength, state 
organization and grandeur. The ruins of the Empire of Ghana became the Kingdoms of 
Diara and Sosso. The provinces of Ghana became a part of the Mali Empire and were 
later absorbed into the Songhay Empire. 
The great drama of state -building, trade and commerce, and power brokerage  unfolded 
at Timbuctoo, queen city of the Western Sudan. Two hundred miles down the Niger 
from Timbuctoo the competing city of Gao stood. It was founded about the seventh 
century and was the capital of the large black empire of Songhay.


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
15 
 
The famous emperor of Mali, Mansa Musa, stopped at Timbuctoo on his pilgrimage to 
Mecca in 1324. He went in regal splendor with an entourage of 60,000 persons, 
including 12,000 servants. Five hundred bondsmen, each of whom carried a staff of 
pure gold and marched in front of  the entourage. Two hundred eighty camels bore 
2,400 pounds of gold which this African monarch distributed as alms and gifts. Musa 
returned from Mecca with an architect who designed imposing buildings in Timbuctoo 
and in other parts of his realm. To the ou tside world of the late medieval period, the 
Emperor Mansa Musa was more than an individual. He was Africa. He conquered the 
Songhay Empire and rebuilt the University of Sankore. He figured, by name, on every 
map. In his lifetime he became, in person, the symbol of the mystery and of the fabulous 
wealth of the unknown African continent. He was the most colorful of the black kings of 
the fourteenth century. He still held this position nearly two centuries after his death. 
After the death of Mansa Musa, the empire of Mali declined in importance. Its place was 
taken by Songhay, whose greatest king was Askia the Great (Mohammed Toure). Askia 
came to power in 1493, one year after Columbus discovered America. He consolidated 
the territory conquered by the previous  ruler, Sonni All, and built Songhay into the most 
powerful state in the Western Sudan. His realm, it is said, was larger than all Europe. 
The German writer Henry Barth, in his famous work, Travels and Discoveries in North 
and Central Africa , calls Askia t he Great, "One of the most brilliant and enlightened 
administrators of all times." He organized the army of Songhay, improved the system of 
banking and credit, and made the city-states of Gao, Walata, Timbuctoo, and Jenne into 
intellectual centers. Timbuctoo, during his reign, was a city of 100,000 people —"People 
filled to the top," said a chronicler of that time, "with gold and dazzling women." 
Askia encouraged scholarship and literature. Students from all over the Moslem world 
came to Timbuctoo to study g rammar, law and surgery at the University of Sankore; 
scholars came from North Africa and Europe to confer with learned historians and 
writers of this black empire. A Sudanese literature developed and many books were 
written. Leo Africanus, who wrote one o f the best known works on the Western Sudan, 
says: "In Timbuctoo there were numerous judges, doctors and clerics, all receiving good 
salaries from the king. He pays great respect to men of learning. There is a big demand 
for books in manuscript, imported f rom Barbary (North Africa). More profit is made from 
the book trade than from any other line of business." 
Askia has been hailed as one of the wisest monarchs of the Middle Ages. Alexander 
Chamberlain, in his book, The Contribution of the Negro to Human Ci vilization, says of 
him: " In personal character, in administrative ability, in devotion to the welfare of his 
subjects. in open-mindedness toward foreign influences, and in wisdom in the adoption 
of enlightened ideas and institutions from abroad, King Ask ia was certainly the equal of 
the average European monarch of the time and superior to many of them." 
After the death of Askia the Great in 1538, the Songhay Empire began to lose it strength 
and control over its vast territory. When the Songhay Empire coll apsed after the capture 
of Timbuctoo and Gao by the Moroccans in 1591, the whole of the Western Sudan was


--- PAGE 16 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
16 
 
devastated by the invading troops. The Sultan of Morocco, EI -Mansur, had sent a large 
army with European firearms across the Sahara to attack the once  powerful empire of 
Songhay. The prosperous city of Timbuctoo was plundered by the army of freebooters. 
A state of anarchy prevailed. The University of Sankore which had stood for over five 
hundred years was destroyed and the faculty exiled to Morocco. The  great Sudanese 
scholar of that day, Ahmed Baba, was among those exiled. Baba was a scholar of great 
depth and inspiration. He was the author of more than forty books on such diverse 
themes as theology, astronomy, ethnography and biography. His rich librar y of sixteen 
hundred books was lost during his expatriation from Timbuctoo. 
Timbuctoo provides the most terrible example of the struggles of the West African 
states and towns as they strove to preserve what was once their Golden Age. The 
Arabs, Berbers and  Tuaregs from the north showed them no mercy. Timbuctoo had 
previously been sacked by the Tuaregs as early a 1433, and they had occupied it for 
thirty years. Between 1591 and 1593, the Tuaregs had already taken advantage of the 
situation to plunder Timbuct oo once more. Between 1723 and 1728, the Tuaregs once 
more occupied and looted Timbuctoo. Thus Timbuctoo, once the queen city of the 
Western Sudan, with more than 200,000 inhabitants, and the center of a powerful state, 
degenerated into a shadow of its former stature. 
Now, West Africa entered a sad period of decline. During the Moorish occupation, wreck 
and ruin became the order of the day. When the Europeans arrived in this part of Africa 
and saw these conditions they assumed that nothing of order and value had existed in 
these countries. This mistaken impression, too often repeated, has influenced the 
interpretation of African and African American life and history for over four hundred 
years. 
Africa's time of tragedy and decline started both in Europe and in Africa itself. For more 
than one thousand years Africans had been bringing into being empire after empire. 
The opening of Europe's era of exploration, Africa's own internal strife, and the slav e 
trade, turned what had been Africa's Third Golden Age into a time of troubles. The 
"independence explosion" that started with Ghana in 1957 was a signal to the world that 
Africans were breaking away from the effects of slavery and colonialism, and were 
determined to reenter the mainstream of history. 
The splendor and the genius in state building that I have been referring to in this short 
paper is as much a part of African history as slavery, if not more so. In the re -education 
of African people to take t heir place in the world of the future, Africans must be clear 
about the role that they have already played in the world of the past. This is essential if 
African people are to shape their world of the future. 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 17 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
17 
 
 
Part 3 of 10 
The African Holocaust—The Slave Trade 
The African Holocaust—The Slave Trade 
There is a need to look holistically at African history, good 
and bad. If African people are to be educated to face a 
new reality on the eve of  the twenty first century, we must 
know about the good times as well as the bad times. We 
must also know that history has not made Africa and 
Africans an exceptional case. In the great unfolding of 
history, Africans have played every role from saint to 
buffoon and we need to learn how to live with the good as 
well as the bad. We need to understand the triumphs as 
well as the tragedies in our history. At the end of what I 
have been alluding to as the last of the three golden ages 
in Africa, we entered a peri od of internal and external 
tragedy, partly of our making, but mainly imposed on us 
by foreigners in search of new land, new energy and new resources. We made the 
terrible mistake of thinking some foreigners could settle our internal "family" disputes. 
Instead of settling our family disputes, the foreigner turned us, one against the other, 
and conquered both. This is the great mistake we made in the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries at the end of Africa's third golden age. It is the greatest mistake we are 
making right now. This mistake grows out of our misinterpretation of our greatest 
strength which is our universal humanity. 
As a people we have always been hospitable to strangers. The weakness in this noble 
gesture is that we have not been alert enough an d suspicious enough to examine the 
intentions of the stranger that we have invited into our homes. All too often in our history 
strangers come in as guests and stay as conquerors. This is, at least in part, how and 
why the slave trade started. You cannot e xplain the slave trade and vindicate or 
rationalize the European participation in the slave trade by saying some Africans were 
in the slave trade and sold slaves to the Europeans. In some instances and in some 
regions, this was basically true. You cannot e xcuse the European slave trade by saying 
that slavery was practiced among the Africans before the Europeans came. In some 
instances and in some regions, this is also basically true. But the system of internal 
servitude in Africa that existed in some parts of Africa before the coming of he 
Europeans and the chattel slavery imposed upon Africa by the Europeans had no direct 
relationship, one to the other. In the African system of servitude which deserves critical 
analysis, families were broken up but not a si ngle African was shipped out of Africa. In 
no way am I trying to say or imply that this system was good. My main point is that it 
was not the same as the European system. The European slave trade was a three 
continent industry that brought about a revoluti on in maritime science, international


--- PAGE 18 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
18 
 
trade and a system of mercantilism that had not previously existed in world history. No 
Africans had this kind of international contact or were in a position to establish it at this 
juncture in history. 
For more enligh tenment on this subject, I invite you to read the following books, Black 
Mother, The Years of Our African Slave Trade: Precolonial History, 1450–1850, by Basil 
Davidson, Forced Migration , by Joseph E. Inikore, Christopher Columbus and The 
African Holocaust, by John Henrik Clarke and How Europe Underdeveloped Africa , by 
Walter Rodney. 
Like most world tragedies the Atlantic slave trade, or the European slave trade, started 
slowly, almost accidentally. At first the Europeans did not visit the coast of West Afr ica 
looking for slaves; they were searching for a route to Asia for the spices and the sweets 
they had heard about because they needed something to supplement the dull European 
food of that day. In general they needed new energy, new land and new resources . 
Plagues, famines and internal wars had left Europe partly exhausted and partly under -
populated. In the years between the first European entry into West Africa from about 
1438 to the year of Christopher Columbus' alleged discovery of America in 1492, ther e 
were no slaves of consequence taken out of Africa because there was no special work 
outside of Africa for slaves to do. The creation of the plantation system in the Americas 
and the Caribbean Islands set in motion a way of life for Europeans that they ha d not 
previously enjoyed. This way of life and the exploitation of the resources of the 
Americas and the Caribbean Islands, after the destruction of the nations and 
civilizations of the people referred to as "Indians," renewed the economic energy of 
Europe and gave Europeans the ability to move to the center stage of what they refer to 
as world progress. This was done mainly at the expense of African people who are still 
not thoroughly aware of their impact on every aspect of world history. Education for a 
new reality in the African world, must train African people to understand the nature of 
their contribution to the different aspects of world history, past and present, and the 
possibilities of their future contribution. 
If slavery was the African people's holocaust, we should not be ashamed of saying so. 
We should have no hesitation in using the word "holocaust" because no one people has 
a monopoly on the word and I know of no law that gives a people the right to copyright a 
word as though it is their exclu sive ownership. In relationship to this subject I have 
previously said that slavery was already an old institution before the European slave 
trade. However, the European slave trade in Africa is the best known and best recorded 
in the history of the world and also, in my opinion, the most tragic. The neglected 
tragedy of this system is that it did not have to occur at all. Had the European entered 
into a genuine partnership with the Africans instead of reducing them to slaves there 
would have been more good s and services to be had, both for the Europeans and the 
Africans, through contract labor. 
The European slave trade in Africa was started and reached its crescendo between 
1400 to 1600. This was also a turning point in the history of the world. Europe was 
emerging from the lethargy of the Middle Ages. Europeans were regaining their


--- PAGE 19 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
19 
 
confidence, manifesting a new form of nationalism and extending that nationalism into 
racism. The African had goods and services that the European needed, and the 
European had the basic technology that the African needed. Had the African needs and 
the European needs been considered on an equal basis, there could have been an 
honest exchange between African and European and the European could still have had 
labor in large numbers w ithout the slave trade and the massive murder that occurred in 
the slave trade. This idea, only a dream in the minds of a few men, could have changed 
the world for the better had it been seriously considered. 
Slavery is taught as though it is something tha t victimized only African people. Slavery 
is an old institution. It is as old as human need and greed. It grew out of a weakness in 
the human character and the need to cover -up that weakness by dominating other 
people. In teaching about slavery, the one thing African people seem not to know is that 
for most of their existence on this earth they have been a sovereign people, free of 
slavery. The period of their enslavement is the best known and the best documented in 
history in comparison to other slave peri ods in history. When other people were the 
victims it was comparatively short. Feudalism in Europe, a form of European 
enslavement of Europeans, no matter what you call it, lasted much longer. This is why a 
holistic view of history is needed in order to understand this particular part of history that 
relates to a single people. This is where so -called Black Studies Programs missed both 
the objective and the subject in the study of slavery. 
In evaluating the African slave trade, there was another "Middle Pas sage" often 
neglected by most scholars —the Arab slave trade. It is often forgotten that the Arab 
slave trade in East Africa and the slave trade from North Africa into Inner West Africa 
was protracted and ruthless. Sometimes the Arabs from the north who wer e Moslem 
enslaved Africans in the south who were also Moslems, thereby violating one of the 
most basic customs of their faith —that no Moslem should enslave another Moslem. 
There is a small library of books on this subject that most scholars have chosen not  to 
read, thereby making the Arab slave trade the best kept secret in history —although it is 
not a secret at all. Of the many books and documents that I have read on the subject, 
Slavery in the Arab World  by Murray Gordon, 1987, and The African Slave Trade  From 
the 15th to the 19th Century, in The General History of Africa: Studies and Documents 2, 
UNESCO,1979. I find the most informative the UNESCO book, especially the chapter, 
"The Slave Trade in the Indian Ocean." 
Like most strangers to Africa the Arabs entered Africa, allegedly, as friends. The 
Africans who are curious and uncritical about new people, new religions and cultures 
treated the Arabs as well as they treated other strangers. The Arabs were not always 
kind in their spread of Islam in Africa. In  fact, they were usually ruthless and often 
disrespectful of societies and cultures that existed in Africa before they arrived. In North 
Africa the two wars of Arab conquest that came in the seventh and tenth centuries, the 
first being religious and milita ry, broke the back of Roman influence in the area and 
replaced the corrupt Roman regimes. At first the Arabs were welcomed in North Africa 
as a replacement for the ruthless Romans. When the North Africans and Berbers


--- PAGE 20 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
20 
 
discovered that the Arabs were also rut hless, although in a different way, it was too late 
because the Arabs now had the military upper hand. 
Another aspect of Arab conquest, generally neglected, is the spread of Arab influence in 
East Africa through accommodation and sexual conquest. Many time s the Arabs moved 
down the coast of East Africa rendering the service of the much needed East African 
coastal trade. Soon after this, Arabs began to marry or cohabit with African women. This 
in turn resulted in a generation of African -looking Arabs. These Arab half -breeds 
facilitated the spread of the trade inland at a time when the Arab face was held in 
suspicion in this part of Africa. In the fierce competition in the West African slave trade, 
the Portuguese were driven from West Africa around to East Afr ica. The Arab slave 
trade, moving from north to east met the Portuguese slave trade moving up from the 
south. These two slave trades complemented each other and culminated with the 
establishment of one of the largest slave trading forts, in the history of the world, on the 
Island of Zanzibar. This event is well documented in any good history of East Africa, 
including the Cambridge History of East Africa, and The Cambridge History of Africa. 
Basil Davidson's A History of East and Central Africa to the late 1 9th Century, and 
certain chapters on East Africa in his Lost Cities of Africa  is a popularization of the 
subject. There are two old but valuable books on the subject, East Africa and Its 
Invaders by Reginald Coupland, and the chapters on East Africa in the  book, The 
Colonization of Africa by Alien Races, by Sir Harry Johnston. 
While the East African drama of slavery was unfolding with the Arabs and later with the 
Portuguese as the protagonists, the larger drama in West Africa was changing the 
course of history. The Africans, all along the coast of West Africa were being subjected 
to a form of humiliation never before known, in quite the same way, in their history or 
human history. The collecting of Africans, sometimes prisoners of war from other 
Africans, the movement of Africans from the hinterlands to the coast, where very often 
seven out of ten lost their lives, were forms of unrecorded genocide. This is one of the 
numerous missing statistics in the attempt to estimate the number of Africans who died 
in th e slave trade within Africa, the number of those who died in the slave dungeons 
waiting for shipment to the Americas, and the number of those who died on the journey 
to the Americas. The precise figures will never be known. Good estimations in this case 
are the best that we have. 
There are a number of books describing the tragic living conditions in the slave forts and 
dungeons along the coast of West Africa. Books written by Europeans tend to tone 
down the tragedy. Books written by African scholars tend to  be academic and objective 
to the point of being noncommittal to the tragedy of slavery. The following is a brief 
description of some of the conditions in these slave dungeons. In the early slave trade 
the forts sometimes contained between three hundred to  five hundred captives. During 
the eighteenth century most forts had been adapted to the larger scale slave trade and 
they held many hundreds more. There were sections for the female captives and 
sections for the male captives. There were smaller and more tortuous dungeons for the 
rebellious and unruly captives. The conditions within and around these slave holding 
castles were great tragic horror stories. Within the castles there were no beds, no


--- PAGE 21 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
21 
 
drinking water, no installed toilet facilities, and no means of day by day sanitary 
maintenance. The apartments of the slave traders and captains were directly above the 
main holding dungeons. And they lived there in luxury and were unmindful of the misery 
and degradation one or two floors below. 
These conditions were forced upon a people who had never done European people any 
harm or had ever allied themselves with the enemies of the Europeans in any way. The 
Europeans who forced this condition upon African people professed to believe in a 
loving God who was no resp ecter of kith, kin and geographical boundaries in the 
dispensing of his mercy and understanding to all human beings. In their action toward 
the Africans that would last for more than three hundred years, the Europeans were 
saying that Africans had no soul or humanity, no culture or civilization worthy of respect, 
and that they were outside of the grace of God. 
The long journey across the sea was another tragic story of misery. Figuratively, the 
slave ship was a floating city of prisoners presided over by a crew of ruffians gathered 
from the human scum of Europe. The period of the European slave trade in Africa is 
best known to us because it is the best -documented. However, the documentation is 
often confusing because it was created by people who were trying to justify the slave 
trade. Most people, especially Europeans who created most of the documents on the 
slave trade, write about the subject with the intent to make the victim of slavery feel 
guilty and to vindicate the perpetrators of this inhuman trade. 
There is probably more dishonesty related to the interpretation of this subject than any 
other subject known to mankind. The African slave trade, like African history, is often 
written about, but rarely if ever understood. This misunderstanding probably gro ws out 
of the fact that we nearly always start the study of the African slave trade in the wrong 
place. The germ, the motive, the rationale for the European aspect of the African slave 
trade started in the minds of the Europeans in the fifteenth and the si xteenth centuries. 
And this slave trade could not have started at all had there been no market for it. The 
slave trade started when the Europeans began to expand into the broader world. And 
the market for slaves was created by Europeans for European reason s. The story of the 
European slave trade in Africa is essentially the story of the consequences of the 
second rise of Europe. 
The peopling of the so -called new world by African people in the Americas and the 
Caribbean Islands was an enterprise of monumental proportions. This act would change 
the status of Europe and the world forever, and the Africans brought to the new world 
would be transformed into a new kind of people, neither wholly African nor wholly 
American. They would not easily adapt to their new condition though they gave their 
slave master, in some cases, the impression that they were doing so. They did not 
easily give up their African way of life, in spite of the attempt to destroy and outlaw it. 
This was the basis of massive slave revolts throu ghout the Caribbean Islands, South 
America, especially Brazil, and the more than two hundred and fifty slave revolts 
recorded in the United States.


--- PAGE 22 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
22 
 
Every attempt was made through the church and through oppression to deny that 
Africans hid a revolutionary h eritage. There is documentary proof that Africans fought 
on the shores of Africa to keep from getting on the slave ships. After being forced on the 
slave ships they continued the fight. Some fought to keep from being taken off the slave 
ships. Many, many m ore continued the fight once they got here. In parts of South 
America, and on some islands in the Caribbean where the slaves outnumbered the 
Europeans, some Africans bypassed the auction block, fled into the hills and the forests 
and never became slaves at  all. Some of these Africans who escaped slavery were 
called Maroons. The best books on the subject are, The Maroons, by Mavis Campbell, 
Maroon Societies, by Richard Price, and The Haitian Maroons , and Black Jacobins by 
C.L.R. James. 
The drama of African s urvival in what is called the new world went beyond drama itself. 
In conditions that defied human imagination, for a protracted period lasting over three 
hundred years, Africans, using various techniques, pretenses, and acts of both 
submission and rebellion, went beyond survival and prevailed in order to live and still be 
a people in spite of the massive effort to destroy every aspect of their humanity. Part of 
what kept them alive, away from home, is that they would not give up their African 
culture in spi te of being consistently pressured to do so. Many Africans, away from 
home, depending on the prevailing conditions that could change any day or any 
moment, had to become two persons in a single body. Some went beyond 
schizophrenia and changed their persona lity to suit the prevailing situation in order to 
survive so that the next generation could prevail. 
 
Part 4 of 10 
 
African Historiography 
African Historiography 
 
Joel A. Rogers, a J amaican scholar, whose work in 
the field of African world biography is still not 
appreciated as well as it should be by blacks, is 
comparatively unknown by whites. The following 
quote is from my Introduction to the re -publication of 
his book, World's Great Men of Color Vols. I & II: 
"J. A. Rogers devoted at least fifty years of his life to 
researching great black personalities and the roles 
they played in the development of nations, 
civilizations, and cultures. This book is his greatest 
achievement. In his lifetime his books did not reach a 
large popular reading audience. All of them were 
privately printed and circulated mainly in the black communities; he died, unfortunately, 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 23 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
23 
 
on the eve of the "Black Studies Revolution." Mr. Rogers had already delivered wha t 
some of the radical black students were demanding. He had looked at the history of 
people of African origin, and had showed how their history is an inseparable part of the 
history of mankind.  
J. A. Rogers started his research at a time when a large numb er of black people had 
some doubts about their contribution to human history. In books like, Blacks in Antiquity 
by Frank M. Snowden, Jr. (1970), The African Genius  by Basil Davidson (1969), The 
Prehistory of Africa  by Desmond Clarke (1970), Topics in West  African History, by A. 
Adu Boahen (l967), Introduction to African Civilizations, by John G. Jackson (1970), and 
Great Civilizations of Ancient Africa , by Lester Brooks (1971) these doubts  are put to 
rest. 
Europeans have long been in contact with Africa, that is, Northern Africa. The names of 
Aesop and Memnon, of Terence and Cleopatra are the names of Africans who have 
figured in legend and the literature, the arts and history of Greece and Rome. Indeed, 
the land of Africa was a land of wonder for the ancient Greeks and Romans, and this, to 
such an extent, that among them it was a proverb that out of Africa there is always 
something new. The concept of "darkest Africa" refers to the comparative ignorance of 
Europeans regarding that continent and its people over the last four centuries. An 
English writer, Jonathan Swift, made a sharp but witty comment on his fellow 
Europeans' lack of knowledge of Africa when he wrote: 
Geographers in Africa maps 
With savage pictures fill their gaps, 
And o'er uninhabitable downs 
Paint elephants instead of towns.  
There is another reason why the people of Africa, with the notable exclusion of Egyp t, 
were depicted as uncivilized and lacking in cultural attainments. A number of pious 
people in Europe would have been struck with horror if they knew of the cruel and 
bloody acts of their countrymen in the course of the inhuman slave trade. Ruthless 
European adventurers promoted the hunting down of men, women and children like 
beasts, and the destruction of complete villages in order to capture the inhabitants and 
sell them like cattle. Therefore, slave traders would invent fantastic tales of savagery 
about the Africans so that their capture and transportation to labor on the plantations of 
the Americas would appear to be acts of Christian concern and high -minded 
enlightenment. 
In the books of J.A. Rogers an attempt was made "to locate Africa's proper plac e on the 
maps of human geography. That is what his life and research was about." Rogers came 
from a large family of African researchers, away from home, searching for the proper 
place of African people in world history. Almost two hundred years before Ivan  Van 
Sertima, wrote his book of inquiry. They Came Before Columbus, black scholars, mostly 
informally trained, suspected that African people were part of the new world before the 
arrival of Columbus and they were searching out documents and evidence to prove their


--- PAGE 24 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
24 
 
point. Some of these black scholars were drawing upon evidence from artifacts noted in 
their travels, some from research and some from Leo Weiner's three volume work, 
Africa and the Discovery of America . Because the greatest assault on African his tory 
and African personalities was made in the United States, many scholars born in the 
Caribbean did their best research and wrote their books while residing in the United 
States. They were joining African American scholars, writers, and teachers in an 
attempt to answer the question: Why Africana or African world history in the first place? 
The following is my own explanation. 
Africa and its people are the most written about and the least understood of all of the 
world's people. This condition started in t he fifteenth and sixteenth centuries with the 
beginning of the slave trade and the system of colonialism. The Europeans not only 
colonized most of the world, they began to colonize information about the world and its 
people. In order to do this, they had to forget or pretend to forget, all they had previously 
known about the Africans. Europeans were not meeting Africans for the first time; there 
had been another meeting during Greek and Roman times. 
The African, Clitus Niger, King of Bactria, was also a Cavalry Commander for Alexander 
the Great. Most of the Greeks' thinking was influenced by this contact with the Africans. 
The people and the cultures of what is known as Africa are older than the word "Africa." 
According to most records, old and new, Africans  are the oldest people on the face of 
the earth. The people now called Africans not only influenced the Greeks and the 
Romans, they influenced the early world before there was a place called "Europe." 
When the early Europeans first met Africans, at the cro ssroads of history, it was a 
respectful meeting and the Africans were not slaves. Their nations were old before 
Europe was born. In this period of history, what was to he later known as "Africa" was 
unknown to the people who would someday be called, "Europ eans." Only the people of 
some of the Mediterranean Islands and a few states of what would become the Greek 
and Roman states knew of parts of North Africa that was a land of mystery. After the 
rise and decline of Greek civilization and the Roman destructio n of the City of Carthage, 
they made the conquered territories into a province which they called Africa, a word 
derived from "Africa" and the name of a group of people about whom very little is 
known. At first the word applied only to the Roman colonies of North Africa. There was a 
time when all dark -skinned people were called Ethiopians, for the Greeks referred to 
Africa as, "The Land of The Burnt-Face People."  
  
Africa, in general, is a manmade mystery, and Egypt, in particular, is an even bigger 
one. There has long been an attempt on the part of some European "scholars" to deny 
that Egypt was a part of Africa. To do this they had to ignore the great masterpieces of 
Egyptian history written by European writers such as, Ancient Egypt, Light of the World , 
Vols. 1&2. and a whole school of European thought that placed Egypt in proper focus in 
relationship to the rest of Africa.


--- PAGE 25 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
25 
 
The distorters of African history also had to ignore the fact that the people of the ancient 
land which would later be called Egypt, n ever called their country by that name. They 
called it, TA-MERRY or KAMPT and sometimes KEMET or SAIS. The ancient Hebrews 
called it MIZRAIN. Later the Moslem Arabs used the same term but later discarded it. 
Both the Greeks and the Romans referred to the c ountry as the "Pearl of the Nile." The 
Greeks gave it the simple name AEGYPTUS. Thus, the word we know as Egypt is of 
Greek origin. 
Until recent times most Western scholars have been reluctant to call attention to the fact 
that the Nile River is 4,000 mile s long. It starts in the south, in the heart of Africa, and 
flows to the north. It was the world's first cultural highway. Making Egypt a composite of 
many African cultures. In his article, "The Lost Pharaohs of Nubia," Professor Bruce 
Williams infers that the nations in the South could be older than Egypt. This information 
is not new. But when rebel European scholars were saying this one hundred years ago, 
and proving it, they were not taken seriously. 
It is unfortunate that so much of the history of Afric a has been written by conquerors, 
foreigners, missionaries and adventurers. The Egyptians left the best record of their 
history written by local writers. It was not until near the end of the eighteenth century 
when a few European scholars learned to deciph er their writing that this was 
understood. 
The Greek traveler, Herodotus, was in Africa about 450 B.C. His eyewitness account is 
still a revelation. He witnessed African civilization in decline and partly in ruins, after 
many invasions. However, he could s till see indications of the greatness that it had 
been. In this period in history, the Nile Valley civilization of Africa had already brought 
forth two "Golden Ages" of achievement and had left its mark for all the world to see. 
In approaching this subject , I have given preference to writers of African descent who 
are generally neglected. I maintain that the African is the final authority on Africa. In this 
regard I have reconsidered the writings of W.E.B. DuBois , George Washington 
Williams, Drusilla Dungee Houston, Carter G. Woodson, Willis N. Huggins, and his most 
outstanding student, John G. Jackson. I have also reread the manuscri pts of some of 
the unpublished books of Charles C. Seifert, especially manuscripts of his last 
completed book, Who Are The Ethiopians? Among the Caribbean scholars, like Charles 
C. Seifert, Joel A. Rogers is the best known and the most prolific. Over fifty  years of his 
life was devoted to documenting the role of African personalities in world history. His 
two volume work, World's Great Men of Color is a pioneer work in the field. 
  
Among the present -day scholars writing about African history, culture and po litics, Dr. 
Yosef ben -Jochannan's books are the most challenging. I have drawn heavily on his 
research in the preparation of this article. He belongs to the main cultural branch of the 
African world, having been born in Ethiopia, growing to early manhood in the Caribbean 
Islands and having lived in the African American community of the United States for


--- PAGE 26 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
26 
 
over thirty years. His major books on African history are Black Man of the Nile and His 
Family, Africa: Mother of Western Civilization , and The African Origins of Major 
"Western Religions."  They tell the African story, and in the distance it is a part of the 
African American story. It is difficult for depressed African Americans to know that the y 
are a part of the larger story of the history of the world. The history of the modern world 
was made, in the main, by what was taken from African people. Europeans emerged 
from what they call their "Middle Ages," people poor, land poor, resource poor, an d to a 
great extent culture poor. They raided and raped the cultures of the world, mostly Africa, 
and filled their homes and museums with treasures, then they called the people who 
created these items, primitive. The Europeans did not understand the cultur es of non -
Western people then; they do not understand them now. 
History, I have often said, is a clock that people use to tell their political time of day. It is 
also a compass that people use to find themselves on the map of human geography. 
History tells a people where they have been and what they have been. It also tells a 
people where they are and what they are. Most importantly, history tells a people where 
they still must go and what they still must be. In his book, Tom-Tom the writer, John W. 
Vandercook, makes this meaningful statement: 
A race is like a man 
Until it uses its own talents, 
takes pride in its own history, 
and loves its own memories, 
it can never fulfill itself completely.  
This, in essence, is what African history and what African Americ an history is all about. 
The phrase African American or African American History Month, taken at face value 
and without serious thought, appears to be incongruous. Why is there a need for an 
African American History Month when there is no similar month for  the other minority 
groups in the United States. The history of the United States, in total, consists of the 
collective histories of minority groups. What we call "American civilization" is no more 
than the sum of their contributions. The African Americans  are the least integrated and 
the most neglected of these groups in the historical interpretation of the American 
experience. This neglect has made African American History Month a necessity. 
Most of the large ethnic groups in the United States have had, a nd still have, their 
historical associations. Some of these associations predate the founding of the 
Association For The Study of Negro Life and History in 1915. Dr. Charles H. Wesley 
tells us that, "Historical societies were organized in the United States  with the special 
purpose in view of preserving and maintaining the heritage of the American nation." 
Within the framework of these historical societies many ethnic groups, black as well as 
white, engaged in those endeavors that would keep alive their beliefs in themselves and 
their past as a part of their hopes for the future. For African Americans, Carter G. 
Woodson led the way and used what was then called, "Negro History Week," to call 
attention to his people's contribution to every aspect of world history. Dr. Woodson, then 
Director of the Association For the Study of Negro Life and History, conceived this 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 27 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
27 
 
special week at a time when public attention should be focused on the achievements of 
America's citizens of African descent. 
 
Part 5 of 10 
The African World Revolution 
  The African World Revolution 
The 1950's marked a new era in African world 
relationships. The search for change was part of the 
African American agitation for equal  pay for black 
teachers that was converted into a fight for equal 
education, which in turn became a part of the fight for 
equal citizenship rights on every level and laid the 
foundation for the civil rights movement. When 
segregated schools were outlawed b y the Supreme 
Court in 1954, the fight against segregation on buses 
and separate eating facilities had already started. The 
Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955 and the murder of a 
black teenager, Emmett Till, later that same year, 
galvanized and consolidated th e various civil rights 
efforts and made them into a movement of consequence. In the next decade, this 
movement would receive national and international attention. The fact that this 
movement rose concurrent with the Caribbean Federation Movement and the Af rican 
Independence Movement made it a part of an international movement by African people 
for a place and voice in the political arena of the world. The Africans in Africa were 
agitating for independence and demanding the fulfillment of promises made to th em 
after World War II. Many Africans who, prior to this war, would have been put to death 
for lifting their hands against a white person, now were looking at the world from a 
different vantage point. Some were returning soldiers who had been trained to fig ht 
white Europeans, other than their colonial masters. Some returned home with the idea 
of using their skills to fight against colonial oppression itself. Many missionary -trained 
Africans began to see the God that the missionaries had trained them to worsh ip as no 
respecter of color. They began to question their status at home and abroad. 
In the education of African people for a new reality, as the people of the African world 
face the twenty -first century, a history of the rise and fall of these movements i s 
essential. African people throughout the world must be bold enough to ask the 
questions: What went right with this movement? and, What went wrong? In the final 
analysis: Who betrayed this movement, and Why? This was a part of an African World 
Revolution for dynamic social change.


--- PAGE 28 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
28 
 
Agitation against colonial rule in Ghana led to the establishment of facsimile political 
associations that would later be developed into political parties. The main political party 
in Ghana, the Convention Peoples Party (CPP), un der the leadership of Kwame 
Nkrumah guided Ghana into independence in 1957. This spectacular action set Africa's 
political revolution in motion. After 1957 nations in Africa were coming into b eing almost 
weekly. By 1958 a conference of nine independent. states in Africa was called by 
Kwame Nkrumah. Some of the ideas that came out of the Pan -African Conference in 
Manchester, England, in 1945, were becoming realities. A small West African nation,  
Ghana, under the political leadership of Kwame Nkrumah, began to take all Africa for a 
political walk in the sun. The African Revolution was born and growing fast. 
Independence fever swept over Africa and reinforced the aspirations of the Africans 
living abroad. The new leaders of Africa were men of vision who had challenged the 
right of foreigners to rule their respective countries. By the mid -1960's coups and 
counter coups and paid agents of the former colonial powers had frustrated most of the 
countries in Africa and stymied their promise. In the closing years of the 1980's a 
generation of Africans, some missionary -trained, some educated abroad, had returned 
home, more Western than African. To put it crudely, most of these returning Africans 
were Europeans in black-faces who only superficially had Africa's interest at heart. 
What is needed now is a clear agenda of what we must do in the future to save Africa 
for African people. The Africa of tomorrow will belong to those Africans who are 
prepared to sacrifice the time and energy to properly handle Africa and all its resources, 
and to protect Africa internally and externally. The guiding principle for African people, 
here and abroad, has to be a form of Pan -African Nationalism. Because we have been 
the vict ims of imperialism we should never contradict ourselves by becoming 
imperialistic in our relationship with other people. The following comment on Pan -
Africanism is extracted from my book, Who Betrayed the African World Revolution? and 
Other Speeches.  
Pan-Africanism and African Nationalism are too often misinterpreted as forms of Black 
Separatism, a move to organize blacks against whites. I think Pan -Africanism might be 
understood if we also understood that for the last five hundred years the world has been  
ruled in the main by white nationalism. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when 
Europe pulled out of the lethargy of the Middle Ages and began to expand into the 
broader world, no nation in Europe was against this move. If there was an argument 
among Europeans at all, it was an argument over the spoils of conquest. Europeans' 
conquest and dominance over the land and commerce of most of the world was 
achieved by a form of Pan -Europeanism. Pan-Africanism was created as a means of 
relieving Africans of  the burden of European dominance in order to create, at least 
symbolically, the concept of "One God, One Aim, One Destiny," as advocated by 
Marcus Garvey.


--- PAGE 29 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
29 
 
 
Part 6 of 10 
The Rationale for Pan-Africanism 
A Single Focus With Many Dimensions 
Early in this century, Caribbean intellectuals began to 
produce the concept called Pan -Africanism. This was a 
new international educ ation whose full dimension few of 
us understood. The idea of bringing the totality of the 
African world together as one people, looking at the very 
essence and existence of African people. The first Pan -
African Congress was called in London by H. Sylvester  
Williams in 1900. W.E.B. DuBois , who would later be 
referred to as "the Father of Pan -Africanism," was really 
the intellectual guardian of Pan -Africanism and its finest 
scholar. In my opinion, the first Pan -African Congress, 
1900, and the fifth Pan -African Congress in Manchester, 
England, 1945, were the most significant. The basic ideas 
that went into the African independence explosion came out of the fifth Pan -African 
Congress convened by Georg e Padmore, Kwame Nkrumah, and other Africans, some 
of whom would become future heads of state. 
Again, in my opinion, what could have been the most important Pan -African Congress 
and the first to meet on African soil was the Sixth Pan -African Congress. It was the 
largest and most diverse of these meetings. It was unwieldy and very little was 
accomplished. Too many Africans from different parts of the world and from within 
Africa itself came with  different agendas. Not much was achieved except some good 
and bad conversations and an unfortunate fight over ideologies. There should have 
been a preparatory meeting in order to clarify the terms of the Sixth Pan -African 
Congress. The sixth Pan -African Congress that met in Tanzania, in my opinion, was a 
great opportunity misunderstood and killed by selfish, petty, amateur political hacks who 
had no clear idea of what the concept of African unity could be. 
All "Pan" efforts among African people must ultima tely lead to a concept of a world 
union of African people, in spite of geography, religion, and culture. African people live 
in many lands, under many regimes and practice many religions and represent many 
cultures. Wherever they are on the face of this ea rth they must think of themselves as 
first and foremost an African people, no less patriotic to the nations where they live 
outside of Africa. 
The acceptance of the African American history and the African American historian as a 
legitimate part of the aca demic community did not come easily. Slavery ended and left


--- PAGE 30 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
30 
 
its false images of black people intact. In his article, "What the Historian Owes the 
Negro," the noted African American historian, Dr. Benjamin Quarles, says: 
The Founding Fathers, revered by his torians for over a century and a half, did not 
conceive of the Negro as part of the body politic. Theoretically, these men found it hard 
to imagine a society where Negroes were of equal status to whites. Thomas Jefferson, 
third President of the United Stat es, who was far more liberal than the run of his 
contemporaries, was never the less certain that "the two races, equally free, cannot live 
in the same government."  
The role and importance of ethnic history is in how well it teaches a people to use their 
own talents, take pride in their own history and love their own memories. In order to 
fulfill themselves completely, in all of the honorable endeavors it is important that the 
teacher of history of the black race find a definition of the subject, and a fram e of 
reference that can be understood by students who have no prior knowledge of the 
subject. 
The following definition is paraphrased from a speech entitled, "The Negro Writer and 
His Relation To His Roots," by Saunders Redding, in 1960: 
Heritage, in essen ce, is how a people have used their talent to create a history that 
gives them memories that they can respect, and use to command the respect of other 
people. The ultimate purpose of history and history teaching is to use a people's talent 
to develop an aw areness and a pride in themselves so that they can create better 
instruments for living together with other people. This sense of identity is the stimulation 
for all of a people's honest and creative efforts. A people's relationship to their heritage 
is the same as the relationship of a child to its mother.  
I repeat: 
History is a clock that people use to tell their time of day. It is a compass that they use 
to find themselves on the map of human geography. It also tells them where they are, 
and what they a re. Most importantly, an understanding of history tells a people where 
they still must go, and what they still must be.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 31 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
31 
 
 
 
Part 7 of 10 
Washington, DuBois, and Woodson 
Washington, DuBois, and Woodson 
Africans are closely connected to the history of both 
North and South America. The African American's role 
in the social, economic and political development of 
the American states is an important foundation upon 
which to build racial understanding, especially in areas 
in which false generalizations and stereotypes have 
been developed to separate peoples rather than to 
unite them. Early white American historians did not 
accord African people anywhere a respectful place in 
their commenta ries on the history of man. In the 
closing years of the nineteenth century, African 
American historians began to look at their people's 
history from their vantage point and their point of view. 
Dr. Benjamin Quarles observed that "as early as 1883 
this desi re to bring to public attention the untapped 
material on the Negro prompted George Washington Williams to publish his two volume 
History of The Negro Race in America from 1619 to 1880." 
Booker T. Washington's Atlanta Cotton Exposition Address, in 1895, set  in motion a 
great debate among black people about their direction and their place in the developing 
American social order. Some, principally Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, questioned 
whether black people had any future in America. The black woman, who was ve ry much 
a part of this movement, answered this question in the affirmative by pouring massive 
energy into building new institutions, primarily schools. This nineteenth century and 
early twentieth century reaction to oppression by the black American intelle ctual 
community was part of the search for a definition of the status of the African in the world 
community. 
Although Booker T. Washington's speech set off debates among people of that time, it 
was misunderstood then and it is misunderstood now. The reason  it was misunderstood 
was that this speech was a speech of strategy, and was one of the most unique con -
games ever played. In this speech he maneuvered to appeal to all sides. He spoke to 
the white South, the black South, the North and he got what he wante d and what he 
needed. No one really noticed what he did. One reporter from Boston who did notice 
reported that as blacks came down from the balcony —some of them were crying and 
some of them waved their hands toward where Booker T. Washington was standing. 
They shook their heads and said," Oh, no, Booker, no, Booker." Some of them began


--- PAGE 32 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
32 
 
their retreat out of the South. They began the migration because they couldn't believe 
some of the things he had said. Yet, he had set a pace and had taken blacks out of the 
nineteenth and into the twentieth century. We did not quite understand what he had 
done. The South misinterpreted the speech. They thought that he meant that he 
endorsed segregation and in the five year span from 1895 to 1900, a rash of Jim Crow 
laws came into being. That was not his intent nor what he meant. 
During the twenty year span between his speech, in 1895, and his mysterious death in 
1915, Booker T. Washington stood astride the life of black America in such a way that 
the social history of that period can be written around the life of this single man. He was, 
to say the least, a schizophrenic and probably much more than that. A black person in 
America cannot afford the luxury of just being schizophrenic. We could not get through 
a twenty four hour d ay with just two personalities. We need at least a dozen 
personalities so that we can hide from the people of our own race to whom we dare not 
tell the truth. And we move through life with our little bag of masks, and we put on 
different masks as we meet d ifferent people because telling the truth to these people 
would get us killed. 
The first formally trained African American historian was W.E.B. DuBois, whose doctoral 
dissertation, published in 1895, "The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the 
United States, 1638 -1870," became the first title to be published in the Harvard 
Historical Studies. A few Black scholars believed that the African American had no 
African heritage to reclaim. W.E.B.  DuBois and his followers stood in opposition to this 
view. At the start of the twentieth century African Americans were confronted with two 
schools of thought: the school of Booker T. Washington and the school of W.E.B. 
DuBois. In 1903 Dr. DuBois published a book of essays, The Souls Of Black Folks. This 
was a different kind of scholarship, more explanatory than argumentative. In 1905 he 
helped to bring the Niagara Movement into being. In 1909, the ideas of this movement 
helped to create the National Assoc iation for the Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP). 
After being introduced to the international significance of Africa at the First Pan -African 
Congress in London in 1900, DuBois remained committed to the unification of Africa for 
the rest of his life. A t the Second Pan -African Congress in Paris in 1919, Dr. DuBois 
emerged as the movement's world leader, the capacity in which he appealed to the 
League of Nations and other international organizations on behalf of African people. 
In his essay, "My Mission," published in Crisis magazine, April, 1919, Dubois said: 
I went to Paris during the time of the Peace Conference because the destinies of 
mankind for a hundred years to come were being settled by the big four, because they 
had the power through their armed forces, capital and propaganda machines to do so.  
He went on to say that thirty two nations, people, and races had permanent 
headquarters in Paris. He felt it imperative for African people to make their presence 
known in Paris at this time.


--- PAGE 33 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
33 
 
The Second Pa n-African Congress adopted eleven resolutions and submitted them to 
the Peace Conference, then meeting at Versailles. The first two resolutions applied only 
to Africans, calling for a Code of Laws for the international protection of Africans and for 
the establishment of a permanent bureau to oversee the application of that code to their 
political, social and economic welfare. The remaining resolutions applied to Africans and 
people of African descent living in countries outside the African continent. The qu estion 
of the slave trade had been raised by the British at the Congress of Vienna and the 
specific question of the Belgian Congo had been raised on the international level, but 
the Second Congress marked the first time that the Africans and people of Afri can 
descent themselves had raised the international issue of their condition. Referring to 
this Congress, Dr. DuBois said: 
I went (to Paris) with the idea of calling a "Pan -African Congress" and trying to impress 
upon the members of the Peace Congress meet ing at Versailles the importance of 
Africa in the future world. I was without credentials or influence, but the idea took on. I 
tried to get a conference with President Wilson, but only got as far as Colonel House, 
who was sympathetic but noncommittal.  
The Pan -African Congress of 1921 adopted resolutions similar to those of the 1919 
Congress, but was more specific in the proposals they presented to the new League of 
Nations. They called for the establishment, under the League, of an international 
institution for the study of African problems and asked that an international section be 
set up under the jurisdiction of the Labor Bureau of the League to protect African labor. 
After the Pan-African Congress of 1921, Dr. DuBois went to Geneva where he met with 
the head of the Mandates Commission and talked with Albert Thomas, head of the 
International Labor Organization. Through the Haitian representative to the League, the 
Pan-African Congress submitted a petition that asked that a man of African descent be 
appointed to the Mandates Commission as soon as a vacancy occurred. The petition 
also asked the League to devote some of its attention to the plight of the millions of 
black people living in countries outside of Africa who were being discriminated against. 
This petition, an interesting landmark in the development of African and African 
American political thought, had far -reaching implications for international politics 
because it asserted that the race problem was international and because it maintained 
that an international organization had the responsibility to concern itself with the 
problem within particular nations. 
My point here is that W.E.B. DuBois was never a narrow partisan. For most of his public 
life, which extended over two generations, he held an in ternational view of the problems 
of his people. He was a nationalist, PanAfricanist and a socialist, and he saw no 
contradiction between these positions. His love for his own people gave him an 
appreciation of all people. He was one of the pioneers that ca lled for a reinterpretation 
of the history of Africa and of African people throughout the world. He said: 
African American history cannot be honestly taught without some reference to its 
African background and the black American's search for the meaning of  that


--- PAGE 34 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
34 
 
background and its relationship to their present-day lives. The Africans who came to the 
United States as slaves started their attempts to reclaim their lost African heritage soon 
after they arrived in this country. They were searching for the lost i dentity that the slave 
system had developed. Concurrent with the black man's search for an identity in 
America has been his search for an identity in the world, which means, in essence, his 
identity as a human being with a history, before and after slavery , that can command 
respect.  
In the fall of 1961, Dr. DuBois and his wife, Shirley Graham DuBois, took up residence 
in Ghana, at the invitation of the late Kwame Nkrumah , then President of Gha na. 
DuBois died in Accra on August 27, 1963 at the age of ninety five, on the eve of the 
historic March on Washington. On September 9, 1963, the Board of Directors of the 
N.A.A.C.P. passed a resolution mourning his death and calling him "a pioneer in the 
struggle for human rights." The members of the Board noted that Dr. DuBois was: 
The prime inspirer, philosopher and father of the Negro Protest Movement, a founder of 
the NAACP, an impassioned and eloquent spokesman for equal rights, a fierce and 
uncompromising foe of colonialism and promoter of the Pan -African Congress, and the 
most eminent scholar and historian of the black race in America and Africa.  
The resolution further stated that: 
His literary, historical and sociological contributions were so vast and all-inclusive that 
no serious research in the African field can be done without reference to the work of Dr. 
W.E.B. DuBois.  
Now in the debate between W.E.B. DuBois and Booker T. Washington we started 
choosing sides. We started choosing sides and we ha ven't straightened it out until this 
day. We assumed that we had no choice other than to choose sides between a 
political/liberal education and an agricultural/industrial education: either DuBois was 
right or Booker T. Washington was right. We could not al low that both of them were 
right. 
Both of them looked at the world based on how they were reared. DuBois was raised in 
New England, a partial aristocrat. One could be an aristocrat in New England and not 
have any money. Washington was a farm boy from slave  parents, and he did not know 
his father; therefore, he looked at the world that way. Both men were practical, based on 
each one's vantage point in looking at his world. And we needed what both men offered. 
We needed it at that time and we need it now. 
Booker T. Washington's program would have eventually led us to DuBois' program and 
DuBois' program would have eventually led us to a consideration of Washington's 
program. We did not have to reject either one of them. At the time when whites were not 
paying much attention to our education, we could have innovated to the point of creating 
an educational system that would have moved ahead of American education. However,


--- PAGE 35 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
35 
 
instead of leading we began to follow, and today we are still following a people who 
don't know where they are going.  
We have not considered that the education for white people in this country is basically 
bad, and it is even worse for us. If we had followed Booker T. Washington's educational 
plan there would not be a boarded -up house in any blac k community. There would be 
black plumbers, black carpenters, blacks who own brickyards, and black technicians 
who would fix the houses long before they reached the point of being boarded-up. 
Had we followed W.E.B. DuBois' program, there would be no inept black politicians 
because we would have learned how to make our politicians accountable to us, or else 
we would remove them. We should have had a wedding between what Booker T. 
Washington was saying and what DuBois was saying. Instead we called Washington a 
traditionalist and DuBois a modernist and did not see that there was no conflict between 
one and the other. 
It was with Carter G. Woodson , another Ph.D., that African world history took a gr eat 
leap forward and found a defender who could document his claims. Woodson was 
convinced that unless something was done to rescue the black man from history's 
oversight, he would become a "negligible factor in the thought of the world." Woodson 
believed that there was no such thing as "Negro History." He said what was called 
"Negro History" was only a missing segment of world history and he devoted the greater 
portion of his life to restoring this segment. In his own way, Carter G. Woodson 
answered the ne ed of scholars of his day. After serving many years as a teacher in 
public schools, Woodson became convinced that the role played by his people in 
American history and in the history of other cultures was being so drastically ignored 
and misrepresented tha t he founded the Association for the Study of Negro Life and 
History in 1915, to conduct research into the history of the African all over the world. 
The next year he began publication of the Journal of Negro History, which has never 
missed an issue. 
A chronicle of Woodson's far -reaching activities must include; the organization in 1921 
of Associated Publishers, Inc., to make possible the publication and circulation of 
valuable books on the African American and American history that was not acceptable 
to mo st publishers; the establishment of Negro History Week in 1926; the initial 
subsidizing of research in black history; and the writing of many articles and books on 
African American and American life and history. 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 36 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
36 
 
 
Part 8 of 10 
The Challenge Facing the Scholar of African Descent 
The Challenge Facing the Scholar of African Descent 
Contrary to a misconception which still prevails, Africans 
were familiar with literature and art for many years  before 
their contact with the Western World. Before the 
breaking-up of the social structure of the West African 
states of Ghana, Mali and Songhay and the internal strife 
and chaos that made the slave trade possible, the 
forefathers of the Africans who eve ntually became slaves 
in the United States, lived in a society where university 
life was fairly common and scholars were held in 
reverence. To understand fully any aspect of African 
American life one must realize that the African American 
is not without a cultural past, though he was many 
generations removed from it before his achievement in 
American literature and art commanded any appreciable 
attention. 
That is why African and Africana history should be taught every day, not only in the 
schools, but also in the home and African American History Month should be every 
month. We need to learn about all of the African people in the world. The idea of an 
education for a new reality in the African world was already old, with me, before this 
decade. The serious s tudy of the plight of African people all over the world, in all ages, 
conditions and geographical settings, has been the main part of my life's work. It is the 
all consuming passion of my existence. It is something I do, just like breathing is 
something I do. It is a subject which, if I were to talk directly on it for more than twenty 
minutes, I would have to talk on it for at least a year. 
To begin, let's consider the word BLACK. Black is an honorable word and I am glad to 
see so many people lose their fea r of using it: however, black has its limitations. Black 
tells you how you look without telling you who you are. A more proper word for our 
people, African, relates us to land, history and culture. 
 No people can be spiritually and culturally secure unt il they answer to a name of their 
own choosing—a name that instantaneously relates that people to the past, the present, 
and the future. In his book, The Name "Negro": Its Origin and Evil Use , the Caribbean 
writer, Richard B. Moore, has said: 
Slaves and dogs are named by their masters. Free men name themselves.


--- PAGE 37 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
37 
 
In his book Mr. Moore expresses something that is increasingly rare in the present 
academic environment —a conviction based on research and reason. "Human 
relations," he says, "cannot be peaceful, sa tisfactory, and happy until placed on the 
basis of mutual self -respect. The proper name for people, has thus become, in this 
period of crucial change and rapid reformation on a world scale, a vital factor in 
determining basic attitudes involving how, and even whether, people will continue to live 
together on this shrinking planet." 
Richard B. Moore gives us much to think about in a world where Europeans and white 
people in general went to such great lengths to distort world history. Europeans 
benefited, greatly, from this distortion and it is clear that they knew more about history 
than they are prepared to admit. They had to know a great deal about history in order to 
distort it so effectively, and then use this distortion as an element of world control. Th ey 
knew that history is a two -edged sword that can be used both as an instrument of 
liberation and a weapon of enslavement. They knew that then and they know it now that 
history, like a gun, is neutral; it will serve anyone who uses it effectively. 
We must understand that all the world was changed to accommodate the second rise of 
Europe in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Followed swiftly by the European 
conquest of most of mankind, this conquest was achieved by the astute use of two 
political instruments—the Bible and the gun. The Europeans, in addition to colonizing 
the world, colonized information about the world and the writing of the history of the 
world. They were so successful that today there is not a single book in existence with 
the title, " World History," that is an honest history of the world and all of its people. 
World history lost its broad definition and became a rationale for European conquest 
and control—a means for the glorification of European people at the expense of other 
people and nations whose civilizations were old before Europe was born. 
The first European attack was on African culture. Their next move was to deny that this 
culture ever existed. A look at African cultures, especially in West Africa, will show us 
what an educat ion for a new reality in the African world should be about. There is no 
way to talk about this education without looking again at the roots of world history and 
the interplay of the histories of various people. The scholar who knows his people's 
history and its relationship to the history of the world should start with the bold assertion 
that Africa is the basis of world history, and that African people are the mothers and 
fathers of mankind. Scholars the world over must be courageous enough to make this 
assertion and prepare themselves academically to prove it. The special role that history 
assigns to the scholar eludes most of us: the role is simple, therefore it is very complex. 
In most societies the scholar is not required to labor in the fields, to draw  water, nor to 
bring wood for the fires. At this point you might ask what is the scholar required to do? 
What is his or her special mission? What is the assignment? The scholar is the clock -
watcher of history and the keeper of the compass that must be used  to locate his or her 
people on the map of human geography. The scholar will be able to tell the people 
where they have been and what they have been, where they are and what they are. 
Most importantly, the scholar should be able to prophesy and predict whe re his people


--- PAGE 38 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
38 
 
still must go and what his people still must be. The scholar should be able to find the 
special clock that tells his people their historical, cultural and political time of day. 
The role of scholars to us as a people is to end part of our spe cial tragedy because for 
too long, figuratively speaking, we have been telling our time by our oppressor's clock. 
By his clock it could be midnight in December because he is losing control of the world. 
We, estranged in the Western World where we are neith er guest nor citizen, are re -
merging with hope flowing before us like a river —by our special historical clock. It is a 
morning in spring. 
  
We are in an extraordinary situation so let us use our imagination to create an 
extraordinary way of looking at it. For the moment, let us take our crisis out of the 
framework of history and sociology, and instead regard it as a drama with many 
dimensions and with long historical roots. The drama is not pure: it is part comedy and 
part tragedy, sometimes it will be a sa tire and there are even elements of farce. It is a 
mystery play about the greatest crime ever contrived by the mind of man. The recurring 
theme of this drama is rape, the rape of a continent, the rape of its people. This rape set 
in motion an act of protra cted genocide that lasted for five hundred years and has not 
completely exhausted itself today. The aftermath of this crime is the basis of the black 
world drama and the crisis that no black scholar can avoid. 
With this said we can now, figuratively, put the players on stage. 
In the unfolding of this great human drama that we are calling the "Black Crisis," the 
characters will play every role from saint to buffoon. The first scene in the play is 
pleasant and here is nothing that suggests future developments . Some sailors have 
arrived on the coast of West Africa. The year is 1438. The Africans with their customary 
hospitality to strangers have invited the sailors to dinner, a scene that will be repeated 
many times before it is turned into a tragic occurrence.  The Africans did not know the 
temperament of these strangers, nor did they sense their ambitions nor the intent that 
was hidden behind their smiles. These sailors have come from a thawed -out icebox 
called Europe. A people who were as violent as the climat e that produced them. A 
people who were reaching out from their hostile land searching for new gold, new labor, 
and a new supply of food. They find all of these items in Africa and they do not buy or 
bargain for them, they take them. 
In the second scene of  our play's first act, the dinner is over and the guests begin 
looking around the house of their hosts. They like so many of the things they see, 
including the wife of the house. Suddenly all expressions change. The guests take out 
their guns, rape the wif e, enslave the both of them and force them away from their 
home to labor in the far reaches of the world. Thus the long night begins. The curtain 
falls on the first act of a long play that, in many ways, is still on the road.


--- PAGE 39 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
39 
 
My basic point is that all bla ck scholars in the West, and most of them in Africa, have 
been reacting to the consequences of this play. Their dilemma is how to interpret these 
events and their far -reaching tragic aftermath. Their consequences are the primary 
content of their literary h eritage and out of this material came the slave narratives, the 
spirituals, and the blues. 
I am talking about something that is both historical and topical, which helps to explain 
why we can better understand the present by looking through the lenses of the past. We 
need both vantage points in order to understand the present. We, as a people, each 
time we forget that our African-ness is our rallying cry, our window on the world, and the 
basis of our first allegiance, find ourselves in serious trouble. To ex plain this fact I must 
make an admission that breaks my heart, as well as it might break yours. Throughout 
history we have been a politically naive people. We have never made a good alliance 
with another people, least of all with white people. I do not mea n that we have never 
made alliances with other people. I am saying that the alliances that we have made 
have not been in our favor. In the future we should enter into only those alliances that 
we can control. 
Africans, traditionally, have been the only peo ple who permit other people to live in their 
home, or country, for hundreds of years without demanding a declaration of allegiance 
to their home. We have always invited our future conquerors to dinner. This misplaced 
humanity and hospitality to strangers is at once the strongest and the weakest aspect of 
our African way of life. It is the strongest because it is the basis of African humanity; it is 
the weakest because all too many strangers have come into Africa and have taken 
advantage of Africa's generosi ty. People who think they can trust every stranger who 
enters their home are politically naive. This is an aspect of the African world situation 
which we have not studied or fully acknowledged and it will remain so as long as we 
ignore it. 
We need to take a global view of African people in our attempt to understand how we 
relate to other people. This will be the culmination of a long intellectual struggle that 
started in the first half of the nineteenth century. The need to analyze and interpret the 
place w here African people in world history grew more critical during the first two 
decades of this century. Black Americans had entered the twentieth century searching 
for a new direction, politically, culturally and institutionally, a new definition and an 
ideology. New scholars were emerging who began to interpret the history and struggles 
of African people from an international point of view. This atmosphere nurtured new 
men and movements which gave black scholarship the real test of its existence. To 
establish an education for a new reality in the African world without an ideology would 
be merely a recitation of days, places, personalities and events, without an 
understanding of their place in the past, the present and their effect on the reshaping of 
the future. 
For our liberation we should draw on the intellectual heritage of the whole world, 
beginning, of course, with our own intellectual heritage. If our people are cold, we


--- PAGE 40 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
40 
 
should invade hell and borrow fire from the devil, and we will do this without becom ing 
the devil's disciples. We should properly read the signs of history and remember: 
What we do for ourselves depends on what we know of ourselves and what we accept 
about ourselves.  
This is what the struggle in education for a new reality in the African  world is all about. 
An education for a new reality in the African world must be holistic. Africans must be 
educated to know, down to the marrow of their bones, that they must be the owners of 
Africa and must be responsible for the management of every part  of Africa. While there 
are Africans in most parts of the world, the historical, political and cultural heart -beat of 
all Africans is in Africa itself. 
 
 
Part 9 of 10 
Education Is Power 
Education for a New Reality in the African World 
Recently some of the new leaders of African nations 
are beginning to sell their gold mines to Europeans, 
land to Europeans and to make concessions within 
Africa that violate the traditional values of African 
people. What these European -minded Africans fail to 
remember is that by custom and culture, land in African 
can neither be bought nor sold because land has been 
traditionally seen as the collective property of the whole 
people and no leader has the right to sell this birthright 
and the birthright of generations of Africans still to come 
because land is essential to nationhood. For more 
information about the land problem in Africa I suggest 
you read, The Truth About the West African Land 
Problem, by Casely Hay ford, and Facing Mt. Kenya  and Kenya, Land of Conflict  by 
Jomo Kenyatta. 
Education for a new reality in the African world must be an education that enables the 
African to handle all of the wealth producing resources of Africa. An education that 
enables the  African to manage and market these resources and an education that 
enables him/her to prepare the generations still to come to do the same thing. A large 
number of African children should be chosen at birth and trained toward these ends and 
all education should be for the total sovereignty of African people. There is nothing in 
African traditional values that prohibits modernism, upward mobility, or the use of


--- PAGE 41 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
41 
 
science and technology. Africans must realize that they live in a modem technical world 
and that there are lessons we can draw from our ancient societies to guide us. Africa 
has to move with the age in which it finds itself in order to survive. 
What I am proposing here is a holy order of commitment. In the future we can not leave 
land and nation management to chance. What I am alluding to here is the establishment 
of an international priesthood of liberation and an institute to maintain that priesthood. If 
we are to go back to nationhood and be safe and secure, we must understand that a 
nation must be a cultural, political and economic container of the national and 
international aspirations of a people. The commitment to maintain the nation and secure 
it against all enemies, both foreign and domestic, must be part of everyone's mission, 
not something left solely to politicians. Africans the world over must stop playing games 
about who is an African. Everyone in Africa who cannot be addressed as an African is 
either an invader or a descendant of an invader. It is time for the African to ask the 
guests in their house the question: What is your mission in my house? and —Do you 
have any loyalty or commitment to the preservation of my house, as I conceive it to be? 
Africans must be bold enough to let the non -African in Africa know that, "I will share 
power with  you in Africa to the extent that you are willing to share power with me in 
Europe. You demand and get the prevailing power in your countries and I have every 
right to demand and get the prevailing power in my country." Africans should demand 
and get Africa as African-ruled as France is French -ruled and England is English -ruled. 
Too many times Africans are expected to share power with others who have no 
intention of sharing power with them. In educating Africans to realistically face the world 
of the immediate tomorrow, I am referring to the essential selfishness of survival. 
My subject, Education for a New Reality in the African World, was not casually chosen. I 
have spoken and written on this subject or some aspect of it many times over the years. 
I have exhausted my arguments in favor of the subject without losing my passion for the 
subject. And yet I still have not made everyone understand the importance of education; 
education is power. When education is properly done, education opens the door to 
power. A true education has one purpose, and one purpose alone: to train the student 
to be a handler of power. One of the things that we fail to understand is that our 
oppressor cannot afford to educate us to handle power. We live in a society where, if we 
were properly educated, we would not ask for power. We would take power. We will 
have to stop answering to names that our mothers and fathers did not give us. We will 
have to stop answering to names of which we are not. 
The real crisis facing black educators beg an a long time ago with things we did not 
understand. I think back to reading about a scene of an African being forced on a slave 
ship, and he reaches back and puts a handful of African dirt in his mouth. I think that 
African understood more about educatio n than most of us. He understood the basis of 
nation—land. Until we understand the land basis of education and the nation basis of 
education, we will miss the point. Where did we go wrong and when did we stop being 
innovators and became imitators?


--- PAGE 42 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
42 
 
In the n ineteenth century we began to be "those things most unlike ourselves." When 
we had the golden opportunity to set a new tone in education, we tried to be like our 
oppressor instead of setting a new basis for education. Professor Ivan Van Sertima 
says that E uropean expansion into the broader world and European colonization of 
history have locked us into a "five hundred year room" of history. A room wherein 
African people and their contributions to the world were removed from history. The basis 
of education for a new reality is to pull us out of this five hundred year room. We have to 
understand what was wrong with our education and examine the nineteenth century in 
the African world. The nineteenth century might have been the greatest century in the 
whole of t he African world. This might be the century that we have to go back and 
examine in order to survive in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. 
We produced the finest minds that we have produced since the decline of Egypt and 
Nile Valley Civilization in t he nineteenth century. We produced the rebels, the activist 
mentality, the realists in the nineteenth century. This is the century of Frederick 
Douglass and Martin Delaney. This is the century of the great ministers, who tower over 
Martin Luther King, Jr.  and were more realistic than Martin Luther King, Jr. Taking 
nothing from Dr. King, this is the century of Henry Highland Garnett whose motto was 
"Resistance, Resistance, Resistance." This is the  century of a search for Africa again. 
This is the century of the great black women: Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman. We 
have forgotten that century, but we will not orient ourselves in the twentieth century until 
we go back to that century, and I was j ust talking about what was happening in the 
United States. 
When we look at the Caribbean Islands, this is a century of physical resistance. Looking 
at South America, especially Brazil, Africans brought into being two black nations. 
African captives were able to by-pass the auction block, escape into the hinterlands and 
form African nations. One of these nations, Palmares lasted for one hundred and ten 
years. The other one, Bahia, lasted almost as long. During this century African cultural 
continuity produce d the most successful slave revolts in the history of the world. The 
best known revolts were those in Jamaica and in Haiti. Jamaica fought longer and 
harder than Haiti, but Haiti was able to bring off an independent state and Jamaica 
could not, and we wonder why. 
Haiti fought over a shorter period with a greater degree of consistency, and hit the 
French at a strategic time —when Napoleon was involved with other campaigns in 
Europe. They were successful in their revolt. When the Jamaicans revolted, their revo lts 
were put down and too much time elapsed between revolts, giving the British time to 
destabilize them. After each defeat the Jamaicans had to remount each revolution from 
scratch. The time lapse did not give them the facility to bring forth a nation, wh ile the 
total of the Haitian revolutions (there were more than one) happened over a twenty year 
period. 
The physical resistance in the Caribbean Islands challenged Europe and changed the 
geography of this hemisphere. Because of the challenge of the Caribbe an Islands —
Toussaint L'Ouverture, Jean -Jacques Dessalines, and Christophe —Napoleon had to


--- PAGE 43 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
43 
 
sell the Louisiana Territory. These Caribbean revolutions brought into being the 
stimulation for the massive slave revolts in the United States. 
While we are looking at the Caribbean, let's look at the Caribbean mind and its 
contribution to the stimulation of black social forms in the United States. We need to 
understand that the Caribbean mind never functioned well at home. Once the 
Caribbean mind begins functioning w ell it is driven away from home. The Caribbean 
mind has a way of producing seed that does not grow in the soil of the Caribbean. The 
soil was fertile in the United States and the best of these minds came here. It started 
with Prince Hall. Robert Campbell w ould come here. He would travel with Martin 
Delaney to Africa and write A Search for a Place . John B. Russwurm would edit 
Freedom's Journal. Peter Ogden was one of the founders of Odd Fellows. Prince Hall 
would found the Masons. H. Sylvester Williams had t ried to establish a Pan -African 
League in Trinidad. It failed. Trinidadians did not pay any attention to it. The same thing 
happened when Marcus Garvey started his Universal Negro Improvement As sociation 
and African Communities League in Jamaica. He could not get it off the ground. The soil 
would not take the seed. The greatest contribution to the formal idea of Pan -Africanism 
was made by three Trinidadians: H. Sylvester Williams, C.L.R. James, a nd George 
Padmore. Why couldn't these minds function at home? You can trace the history of 
these minds for two hundred years all the way up to Marcus Garvey, including those 
that returned home and were killed. None of them were accepted at home. 
The greatest and clearest of the minds of the nineteenth century was Edward Wilmot 
Blyden. What he said about education in his famous inaugural address at Liberia 
College, in 1881, said more about education over one hundred years ago than we are 
saying right now. He said: 
We will have to work for many years to come. Not only without the popular support that 
we must have, but with inadequate resources.  
  
...We strive to be those things most unlike ourselves. No matter what talent we have, we 
feed grist into other peo ple's mills and, of course, nothing comes out except what has 
been put in. And that then is our great sorrow. 
This was said in 1881, over one hundred years ago, and we are still doing it. Edward 
Wilmot Blyden was one of the finest voices of the nineteenth century. He was not only 
ahead of his time, he is ahead of this time. 
Let's look at Africa in the nineteenth century. This is the century of the massive anti -
colonial revolts. This is the century when the African world faced reality as it had never 
faced reality before. In the first half of the century, the Zulu Wars in Southern Africa had 
already started. The Ashanti Wars in Ghana had already started. The Islamic Wars in 
the Sudan had already started. The Maji Maji Wars in Tanganyika and neighboring


--- PAGE 44 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
44 
 
territories, and the Riff Wars in North Africa had already started. And the wars in Nigeria 
led by Ousmane Dan Fodio had already started. 
The physical confrontation diminished as the slave trade turned into Colonialism 
(another form of slavery) and the Africans soon realized that missionary efforts were 
also a form of slavery. The Europeans began to take away the African energies and 
began to destroy the African images of god. One of the ways to continue to enslave a 
people is, after removing one set of chains fr om their body, to place another set of 
chains on their mind. Not only make them change their religion but make them abandon 
their religion. Make them change their dress, their tastes, their music, their food, and 
when this is done, you don't need any priso n walls to confine these people. The prison 
walls inside their mind will be more binding than any prison walls you can construct. 
Once we face the reality of the imprisonment of the African mind in the nineteenth 
century, we will face up to what was happening to that mind. We will look at the debates 
between blacks and blacks and look at the blacks going to Liberia to "Christianize" their 
"heathen" brothers. Read Alexander Crummell's work. Alexander Crummell was a great 
black missionary. But Alexander Crumm ell was a missionary with the mentality of a 
white missionary. He was going to Africa to spread Christianity in a continent where 
every element that originally went into the making of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism 
began. Every element that went into the se three religions had long been in practice on 
the African continent. 
Once we understand the nature of our oppressor's religious oppression, we must look at 
the mentality of our respective oppressors. The oppressor in the United States has 
taught us to fa ce reality better than any of the others. The oppressors in the Caribbean 
area and in South America gave their black population the illusion that one day they 
would be allowed to join the club. The oppressor in the United States has taught us 
explicitly th at we will never join the club. Even with what we like to call integration, 
another fakery, they still let us know that if we manage to get into the club, we will never 
be accepted. 
In the physical integration in the Caribbean Islands and in South America,  if you are 
almost white a special place is made for you in society. You are not allowed in the 
house, but you would be allowed in a designated area close to the house. In the United 
States, the crudest of oppressors say, if you've got one drop of one drop  you will be 
placed with the blackest of blacks and at one word, all of you will be placed in the same 
sack. Although the females with the one drop had some advantage in the domestic job 
market and the husband market, and another market which I will not me ntion, no place 
was made for them in their father's house. And this is reality. 
In my research for this paper, I re -read a dissertation on religion written by an African 
attending Syracuse University. His dissertation detailed why African religions never 
became world religions. He said they had no pews, no collection plates, no temples, no 
missionaries, everything was free. He asked the question: How can such a religion 
become a world religion? Nobody was exploiting anybody. Priests were free. The


--- PAGE 45 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
45 
 
community paid the priest so they did not have to pass the hat. The community brings 
the priest his food and makes his clothes. He pointed out that all of the elements that we 
call Christianity came out of Africa. All of the symbols of Christianity came out of Afri ca. 
He explained that when the people from Israel came into Africa, they had no clear 
religion, no law and no language, when they left they had all three. His dissertation was 
not well received by Syracuse University and he was thrown out, in 1933. 
I would  like to approach my conclusion with quotations from great African American 
women poets because in the great civilizations of Africa, long before we knew 
Europeans existed, women were revered, were treated equally and moved freely 
through the society and played all kinds of roles. The first deity in history was seen as a 
female goddess. The first woman to ride at the head of an army was an ancient Africa 
woman. The first woman to challenge the foreigner challenged Octavius, who later 
became Caesar Augustus. Another African woman challenged Alexander of Macedonia. 
In her poetry, Mari Evans has said that part of the immediate solution to education is to 
"speak the truth to the people." With this she implies that if you give people the light, 
they will find their way. 
In her early poetry, Pauli Murray, now The Reverend Dr. Pauli Murray, speaking of 
freedom, in her Dark Testament, says: 
Freedom is a thing like amber wine 
that lures man down a path of skulls. 
For they killed the dreamer but not the dream 
the dream is always the same. 
The dream is about freedom. 
Professor Carolyn Fowler of Atlanta University, in speaking of the need to bring African 
people back together again, said: 
We need to look at each other more. We need to get acquainted with each other's 
personality. We need to remove the strangeness that has grown up between us across 
all the seas and all the centuries.  
Margaret Walker challenges us to take action in her classic poem, For My People. She 
called for us to: 
Let the new earth begin. 
Let a new race of men rise and take control.  
We will accept her challenge and my answer to her will be, Sister Margaret, we are 
people of vision and we see tomorrow, not as a male -dominated tomorrow, but as a 
collective tomorrow with males and females functioning as equals. We will say to her: 
We have heard the martial music. We have heard the trumpet call. We accept the


--- PAGE 46 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
46 
 
challenge. We are the new men who, with our women at our side as equal partners in 
this enterprise, are prepared to take charge. 
As we enter the twen ty-first century there will be over one billion African people on the 
face of the earth. Properly counted, the Africans in the United States, the 1990 census 
says, are at 30,000,000, and the census takers missed over twenty percent of us. In the 
Caribbean there are 60,000,000 admitted people of African descent. In Asia there are 
millions who are African, whether they know it or not, and on the islands of the Pacific 
that are several more million who are yet to consider their African ancestry. The 
population of Africa was last fixed at over 700,000,000 and continues to grow. 
These are staggering figures. Our study of history has taught us that we were 
yesterday's people, and by our shear numbers we will be tomorrow's people too. With 
this understanding of our  new importance we can change the world, if first we change 
ourselves by educating ourselves for this new reality. When we count one billion of this 
earth there will be very few people who we will need as allies. The main allies that we 
will need we will b e able to find among ourselves. We will be the only people who will 
have a continent for themselves. We will not be an oppressed people and we will not be 
an oppressor of any people. We will not need to exploit or take advantage of other 
people. We could b ring to the world a new humanity and build a new age of man. This 
might be our mission, it might be the greatest legacy that we can leave for mankind. 
 
Part 10 of 10 
Conclusion 
Struggle is the Highest Form of Education 
Conclusion 
According to the statement above African people should 
be the most educated people in the world. For over 
three thousand years African people have been 
struggling against one invader after the other; for at 
least t wo thousand of these years the invader came 
from Western Asia. This period of oppression abated for 
a few hundred years and began again with the rise of 
Rome and Greece and continued in a different form with 
the rise of Islam and the Arab slave trade. I ma intain 
that if we had learned the right lessons from our 
invaders and from our oppressors we might have 
become the world's greatest realists and the world's 
most astute educators. Unfortunately we have not learned the needed lessons, mainly 
because we have not invested the time to learn our history. At the time in our lives when 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 47 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
47 
 
we were being prepared against our will to lose our freedom, we were lacking in a 
proper education, so unsuspecting and politically naive. 
Although I am an educator, and have only r ecently earned a doctorate, most of my 
education has been informal. The most meaningful survival skills I have learned were 
learned outside of schools, although the schools, when I could get to them, gave me a 
formal structure. I think the main thing that schools did for me, in my youth, was not so 
much to educate me, but to package the loose education I had picked up along the way 
and give me some indication as to how to use it more effectively. If that is all schools 
achieve, that's a major achievement, a nd the schools need not feel negated in their 
effectiveness. If all schools do is to take what you learn from life and convert it into an 
instrument for living a more meaningful life in relationship to yourself and other people 
they have much to congratula te themselves for because we are not nations unto 
ourselves. Part of what a good education does is to teach us to be better instruments of 
living together and accepting our interdependence —accepting how much we need from 
others and how much other people need from us. 
I think this point was rather clear in the affairs of man until the introduction of hard 
currency and the gradual disappearance of barter as trade. When you had to make 
someone else's shoes, and he had to furnish bread for someone, and he in tu rn had to 
depend upon someone to make the quilt for his bed, this interdependence of people 
upon other people, based on what each had to offer, made for not only a better life for 
all, by virtue of this dependence, but it made for a better human existence because man 
understood the particular contribution of every man and valued it in the overall society. 
What we lost of the old way of life and what we long for, while not acknowledging that 
that is what we long for, has made our lives too complicated. We ne ed to make things a 
little less complicated. With our machines and computers we have made too many day -
to-day things complicated and we have over -packaged education to the point where we 
cannot understand the package. 
Education in its formal beginning star ted long before the first school was built. People 
become educated by living in and responding to the world around them. In that same 
way they create their culture. Therefore, there can be no such thing as a culturally 
deprived human being or an uneducated  human being. People in power create rules, 
standards, and institutions to accommodate their power and what they call their culture 
and their way of life. This creation is collectively called education. 
To the African American, struggle has been the highes t form of education, because it is 
through struggle that he prepares himself to face reality. Lost in his attempt to escape 
his reality, he goes into fantasy in order to save his sanity. We know what reality is and 
where reality is. And if we cried all the  times we needed to cry, we would be crying all 
the time. If we looked at our situation, straight in the face, for what it really is, the 
tragedy would have driven us stark raging mad.


--- PAGE 48 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
48 
 
Our Dilemma: The Dream Was Not Dreamed For Us 
We are America's contradiction. We are a free citizen in a democracy, and yet the sores 
of racism, inherited from slavery, are still with us and lingering, in the black 
communities, especially the black urban communities. Black urban communities are the 
servants' quarters that were created because after the servants had served the master 
the latter did not want to look at them until he wished to be served again. These 
communities are old in America. The early freed blacks and escaped slaves lived, in 
most cases, in the first bl ack urban communities. When servants were educated at all 
they were educated to serve and not to share power. This is the basic dilemma in black 
education. Black people were not brought to this country to be given education, 
citizenship or democracy. They were brought here to serve, to labor and to obey. When 
the American promise was made originally, it was not meant for us. When the American 
dream was dreamed originally, it was not dreamed for us. And yet we, the pathological 
American patriots, have never been able to accept this. And when they said, "Liberty 
and justice for all," we ran to the place where the "all" was being given out, only to 
discover that we were not part of that "all." And when they draw the picture of the "all," 
we discover again to our heartbreak that we are not in the picture. 
I think our misunderstanding of America is a misunderstanding of its design. If we could 
understand its design we would understand its education and its miseducation. To 
understand its design we must go back to its roots and look at the religion of each one 
of its founding fathers. Go back and look at the property holdings of each of these 
founding fathers and you will understand what is so very apparent every day, namely, 
that this country was designed for free,  white, protestant males, preferably those who 
own property and agree with the prevailing political status quo. Everyone else in 
America is second to that group, although some people choose to dream otherwise. 
This country was founded on a particular pecki ng order with the protestant male 
property owners at the top of the peeking order. I draw the following example from my 
sharecropper's background. The rooster in the conglomerate of chickens is the king, 
and when he gets bored he pecks at one of the hens. In turn the hen, by whatever 
motivation propels hens, pecks at a smaller hen until it gets down to the smallest chick. 
The smallest chick does not peck back because he is the end of the pecking order. In 
the pecking order of power in America, black people stand at the end of the pecking 
order. What disturbs America now is that there is a revolt at the end of the pecking 
order. The people in between, especially the white ethnic minorities are in a panic, 
because if we move from the bottom —who is going to tak e that last peck without 
pecking back? 
What we have to do in America is to end the whole system of the pecking order and to 
do this we will have to deal with the white, protestant, male dominated society in order 
to end this system and bring about a sembla nce of democracy which could ultimately 
lead to true democracy. When this happens black people will be able to go where the 
"all" is given out and get their share of the "all," and they will be able to look at the 
picture of the "all" and see themselves. Until this happens this country is unworthy of the 
name Christian and unworthy of the label Democracy.


--- PAGE 49 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
49 
 
Another contradiction in America for us is the contradiction in education. We are seen 
as powerless people and powerful people never educate powerless peo ple in how to 
take power from them. When education is given to powerless people, the main function 
of that education is to control them. And this is the tragedy of education for the blacks 
and for the education of the poor in this country. One can be forma lly educated and still 
be a fool where he does not know how to handle himself vis -à-vis the power that 
controls him. 
We need to re -cast education in its entirety. A child going to school needs to be taught 
how to live in the world that he lives in and how to change that world when it is needed. 
Somebody needs to take a child's coat or shirt and tell him what process cloth has to go 
through chemically and scientifically from the field to the shirt, and how one can take a 
piece of cotton and through different  processes turn it into a napkin, a sheet, a towel, 
and mixed with another kind of fabric into a coat. 
We need to sit a child down before his class so that the entire class can see him and be 
educated by the lesson. We start with his shoes, explaining that  Jan Matzeliger, a black 
man, invented the lathe that revolutionized shoemaking in America, and that the 
process of leather tanning was old among us before Europe was born, and that the 
famous Moroccan leather craved by the kings of Europe did not come fro m Morocco at 
all, but came from the same place it still comes from, Northern Nigeria. And that the 
tanning process in Morocco was in the hands of African craftsmen who made the gloves 
and the saddles for the horses of the kings. And when we are through wit h his shoes, 
we can deal with his cotton socks. He must learn that Eli Whitney did not really invent 
the cotton gin but tipped the balance laid out by an illiterate slave and developed it into 
the cotton gin, and then we can deal with cotton itself and the  relationship of blacks in 
America to cotton. 
We could ask him how he arrived at school that day. He would tell us that he walked 
through the streets. We could tell him the contributions of blacks to road building, long 
before Europe had its first road. We  could mention that the stoplight was a black 
invention. What we need to do is draw from day -to-day knowledge to teach our children 
that all history is a current event and that nothing man ever does in the world ever 
leaves the world, and the first man tha t sneezed is still influencing the atmosphere, and 
that all things are here for all time to come, and that if you extract from America the 
contributions of blacks to this society, the American society would come to a halt. 
We could tell this child how the expression, "The real McCoy" developed in our society. 
The coupling that goes into holding trains together, and the lubrication system that 
revolutionized American industry was invented by Elijah McCoy, a black man. Elijah 
McCoy invented so many things and  white inventors stole so much from him that when 
they went to the patent office to register a lubrication system, he was asked, "Did you 
steal this directly from McCoy, or is this the real McCoy? 
By the things that touch the young child's life every day w e can try to show him that 
there moves the genius of his people. The electrical system between the trains was


--- PAGE 50 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
50 
 
invented by a black man. The very fluorescent light in our room was invented by Louis 
Latimer who assisted Edison in more ways than Edison cared t o admit. Edison's light 
bulb kept going out until Louis Latimer came up with the filament that made the light 
burn and bum and bum. This same Louis Latimer drew up the plans for the telephone 
and he did one other thing that I wish he had not done, he impro ved the old Gatlin gun 
which became the forerunner of the rapid -fire machine gun. This same Gatlin gun in the 
hands of the British, helped to build the British Empire. 
In talking about education and struggle, I have been alluding to street education versus  
formal education and how to communicate with the child whose education is more on 
the street than in the classroom. My point here is that the institutions of the powerful are 
limited when it comes to educating powerless people, no matter what the purpose of 
those institutions happens to be. The one thing powerful people cannot afford to say to 
powerless people is, "We were wrong." They cannot afford to make this admission 
without giving the impression that they are unworthy of handling the power that they 
have. They must always give the illusion of forever being right no matter how disastrous 
this illusion might turn out to be. 
In talking about struggle and formal education we must start with the New England 
states. At the turn of the century newly freed bl acks produced leaders like Frederick 
Douglass, and strong, black radical ministers who established the first black 
newspapers, the first labor organizations and the first independent black churches. Now 
the white missionaries from the North were assisting in black education. Something 
happened that was very unique in American history and it is unfortunate that this is now 
forgotten. The first large group of white women who went to school were educated in 
the New England states. The New England man, a high s chool graduate if he was that, 
a good craftsman, a good manager of a factory, but a man not too intellectually 
endowed, did not know what to do with this college -bred woman. They surely were not 
going to marry them. In fact, they acted as though they were afraid of them. Large 
numbers of these women were sent to the south to teach in the newly established 
schools for blacks. They were called New England schoolmarms, and made a major 
contribution to black education at a time when we had only a small number o f trained 
black teachers. 
Although we have to be thankful for their presence, some of their teaching proved 
disastrous. Some of these teachers came from New England finishing schools and 
began to train the black girls accordingly. They began to train black  children from farm 
communities, where they did not have enough forks to go around, how to set a table for 
a banquet, when they would never have a banquet. If these New England women knew 
what we did have, like tent meetings, collective eating, mass church  picnics in a setting 
where everything was finger food and no forks were needed, perhaps they could have 
adopted a more realistic approach to educating the children. They began to teach our 
girls what gloves to wear with what gown, and our girls often did not own gowns. This 
was a waste, as all improper education is a waste. One of the notable subjects they 
taught were Latin and Greek. Their best contribution to our education was the training of 
black teachers in the structure, design and methodology of tea ching the English


--- PAGE 51 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
51 
 
language. Soon after Reconstruction the southern man must have gotten used to them. 
He no longer seemed to panic over them, although he remained in awe of them, and 
eventually began to marry them. Many of these women remained in the South  and 
became Southerners. Some of them returned to New England to live out the last of their 
days. In the turbulent period of the Reconstruction and its aftermath, when black 
colleges and new black institutions were established, the schoolmarms were either 
marrying Southerners or going back to New England, and there was a terrible struggle 
to keep alive these institutions without their support. 
Early in the twentieth century black institutions were still in trouble and vying for a new 
kind of education and o nly partly winning the fight. The racially motivated raids in the 
South and the struggle against these raids caused blacks to migrate from the South in 
increasing numbers. They came to communities like Harlem, Boston, Philadelphia. and 
Chicago looking for a new way of life, a new home for themselves and new 
opportunities for their children. They came looking for something better than what they 
left behind only to discover that they were to meet new troubles in these places that had 
to be dealt with in different ways. 
We arrived at this present point in our history again facing change. We are increasingly 
facing a world that will be run, in the main, by science, technology and the ideology that 
will maintain these forces. Education for the African world of to morrow must first and 
foremost take this fact into consideration. When our youth are properly trained to face 
this reality there should not be a single child, male or female, in the African world, over 
the age of ten, without a basic knowledge of the compu ter, some sciences and the 
accompanying technology. Great emphasis needs to be placed on ending the 
dependency on others which started during slavery. We must, increasingly depend on 
ourselves and exchange goods and services between ourselves and others. W e should 
look realistically at the state of the world and build the kind of state that can be the 
container for our culture, our hopes, our aspirations and the land base of our true 
sovereignty. All education should be education to assume responsibility 
I would like to close with a statement John O. Killens made about Malcolm X. In order to 
make his statement applicable to all African people I will paraphrase it a little. Mr. Killens 
said, in effect, We are DEDICATED and COMMITTED African patriots, with DIGNITY as 
our country, MANHOOD as our government, and FREEDOM as our land. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 52 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
52 
 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
Barth, Henry. Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa. 
           London: Frank Cass Co., Ltd. 1965. 
ben-Jochannan, Yosef A.A. Black Man of the Nile and His Family. 
           Baltimore: Black Classic Press. 1989. 
_________________________ Africa: Mother of Western Civilization. 
           New York: Alkebulan Books, c/o Dr. Arthur Lewis, 725 
           SL Nicholas Avenue, NY, 10030.1971. 
_________________________ The African Origins of Major "Western Religions". 
           Baltimore: Black Classic Press. 1990. 
Bennett, Lerone, Jr. Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America. 
           Chicago: Johnson Publishing Co. 1962. 
___________________ The Shaping of Black America. 
           Chicago: Johnson Publishing Co. 1975. 
Blyden, Edward Wilmot. Inaugural Address at Liberia College, 1881. 
           New York: Young's Book Exchange, 1926. 
Campbell, Mavis C. The Maroons of Jamaica, 1655-1796. 
           Lawrenceville, NJ: Africa World Press. 1960. 
Clarke, John H. Christopher Columbus and the African Holocaust. 
           New York: A & B Books, 1992. 
Coupland, Reginald. East Africa and Its Invaders. 
           London: Oxford University Press. 1938. 
Davidson, Basil. Black Mother: The Years of Our African Slave Trade: 
           Precolonial History, 1450-1850. Boston: Atlantic-Little, Brown, Co. 1961. 
____________. A History of East and Central Africa to the Late 19th Century. 
           New York: Anchor Books, Doubleday and Co. 1969. 
____________. The Lost Cities of Africa. 
           Boston: Atlantic-Little, Brown, Co. 1959.


--- PAGE 53 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
53 
 
Diop, Cheikh Anta. African Origins of Civilization, Myth or Reality. 
           New York: Lawrence Hill & Co. 1974. 
DuBois, W.E.B. The Souls of Black Folk. 
           New York: Fawcett Publications. 1965. 
_____________ The Gifts of Black Folk. 
           New York: Fawcett Publications. 1965. 
_____________ The World and Africa, 
           An Inquiry into the Part Which Africa Played in World History. 
           New York: International Publishers. 1965. 
Graves, Anna Melissa. Africa, The Wonder and the Glory. 
           Baltimore: Privately published. 1942. 
Hansberry, William Leo. "Africa's Golden Past" articles published in Ebony Magazine: 
1. "Life Could Have Begun in Kush," November, 1964.  
2. "Historical Fact Challenge Notion That Christianity is Religion of West," 
January, 1965.  
3. "Archaeological Finds Refute West's Dark Continent Views," February, 
1965.  
4. "Black Creativity Has Enriched Various Civilizations," March,  
5. "Queen of Sheba's True Identity Confounds Historical Research," April, 
1965. 
Harris, Joseph E. Africans and Their History. 
           New York: Mentor Books, New American Library. 1969. 
Hayford, Casely J.E. The Truth About the West African Land Question. 
           London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd. 1971. 
Inikore, Joseph E. Forced Migration. New York: Americana Publishers. 1971. 
Jackson, John G. Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth. 
           San Diego: Truthseeker, Inc. 1976. 
____________. Christianity Before Christ. 
           Austin, TX: American Atheist Press. 1985. 
____________. Introduction to African Civilization. 
           Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press. 1974, 
James, C.L.R. Black Jacobins. New York: Vintage Books. 1963.


--- PAGE 54 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
54 
 
Johnston, Sir Harry. The Colonization of Africa by Alien Races. 
           London: Cambridge University press. 1913. 
Leakey, Dr. L.S.B. The Progress and Evolution of Man in Africa. 
           New York: Oxford University Press. 1969. 
Massey, Gerald. Ancient Egypt, Light of the World, Vols. I and II. 
           New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc. 1970. 
Moore, Richard B. The Word Negro—Its Origin and Evil Use. 
           New York: Afro-American Publishers. 1960. 
Padmore, George. Pan Africanism or Communism. 
           New York: Doubleday Anchor Books. 1971. 
Redding, Saunders. "The Negro Writer and His Relationship to His Roots," in 
           The American Negro Writer and His Roots: 
           Selected Papers From the First Conference of Negro Writers. 
           March 1959. New York: American Society of African Culture. 1960. 
Rodney, Walter. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. 
           Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press. 1974. 
Rogers, Joel A. World's Great Men Of Color. Vols. I and II, edited by John Henrik 
Clarke. 
           New York: Collier-MacMillan, 1972. 
Roucek, Joseph S. The Negro Impact on Western Civilization. 
           New York: Philosophical Library. 1970. 
Quarles, Benjamin. The Negro and the Making of the Americas. 
           New York: Collier Books. 1969. 
Salanke, Ladipo. United West Africa (or Africa) at the Bar of the Family of Nations. 
           Ghana: Privately published. 1927. 
Seifert, Charles C. Who Are the Ethiopians?. 
           unpublished manuscript: Schomburg Collection, New York City. 
Silverberg, Robert. Empires in the Dust, Ancient Civilizations Brought to Light. 
           Philadelphia, Pa: Chilton Books. 1963. 
Simmons, William J. Men of Mark, Eminent, Progressive and Rising. 
           Chicago: Johnson Publishing Co. 1970.


--- PAGE 55 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                      June, 2010 
 
55 
 
Snowden, Frank M. Jr. Blacks in Antiquity: Ethiopians in the Greco-Roman Experience 
           Cambridge, Ma.: Belnap Press, Harvard University. 1970. 
Tannenbaum, Frank. Slave and Citizen, The Negro in the Americas. 
           New York: Vintage Books. 1946. 
Van Sertima, Ivan. ed. The Journal of African Civilization. 
           New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University. 1985. See special issues:  
1. African Presence in Early Asia 
2. African Presence in Early America 
3. African Presence in Early Europe  
  
Volney, Count C.F. The Ruins or a Survey of the Revolution of Empires. 
           London: Pioneer Press. 1921. 
Washington, Booker T. Up From Slavery. New York: Dell Publishing Co. 
Weatherwax, John W. The African Contribution. 
           Pamphlet, Los Angeles: Bryant Foundation. 1963. 
Weiner, Leo. Africa and the Discovery of America. 3 vols. New York: A & B Books. 
1992. 
Williams, Bruce. "The Lost Pharaohs of Nubia." Archaeology Magazine. 
           New York:. Sept-Oct, 1980. 
Williams, Chancellor. The Destruction of Black Civilization: 
           Great Issues of A Race From 4500 B.C. to 2000 A.D. 
           Chicago: Third World Press. 1974. 
Williams, George Washington. A History of the Negro Race in the United States From 
           1619 to 1880. Vol.1. 
           New York: Bergman publishers; 1968. 
Woodson, Carter G. and Wesley, Charles H. The Negro in Our History. 
           Washington, D.C.: Associated Publishers. 1959. 
_______________. Negro Makers of History. 
           Washington, D.C.: Associated publishers. 1958. 
 
Back to Top

