=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Elijah Muhammad~ The Fall of America (speech).pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 177
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:51:17.914363
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
T he all of merica  
  
"The old world must be removed to make way for the new 
world. There is a universal struggle being waged by the old 
world against the new world. Will the old world's 
opposition prevent the establishment of the new world?  
According to recorded history, the efforts being made by 
the old world against the beginning of a new world will fail 
as did former opponets of Allah."  
Chapter 1  Washington DC Speech May 29, 1959  
Chapter 2  Dawn of a new day  
Chapter 3  Self First  
Chapter 4  The Black Man  
Chapter 5  Under the Shadow of Death  
Chapter 6  Babies Murdered  
Chapter 7  When Abe Lincoln, J.F. Kennedy Spoke out 
for Negroes  
Chapter 8  The National Election  
Chapter 9  The dead are rising, They seek their own  
Chapter 10  Resurrection of our people  
Chapter 11  Opposers of Truth  
Chapter 12  Deceivers and the Deceived  
Chapter 13  Evil Spreading Far, Wide  
Chapter 14  Every Nation has a Tern  
Chapter 15  America  
Chapter 16  Independence Day  
Chapter 17  Independence  
Chapter 18  Slavery in Alabama and Mississippi  
Chapter 19  Alabama  
Chapter 20  The Decline of the Dollar


--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 21  Destruction of America's Education  
Chapter 22  Savagery of America  
Chapter 23  The Dissatisfied  
Chapter 24  Confusion, Confusion of People  
Chapter 25  America's loss of Friendship  
Chapter 26  Will America Repent?  
Chapter 27  The Troubled America: No Peace  
Chapter 28  Is Modern America as Merciless as Ancient 
Ninevah  
Chapter 29  Rise and Fall of Nations  
Chapter 30  She had become the Habitation of Devils (Rev. 
18:2)  
Chapter 31  "Mystery Babylon, The Great"  
Chapter 32  Babylon could have been saved, but she was 
not  
Chapter 33  Modern Babylon is Falling  
Chapter 34  The Judgment of America  
Chapter 35  America surronded with the Judgment of 
Allah  
Chapter 36  Four Great Judgments of America  
Chapter 37  America;s Land being Divinely Curtailed  
Chapter 38  The Fall of America foretold, Separation is 
the Answer  
Chapter 39  The House Doomed to Fall  
Chapter 40  The Destruction and Fall  
Chapter 41  The Day of America's Downfall  
Chapter 42  The Days of Trouble  
Chapter 43  Plauged by God, America is Doomed  
Chapter 44  America's Doom Feared  
Chapter 45  America Hastens Her Own Doom  
Chapter 46  The Great Days, The Terrible Days of God  
Chapter 47  America's Dreaded Destiny  
Chapter 48  The Dreadful Times of America  
Chapter 49  Lull Before the Storm  
Chapter 50  Fire Fed with Fuel  
Chapter 51  Men's Hearts Failing; Fear


--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter 52  Hell Erupts  
Chapter 53  The Great Commotion  
Chapter 54  The Calamity  
Chapter 55  Can America Exist?  
Chapter 56  What Will Be the End of the War  
Chapter 57  The War: America Cannot Win the Victory  
Chapter 58  The Mother Plane  
Chapter 59  The Decision  
Chapter 60  When Ye Shall See All These Things  
Chapter 61  The Judgment Nears  
Chapter 62  The Worst is Yet to Come  
What the Muslims Want  What the Muslims Believe


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 1  
Washington DC Speech May 29, 1959  
 
The following are excerpts from a speech I delivered before a gathering of well 
over ten thousand people at the Uline Arena. Washington, DC, Sunday, May 29, 
1959.)  
1    My people, I am here to fulfill a promise made long ago. I am here to bring 
you the truth. I am here with a solution to the problems of the so-called Negro 
and his white slave masters. You are seeking something. You are seeking an 
answer to your four hundred year old problem of slavery, servitude and fifth - 
class citizenship. I am here with the solution to that problem. How good it is, 
then, for Black brothers of like minds and similar burdens to get together for a 
spiritual feast. For more than four hundred years your pleas for justice, freedom, 
equality, a decent place in the sun have reverberated like thunderclaps sounding 
in the dark valleys of Lebanon. Yet there has been no answer. Never in the history 
of human evil have so many asked for a just pittance, so loud, so long and 
received in return so little, if anything at all.  
2    The church has failed you. Christianity has failed you. The government of 
America has failed you. You have not received justice from any quarter. As 
prophesied, you, my fellow Black men, are as sheep among wolves and as is to be 
expected, every wolf is taking a bite at you. You approach the Senate, the House, 
the White House, and you ask for justice. You get injustice. All our prayers have 
come to naught because we have proceeded out of ignorance. We have not known 
the true God. We have not known who are our brothers. We have not known who 
are our enemies. We have not known who is God; nor have we known who is the 
devil. In a nutshell, we have not known the truth about God, the devil and until 
that truth is made plain to us, our prayers for justice will forever go unanswered. 
We will be the subject of scorn and laughter.  
3    By now it should be ever so clear that politics will no more solve our problem 
than it did the difficulties facing Israel during her bondage in Egypt. We have 
come to the brink of extinction. We must now and here make an agonizing 
reappraisal of our way of life if we care anything for ourselves, our lives, our 
people, our race, the future of our properties, wives and children. Justice is a 
common thing. Yet, it is elusive. Men have sought its meaning and substance 
since time began. Plato shrugged that justice was nothing more than the wish of


--- PAGE 5 ---
the strongest members of society. Jesus equated justice with brotherhood. 
Shakespeare saw it as a matter of mercy. I am here to tell you that justice is the 
eventual working out of the will of God as indicated in the fundamental principles of 
truth . Justice is the antithesis of wrong, the weapon God will use to bring 
judgment upon the world, the purpose and consummation of His coming.  
4    Although we are the chosen of God, when it comes to justice, the so-called 
American Negroes are the most deprived people on the planet earth. Had justice 
prevailed, there would be no need for a day of judgment to come today to plead, 
not to the unjust judges of the world, but to the just judge to give the Black man 
of America justice. That just judge is Allah, God. We have come to the end of the 
days of the unjust judges. Even though it may offend some, you must know the 
truth of it all. The truth hurts the guilty. According to the sayings of Jesus, the 
truth will make us free. The imperative need is for a clear cut definition of that 
truth that will make us free. We must distinguish between the truth and the false 
so-called truths that have been handed down to us from generation by our slave 
masters. We have been falsely taught that the truth was the matter of Jesus' birth 
and death. It has been taught, and this is also false, that the truth is the 
revelation of Christianity. Neither of these is the truth. Neither of these will make 
you free. The truth to freedom is the knowledge of God and the devil, truth of 
yourselves, others and the real religion of God.  
5    How mistaken you are to assume that Jesus was the final word of truth. Jesus 
Himself admitted He could not tell it all. Yet He promised that God would send 
one who would not only reveal the ultimate truth but Who would reveal it to the 
people lying in the mud of ignorance and shame. We, the fools of the world, 
would be the first to know that truth, not the wise of this world. This is not cause 
for offense: for when God said He would reveal his truth to the fools of the 
world, it was a blessing, not an insult to us. After all, this names us His chosen 
people. Thus it is that the problem of the Black man in America has set off an era 
of troubling throughout the world. Until your problem is solved there will not be 
peace for anyone. Today, then, is a new day dawning in a new world; for the old 
day and the old world have passed away. The new day, the new world, if you 
please, cannot come into full meaning until justice comes to our people. The 
burden is not our oppressor's alone. Much of it is upon us. The time has come 
when we must speak or die.  
6    Our leaders, or so-called leaders, are choked by fear. Such a leader is not 
worth the salt that leavens his bread. This fear is the root of their failure to tell 
you the truth. Now this truth must come out. You have misunderstood the Bible. 
Christianity is a white man's religion and it contains no salvation for the Black 
man. For this very reason, the prayers of your preachers to the government, the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost have fallen on deaf ears. Now, I ask you, 
what good is Christianity to you and to me if that religion and the God of that


--- PAGE 6 ---
religion will not defend us against lynching and rape? Indeed, we would be fools 
to believe and trust such a religion and such a God knowing that He bestows all 
His blessings upon our enemy. We are taught to look forward to a salvation that 
does not exist. Christianity offers you salvation after death. You must go down 
into the earth and rot. That kind of salvation I don't want. I will not give you two 
cents for it. Any man that will work hard all his life praying to God to take and 
give him a home beyond the grave is a fool. I am sorry if you think ill of me, but 
the truth is all 1 am going to speak. The Black man in America is in a terrible 
condition. He is emasculated, blinded, confused, and wandering about at high 
noon on judgment day. If judgment day were not here, instead of some remote 
hour to come, I would not be bringing you this message at this hour!  
7    Elijah is here because the day of judgment is here! What a sorry spectacle we 
make before God and the nations of the world! Here we are, upwards of twenty 
million Black Americans who have given their blood, sweat, and service for four 
hundred years in the vain hope that one day justice would be ours. When the 
bugle call of war sounded, the Black soldier stood erect. The plains of Europe, 
Asia, Africa and America have been fertilized by his blood. Yet the government of 
the nation, for which he fought and in whose cause he died, allows his sons to he 
lynched and then adds salt to the wound by concealing the identity of the 
lynchers. More, the government seeks out the lynchers and then turns them over 
to their fellowmen who share the lynchers' cause and motives. Our daughters and 
wives are lynched before our eyes. The government will not put a stop to it. They 
will allow the lynchers to lynch you and me if we are charged with an attempt to 
rape one of them. The lynchers live right next door, down the street, up the alley. 
Yet, they are not brought to justice. All of this grief you and I must suffer. All 
these burdens, we must bear. It is beyond comprehension that the American 
government, mistress of the seas, lord of the air, conqueror of outer space, squire 
of the land and prowler of the deep bottoms of the oceans, is unable to defend us 
from assault, rape and murder on the streets of these concrete jungles. What sane 
man can deny that it is now time that you and I take counsel among ourselves to 
the end of finding justice for ourselves.  
8    If we continue to accept these injustices, we are nothing but cowards. If we be 
cowards, then we ought to go home, kill our wives and then commit suicide. We 
killed the devil in Germany. We killed his brothers for him. We killed our own 
brothers for him Yet, we are without justice. We have nothing. Our sons and 
daughters are lynched, kicked, beaten, hung up in the sun, drowned in the river, 
in ponds and lakes. Their bodies are found in the street, on the highway, in the 
bushes -- killed by the very people for whom they have slaved their lives out to 
give comfort. When you stand up and speak a word in behalf of your own people, 
you are classified as a troublemaker, you are classified as a Communist, as a race 
hater and everything but good. How can you as a people ever be anything if you 
are going to crush out your leaders who try to seek justice for you even at the cost


--- PAGE 7 ---
of their own lives? I, Elijah Muhammad, am classified as a race hater. What race? 
What teaching am I uttering that you can classify as race hatred? How can the 
devil say little Elijah Muhammad is teaching race hatred in the face of over four 
hundred years of his hatred of you and me!  
9    If God has revealed to me the truth of this race of people and yourself, and I 
tell you of it, and that is the truth, then don't say that I am teaching race hatred. 
Just say I teach the truth. There is only one thing that I am teaching today that is 
hatred. That is the truth of the devil. That truth I did not know. Only God knows 
the truth of the devil. He has revealed it to me. If that is not the truth, let the 
devil attack God. It is just that the truth has come to you, people without the 
knowledge of the truth, the deceived, and misled by a wise, wicked scientist. I am 
here with the truth from God Almighty, and for that truth I will give my life. I 
will not hide that truth to the inducement of falsehood. I wont mix it up with 
falsehood. I say to you, my beloved brothers and sisters of injustice, if you will 
only reflect on what is said from the mouth of Elijah, you will not take it for 
insult. You will not take him for a race hater. You will take him for a beloved 
brother, a beloved teacher and a beloved defender of yourself. I am not before you 
of myself. I have not been sent of myself. My mission is not for me, nor is my 
mission from the devil. I have been Sent by Almighty God, Allah. It is a very 
strong and powerful mission that will bring a turning point in the history of the 
world at large, the Black man in particular.  
10    The truth will make you free. What is that truth that will free us? You say, 
"We are already free. Abraham Lincoln freed us.'' That is not the kind of freedom 
of which I speak. Abraham Lincoln was not instrumental in trying to free you. 
Remember that! Abraham Lincoln wanted a United States of America. They 
didn't want two presidents. They didn't want two governments ruling America. 
They wanted only one government with one president for all. It was not that they 
were so full of love for the so-called Negroes, that he wanted to free them from 
the hands of his brother. But this was a good weapon to bring his brother into 
submission to his idea of a United States and one President of that United 
States. So, therefore you were just lucky that you got freed from servitude and 
slavery at that time. Otherwise, you would probably still been in servitude and 
slavery today. You say you love Lincoln. You love him because he freed us. He is 
your emancipator. I say to you, my beloved brothers and sisters, Mr. Lincoln was 
not your brother. He was not your friend anymore than George Washington.  
11    Now we are one hundred years up from slavery Many of you feel proud that 
you have been schooled. You have a few diplomas and degrees. You can do little 
things educationally, but that does not get you justice in America. You still suffer 
injustice with an armful of diplomas and degrees from colleges and universities. Is 
that right? If that is not right, I am willing that you shoot me down, cut me 
down, anyway you please to get rid of me, if I am not right. If I am right, be


--- PAGE 8 ---
aware! What we want today is justice. We want the truth. The truth has come to 
you. You are not accepting it. Think it over! Here are a few of us who have 
accepted God to be our Lord. We have accepted Islam to be our religion -- an old 
religion, as old as God, Himself; a religion of the prophets, of all the righteous; a 
religion of freedom, justice and equality; a religion of universal brotherhood: a 
religion that a brother will fight and die for his brother; a religion that believes in 
the law that was given to Moses. An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth !  
12    Look at Christianity. That law is killed. Why? Because the devil did not 
want you to strike back at him. Therefore, they condemned an eye for an eye and 
a tooth for a tooth in their Christian religion because twenty million so-called 
Negroes might get an eye for an eye. That is nothing but the common law of 
justice. If you pluck out my eye, I should try and pluck out yours. But you have 
been made such harmless slaves by the teaching of a slavery religion called 
Christianity which teaches you to love, not to strike back, but to turn the other 
cheek. It teaches you to give freedom to the robber. If he takes one's coat then 
give him the cloak also. Help the robber to rob. Enrich the thief. That is the kind 
of religion that you are taught to believe. That is God's religion? I say my friends, 
it is a slavery teaching! It is against the very nature of you and me to stand and let 
someone smite us on one side of the cheek and then we turn with enough love -- I 
would say cowardice -- in us the unsmote cheek to the smiter. You can't do that! 
It is against the law of nature. America can't do it. When America's cheek is 
struck by an enemy, she prepares her army to strike back. The Christian 
government of America can't do it. The Pope of Rome can't do it. If you and I 
don't wake up to that knowledge and execute the law of an eye for an eye, we 
might as well be dead and forgotten.  
13    It is better for you and me to just go and commit suicide than for the enemy 
to come in our homes and drag us down, drag our daughters out, beat, lynch. and 
rape them while we stand by looking. If you and I are deprived of justice, if the 
federal government will not punish our murderers and our rapers. I say to you. we 
must get together and find someway to punish them ourselves! In the case of a 
recent lynching in Mississippi, the government agents spent a lot of time trying to 
find the lynched body to show that he had been lynched. It would have been 
easier to find the murderers than the dead body. According to the papers, that is 
all you and I have to go by, the government knows the lynchers. But since finding 
the lynchers -- according to the papers -- they have turned the lynchers over to the 
judges of their own native state and court then they will be freed. As all the other 
lynchers of our people have been freed.  
14    We have come to the point where we must find justice for ourselves or 
commit suicide. What good is your life and my life if we have no protection? If I 
were a Black woman, and my men were such cowards that they would not try and 
defend me and the children I had produced, I would get a shotgun and kill


--- PAGE 9 ---
myself. This is nothing but right. This thing has come to a point of explosion. I 
am your brother. Your hurt is my hurt. It doesn't make any difference with me 
what religion you are as long as you are a Black man or a member of the darker 
people. You and I are brothers. Your hurt is my hurt. How many years have you 
been frightened? "Keep your mouth shut. Don't say that. It is not time." When is 
it going to get time for you to speak up for yourselves? You can't blame the 
government for not giving you anything when you are not asking for anything. 
The only thing that you are pleading for is a job. Is it not true that John 
Hawkins, the slave trader of our people, brought you and me here for just the 
purpose of working for the white man? He didn't bring you here to make you the 
white mans equal. It is certainly evident by now that it was never intended that 
you be a full citizen, owner or a significant office holder in America. Your role 
was that of a slave. Today, even though four hundred years have elapsed, that 
intent underlies your role in the American body politic.  
15    How pathetic a sight many of us make as we boas of our meager education 
and the attainment of a measure of economic growth! All these things are are 
illusion. When rightly viewed, your education has been designed by your 
oppressors with the specific intent of keeping you in servitude. Your economic 
growth has been achieved by installment buying which is now clearly shown to be 
a Banger's rope about the neck of the Blackman. Our oppressors own and control 
everything. We have nothing. What, then, is the basis of our vaunted and foolish 
pride? Something must be wrong upstairs. I ask you how in the name of common 
sense can we be satisfied with our roles of servitude and as the helpless victims of 
injustice? If we have simple intelligence and love for our fellowmen we must 
sound the alarm and let the world know we are not satisfied. We must shake off 
the dead, dumb and blind shackles that have beset us for generations and move 
toward unity of our kind. This is the truth. The truth hurts. I will speak it or die. 
I am not afraid to die for truth indeed. I did not take this mission to try and save 
my life. I took the mission to fulfill truth even at the cost of death. We must 
unite at all costs. Once united, we must stand fully packed as a wall against 
injustice. If your brother does not want to unite with you, then you must teach 
him, cajole him, urge him, and persuade him by all methods available until he 
realizes that he, too, must give his all on the altar of justice. For what if ten 
million of us die in the process, the remaining seven million or more of us will 
enjoy freedom, justice and equality!  
16    Allah is sufficient for all our needs. This is why I do not have to beg from 
our oppressors or march on their Capitol with my hat in my hand. For how can I 
on one hand preach the doom of the oppressive system and then with the other 
hand ask alms of the oppressor. Allah is our God. We are His Blessed. He has 
given all the world to us if we would but first give our all to Him. I met with 
Allah as Moses met with Jehovah. Allah has revealed the truth unto me. It is up to 
you to believe it or let it alone. But this does not negate the fact that I know the


--- PAGE 10 ---
end of it all. I know tomorrow. I would be happy to tell it to you if you will 
believe it. I want you to know that our oppressors are exerting every effort to 
prevent you and me from uniting. They do not want a united Negro, they do not 
want an Islamic so-called Negro. They know that Islam frees Black men from 
fear. As a result, it sets the oppressor's teeth on edge. The power of Islam ins best 
seen when compared to the failure of Christianity.  
17    First, Christianity has failed you because it was the religion which first 
placed you in slavery. Secondly, Christianity has failed you because through its 
doctrine of turning the other cheek it has rendered you incapable of defending 
yourself in the hour of peril. Thirdly, Christianity has failed you because it has 
caused you to forsake the pursuit of justice in this world in the pursuit of an 
illusory and nonexistent justice beyond the grave. Now, my beloved, you are faced 
with the same problem that beset Moses and the children of Israel during the era 
of the Egyptian captivity. Pharaoh did not want Moses to preach the religion of 
Jehovah in Egypt because Pharaoh knew such preaching would bring damnation 
to his wicked kingdom. So it is that your oppressors did not want you to hear the 
gospel of the Black man. They know that this gospel will one day be their 
undoing. Pharaoh did not want Moses to call the Jews to the wall to wail at 
sundown. He knew that once the Jews were united in the name of the religion of 
their fathers they would no longer abide in slavery with a docile air. Pharaoh did 
not want Moses to teach the gospel of justice on this side of the grave. He knew 
that once the Jews determined in their hearts to seek justice here and now they 
would rise up and demand a place in the sun.  
18    So, then, it is with us. Our oppressors are determined to keep our eyes in 
the sky while they control the land under our feet. They are determined to bog us 
down in an impractical ethic of turning the other cheek, the better that they may 
smite our cheeks and rob our pockets. We must not be deceived by the rush 
toward integration that has become the theme of the past few years. Just as the 
Romans were to beware of slave masters hearing integration. Why, I ask you, 
after four hundred years of murder, rape and slavery, do our oppressors now come 
waving the olive branch of integration? Is it that they really love us; is it that they 
are sincerely sorry for their sins and seek restitution? If they love us, then why 
was there no evidence of this love in the hearts of their forefathers when they sold 
our forefathers like cattle on the auction block? If they are really seeking to 
atone, then why do they not offer us some measure of restitution -- an area of this 
country we can call our own--to the sons and daughters of the embattled? They 
have not come to this hour because they love us nor is integration a sign that they 
are sorry for their sins. The blunt fact is, our oppressors see fire coming. They see 
the handwriting on the wall and know what it means. They would have you 
believe that the days ahead hold glory for the Christian world.


--- PAGE 11 ---
19    My beloved, I, Elijah Muhammad, who must speak if it kills me and who 
will die rather than lie, tell you this. I know tomorrow! I know the end of it all! 
Tomorrow is not heaven for the Christian world! Tomorrow is hell for the 
Christian world! You have a blind spot because you have not come to the religion 
of your people. Instead you are weeping and moaning over the death of Jesus two 
thousand years ago. You are going insane over the preaching of Jesus' life and 
death. Yet, you don't weep, moan and go insane over the rapes and lynching of 
your own people in your own time. It is a modern disgrace to see you shouting 
and having spasms in church over the mistaken notion that God gave His only 
son to save the Christian world. What a shame! What fool God would give His 
only son to save the devil? What fool people will give their all in the vain hope 
that the devil can change his horns and lay down his pitchfork? The religion that 
has brought us to the brink of destruction is the way of our oppressors. It is not 
our faith. It is not natural to us. Even more our oppressor cannot follow the very 
religion he would teach us.  
20    I have no alternative but to tell you that there is no life beyond the grave! 
There is no justice in the sweet bye and bye! Immortality is now, here! We are the 
blessed of God! We must exert every means to protect ourselves! The message I 
bring is not for the cowards. Those of you who follow me must be ready to 
withstand the barbs and insults of those who come to investigate, pry, and claim 
that our ultimate aim is to undermine the American way of life. We have no such 
intentions. Our critics know it. There is nothing under the rug or subversive 
about what I say and teach. It is shouted over the air, in the newspapers, on the 
street corners. Why, then should you be intimidated by those who seek only to 
throw fear in your hearts and know what we say is right. How ironic it is that the 
very people who charge us with disturbing the status quo themselves go around 
raping, lynching, denying citizens the right to vote and taking to the halls of 
Congress to call you and me everything from a beast to an amoral entity! Yet they 
unite with their own kind. They give aid and comfort to their own kind. They 
bring their common enemy to naught. When then is it so wrong and subversive 
that you and I unite for the same end?  
21    If you listen well, you can hear the screams of a Negro co-ed in Tallahassee 
as she vainly begs her four white abductors to leave her virtue intact. If you listen 
a little longer, you can hear the pleas of a Milwaukee Black mother as she begs 
police to free her six and seven year old daughters from a white abductor who 
held them captive and took carnal liberties with them for over an hour.  
22    These acts of carnage must come to an end. To that end I suggest the 
following. First, we must discipline our women. If any of them are so blind as to 
consort with our oppressors, then we must take counsel among ourselves and with 
her. We must exert every pressure at our command until she will have returned to 
a state of loyalty to her own. Much of the defection among our women stems


--- PAGE 12 ---
from the fact that they have been cajoled into following the oppressors' style when 
it comes to hair, dress and clothing. These are the badges to sin and cause men to 
leer and behave lasciviously. If you study the customs and traditions of Islamic 
countries you will see the proper manner of dress. These are the rules we must lay 
down and enforce if our women are to receive the respect due them. Of course it 
must be realized that the oppressor seeks out our women to debase them. There is 
no real love and affection in his heart for them or us. She but becomes the tool of 
his pleasure, the object of his scorn. Secondly, we must realize the difference 
between integration and separation. To integrate with evil is to be destroyed with 
evil. What we want -- indeed, justice for us, is to be set apart. We want and must 
insist upon an area in this land that we can call our own, somewhere we can hold 
our heads with pride and dignity without the continuous harassment's and 
indignities of our oppressors. Thirdly, we must realize that whereas the Black 
man in Africa is our brother, our central responsibility is with the Black man here 
in the wilderness of North America. For us to expend our energies pleading for 
the cause of Africa is like a blind man pleading that his fellow blind man be given 
eyes while he continues to stumble in darkness.  
23    The solution to all these problems lies in a clear cut understanding of the 
truth. I have come to bring you that truth. Now, I spell it out so that even the 
children among you may know the nature of tomorrow. First of all you must 
know the truth about God and the devil. We, the Black men are of God. Our 
oppressors whoever they may be are of the devil! Their nature is evil! They are 
incapable of doing good! Secondly, I must tell you the truth about the day of 
judgment. You have been taught that one day the dead In God shall rise again. 
You have taken that to mean that people will get up from the graveyard and walk 
about. That is so much nonsense! Properly read, the resurrection means that we, 
the Black men of North America, will rise from mental death. Realize who we 
are! Discover who God is! Name the devil for the beast that he is! Then, like 
Joseph, go on to become master in the land wherein once you were a slave!


--- PAGE 13 ---
The Fall of America  
Ch apter 2  
Dawn of a New Day  
 
1   America's burden in trying to protect herself from the attacking nations of the 
world is tremendous, one that she will not be able to carry. Therefore, she must 
succumb to the powerful forces that are coming against her. The fall of a nation 
makes way for another.  As the earth continues, all nations and their civilizations 
are limited upon it, except the original nation, which takes on renewals and 
changes.  
2   Though in appearance America seems steadfast, she is moving towards an 
ultimate end. One great problem to be solved in the Fall of America is the 
liberation of the so-called American Negro (the lost and found people of the 
original Black nation of the earth). They have been here for four centuries, 
mistreated and brought into a state of corruption and shame. They now are being 
helped, although they are as blind mentally as someone is physically.  
3   In all the preparations of the Divine Supreme Being and the nation of 
righteousness to remove the enemy of God and the righteous from the earth, the 
poor so called American Negro cannot see it. In the South, we saw Rev. Martin 
Luther King, Jr. a graduate of theology as I am told, on his knees begging the 
divinely condemned people (the white race) for brotherhood. You (the so-called 
Negro) are too spiritually and mentally blind to see; your heart is too hard against 
receiving the truth, and your ears are too thoroughly closed to the truth (that 
God, Allah, has said the white race is a race of devils, created to be destroyed.) 
This truth is verified in the Bible and Holy Quran.  
4   Hundreds and thousands of preachers tremble at the thought of even 
accepting the truth, and wish to take their followers into the "Fall of America." 
This is the problem to be solved. If it is to be solved then how shall it be solved: 
and what is the best method to use in the solution? It must be a solution that 
touches, not only the enemy, but those who cleave to him while defying the wrath


--- PAGE 14 ---
of Almighty Allah (God). It is incumbent (says the Holy Quran) that Allah give 
life to this mentally dead so-called Negro.  
5   It is also made incumbent in the Bible where Ezekiel declares (in his vision) 
that all of the dry bones were resurrected. This does not refer so much to the 
word because the word has no effect on their resurrection. It literally took 
something more effective than the word. The winds that the prophets were to 
prophesy to represent wars which will eventually bring harm and suffering to the 
rebellious rejecters of the truth. Salvation must come to the so-called Negro. 
Everyone's eyes should be opened. The time of the ending of this world is now, 
and not yet to come, as you so foolishly think.  
6   Study your own Bible (it is there.) The end is predicted and hinted in many 
places. Daniel (in the Bible) however gives you a better knowledge of it than in 
any other place. And the Quran prophecy is exact. Do not expect ten more years, 
the fall will be within a few days. The so-called Negro must be stripped completely 
of the white man's way of life, his name and Christianity. The world of scholars 
and scientists knows that Christianity will not survive. They know Islam is the 
only religion that will survive the destruction of this wicked civilization.


--- PAGE 15 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 3  
Self First  
 
1   "Self First." We, the Black people in America, do not think for self first. 
Failing to think for self first is the greatest mistake we the poor Black people who 
are up from servitude slavery of the fathers can make. But for the slave masters 
children our failure to think for self first is wiser than anything their fathers 
could hardly dream of in their day and time!  
2   Self first.  In over one hundred years, we the Black people have not learned to 
think for self first. This is due to the fact that we try to think something for the 
benefit of the slave master; something to make him smile at the freed Black slave! 
Trying to win the love of the white slave master has been our (the Black People's) 
greatest mistake. Now, it has become our gravest mistake. To have love for them 
(white race) means the fire of hell that God has heated, is being heated up for 
both, you who love the devil, and the devil too! Do not blame the white slave 
master for your love and desire for them above your love and desire for Allah 
(God), who loves you while the white slave master (devil) does not love you. The 
devil's nature will not let him love you! The white slave master is so full of deceit 
that he can deceive you and all others, the Bible teaches us. The Holy Qur'an 
refers to the white slave master, the devil, as "the arch deceiver. "As a deceiver, the 
devil has no equal; he is the professional, the wisest of all deceivers. So from the 
slave master's preacher making parents up to today, he is the professional and 
wisest deceiver of all of the civilizations of the earth, and he has deceived all of 
the civilizations of the earth.  
3   The Bible teaches you that "he deceived the whole world." The white slave 
master, the devil, did not deceive us the Black people in America, alone. He has 
deceived every human being.  Well, except the angels of heaven. The arch-
deceiver, the white man, has deceived the "reverends" that he has made and this is 
why they will not accept Islam; they would rather go to hell with the white slave 
master, devil, if the devil will just honor them as a "reverend" that the devil has 
made. In the Bible, John in The Revelation, sees the preachers and his followers 
burning in hell fire with the devil, the white slave masters. I do not care how 
much you teach or tell the "reverend" that he is headed for hell in following the 
white slave-master, devil; they ignore the warning for the sake of the honor of the 
white slave master. But when you look into it, you will see that the white slave 
master is not honoring the "reverend;" he is fooling him. The white slave master


--- PAGE 16 ---
cares nothing about the "reverend" that he has made, and he thinks that the 
"reverend" is a fool for following him. It is written in the Bible which teaches the 
"reverend" against following the devil. The people who work as the devil's disciples 
are called "reverend." The word "reverend" means "to respect" but this is a false 
honor from the devil and yet the reverend goes still and he will walk right into the 
lake of hellfire with the devil, as long as the devil calls him "reverend" or "father."  
4   Some of the devil's disciples are called "father " after the pope, the chief father 
of Satan's religion, Christianity. The pope claims in the Bible, that he will sit in 
the sides of the north and be like the Most High. Isa. 14:13.14. And yet Allah 
(God) promised to pull him down to hell (Isa. 14:15). And Allah is going to pull 
him down real fast. The Vatican, the home of the pope, has gotten one of the 
worst beatings with plagues, snow, ice, and enemies--the worst beatings that you 
ever could have imagined coming to the head of the church. This shows that Allah 
(God), the Supreme Being, does not respect Rome and its father whom they call 
pope. The Vatican, if it were a holy place, we would not expect to suffer the curse 
of nature. We who live in America live in a cursed country. America is a cursed 
country. America is a divine place of exile for Allah's enemies and he promises to 
use America now for a lake of fire in which to burn all of his enemies. The 
Indians, the first people who were sent--who migrated to America--the Indians 
were also the enemies of Allah.  
5   Self first.  The "reverends" are the enemies of their (our ) own Black People. If 
the preachers do as the white slave master tells them to do the white slave master 
kills them as he did Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. But since they are the devil's 
disciples, he should kill them if they do not obey him. That is right, if the devil 
wants to be a god like Allah, for Allah will kill those who do not obey him! So the 
devil kills those whom he sent and who will not obey him--so look out "reverend!" 
Be careful "reverend!" The white slave master has proved in our own eyes and 
hearing by killing Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. who thought he was blessed to go 
to heaven; but instead he went to hell with his enemies. I do not mean a hell that 
is in the earth someplace, brother. Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. went to hell in 
the wickedness of his white enemies, trying to satisfy his white enemies. He gets 
no credit for all of the work that he did for his enemies, and his enemies know 
that. I dare any one of the Christian theologists to try to prove that Rev. Martin 
Luther King, Jr. went anywhere else. Good man that he was, Rev. Martin Luther 
King, Jr. was deceived and frightened to his very heart by the enemy.  
6   Self first. Think for self first!! When Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. talked with 
me at my home, I saw in him that he wanted to believe me; but, he was so afraid 
of his enemies. Self first, you cannot serve two masters. I tried my best to put 
fearlessness in him. Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. admitted to me that I am 
teaching right. He admitted that the white man is the devil, but he was afraid to 
take a stand and preach that the white man is the devil. The white man had set


--- PAGE 17 ---
Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. up with a $50,000 Nobel Peace Prize. For this 
money the white man desired that Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. go to hell with 
the devil. The devil did take Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. to hell. If Rev. Martin 
Luther King, Jr. had lasted to this day he would have been in the same corner 
with me. The devil had Rev. Martin Luther King,Jr. in his power through fear. 
But good hearted Black Brother, Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. had a good heart 
but he was yet dead spiritually; yet he was smart enough in his studies to see the 
truth of what I am saying.  
7   So I went down to the Coliseum that we had rented for a mass meeting and I 
told the public what a great time Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. and I had at my 
home. I told the public what a great man Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. was; and 
the white enemy showed Rev. Martin Luther King. Jr. what a great man he 
(Archdeceiver) was and he set Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. up with the prize 
money. Just as it is written the arch-deceiver is capable of deceiving the whole 
world, except God's last Messenger (Lamb), Bible "Revelations".  
8   Self first. Let us try and be ourselves first and stop trying to be like the devil. 
Black man, you are created Black. You, Black man, are the first and the last. 
Black man stop trying to be white. If you see what Allah (God) has prepared for 
the white slave master, the devil, you will run from the devil when you get a taste 
of it. Allah (God) has prepared the fire of hell for them. The Holy Qur'an teaches 
that the Black man will wish that between him and the devil was the distance between 
east and west . But you serve the devil; you love him because he has made you to 
fear him, from the cradle to the grave.  
9   Wake up and take pride in Black self and come on and follow me. I have the 
God with me, the God who says that there is no fear for the one who believes in 
him.Nor shall you grieve.  
10   Just think of the blessing that is in those two promises; no fear, no grief. I 
know we have feared and grieved much. So if anybody needs a God to remove 
fear and grief from him, we are certainly the people. Fear of the devil, the white 
man, is what keeps us back from enjoying heaven. If we do think to please the 
devil, we are most certainly members of hell. Day and night they are killing you 
and each other, of their kind and yet you want to please the devil. You cannot go 
to heaven pleasing the devil. To go to heaven, you have to please God. You, Black 
man, are directly from the God of heaven.  
11  Black man you are created to serve Allah. You were not created to serve the 
devil. Come and follow me, and there will be no fear for you, nor shall you grieve. 
We the Muslims fear none but Allah. If anybody needs the fear removed from 
him, it is the frightened to death Black man in America. Self first.


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 4  
THE BLACK MAN  
 
1    The Black man, for the first time since he has been in the Western 
Hemisphere, is accepting himself as a Black man and not as a colored man. 
Although the Black man has been colored, now the Black man has learned that 
the coloring was false and that the coloring came from a robber (the devil). After 
he (the devil himself) had put our Black fathers asleep to the knowledge of their 
Black selves, the white man pretty nearly destroyed all of the original color of us; 
and he has added in his own color. Never have we, the Black man, been so happy 
to be called Black. And the Book (Bible) teaches us that God will come one day 
and God will choose us, the Black people, to be His people.  
2    We did not know anything about the false color part that God had in mind to 
remove from us; but now God is here among us; and He is teaching us the 
knowledge of our color; and we love our own Black color. And now we have 
learned that the color of our enemy has almost destroyed our original Black; we 
are now waking up to the knowledge that Black is the first color and the last 
color, (if there be a last). And now that we have learned that Black is a better 
color, we want to be Black. You just do not have a better color than Black. Black 
looks good all of the time. The beautiful part of Black is that we love Black. 
Since we now have the knowledge of the two colors (Black and the false color), we 
are separating the original Black color from the false color so that we can preserve 
our own Black color forever.


--- PAGE 19 ---
3    The knowledge of Black self, given to us by Him who knows us; we all should 
be happy and rejoicing to know that we, the Black people were never a wicked 
people until we followed the wicked  one (the white man) after his wickedness. 
God has declared us, the Black man, to be the righteous and God makes it plain 
to see why we are the righteous. We are from the righteous Black people by 
nature. We, the Black man, are righteous by creation, and we cannot be other 
than righteous. This is the happiest time of our, the Black man's life! It is the 
happiest time of our life to learn who we are and to learn that who we are, the 
Black man, is the best of the people!


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 5  
Under the Shadow of Death  
1   We, the Black lost-found of our people here in America live under the shadow 
of death by way of cowardly enemies. Every one of us--the cowardly enemies seek 
our deaths, one way or another. The cowardly enemies will not fight you as a 
brave man would fight you if they think that you would fight back. They will steal 
on you when you least expect an attack from them.  
2   We live under the shadow of death. We fled from the cowardly enemy devils of 
the South, seeking refuge in the same cowardly enemies' brother in the North. 
The enemy devils of the South followed us to the North to see that his brother of 
the North does not treat us any better than they did in the South. They seek 
police jobs so that they can beat and kill us who are trying to escape.  
3   They seek to kill us, or get us killed, at any price. They do not care about our 
loyalty to them. In their hearts there is death for us, the Black Man in America. 
Today, they hold out promises to you only to deceive you. They know that Allah 
(God) is here offering to seat us in heaven at once. And since hell is their 
appointed place, they are trying to get us to go to hell with them on false 
promises. I have told you. Believe it or let it alone. We live "Under The Shadow 
of Death "


--- PAGE 21 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 6  
Babies Murdered  
 
1   Today you read and hear that white America is agreeing to kill unborn babies. 
They have set up a law for it. This is the worse sin that you could agree on to 
have your baby killed before its birth. What are you going to do that for? He tried 
to put out an old unfounded story that you are getting to be too many people and 
"We have to cut the birth-rate." Who needs to cut the birth rate? The Black 
people have no need to cut down; they need to increase the birth rate. The earth 
and the heavens around the earth are ours. Who is going to go hungry? Do you 
not read the past histories of how the righteous were always the winners and the 
victorious people? So will we be, the winners and the victorious people.  
2   We are not thinking of anyone making us hungry unless it is Allah (God), and 
He came to feed us as it is written, "My righteous servant shall eat, but ye shall go 
hungry." And, America, hunger is staring at you now.  Unemployment-you 
cannot buy the food that you used to buy, for you have nothing to buy it with. 
This is why I plead with you to come join up with me and let us go to the earth 
and grow our food not go walking around the city with a basket for the devil to 
drop food into--he will not help you for he will not have any food to drop into his 
own basket. He has not only food stored up, but he has clothes stored up. He has 
plenty of this, but that does not mean that he cannot come to hunger and 
nakedness if Allah (God) strikes at him. Allah (God) brings the wicked into 
desolation before they can get started to strike back.  
3   Murder the Black babies? --The only ones he should be thinning out is 
himself. The earth belongs to the Black People. What do we look like cutting 
down on our birth rate. Is there any narrowing of the earth for Us? The earth is 
being expanded for us. There is plenty of earth for us, for Allah (God) will clear 
the earth of its wicked population. All of those places will be taken by the 
Muslims.  
4   My God! To pay attention to the white man and let him slaughter the babies 
before, and after their birth--this would be like what the fire-worshippers did, 
who worshipped the fire-god Moloch. They took their babies and threw them into 
the fire to be burned up, to show their sincerity to the god of fire.


--- PAGE 22 ---
5   And, are you going to the enemy of the Black Man to have him deprive you of 
giving birth to a Black baby, to let him kill it in your worship of him? Do not you 
think that you are acting like a mighty big fool? I think that you are. This is our 
earth. Have they squeezed it up so that there is no place to live, except they kill 
off the Black people? No. Black brothers and Black sisters, I hope that you will 
read this and understand that we, the Black people, are the true owners and Allah 
(God) is giving our earth back to us. This is what he means as well as the spiritual 
religion of us, when He Says, "Accept your own. This is our earth. He is telling 
you to accept it. He will give it to you. The Bible teaches that "The meek shall 
inherit the earth".  The humble, poor people they will get the earth, 1for it 
belongs to them.  
6   We have parables in the Bible which the writers of the history of Jesus tell us 
were spoken by Jesus--the Parable of the Lost Sheep and the Prodigal Son -- they 
returned and became the owners. This only means you and me. Why do not we 
take our place? Why should we give our babies to the enemy to be destroyed 
because he says you have nothing to feed them with? Follow me and I will show 
you: you will get more houses than you need and more money than you can 
spend. Help me, brothers, and Allah (God) will not deprive you of your good 
reward. I know you understand. What we do for Allah (God) He will do it for us. 
In this day and time we are all tried-- the wicked and the righteous are both tried. 
What sin has the poor Black baby done for you to murder it in your womb? He 
has done nothing. It will come back to you in a terrifying way. Your conscience 
will condemn you for doing such. All of our evil will come before us in a 
palpitating form. Let us not be such fools as to think that we have to east our 
babies into the arms of a murderer to murder them for the excuse that he needs 
to do so in order to feed and house you. No place is crowded but the cities. There 
is plenty of room in the country. The Black man has never had a problem. Look 
at China and India. They do not destroy their babies just because they do not 
have money. They try to have means to take care of them. China takes care of her 
population. India does not take care of hers because she depends on Britain and 
other white people.  
7   We must remember that the white race has no part no share in our earth. They 
only had time to live on our earth. They did not have a share of actual earth itself. 
So let us not kill our Black people for just the asking of a murderer who was 
made to murder us. I warn you. Do not think hard of him for doing what he was 
made for. But I do fault you for following him in what he was made for.


--- PAGE 23 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 7  
When Abe Lincoln, J.F. Kennedy Spoke 
Out for Negroes  
 
1   From the death of Abraham Lincoln to the assassination of President 
Kennedy, it proves that on each one of these occasions where outlaws over ruled 
legal authority, it was in the case of Presidents who opened their mouths and said 
something favorable for the so - called Negro.  
2   I am not saying that this was the reason President Kennedy was assassinated, 
but it seems very strange that every President who says something favorable for 
the so called Negro pays for it with his life. We also can substantiate this by the 
fact that any Negro who wants to lead the so called Negro to a better life and 
towards true peace, freedom, justice and equality, which he is entitled to enjoy, is 
also subjected to the same kind of assassinations or attempts at assassination. I 
know these to be facts. There are some who seem not to want a true freedom and 
who will also speak unfavorably and plan unfavorable actions against those who 
dare to lead a true struggle for justice and equality. The tragic death of President 
Kennedy should serve as a warning to all rulers and people of value that values 
cannot be trusted openly in the presence of thieves and robbers.  
3   There has never been a president elected to such a high office who had the 
heart of everyone for him, and never was there a king who had the people 
wholeheartedly with him, regardless of how good the king, the president, prime 
minister or the spokesman for the king or president. There may be some people 
who do not like the high official holding the top office of the nation. I think that 
they should be well protected, and all precautionary steps should be taken to 
insure such persons safety. Riding in open cars or walking openly in the public is 
usually a needless risk taken by anyone holding such high office, especially when 
they are political officials.  
4   Those spiritual teachers, such as prophets of God and messengers, their lives 
have not been spared in the public according to recorded history of the lives of 
these characters. There are both friends and enemies of public servants and we 
must be aware of them. Such outlaw action permitted in America is a disgrace 
and shame to the government and to people who are recognized as world leaders 
and examples of what others should do in the way of friendship and cooperation.


--- PAGE 24 ---
5   With the great scientific advancement that America has made, it does not 
seem possible in this modern time that the tragedy that took place on the 22nd of 
November should have happened. This is a long way from the assassination of 
president William McKinley. There are sixty-two year's between the two 
assassinations of the presidents of the United State of America, and with such 
great advancement in the science of protection, these things should have never 
happened. Again, it shows to the world that the government of America and its 
people are actually given to such outlaw and violent action.  
6   To take human lives at will, disregarding their own legal law against such 
action, makes the country be classified as country or government of outlaws 
where people have no safety of their lives under the law which claims to safeguard 
the lives of human beings.


--- PAGE 25 ---
The Fall of America  
C h a p t er 8  
T h e N ati o na l  E l e c tio n  
 
1   The Black man of America has been privileged by the slave masters children 
for the last century to vote for whites for the offices to judge and rule. This 
freedom to vote has made the Black man in America feel very dignified and proud 
of himself. He goes to the polls very happy to vote for a white ruler. Today, he is 
gradually changing to a desire to vote for his own kind for such offices of 
authority. We must remember that our vote is strong and powerful only when and 
where the white man can use it to get in the office over his white opponent. After 
the election and the victory there are very few favors that come from his office to 
the Black voters who helped and aided him in getting in the office. Why? Because 
he does not owe the Black voter anything as long as he has to feed, clothe, and 
shelter him.  
2   The Black vote could be cast or not cast. The white citizens of the government 
are going to win and continue to rule anyway. There is much talk of this man and 
that man (who shall the vote of the people put in the White House for the next 
four years?) How much good have the two parties (Republican and Democrat) 
done for us for the last century in the way of freedom, justice, and equality? 
Regardless of what party wins, the die is always set against us (the Black people in 
America).  
3 Injustice, crooked politics, and the breeding of corruption under crooked 
politics have been practiced ever since Adam to the present day rulers. 
Adam was the first crook. There has not been justice for the Black man in 
this race of people, and this is why the race suffers from the effect of chaos 
today. There are Black politicians who would like to use their Black people 
for selfish greed and will throw them behind any crook with money. Black 
politicians of this type have sold their Black brothers to suffering and 
shame for self elevation with the crook. This election is one of the most 
serious in the history of American government, because either party that 
seeks the office of presidency is faced with the problem of saving the lives 
of the people of America. If the present party (Democratic) remains in 
office, you know the answer. If the Republican party takes over, you


--- PAGE 26 ---
should know the answer. There will be a lull before the storm. The storm 
can be delayed and every hour and day that it can be delayed is to your 
benefit. The Black man should be very serious and careful about his voting 
because 90 per cent of the Black votes cast are cast by ones who do not 
have the knowledge of what they are casting their vote for. I still say, as I 
have said for many years, vote for Allah (God) to be your ruler and come 
follow me.


--- PAGE 27 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 9  
The Dead are Rising! They 
seek their Own!  
 
1   The dead are we, the Black once slaves of the white man of America. We are a 
mentally Dead people. We are dead to the knowledge of self and others. The 
knowledge of self has now come to us from God, Who Came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever! Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever, is A Man. His Teachings bring us 
into Reality, and not into some kind of spooky, or spirit, or ghost -like teaching.  
2   Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever is The All Wise 
and Living God. He Desires that we see Him as He is a Human Being and not 
something beyond the family of human beings...spookisms. We could never ask a 
formless spirit to lead us because we are not a formless spirit ourselves. Man can 
only listen to man. Man cannot listen to other than man. And I have proof.  We 
just never were able to obey anything but ourselves! We, the once Dead, mentally, 
are coming to the knowledge of life; when we learn this lesson of the living, it will 
destroy the belief in other than ourselves.  
3   Bringing us up in slavery time putting us to a mental death was something 
that the slave master and his children did because of their desire to make us into 
something that was other than the truth, in order to be able to keep our minds 
enslaved! From the Visit of God, in the Person of Master Fare Muhammad to 
Whom Praises are Due forever, the Time, now, has come to us, as it is written. 
That on the Day of Judgment, we will see God as He Is (Bible; Rev. 1:7.). The 
Rise Of The Dead, does not, by any means, mean what you and I were taught 
when we were little boys and little girls; and even while we are little boys and little 
girls in man and woman  age, we are still pushed on a baby side, for 
understanding of the truth. We, the Black People, are no longer babies.  We are 
babies to no one, except, God Himself! You are fast learning that you are not 
babies any more but on your Rise Up From The Dead knowledge of Black self, 
and others.  
4   You are learning fast that Allah (God) Is Fast creating in us a new way of 
thinking, for the way in which we had been thinking was in a way of untruth and 
an unseemly way of understanding. America is a country where evil is dominant 
and the people in America think nothing but evil! It is very seldom that you can


--- PAGE 28 ---
talk to a person without getting the thought, quickly, that their mind is filled 
with evil! We, the Black People in America, are called the Dead, spiritually. And, 
We, the Black People in America, now desire to make for ourselves something 
better than what the slave master's children have made of us. We want to make 
something better of ourselves than what the slave master's children still do make 
of us. Look at the many people who used to be stage actors, and who are now 
forsaking the stage as being a mockery to them and are now former stage actors 
who want to be seen and conversed with as civilized black People; and not as 
some kind of a stage actor. The white stage actors are with some sense because 
they are civilized. A meaningless act is not enjoyed by a people who are 
intelligently learned into the knowledge of civilization. But the poor Black Man 
in America has no knowledge of any civilization. But the white man has gotten 
into all of the civilized people of the earth and he knows them and they know 
him.  
5   This is why now a war between civilizations must take place; because the 
present ruler (white race) has deceived the whole entire civilized world with their 
civilization of deceit! The white race was made for the purpose of making 
mischief. The white race was made for the purpose of deceit. And, now that 
Almighty God Has Come to Make Manifest that which has been hidden of the 
truth, this runs the white man from under his deceitful blanket which had the 
white man covered.  
6   As the Bible teaches us "God will pull the covering off of the covered and show 
the nations his (white race's) shame" (Nah. 3:5). If the white man had not been 
uncovered by Almighty God Allah Who Came in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever, I do not see any cover left for the 
white mans skin! By Allah (God) Pulling the cover off of the white race this 
makes it possible for us, the Black People who were Deaf to the knowledge of the 
truth, to See the natural characteristics of this deadly white enemy of the Black 
Man.  
7   Now we can shun our enemy like we do a rattle snake! When we see the rattle 
snake, or hear his rattler sing, we begin to try and seek cover from the rattle  
snake if we are not able to kill for we know his deadly sting. But this snake (white 
race) has overtaken us and he has bitten us so many times that we have become so 
poisoned from his poison getting into our blood, from his sting, that it has taken 
God, now, to Come to prevent the snake from continuing to sting us. And Allah 
(God) has the Cure for our being bitten by the snake. He will Separate both of us 
from being involved with each other so the snake's poisonous sting will not affect 
us. The Black Man in America has never known anyone but the white race: 
therefore, the Black Man seeks pacification and mercy from a merciless people. 
You cannot blame the white man for what he is, you cannot blame him for being 
merciless, for the white people were made the people that they are. And the white


--- PAGE 29 ---
man has made us, the Black Man, other than our own self. At the present time, 
we are not like we were when we were created in the Beginning! In the Beginning 
we were created right. Then, we were deceived by the deceiver who was made a 
deceiver, by nature.  
8   Our Black People are Rising Up. And we are happy to Rise into the 
knowledge of self and others. The Rise Of The Dead will be like the blast of a 
trumpet pretty soon! The Black People will become into the knowledge of 
themselves so fast that it will look like The Rise of The Dead has taken place at 
once! I just love to look at my Black People now. All of them are Rising. And 
listening to them talk you see how much different they are! My Black People 
must get out of the white man's name. But my Black People must be qualified to 
enter their real Original Name of Almighty God Allah! Come to the Temple of 
Islam and learn all about yourself, and after learning all about yourself, you will 
be able to take those who enslaved you. and wrap them around your little finger 
and you will not feel them on your little finger until you see them on your little 
finger and shake them off! Allah (God) Loves you and I love you. We want to 
Build Up this world for ourselves, to live in this world in Peace and happiness!


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10  
Resurrection of our People Resurrection of our People Resurrection of our People Resurrection of our People  
 
 
1  The old world must be removed to make way for the new 
world. There is a universal struggle being waged by the old world 
against the beginning of the new world. Will the old world's 
opposition prevent the establishment of the new world? 
According to recorded history, the efforts being made by the old 
world against the beginning of a new world will fail as did former 
opponents of Allah.  
 
2    According to the history of Noah, the people ridiculed the 
very thought of Allah bringing a flood to drown them. Noah was 
laughed at and scorned for preaching such a doctrine. According 
to the Bible and Holy Qur'an, he was called a liar and looked 
upon as a crazy person. Some of the members of Noah's family 
joined the mockers and disbelievers of Allah and His Messenger, 
who was Noah. They met the same fate as the others who 
disbelieved. For nearly thirty-four years, I have served you, just 
as Allah's warners of old served a hard hearted and hard headed, 
disbelieving people, who were great lovers of the enemies of Allah 
and the true religion, Islam (which means entire submission to 
Allah's will). 
 
3   The opposition of that world to the advent of a better world 
was a total failure. So shall it be with those today who oppose the 
beginning of a new world of righteousness (Islam.) In the time of 
Abraham and his nephew (Lot)-before the birth of Ishmael and 
Isaac, Abraham's two sons-the people, mockers and haters of 
truth and righteousness in that part of the world (the cities of 
Sodom and Gomorrah,) had become victimized to every 
imaginable evil. They even threatened the life of the preacher of 
righteousness, Lot, disregarding the strangers (angels) visiting 
Lot-until it was too late. So it is with the opponents of the 
Messenger of Allah today in America.  
 
4   Messengers are never sent; they always are raised in the 
midst of those whom Allah would warn so they can't claim


--- PAGE 31 ---
that they did not understand the language of the Messenger, 
or say that he was a foreigner or stranger.  The Messenger is 
one from them.  
5   For nearly thirty-four years, I have served you, just as Allah's 
warners of old served a hard hearted and hard headed, 
disbelieving people, who were great lovers of the enemies of Allah 
and the true religion, Islam (which means entire submission to 
Allah's will).  
6   There is mockery, and evil plans are made against my life by 
the wicked just as they were made against Noah and subsequent 
prophets. The powerful, rich world of Christianity 
especially America, is made to seem as immovable as the 
mountains. But it is not impossible to remove mountains; they 
can be removed by high explosives. So wealth and power also can 
be reduced to nothing. 
 
7   We are now living in the judgment, or doom, of the white 
man's world. Preparations have been made to meet every effort 
by the white man to oppose the beginning and setting up of 
Allah's new world of righteousness (Islam.) The government 
(U.S.A.) today watches my followers with an evil eye, seeking to 
deceive anyone who would enter the fold to help further the 
cause of truth and the upliftment of the mourning heads and the 
grieving hearts of the American so-called Negroes; to help make 
them a nation of righteousness and justice to serve as a star for 
the nations of their own kind forever. The U.S. government is 
active in its deceitful work of trying to slow the progress of the 
resurrection of our people. 
 
8   American whites want us to reject Allah and the true religion, 
Islam, and believe in their false religion and false god, whom 
they cannot make manifest to you. They cannot prove to you, in 
this day and time, that Christianity is a defense for you--as well 
as for themselves-- against their doom.  
9   America must be taken and destroyed, according to the 
prophets, at the time and end of the wicked world, where the lost 
and found members of the ancient and aboriginal people are 
found. America hates and mistreats her slaves to the extent that 
it has reached the heart of Allah and the righteous people of the


--- PAGE 32 ---
earth (the Nation of Islam.)  
10  We read where our Black brothers refer to the American so-
called Negroes as their brothers, while according to the preaching 
of some of these lost and found members of the aboriginal nation 
of the earth, they would rather have themselves referred to as the 
brothers of their enemies. The extent to which the enemy has 
poisoned the minds and hearts of my people here in America is 
shameful. They willfully do anything to deceive the so called 
Negroes into going to their doom with them. There is no way for 
the enemy of Allah, His Messenger and His people (the darker 
people of the earth) to find strength, power and wisdom enough 
to win in a war against Allah.  
11  As it is written in the Christian Bible and many other places:  
"But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in 
thee, which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and 
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the 
works that art therein shall be burnt up." (Bible, Peter, 3:10.)  
12  The earth shall not be burned, it will be here for many 
thousands of years to come. Only that on the earth (the devils) 
which has sinned against Allah and His laws will be destroyed. 
The earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars have never disobeyed 
Allah since their creation.


--- PAGE 33 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 11  
Opposers of Truth  
  
1 Adam and Eve ( the father and mother of the white race - (Yakub is the real 
name) refused the religion of Islam (peace) because of the nature in which they 
were made. This makes it impossible for the white race to submit to Allah and 
obey His law of righteousness. This, the lost-found members of the Asiatic nation 
from the Tribe of Shabazz must learn of the white race: that it is a waste of time 
to seek mercy and justice from a people who by nature do not have it for each 
other. They talk and preach the goodness of God and His prophets only to 
deceive you, who by nature are of the God of Righteousness, into following them 
away from our God to a god who does not exist.  
2 Our future is at stake, and 99 per cent of us do not know it. With ever-evil 
snoopers around you seeking an excuse to do their worst to you makes it hard for 
the 99 percent ignorant to ever know the truth. Their greatest desire is to prevent 
you from ever accepting the truth. They claim the truth to be subversive and hate 
teachings. They seek any kind of charge to place against us to get revenge for our 
teaching the truth. They tap our telephones, eavesdrop and follow us around from 
place to place, and use tape recording machines; and the hypocrites and stool 
pigeons among us keep them up to date on what we say and do. They are bold 
enough to even ask your own relatives to help them to do you evil; and due to fear 
and ignorance on the part of my poor people, the enemies hire them to destroy 
themselves. Truth hurts the guilty. Will persecuting and murdering the truth 
bearer help the evil doers in this late hour of the day (the end of their time)?  
3 Our problem must be solved, saith Allah, the God of Righteousness, Who is 
with you and me to raise us up, the poor lost and found members of the Original 
Owners of the Planet Earth (the tribe of Shabazz). A good solution is as follows:  
4 Stop opposing the spread of Islam (peace) among us. Let us go back to our 
God, Allah, and our religion of Islam (peace). Since you will not give us (the so-
called Negroes) equal justice, and do not want social mixing with your free slaves 
because of degrading and lowering your own status in the eyes of the world, help 
us to go for ourselves, either out or in your country.  
5 For 400 years, we have served you with our labor, sweat and blood, the lash of 
your whip, your killings, lynching and burning of our innocent Black flesh, 
without even a hearing in a court of justice, nor even our murderers being


--- PAGE 34 ---
punished. Although we are marched before your enemies, and there we pour out 
our lives for the freedom of your lives, children and your country, we return home 
to meet an even worse enemy. We are hated and kicked out in certain places like 
an "unwanted dog" who has caught the game but was not given a taste of it (only 
that which the hunter could not and should not eat himself). The dog, being too 
ignorant to recognize the injustice done to him by his master, will jump to his 
feet again at the call of his master to offer his life for his master’s life. This we 
have and still are doing for you.  
6 We are not wanted in your better neighborhoods. In many places we have to be 
guarded and protected by your armed forces in order to live in a house which one 
of your kind has sold to us. Yet, we are the most peaceful and humblest of the 
population. We are taxed equally and perhaps more than those of our own kind 
who are the real citizens and owners of this country, America, though our labor 
and the labor of our fathers made and built it for you.  
7 Think it over - millions of us working, fighting and dying at your hand and 
others for four hundred years without a home which we can call our own - not 
being allowed to worship our God, religion, nor have unity among self and our 
kind without being charged with the worst of crimes: subversiveness, sedition, 
treason and seeking to overthrow the government by force (though we have no 
arms to do such) just to have and excuse for your persecuting and seeking to kill 
the same poor four hundred year old slave.


--- PAGE 35 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 12  
Deceivers and The Deceived  
  
  
1 We, the whole nation of the lost-found members of the Black nation in 
America, must remember that for the past four hundred years we have been 
reared by the enemies of our fathers.  
2 According to their own history writing, bringing us from our native land and 
people into the Western Hemisphere was not for the purpose of making 
themselves friendly people to us and our nation, but to deceive us as being that 
which they actually were not - a friend and advisor to us, while at the same time, 
depriving us of truth, justice and equality even now, after four hundred years of 
servitude slavery.  
3 We must remember that the deceiver actually has deceived us. The coming of 
God in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad (to Whom praise is due forever)is 
to make manifest this arch deceiver’s work against us and to acquaint us with the 
nature of the arch deceiver - that deceit is part of his very nature.  
4 He (Allah) comes to give us the knowledge of the god of evil who had freedom 
for the past six thousand years to deceive not only you and me but also the entire 
nations of the earth.  
5 This is the greatest salvation that God (Allah) could bring to you and me - to 
know the source of our trouble and its cause. The power of the Manifestor is to 
remove this cause which has affected the Black nation for six thousand years.  
6 It is worth the heaven and the earth to us when we agree on not trying to make 
them our friends, which by nature they cannot be, even if they wanted to. Only a 
few have the belief of goodness. By nature, they are not good, but they can 
practice goodness.  
7 Our predicament and position makes us the victim of deceit of these great 
scientific deceivers, the white race. They put us to sleep as babies, and they know 
the type of noise that will awaken the sleeping baby. The noise is that which Allah


--- PAGE 36 ---
(in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad) has made. And He (Allah) has 
missioned me to continue to make that noise until all of our people are fully 
awakened from the slumber of the arch deceiver of the nations of the earth.  
8 Surely not all are really working to keep us blind, deaf, and dumb to the 
knowledge of the deceiver; but the few who would help us endanger their own 
lives in trying to help us.  
9 As you see, the Christian priest Groppi, in Milwaukee - who professes to be 
trying to help those who want to live next door and in the house of the children 
of our father’s slave master - is having trouble. Even this easily can be classified 
as deceitful work against true freedom, justice and equality for our people. This 
priest Groppi is having trouble among other open vicious haters of you and me, 
of his kind.  
10 This priest wants to help the poor Black man here in America , and especially 
in Milwaukee, to accept false friendship; to forever be at their mercy to rule 
spiritually, economically and politically.  
11 He is not trying to teach the Black men that they should not want to sell 
themselves back to the slave master for a morsel of pottage. The priest knows by 
the scripture in his Bible that the time is ripe for the total freedom of the 400-
year-old slave of the white man to go to his own (earth). The priest is wise to you, 
that you should have a place to live wherever you want.  
12 He would not have dared teach this openly before this day and time - the end 
of this world. The others are so, evil and vicious to do us harm that great gangs of 
white people out in the streets will attack one poor Black man going through the 
area in his car and will yell "Get the nigger!"  
13 This is a cowards action of the white man in America ever since we have been 
here - going after the so-called Negro to do him harm. He always wants a hundred 
whites to attack that one Negro. This shows cowardice and the savage instinct of 
the white race against Black people. The Black man can put a stop to such 
attackers of this evil force, but it is not the way of Allah (God). It is not the way 
of the prediction, as the priest knows.  
14 The coming of Allah in search for the Black lost members of their nation 
today is to make Himself known, so He can conquer our captors by using 
weapons against which they have no power. He (Allah) will bring attacks of divine 
judgement of their world without the use of contrived weapons.  
15 The weapons of war used by God in the past history of the destruction of the 
enemies of God - such as Noah’s people, Lot’s people, and Moses’ people - are an


--- PAGE 37 ---
example of what he will use today. The weapons are the forces of nature against 
which we have no defense.  
16 America is under such divine attack now, in storms as rain, hail and 
earthquakes - (the latter is yet to take place.) A terrific drought is on its way, too 
against America. The Book must be fulfilled. The Bible and the Holy Qur’an 
both refer to all that I have said.  
17 This is the divine judgement to bring vicious America to her knees. She 
(America) hates the people of God and the Negroes do not know that they are 
really the people of God. This is the great truth that you must come into the 
knowledge of - that you are a member of the family of God, and not a member of 
the family of the devil. But you follow the devil, contrary to your own nature. The 
natural man (Black) is of God Himself.  
18 We have been deceived of righteousness, justice, and equality by the arch 
deceiver. We have been taken from the knowledge of self as being the true people 
of God and that God is present seeking us to place us again in the orbit of the 
Divine Supreme Being where we can rotate in submission to the will of God as 
the entire universe is doing - except the white race.  
19 We cannot set up a better government for our people by using the corrupt 
political activities of this people - the arch deceivers. All of their work was based 
upon deceiving the nation, not to bring them into friendly brotherhood and 
prosperity for the Black man.  
20 Even today, after a hundred years of so-called freedom, he is still against you 
going free. This is your trouble today. You are deceived, and deceived by the 
enemy you think is a friend, but take note of what he offers you. He is offering 
you only temporary enjoyment - and not a permanent enjoyment for your people. 
We want some earth, and not a temporary room in the house of our enemy.  
21 Let the political and spiritual leaders unite on such a stand as getting some 
earth for the people, and not getting just a job and a chance to loll around, 
sleeping and allowing the enemy to protect our responsibility for self. We must 
bear our own responsibility.  
22 This the God of justice and truth will force you to do, before He will be 
defeated, His purpose and aim is to reunite us to our own. He will fight the arch 
deceiver with the forces of nature and with His own wisdom, which has no equal, 
to make you and the enemy bow to His will.  
23 This is the judgement of the world and especially of the white man in 
America, who has been here for 400 years, living between the two oceans - the


--- PAGE 38 ---
Atlantic, and the Pacific - to do as he pleases. The slave is deprived of the 
freedom to do as he pleases, but to do as the slave master pleases.  
24 Our great misunderstanding of self and of others lies in the deceit of the arch 
deceiver of us. They will never teach you and me to do good for self, only under 
their own power and dictatorship.  
25 What we need is to unite, not demanding and marching all over the country to 
live near the white man in his home - but demand a separate place for us in this 
country and help us with the means of civilization, as he had to get started, 
limiting the time to get started within the next twenty or twenty-five years.  
26 Many scientists think that it is too late for this demand because of the anger 
of Allah (God) against America for her evil done to us, but Allah has power over 
all things and He does that which he wills to do.  
27 It is up to America, if she wants to help us. It would be a great good, putting 
us on the way to self, by any evil one or nation. The God of justice would grant 
them a reward for doing such, as no good act goes without its reward.  
28 They deceive the so-called Negro under temptation, filth, indecency and a 
promise that they will be given jobs and new homes next door to them in the 
same territory which their very nature is against and which is without any future. 
It is temporary enjoyment. We want something permanent. Give us a few of these 
states to live in to ourselves which we have well earned with four hundred years of 
free labor.  
29 When he sees that his life and your life are at stake to try to accept the present 
plans, filled with deceit to the Negro, both you and he will welcome an 
opportunity to agree on the kind of program.  
30 Unite with me, Black America, for your salvation.


--- PAGE 39 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 13  
Evil Spreading Far, Wide  
  
 
1 Never since the creation of Adam and Eve have there been such chaotic times as 
we are witnessing today - with the worst yet to come! There is no peace among 
the nations of the earth.  
2 The only people who enjoy peace of mind and contentment in this day and time 
are the elect of God, thought they are persecuted from city to city and falsely 
accused and denied the credit due them because of their righteousness in the 
midst of the wicked who have ruled the world.  
3 By no means can the righteous be represented for their righteous sake by the 
evil - doers of the world.  
4 "God is despised and rejected; evil is accepted and honored; justice stands afar 
off, and equity cannot come in," says the prophet Isaiah in the Bible.  
5 The Holy Qur’an warns us to fear a day when evil is spread far and wide in the 
days of God’s presence at the end of the satanic world to bring it to naught.  
6 Allah (God) causes the evil world to be upset since they have been the enemies 
of peace and the haters and destroyers of the righteous who would have brought 
them peace if they had accepted those worthy (the Prophets).  
7 But they rejected all; Jesus charged them with being the murderers of the 
righteous from Abel to Zachariah - we can very well add more, and say from Abel 
to Muhammad.  
8 Today, America professes to be the most Christianized country on our planet. 
But actually she is not; for Christian means to be crystallized into one. 
Spiritually, that One refers to the Christ.  
9 Christ means the "One Who is coming at the end of the world of the wicked as 
a crusher." His name actually means "One who is anointed to crush the wicked." 
The real satanic people are the white race who have disguised themselves to


--- PAGE 40 ---
deceive the Black people to follow them. They just use the name, Christian, 
which means to be Christ-like.  
10 They have set up a head for their religion in Rome, Italy, with the pope or 
father who represents himself as being the intercessor or viceregent; meaning one 
who is second only to Christ or God and intercedes for the people’s sins and 
recognition of God. But he has no Divine backing.  
11 This false regime should be destroyed by the Christ, the Crusher of the 
wicked, the Great Mahdi of Islam (Allah ‘God’ in person).  
12 These are the days of God’s or Christ’s presence to destroy this evil world with 
all the deceptions that the people should again labor under a wicked and merciless 
ruler, the devil. The presence of Allah has upset the devils who have had and 
exercise total control over the world under falsehood and have made evil to appear 
fair-seeming.  
13 The so-called Christian world has never before displayed such madness as they 
do today. Since they cannot hide their real wickedness and deceitful ways, they 
are angry.  
14 According to the preaching and teaching of Christianity, they prophesy that 
they alone would be the happy group that would welcome the coming of the 
Messiah, the Christ, or the Mahdi. But the Bible condemns them; that they were 
angry and sought to hide their faces from Him (God).  
15 It should be clear to you today that Christian America does not want such 
preaching as entire submission to the will of Allah (Islam). The Christians hate 
the very names of God: such as Muhammad, Omar, Karriem, Ali, Hassan, which 
are attributes of God.  
16 The Jesus prophesied that they would hate you for His (God’s) name sake, for 
having one of His names. Because the names of God are to live forever. No other 
people on earth have the names of God but the Muslims.  
17 So the coming of the Just One makes manifest to you this evil race of sinners. 
And they will be against His (God’s) presence; be angered because of Him and 
will seek to destroy Him and His messenger as it is prophesied (2nd Psalms).


--- PAGE 41 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 14  
Every Nation Has A Term  
  
1 "And every nation has a term; so when its term comes, they cannot remain 
behind the least while, nor can they precede (it)." - Holy Qur’an 7:34.  
2 There was a term for the people of Noah, Lot, and Moses. This also holds true 
in the life and death of individuals - all is under the control of Almighty Allah - 
especially when a divine beginning and ending has been appointed for the 
accomplishment of a certain work that must be done by the life or the life of 
peoples.  
3 The above chapter and verse of the Holy Qur’an is a warning to the present 
nation whose term is now coming to an end. If we know what is said to us and 
what is written by the prophets for us to read, study and ponder over, and if we 
understand, we should not fall victims to misunderstanding and disbelief.  
4 The trouble with the Black man in America is that he is heedless of the truth, 
for he was reared by slave foster-parents who were his enemy (the white race). 
They caused him to become heedless. It was the intention of the enemy to make 
the Black man an enemy to the truth as he himself was and is.  
5 This the enemy was successful in doing, for the aboriginal Black man in 
America is referred to as being blind, deaf, and dumb, and in many instances as 
dead. This is the work of the enemy.  
6 Therefore, it took one who is our friend and not our enemy, to do good to us 
and restore us to life (mentally). The children of the fathers (slave masters) who 
took our life (mental) are working just as faithfully as their fathers did.  
7 However, since 100 years have elapsed from the time of their slave-fathers, the 
children are wiser and educated more in methods to keep the aboriginal Black 
man in America blind, deaf and dumb.  
8 In the days of servitude slavery - of our grandparents - the white slavemaster 
did not even give them good food. Today, you can buy good food if you have the 
money. However, much of it is poisoned (by chemicals used). The slavemaster 
would offer a piece of fried chicken and a biscuit with a little butter on it to a so-
called Negro as an inducement for him to teach or preach what the slavemaster


--- PAGE 42 ---
wanted him to, to the other slaves on Sunday morning. The slaves did not have 
the theology of the scriptures and he made his other brothers spiritually blind, 
deaf and dumb.  
9 The same goes for the preachers of today, as you can see. They preach for a 
reward from both white and Black. I have tried them for many years. They are as 
their fathers were. They desire the exaltation of the white man. They want him to 
give them better positions and they will offer to cut off the heads of their Black 
brothers if it will please "master."  
10 Although I live in a neighborhood with white neighbors, I do so for the 
purpose of proving that I can live in their neighborhood just as cleanly and 
noiselessly as they do. White people do not like you to come into their 
neighborhood, jumping on them and licking them in the mouth like a puppy.  
11 They do not want their friends to think that they are taking you for an equal. 
He will talk to you as a friend when he is not in the presence of members of his 
society. They do not like you coming into the block beating your wife or girl 
friend and drinking in front of their houses. No decent and intelligent person 
likes this, whether he is white as snow or Black as the ace of spades.  
12 You can go to the jungle and the pygmy will not want this. Late at night he 
and a gang of monkeys will come out and beat you up.  
13 The American so-called Negro has been made out of himself and kind by the 
white Americans . He must now be reformed. In fact, God has promised him a 
new body. The Bible and the Holy Qur’an teach us that we will be a new people 
altogether. He was destroyed and acts ignorant and foolish. He is not aware of his 
ignorant actions because he has become a part of ignorance.  
14 Now the end of the term which was set for the white man has come. The 
average so-called Negro, the lost found member of the Black nation does not 
know that this is the end of the world of the white man (his rule over the Black 
nation). He will not listen to one of his own kind who tells or teaches him of the 
time and doom of the world that we have known (white man’s world).  
15 They offer high positions and money to the so-called Negro intellectual 
politicians who will work against the good of the Black American people. They 
will accept such gratuity, for they have been deprived of love for self and kind. 
What so they care about the millions who are sprawled in the mud of civilization? 
They are content as long as they eat the buttered biscuit and the fried chicken (as 
their slave-fathers did).


--- PAGE 43 ---
16 You would not think that they would hire themselves out to be stool pigeons - 
white man’s bootlickers and Uncle Toms in these modern times of advanced 
education - but they are doing just that.  
17 They do not want the praise and exaltation of God and their own Black 
people. They want it from the slavemasters’ children. The slavemasters’ children 
will give it to them as long as they reject themselves and kind and worship and 
exalt the white people.  
18 The white man is very clever in making a public fool of the Black man. They 
show the brown, yellow and red man what a good job they have done on the Black 
man in America and throughout the earth. He is doing what nature bids him to 
do.  
19 I do not blame the white man anymore for making fools of our people. It is 
the nature of the white man to make a fool of our people, but it is not the nature 
of our people to allow him to make a fool of us.  
20 But , you have been given the knowledge of yourself, the nature in which God 
created you, and you still allow the enemy to make a fool of you, then you do not 
have the sympathy of God and the righteous, not after knowledge.  
21 The divine term that was given to the white race to allow them to make a fool 
of the Black man and rule him with tricks is now up. The devil with his tricks 
must be removed.  
22 He was given this chance to deceive you with his tricknology; and therefore, 
God will not hinder the devil from tricking you if he can. This is written in the 
Holy Qur’an, chapter 7. But God promised hell-fire to both the devil and his 
followers whom he can get from the Black Nation.  
23 Therefore, you and I - after knowledge of the devil, his tricks, and his term - 
should not blame anyone but ourselves, if we allow the devil to trick us, for that is 
the job of the devil. It is his nature. We blame ourselves and not the enemy.  
24 You lust for his half-nude women and thirst for whiskey and beer. You desire 
gambling, robbing and killing each other for the personal property of others. This 
is the work of the devil upon you. You do not have to allow him to cause you to 
live such a life. Do not blame them, blame your foolish self.  
25 It has always been the policy of the white man to use a Black man against a 
Black man - especially leaders. Look at history. See how he has deceived and 
killed off the Black leaders of foreign lands and then they took over themselves. 
This should be a lesson for you and me.


--- PAGE 44 ---
26 We, the Muslims, have watched our people who have come among us as eyes 
and ears (stool pigeons) for white folks. When they have become converted to the 
truth and join us, they confess that they are ashamed that have worked against us, 
for the sake of a few perishable dollars.  
27 We know that the white man is our enemy and wherever we are, he offers 
some silly so-called Negro a higher office and higher pay to work against us 
Muslims, the righteous, or any so-called Negro. Whether he be a Baptist, 
Methodist, Holy Roller or Sanctified, some lazy so-called Negro will work against 
him for the white man.  
28 It is a shame in such modern times to see Black politicians and preachers 
accepting positions to work against their own Black people for a few dollars from 
a race whose time has come to an end.  
29 We are justified in taking it if the white man gave us a billion or a hundred 
billion dollars. We deserve it. But we are not justified to sell our lives for such a 
gift in this day and time.  
30 Declare yourself a Muslim and see how much the devil will give you. He would 
say , "We will give it to you if you preach that we are not the devil." We would 
answer, "that is just the same as saying, ‘If you do not teach the truth of me, so 
that I can continue to deceive the world of your kind, I will help you.’"  
31 Remember what the Bible teaches us that Satan said to Jesus, "...All these 
things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me." Matt: 4:9. And he 
showed him the kingdoms of the world.  
32 Perhaps you will be offered the world of the wicked pretty soon. If so, The 
Bible says, "What profit a man if he gain the world and lose his own life (soul)?" 
This is a warning to the preachers.  
33 The little money, with its dying value, will not help you against God’s aims 
and purpose of the resurrection of the dead Lost-Found members of the 
Aboriginal Nation. You will lose your lives for so doing- and you should, for you 
cause innocent ones who are blind, deaf, and dumb to go to hell with yourself and 
the enemy.  
34 Allah, (God) came forth in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praise is due forever, the Son of Man, as it is written, seeking to save that which 
was lost and to restore again that which had gone astray.


--- PAGE 45 ---
35 He said to me that He would eat rattlesnakes to save our lives and that He 
would walk forty miles up a mountain to teach just one in order to save his life in 
exchange for our safety and return to our own.  
36 I have taken Him for my God and my Saviour. I advise you to do the same, 
regardless of the offers of money, which is fast becoming worthless.  
37 Jesus refused the money and dwelt upon the truth that is written that we must 
not worship Satan. Satan’s place is behind us and not in front of us.  
38 It is the nature of Satan to try and deceive the very angels in heaven; not to 
think of the fools who are in his hell. In the Bible (Rev.), it is written that you 
would accept the enemy and go down in a lake of fire with him.  
39 Read the following passages of your Bible which dwells on the time and 
yourselves: Prov. 14:12, 19:20, 25:8, Isa. 9:7, 46:10, 2:19, Eze. 7:2, 3, 21:25, 
35:5, Dan. 5:6, 11:45, I Pet. 4:7, Rev. 21:6, 22:13.  
40 Holy Qur’an translation by Maulana Muhammad Ali - Chapters 104:1-7, 
75:1-15, 35:40, 7:22, 103:2, 4:117-120, 7:20,21.


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 15  
America America America America  
1 The American white people are more concerned about mistreating the Black once-slave 
of America than America is concerned with any nation on earth that is attacking her out-
lying posts. Her enemies are intensifying their attacks on her. America is right out of the 
frying pan into the fire all over the earth, due to her evil intentions against her loyal Black 
once-slaves. Her talk of evil-doing against the Black once-slave in America is worse than 
it is against independent nations that are trying to attack and destroy her country. White 
America has more hatred for the Black once-slaves in her midst who are faithfully 
fighting on the firing- line to help her against her enemy than she is against the enemy 
that they are shooting down. 
2 White America talks of building concentration camps (prison houses) for the Black 
once-slave (the Black man in America). I am told that America already has concentration 
camps built for this purpose. Concentration camps are jail houses - prison houses. This is 
why I cry day and night to my Black brothers to seek refuge in Allah (God) in such a 
time as this. 
3 The Muslims do not have to worry about any such imprisonment, for the Muslim is 
already a citizen of the Nation of Islam, and we have our own people (Muslims) to 
deliver us by the order of God. This is why it is so necessary that the Black man in 
America accept Allah (God) and His name and get out of the name of the enemy white 
slave-master, who does not seek to bring peace for us; but the enemy seeks to bring about 
our death. 
4 White America wants her Black once-slave to suffer that which is not due to the Black 
once-slave. The Black once-slave has not sinned nor has the Black once-slave attacked 
other nations except under the order of his white slave-master.


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 16  
Independence Day Independence Day Independence Day Independence Day  
  
1 Whose Independence? Since 1776 you, Black man, have been worshiping the 4th of 
July along with the real author of the 4th of July...(the white man) as a day of 
Independence for themselves. 
2 It is the white slave-master and his children who enjoy setting forth the 4th of July as a 
day of rejoicing over achieving this country’s Independence from any other foreign 
source. 
3 Now, the history of the 4th of July shows that it is the Independence Day of the 
American white man. They wrote the Declaration of Independence for themselves. The 
white man did not put anything in the Declaration of Independence for the benefit of the 
Black Man, who was the servitude - slave of the white man at that time. 
4 The joy which the black slave experienced on these holidays of the white man was due 
to the Black man getting a rest from his labor and the days which the white man had set 
aside for celebration. That is all the Black slave was rejoicing over...that he did not have 
to work that day. 
5 But, you are free now; and you do not need this for an excuse for your worship of the 
4th of July. There is no further need for us to worship the gaining of the white man’s 
independence. 
6 Let us look again at our own Black independence and how it came on this same day of 
the 4th of July....at the Coming of Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, on July 4, 1930. 
7 The significance of His coming to us, on the Independence Day of the white man, is 
very great. It is their day of great rejoicing. As with former peoples and their 
governments, their destruction took place when they were at the height of their rejoicing. 
8 Nebuchadnezzar, according to the Bible history of him, (Dan. Ch.4) was walking 
around in his palace and proudly looking around and admiring the skill of the work he 
had set up and said, "has not all this my hand wrought?" The Bible teaches us that while 
the words were in his mouth, the end came. Allah (God) changed his mind and heart from 
that of a civilized man to the mind and heart of a beast. He had the brain reactions of a 
wild beast and he was cast out among the dumb brutes.


--- PAGE 48 ---
9 What does that signify? It gives us a gleaning into the history of the white man and his 
being cast out of the society of the Muslims six thousand years ago...after he was made 
and then started trouble among the people of righteousness. 
10 Trouble-making caused the white man his exile into the hills and cave-sides of West 
Asia, as Europe was called at that time, so Allah (God) taught me. Its name was changed 
to Europe after the white man was cast into that area. Europe means a place where people 
are bound in, to keep them out of the society of the righteous. 
11 Moses made (white man) as independent race, through the guidance which Allah 
(God) gave Moses, to guide the white man out of his savage cave life, and put him on the 
road of conquest of the Black man. 
12 For four hundred years the white man swallowed us, (the Black man of America) up. 
He did not put us in a hole of the earth but he swallowed us up by keeping anything like 
wisdom from coming to us. He set a bound against our own Black people visiting us in 
order to prevent them from teaching us anything other than what the white man was 
teaching our Black slave-fathers. 
13 This caged us in, and made just as secure a cage as the literal cage of Europe that the 
Arab people put the white man in six thousand years ago. 
14 The 4th of July is the Day of rejoicing of the white man over his opponents, for the 
Western Hemisphere. He wrote his Constitution for his own white people...not for his 
Black slave. 
15 Since this is his day which he set aside for himself, then what part, Black brother, do 
you have in this day? Your part is not mixed with his part in the way of his own white 
politics and physical independence. 
16 But, as I called your attention to proud King Nebuchadnezzar’s history and what 
happened to him at the height of his kingdom, Allah (God) never destroyed a powerful 
people nor deprived them of self - independence when they were in trouble or when they 
were sick with grief. He made them to feel happy. He made them think that they would 
live forever. 
17 So it was with the coming of Allah (God) in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to 
Whom praises are due forever, on His coming to us, on the 4th of July, 1930. His 
presence meant the destruction of the independence of the white race and especially, 
America...over the Black man. 
18 Allah (God) visited the Black slave, for he is more in need of help to enjoy freedom of 
self. 
19 Since Allah (God) came for the purpose of bringing self-independence to the Black 
slave, then His going forth is with justice (Bible Rev. 19:11th).


--- PAGE 49 ---
20 To show Allah’s (God’s) greatness and power over  the slave-master and his people, 
now  
Allah (God) attacks them at the height of their civilization and at the greatness of their 
power and strength, on the 4th of July...while they worship their greatness of their 
accomplishment; and the Black slave is sitting at his feet. 
21 As it was with Nebuchadnezzar and as it was with Pharaoh, the same is being repeated 
today. 
22 This is the significance of Allah’s (God’s) comi ng on the 4th of July. For four hundred 
years we have been suffering under the pangs of servitude-slavery and at the relentlessly 
merciless hands of the white slavemaster over us. 
23 Allah (God) came to give justice and freedom to us and to make us equal members in 
the society of the new powerful, strong, and wise people of the earth. 
24 Ever since that day, the 4th of July, 1930, has meant the doom of American 
domination over the Black man of America and the Black people of the earth. Ever since 
that day, America has been falling. 
25 America’s fall is not imminent...it is now going on. America refused to break her fall 
when she could have broken her fall, as the Bible teaches us. Babylon could have been 
healed, but she was not (Je. 51:9). She did not do anything to warrant such forgiveness. 
26 America has been offered the chance for forgiveness, but she refused to accept it, for 
she never offered to do anything favorable toward her Black slave, that would make them 
free of her power to rule them. 
27 Black slaves went to their death, fighting the enemy of the white slavemaster, to help 
America to maintain her independence against foreign dominance. The Black slave was 
not given anything in exchange for his sacrifice. 
28 When a dog hunts for a hunter, the hunter (master) will sometimes share part of the 
game with the dog. The Black slave has helped his master to overcome and to put other 
peoples under the control of his white slave-master. The Black slave has fought, bled and 
died around the earth, to help the white slave-master to conquer those whom the master 
called his enemies. 
29 We helped the white man to conquer Cuba and to overcome and subdue Mexico and 
the Philippine Islands and other places around the earth, and also Japan. How many lives 
did the black man lose in the Pacific while helping the white man to conquer the people 
of Japan who are the brown, half-brother of the Black man? The brown race and the 
yellow race are the half-brother of the Black man.


--- PAGE 50 ---
30 Whose Independence? Now the white man and the Black man are both free on this 
day. The coming of Allah (God) on this day means the freedom of the Black man too. 
31 The clear significance of Allah’s (God’s) coming  on this day shows the great wisdom 
of Allah (God). 
32 Everywhere the white man may be, even in Europe, the earth belongs to the Black 
man. 
33 Let us rejoice on this day, the 4th of July, in the coming of Allah (God) Who came in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad to Whom praises are due forever and give thanks 
to Him. 
34 Let us enjoy the independence he brought to us and the freedom, justice and equality. 
35 He brought these things to us not by killing off the red Indian nor any original settlers. 
Justice and righteousness are the ammunition used by Allah (God).


--- PAGE 51 ---
The Fall of America  
Chapter 17  
Independence Independence Independence Independence  
  
1 Independence means to be free of the dominance of others. It is a very happy feeling for 
one to enjoy self-freedom! 
2 The white race, in the Western Hemisphere, takes this day, July 4, 1972, to be a day to 
worship in remembrance of their achieving Independence from other people. 
3 The white race in the Western Hemisphere had to conquer the Indians who had an 
independent claim on the country called America. Then the white race in America cut off 
the tie of England and France and became the independent holder of the present country 
called America, in the Western Hemisphere. 
4 The white race was not satisfied with owning a new country to itself. They wanted the 
country built up but, the white man was afraid to trust himself to build the country up, so 
he goes to other countries that were civilized and uncivilized, Africa. From Africa he 
took our Black people as slaves and used us for hard-labor purposes. 
5 Now, the white race has achieved those desires and now he has the glorious thing that 
man can enjoy-freedom. The country of America cannot be said to be the white man’s 
own- but with having the freedom and the power to overcome the natives (Indians) of this 
country, the white race in America takes this day, July 4, to celebrate the joy of 
independence of others! 
6 "As thou hast done so shall it be done unto thee." Someone is about to take away your 
enjoyable independence. The white race here in America has done the worse to the Black 
people who helped the white man to build up the country of America and to make it 
suitable and to bring in this enjoyable independence. 
7 But the white race in America has angered God due to the evil done to us after our four 
hundred years, here, under the white race. The white race still desires to mistreat and to 
kill us all the day long. 
8 The white man hates his Black slave; while the Black slave should be hating the white 
man, for mistreating the Black slave. But the white man made the Black slave to love him 
so well that when the white man mistreats him, the Black slave will not dislike the white 
man for mistreating him.


--- PAGE 52 ---
9 Now the time of God has arrived - the time that Allah (God) must separate the Black 
slave and his white master, and bring freedom to the Black slave. 
10 So we see the power of our enemy being broken by God in destroying the power of 
the white man: power to maintain his sway over the whole world. 
11 Independence is fine, if we keep and maintain independence! But there is a dark cloud 
of trouble now swinging over the country of America. The dark cloud makes her once 
freedom of thought and action become instead, a freedom of death, hell and destruction! 
12 It is awful to think over the things of evil and of trouble that are coming upon the 
glorified North America. 
13 The poor Black slave, numbering now into tens of millions of Black people, never 
knew anything of the joy of freedom, because the vicious enemy, like a young lion, as 
Daniel gives it in the Bible, has made the Black slave a prey to all of the white man’s 
wicked desires. 
14 Now, what do we have to celebrate in the fact that the white man is enjoying freedom 
over us? In celebrating the white man’s independence, we make a fool out of ourselves. 
We cannot celebrate his day. 
15 The only time that we the Black people have a day to worship and are able to call a 
day ‘our day of freedom,’ is when we are free from white America and free from any 
other nation, and become independent with some of this earth that we can call our own. 
16 Then we can say that this is a freedom day and a holiday for us. 
17 Black sister, Black brothers, let us unite and get together and try and go from that 
which binds us to others.


--- PAGE 53 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
Chapter 18 Chapter 18 Chapter 18 Chapter 18  
Slavery in Alabama and Mississippi Slavery in Alabama and Mississippi Slavery in Alabama and Mississippi Slavery in Alabama and Mississippi  
1 The white man’s tricknology is always being trumpeted to the world (that they are 
peace lovers), as though they want all people, as they falsely claim, to be free and to live 
in peace, while they are sitting on and crushing between twenty and thirty million Black 
people in America, who were their servitude slaves a hundred years ago. Now, for one 
hundred years, the slavemasters’ children falsely claim that we are free and that they are 
trying to treat us as free people. 
2 It has come to me that in the state of Alabama, in Greene County, Alabama, there are 
big plantations owned by white people; and their stately white houses sit up on hills and 
the slaves live in a surrounding of shacks. These Black people work hard for very small 
pay. It is said by some that the salaries range from twenty-five cents a day to $2.50 a 
week. Rough clothes to work in are furnished to them. 
3 This kind of slave labor goes through the generations. One generation after another is 
subjected to this slave way of life in what is called a free world. In order to keep these 
Black people in this type of slavery, the owner has a mounted guard patrolling the 
plantation with a gun lying across his lap in the saddle on his horse, to see that there is no 
Black interference from the outside to entice the enslaved Blacks on the inside of his 
plantation to come in a better area for better wages. 
4 These people grow up there and die there on the plantation. Some of them never know 
civilization. They are satisfied because they know no other life but the slave life that their 
fathers and grandfathers have been living under. We hear this kind of slavery goes on not 
only in Greene County, Alabama, but in other states such as Mississippi and Georgia. 
5 Years ago, when I was a young man in Georgia, I heard that such slavery on large 
plantations was going on in certain areas in Georgia. Our people will go to farm there 
(and the poor man probably owes another white farmer) and this white farmer pays the 
debt that he owes the other white farmer; and then the Black man becomes the slave the 
balance of his and his family’s life on the plantation of this white man who paid the debt 
to a previous white plantation owner. As long as he lives, he never pays that debt. This is 
the worse injustice and the most cruel slavery of all. 
6 They are shot and killed or beaten to death if they are found trying to leave the 
plantation. The white owners make other Blacks of the same plantation (under fear) be 
their informers of what is said and planned by other Blacks. It has been told to me in my 
younger life that certain rivers, lakes, and wooded wilderness-like places carry the bones 
and skulls of many Black slaves from these plantations in so called "freedom" times and 
in the age of abolished slavery by the law of this government and the world.


--- PAGE 54 ---
7 But in these southern states where Mr. George Wallace was running for president, he 
could make every Black man and woman in the south vote for him under fear. 
8 These Black people are afraid to disobey white people in high offices or even an old 
white farmer who is hardly able to buy himself a new overall suit. 
9 The Black people in the south have been brought up for many years and for centuries to 
fear white people. Where there is no freedom or chance to get out among free people, 
these Black people become the most ignorant and the most terrified people of whites that 
there are in the country of America. And the white man knows this. He gets rich. He 
builds himself a fine luxurious home on the plantation and as far as he can see he claims 
that the land is his and the poor slaves are living in the worst of shacks. When the rains 
come, some of them have to go to the walls of their houses with pails to catch the rain 
coming through their almost open roofs. 
10 When winter comes, they are sitting up to their fireplaces trying to keep warm. These 
are the worst living conditions of human beings that could even be in the jungles of 
Africa where they do not have sawmills or brick kilns to saw timber into lumber and to 
mold bricks. 
11 America has everything necessary to make her slaves good warm homes, cool homes, 
and to give her slaves a good living wage, because our fathers, for four hundred years, 
have already supplied the wealth for us today to be given food, substantial wages for our 
necessities of life. 
12 It is pitiful to go in these southern areas, out in the rural districts, and see how, after 
four hundred years, the wicked, sun burned, keen-nosed, tobacco juice-mouthed, and 
blue-eyed devils are buckling our poor people down to such slavery conditions; crushing 
them to death, and diseasing them. Their children are coming up suffering from 
malnutrition. Fever and other diseases capture them and take them to their crude pine box 
graves or to a hole in the ground in the south. Without anything like honor of their death, 
they are buried in rough pine wooden boxes. 
13 The Black man of America is so mistreated by his four hundred year old slave master 
and his slavemasters’ children that you just cannot describe any other mistreatment of 
human beings to equal the evil and ill treatment that the Black Man has and still suffers in 
America. 
15 In many towns and cities of the southern states (even in their capitols) you will find 
the Black Man living in a very bad condition. His toilet is sometimes an open boarded up 
place, stinking right there in the city and diseasing the citizens because of all that evil 
demon, the white man, who wants to give all the ill he can to a people who have served 
him as slaves for four hundred years. This is going on in the South. Go see it for yourself. 
16 The U.S. Mail comes into these towns and cities and in some places the Black people 
are forced to walk to a drug store and ask a white drug store owner for their mail. Then


--- PAGE 55 ---
they are treated like dogs and as though the white devils are giving him something free 
while the senders of the mail have paid tax for postal carriers to bring it to their doors. 
17 Little Black children are walking around with sores - pus running out of them - for the 
lack of medical attention. Little Black children are dying of diseases right in the false 
"freedom" of the U.S.A. 
18 The Black people are cowered down by this vicious enemy who keeps his gun loaded 
to blow them down. And every happy, one-sided, grinning-mouthed policeman or sheriff 
is seeking just the slightest chance to kill a Negro. He only has to say to his brother devil 
judge the he ‘had to kill a Negro’ and the judge lo oks at him and gives him a big smile 
and a hand clasp as though he did not kill enough ("you ought to kill all of them"). 
19 I have heard from their mouths, when I lived in the south, that "there were too many 
Negroes in the South and the white people should kill off some of them." "There are 
more Negroes than whites and the white man should kill off some of these Negroes." 
What chance does the Black man have under the shadow of the American government for 
freedom, justice and equality? 
20 I thank Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praise is due 
forever, who has come to deliver the Black man in America and to kill our oppressors. 
21 This is very good, and we should be shouting day and night that a deliverer has come. 
The revelation of the Bible has given this people the right name (a beast) and a most 
vicious description does the revelation give. In Daniel of the Bible, this people is 
described as a beast rising up out of the sea with three ribs of a man in its mouth. This is 
the description of America with the Black slaves swallowed for three centuries in the 
power of our enemies (the devils). 
22 The Black Man of the South would be a fool to vote for any white man of the South to 
rule him. He should stay away from the polls, because the white man for whom he votes 
is an enemy of his and is bound to tighten the shackles tighter than ever. They preach of 
enforcing the law, and that law is an unjust law directed against the Black Man. 
23 Vote for Allah and for His servant, Elijah Muhammad and by the power of our Allah 
(God), who has come in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praise is due 
forever, all the prophesies of the Bible of what He will do in freeing the Black man of 
America will be fulfilled. 
24 Let us submit to Him and live in peace with money, in good homes, and with the 
friendship of God and the righteous. There is nothing that you have to fear today, but God 
Himself. It is useless for us to fear our enemy after the coming and presence of our God, 
Who has power over the very atoms of life; for it is fear of the white man that will cause 
our people to eat the fire of hell with the white man if they do not recognize the fact that 
it is God Whom they should fear and not the devil. The world of the white man is now 
crumbling and coming to naught. The safety of the Black man is in His God. As the Holy


--- PAGE 56 ---
Qur’an teaches us, in this day and time, seek refuge in Allah, the God of the Black man. 
He is the only place of refuge. 
25 We have made America one of the richest and strongest people on earth. Her mighty 
navy is commanding the high seas with undersea craft crawling on the bottom of the 
ocean, carrying deadly weapons to surface and pour out on towns and cities of other than 
America and with listening devices set up throughout the earth on land, sea, and in the 
air, to listen to see what people are saying about her and planning against her, knowing 
she is guilty and deserving of death, and that she should be taken and destroyed. 
26 She has prepared to put up a mighty battle, but Allah too has prepared and He is the 
Best Preparer; knowing their thoughts before they were ever made. They have not the 
slightest chance today against the power of Allah that is working against them, even 
through the forces of nature. 
27 The white race has been disgracing the entire Black nation of the earth. Africa is 
suffering under the same wicked power of the white race and having an awful time trying 
to rid herself of such a demon. She will do so - and soon. 
28 Here in America, Almighty Allah (God) wants to make himself known with both the 
punishment and the destruction of this mighty, powerful, and rich people. 
29 Fear not, my dear Black people, for we have Allah with us; and He is a mighty, a 
strong, and the most powerful one to be feared. Come follow me, and I will lead you to 
your salvation.


--- PAGE 57 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
Chapter 19 Chapter 19 Chapter 19 Chapter 19  
Alabama Alabama Alabama Alabama  
  
1 According to an article in the November 25, 1969, issue of The Wall Street Journal , 
written by Mr. Neil Maxwell, staff reporter, and according to the reports of our own 
farmers, the Muslim property and lives are being attacked by a devil, Mr. James H. 
Bishop, who calls himself a missionary. He has started attacking us for a fight. 
2 The Muslims have lost a couple of head of cattle by gun-shot perpetrated by some 
coward, according to the report of Mr. Neil Maxwell. 
3 This demon, Mr. James H. Bishop seeks to bring himself and the American people into 
a war with Allah (God) and the righteous, which will be the end of America and her 
people. 
4 We, the Muslims, are a people of peace and have and are proving ourselves to be just 
that all over America. And of course this demon, Mr. James H. Bishop, is proving 
himself to be just what he is made to be, a mischief-maker, as Allah (God) Who came in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever has taught me 
that he is. 
5 I will warn this troublemaker that he is playing with fire, and a very hot fire; for he is 
not attacking Elijah Muhammad and his followers; but he is attacking Allah (God) Who 
welcomes the attack for this is what He came for. 
6 As sure as Allah (God) lives, we will convert every Black man in America to his or her 
own, and this includes those in Alabama. 
7 Look at the Muslims’ condition in Alabama. We went there to buy a piece of land from 
a citizen of Alabama and then some white enemy appeared who calls himself a preacher 
of the gospel of Jesus; but he did not forget to preach the gospel of the devil along with it. 
This devil, Mr. Bishop - we hired him when we first went to the farm in Alabama. He 
worked for us on the farm digging holes to help us to get set up on the farm. At that time 
he said nothing to us in the way of charging us with there illegally. Why did he hire out to 
us? Why did he help us to get started on our farm? We hired him and paid him for his 
work and there was no talk from him in the manner in which he is talking now. 
8 So this man has now turned to be a real open enemy and not a secret enemy. He even 
goes so far now to even talk of killing us and is asking us for a fight. We are losing cattle 
from bullet wounds and he is speaking in the direction of even destroying our property


--- PAGE 58 ---
and cattle. He even makes it hard for us to buy gasoline; and the most ignorant and worst 
thing is that the gas-attendant sells us the gasoline; and then we are arrested and charged 
with a crime for buying the gasoline, instead of charging the man who sold it to us. It is 
very ignorant and silly. 
9 We bought land and cattle in Alabama. We mean to get the profit out of what we 
bought and if the government of Alabama intends to drive us out from our property they 
will have to buy us out; not drive us out. 
10 If the government of Alabama is in agreement with the white people of Alabama in 
what they are doing against the Muslims, the I want to say to the whole of white America 
that we have Allah (God) on our side to retaliate against anyone who mistreats us. We did 
not go down there with rifles and guns to shoot anyone. If we are not accepted by our 
brother Muslims, we most certainly have been accepted by the God of Islam, Allah, 
Whose Proper Name is Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, Who 
came to us without observation, as it is written of Him, however He makes His work 
manifest. The Nation of Islam’s idea again is to build better country homes for the Black 
people. 
11 I say to the whole of the American white people that you could never win against 
anyone outside or inside America as long as you seek to mistreat us. As it is written in the 
Bible, "He who contends with thee (us) Allah (God) Will Contend with him and give 
them their blood to drink like sweet wine." 
12 So remember, we are the people of Allah (God). We make no trouble with anyone, but 
Allah (God) Will retaliate against anyone who makes trouble for us, or who seeks to do 
us harm...


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
Chapter 20 Chapter 20 Chapter 20 Chapter 20  
Decline of the Decline of the Decline of the Decline of the Dollar Dollar Dollar Dollar  
  
1 The strong-hold of the American government is falling to pieces. She has lost her 
prestige among the nations of the earth. One of the greatest powers of America was her 
dollar. The loss of such power will bring any nation to weakness, for this is the media of 
exchange between nations. The English pound and the American dollar have been the 
power and beckoning light of these two great powers. But when the world went off the 
gold and silver standard, the financial doom of England and America was sealed. 
2 The pound has lost 50 percent of its value. America’s dollar has lost everything now as 
power backing for her currency, which was backed by gold for every $5 note and up. All 
of her currency was backed by silver, from a $1 note up. 
3 But today, the currency of America is not backed by any sound value - silver or gold. 
The note today is something that the government declares they will give you the value in 
return, but does not name what the value is. But they definitely are not backing their 
currency with silver or gold. 
4 This is the number - one fall, and it is very clear that the loss of the power of the 
American dollar means the loss of the financial power of America. What will happen 
since there is no sound backing for her notes we do not know. 
5 What should we expect even in the next twelve months under the fall of the power of 
America’s dollar? This means that we have 100 percent inflation. What could happen 
under 100 percent inflation? Your guess is as good as mine. The power of gold and silver 
was once abundant in America. But the touch of the finger of God against the power of so 
mighty a nation has now caused the crumbling and fall of America. 
6 We can easily and truthfully liken the fall of America to the prophetic symbolical 
picture given in the (Bible) Revelation of John 18:2. The name Babylon used there does 
not really say whether it is ancient Babylon or a picture of some future Babylon. 
7 The description it gives is as follows:


--- PAGE 60 ---
"And he (angel) cried mightily with a strong voice (with authority) saying, Babylon the 
great is fallen, is fallen and is become the habitation of devils, (Allah has declared the 
people to be a race of devils) and the hole of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean 
and hateful bird." The description here give to the Babylon by the prophets compares 
with the present history and people of America and their fall. 
8 The picture shows the cause of her fall. Number one, she had become the habitation of 
devils, and being the habitation of devils makes her a haven for every people that love the 
works and doings of the devil. Here the prophet refers to them, symbolically, as being a 
hole of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. 
9 People are referred to as birds, snakes, beasts, fish and other animals to tell or represent 
the characteristics of that person. It is universally known that the very beginning of the 
American people was from the lower class of European people. And their first ruler 
(President Washington) was a fugitive from England. And the common, dissatisfied and 
lower grade of European people followed and boosted his authority. This filled and 
inhabited America with a very low class and low-based people. 
10 And then this type of people went into Africa and purchased slaves from among our 
people who were also uneducated, most of them; but there were a few who were highly 
educated. All of these began to mix with the low-based, evil-minded, real citizens of the 
Western Hemisphere (whites). And when America began to get strong in power, she 
opened her doors to the underprivileged (laborers) in overpopulated countries such as 
China, Japan, and in Europe to seek citizenship in America. 
11 This brought into America one of the most mixed people, who were granted the 
freedom to live any kind of life they chose. They were not forced to serve the God of the 
universe who made heaven and earth nor any religion. They had freedom of worship. 
This made America a haven for any people who wished to be free of the compellers of 
religion and just rule and authority. This people for the past five hundred years have put 
into practice every evil that is imaginable. 
12 The freedom of uncleanliness is granted and is worshiped. The percentage of sexual 
worship of the same sex is greater than any government on the face of the earth. Little 
children are bing taught sex almost from the cradle, making the whole nation, as one man 
put it, "nearly 90 percent freaks of nature." 
13 It is common to see on the streets of any metropolitan city of America men 
sweethearting with men and women sweethearting with women. Little boys with boys 
and little girls with girls. 
14 It is common that a decent family is puzzled as to where to send their children for 
schooling. There are no all girl schools as there once were. They are all girls schools of 
sweethearts; the same sex falling upon their own. Boys’ colleges are breeding such filthy 
practice; the jail houses, prisons, and the federal penitentiaries are all breeding dens of 
homosexuals.


--- PAGE 61 ---
15 As the Prophet says in the 18th chapter; "She is a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird." There are types of hateful birds. This is why a symbolical name is given. It means 
human beings. There are birds of prey and birds that are unclean such as crows, owls, 
buzzards and ravens who live and thrive off the carcass of others. And there are unclean 
people living and thriving off the unclean. 
16 It is time that God intervenes to bring about an end of such people as the wicked of 
America. She offers the same filth to all of the civilized of the earth, and she hates you if 
you are against her way of life and will threaten you with death as the Sodomites did Lot 
and his followers. But I say to you as the 4th verse of Revelations, Chapter 18 says: You 
that want to be a better people than this, "come out of her." 
17 The so-called American Negroes are referred to here in the 4th verse as being God’s 
people ("My people") Come out of her...that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye 
receive not of her plagues." 
18 This is a call to the American so-called Negroes to give up a doomed, wicked people 
that has destroyed them from being a people worthy of recognition, and who have now 
become lovers of their enemies and destroyers. 
19 The 5th verse tells us that "Her sins have reached into heaven and God has 
remembered her iniquities and is ready to destroy her." Her destruction cometh quickly, 
according to the 8th verse, that plagues of death, mourning and famines which cometh in 
one day (one year) then after that she shall be destroyed by fire, utterly burned." 
20 This is backed up by the words: "Strong is the Lord God who judge her." Here it gives 
us a knowledge that He who judges is well able with power, with wisdom, and with 
deliberate and careful maneuvering to make judgement against her.


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
Chapter 21 Chapter 21 Chapter 21 Chapter 21  
Destruction of America’s Educatio Destruction of America’s Educatio Destruction of America’s Educatio Destruction of America’s Education n nn  
  
1 The plague of Allah (God) against the educational system of America is something that 
the philosophers and scientists should look into, as the destruction of America’s 
education is the destruction of their wisdom to educate the people. 
2 There are many who look on the destruction without taking a second thought of the 
destruction without taking a second thought of the destruction of America’s education. 
Education is a guide for the people to keep and maintain a civilized life. It is education 
that civilizes us. Now to see the citizens of America rebelling against the American 
educational system is something that the wise of the wise should take thought of. 
3 The American people actually have come to the point where they hate their own 
educational system. This means that they are now hating and destroying their civilization 
because it is education that civilizes people. 
4 The American people no longer want their education and they are destroying the very 
houses that house their text books of education. They are rebelling against their teachers 
and then they set their houses on fire - schools, colleges and universities. This means in 
words, as I have said above, that they are destroying their own civilization. 
5 The Black people of today who are blindly helping the white people to destroy this 
civilization are like Samson was in his day and time; he helped to pull the building down, 
but he was blind to the effect of the destruction of the building. All Samson wanted to do 
was to get even with his mockers who had put out his eyes and who laughed at him. 
Samson did not care whether there would be a civilization left behind him or not. He was 
willing to die, blind to the knowledge of the future of his people and those people he was 
destroying. 
6 Throughout America, her colleges, her universities and her teachers are in danger. The 
students no longer want old world guidance. It is a new world that they want. But in their 
mad destruction of the old world they do not know how to prepare for a new world 
civilization. They do not have guidance for a new civilization, and in their madness they 
refuse to hear a teacher teaching of an educational system of a better civilization...the 
civilization of the Black man. 
7 The wisdom of the educational system of the aboriginal Black Man of the earth has 
never been known to this world because the Black man was put to sleep in order to let


--- PAGE 63 ---
this world (white man) try itself at ruling. Now the rule of this world has been found to be 
dissatisfying and the dissatisfaction is 100 per cent. 
8 Allah (God) has come to take over and to guide another people into setting up a better 
educational system for the people of whom He Himself is the Head. And we all get 
guidance from Him, as Daniel said in his prophesy, "God will set up a kingdom and He 
will leave it into the hands of others, but He Himself will guide it." But first He must 
remove all the rubbish if this white man’s world educational system. He discards 
America’s educational system, as we discard rubbish to be burned up. 
9 The black man who hears the teachings of Islam feels proud that he has been taught 
something that he has wished for all of his life. But the average Black man that hears 
does not accept it as he should. He accepts it in such a way that he can be criticized and 
mocked: for he wants to take a piece of it, as he has done in the past and he runs away 
with it claiming that he knows this. He will try to set up something of his own from a few 
words of it. This throws the Black man behind. They do this through envy, jealousy, and 
proudness on the part of the person. This is the way the Black man of America is divided. 
The devil knows that the Black man is proud and envious. The white man helps him to be 
this way so that the Black man will never get any place towards self, if the Black man 
takes such steps to divide himself up. 
10 Look how the devil is teaching our people division now. The devil goes and gets 
everyone whom he thinks of for the black people to idolize them. Look at how he names 
streets after Rev. Martin Luther King and Malcolm because he was the devil’s disciple. 
Rev. Martin Luther King was not the disciple of the Black man. He preached integration 
with white people and become white folk, and then the white man killed him. The white 
man does the same to you, although you follow what the white man tells you to follow 
and you worship the white man. 
11 Many times, I have reminded you that Rev. Martin Luther King was not trying to 
separate you from the enemy, but instead he was trying to unite you with the enemy. Rev. 
Martin Luther King was not seeking a home for you as Moses was seeking a home for 
Israel who was opposed in Egypt. In modern day America, I am seeking an independent 
home for you. Rev. Martin Luther King did not do this. Rev. Martin Luther King taught 
you to submit to the white man and to become one of them. All of your life you have 
known that this is destruction - after so-called freedom. It is the same as the dog returning 
to his vomit. The Black man was vomited out of the white man and now goes back to the 
white man... 
12 The white man is right when he says that you are free. You are free; but if you go back 
to him for him to put chains on you again, he will do. 
13 Malcolm fell out from us a hypocrite. He went and joined white people and worshiped 
them and he got what he preached for. Now the white man names colleges after Malcolm 
only to get you to join in the philosophy which he left behind; that white people are good. 
Malcolm went to Mecca and saw white people. And instead of joining in with the Black


--- PAGE 64 ---
Man, he joined in with the white man, although he was taught the white man’s birth and 
death. He preached it as long as he did not turn enemy against me. He turns enemy 
against me, for he wanted my place over the people and he thought that by going over the 
earth and making a mockery of me, he would do just that...get rid of me. But the very 
people of Mecca and Egypt and other places he went, they are with me today. Here, in the 
United States of America, today, I have more followers than I had before Malcolm said a 
word. 
14 You cannot disgrace one whom Allah (God) has taken for His friend, for He has the 
power to keep your disgrace to a naught. The white man teaches you to worship Malcolm 
in order to lead you astray against me. You come around trying to argue with us. I do not 
give two cents for you following Malcolm if you want to follow him. You will get divine 
death and destruction with no one to give you any honor and respect...only the devil 
whom you serve. The devil sets enemies and hypocrites for you to worship in order to 
pull you away from me. He knows that you would be a fool to follow enemies and 
hypocrites. But that is to turn you away from your salvation which I am preaching. You 
cannot prosper fighting against me, for Allah (God) is not with you; He is with Me. It 
does not matter how many devils you have with you, you could have a world full of 
devils, but that would not amount to anything. It shows how anxious you are to get what 
the devil offers you for following his guidance. Allah (God) came to put an end to the 
enemy devil and their power to rule. This you will learn. 
15 I am not without power from Allah (God) by any means, regardless to whether 
everyone of you rejects following me. I mean the whole thirty million of you. That will 
not stop me or condemn me as being not able to lead you. You Black people in America 
are no more than a small family. We have a world of Black people that I can continue to 
teach, and they are anxious for me to come and teach them. After I teach you the truth, it 
is immaterial to me whether or not you believe and follow me. 
16 If all the little Black organizations who are trying to do something for self would unite 
with me and make a complete body of one, we will most certainly have salvation in our 
hands at once. If we all want to be like Christianity, with each one sitting and enjoying 
his little part...in one day they will lose their part. 
17 The destruction of America’s educational system is the best thing that Allah (God) 
could do to get rid of that which you depend on for guidance. America’s educational 
system has never benefited you and me, only to keep us slaves to the white man. We the 
Black people want an educational system that will bring us into unity as a man before 
Allah (God). We want an educational system that we can read in the light of ancient or 
modern history. We want an educational system that will guide us through tomorrow - 
not an educational system that is dying today. What hope can you have in a world that is 
crashing and burning asunder as America is? Do you think that we will be here, and that 
you will go back like you were before the war? I say you wait and see.


--- PAGE 65 ---
18 This is the end of America. Allah (God) will destroy her for she is the most evil one of 
the white race. America is more evil than Europe. America is worse than her father, 
England. 
19 Look what is going on at the present time, day and night. Black man, America has no 
respect for you, nor for your woman; yet you desire America’s civilization; and still you 
want to destroy it. Now what do you want my dear man? I think that you should first 
prepare to replace that which you are destroying. I advise you to unite with me and let us 
build a nation like a single house. A united force is always better than a divided one. 
20 I say unite with me, for I cannot unite with you; for you do not have anything for me 
to unite with you for. You have nothing but a chain carrying it around that any wise 
civilized man can take and bind you with continuously. 
21 You may be able to wreck the whole of America, but you have nothing to replace it 
with. "Vengeance is Mine saith the Lord, I will repay." Look how He is repaying 
America with rain, snow, hail, earthquakes...these can destroy America at once, but He 
brings her destruction upon her gradually. As the Holy Qur’an teaches, "Allah (God) 
brings them (wicked) to a naught little by degrees from whence they (wicked)cannot 
perceive." 
22 Allah (God) came to give you better names that have a better meaning, an external 
meaning. These names of Allah (God) came to give you better names that have a better 
meaning, a greater meaning, an eternal meaning. These names of Allah (God) will live 
forever. But the names of the white man will not live forever. Allah (God) offers you and 
me heaven at once..not heaven after you are dead. If we do not accept heaven he can also 
put us in hell if we reject His help. 
23 Remember the destruction of America’s educational system means the doom of 
America. You are not left to wander aimlessly. The Holy Qur’an plainly teaches you and 
me that Allah (God) would not lead you to wander aimlessly. Allah (God) has that aim 
and purpose to you, in me...so come and follow me and learn the new education for the 
Black man is not designed for you, the Black man in America alone; it is for Black 
people all over the earth. Take it or leave it.


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 22  
Savagery of America Savagery of America Savagery of America Savagery of America  
 
1 The great country of America and her great richness, great institutions, and her great 
towns and cities, spread out like a blanket over the surface of the Western Hemisphere 
with her tall buildings going upward over a hundred stories! The great architects and 
building engineers have become such experts at building to precision that it makes their 
past history of two and four thousand years ago look like child’s play. 
2 Her land is shadowed with the wings of her many planes which cover her almost like a 
cloud. The great and wonderful work of science on the earth and in the air, her great 
mighty fleets afloat on the high seas (on the surface and below the surface), her great 
scientific mechanical communications system! Yet with all of this might of skill in 
engineering or building, the country of America displays and practices more savagery 
than any civilized country on the earth. And all of her educational institutions are not 
enough to make a man so intelligent and proud of his education and of being an 
American citizen that he would not practice the same savagery. 
3 There is no such thing as law and order. The law is disregarded, as though it were 
thrown in the jungles to be carried out by savage beasts. Murdering, killing, robbery, 
raping, and drug addiction are the only law and order that is respected. 
4 It has become such a country that the civilized man of intelligence and decency is afraid 
to walk the streets of the vast towns and cities of America. He would be more secure in 
the jungles, around and in the midst of wild beasts than to be walking in the streets of 
these great cities in America after night. 
5 Groups of robbers and murderers, killers, and dope addicts are prowling the streets after 
night to exact their evil intentions upon the innocent. This is a mob of savages that the 
intelligent and decent women should not dare venture out among. And if we see such 
women walking around, they are part of this savage people. 
6 It has become dangerous even for the girl and woman to be standing alone in any 
unprotected place, day or night. Rapists lurking around bus stations and robbers also and 
thieves are at such stations, and with such conditions existing in a so-called civilized 
country like America, this is the worst name that could be applied to her. 
7 Police, detectives, and FBI all are here; but these daring savage acts are committed 
right before their eyes and ears.


--- PAGE 67 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23  
The Dissatisfied The Dissatisfied The Dissatisfied The Dissatisfied  
1 We are living in the time when dissatisfaction is 100 per cent throughout the world of 
man and mankind. Therefore we are living among the dissatisfied persons, daily and 
nightly. 
2 No one is satisfied though they may be righteous. They are not satisfied because they 
are living among unrighteousness. So the whole entire world of the wicked and the 
righteous is upset due to dissatisfaction. 
3 The dissatisfied are gaining everyday more and more among the people whom they 
hope to bring into the same condition that they are in. And today nothing is made so clear 
to the chief-maker of dissatisfaction. 
4 The Black people in North America, who are up from slavery, are the target of the 
white slave-masters’ children who wish to keep them here and deprived of their salvation, 
if possible. The white man holds out promises to the Black man only to deceive the Black 
man. The white man fascinates the Black man and tries to do that for the Black man that 
the white man does not want to do. But nevertheless, he does these things in order to get 
his hold on the Black once-slave; to go to the white man’s doom with him. The devil is 
the open enemy of the original Black people of the earth. 
5 Temptation -- The white man is trying to temp the Black man all over the earth to take 
part with the white man in evil and filth. Here in America, if you will bear me witness, 
sex talk is the topic of conversation twenty-four hours a day on the radio and the 
television. These public broadcasts to the people contain some of the most filthy talk and 
some of the most filthy actions on the screen than we ever dreamed of hearing from a 
neighbor even in private...not to think of in public. 
6 The Black man in America is on the radio twenty-four hours a day. The white man 
loves to weigh the Black People out in his filthy language of sex to see how many of our 
Black People he can get to go to hell with the white man by persuading them with his 
sexual talk. The Holy Qur’an is 100 percent right. Read it, and try and find something in 
there that is not true. If you think that you have found something come to me and I will 
show you and the world that it is true. 
7 Black Man, this is the end of the rule of the white man. Allah (God) came to Kill them 
for mistreating the Black once-slave here in America. Allah (God) says in Isaiah (Bible) 
that He will kill our enemy and call us by another name, Black Brother, this is going on 
right in your eyes, but you still think that the time is prolonged to the distant future and 
that you will not live to see it. But, I say to you all, in truth, that you are living in it now.


--- PAGE 68 ---
8 The scientists of America know that America is on her way out. And since you, Black 
man, are the righteous perhaps all of you will be saved; for you are bound to submit when 
you see what is coming. Allah (God) will take you and me and call us after His own 
name. As I have 
preached to you for years, as long as we go in the name of the white man we are his 
people to serve him and to go his doom with him. 
9 The white man is stripping you of decent clothes to wear. Many of you come out in the 
public one-half nude. He is making you shameless. You are doing something that you did 
not know you would ever be able to do. But, it is in you, that you would like to obey the 
devil and not obey Allah (God), the God of righteousness, truth, freedom, justice and 
equality. It is so shameful for you to sit and let your voices be heard on the radio and 
television answering the filthy questions that the white man is asking concerning your 
own personal self and the way that you think. 
10 The white man is only trying to choose you to go hell with him. That white man 
knows that there is no heaven for him. There will be a remnant of them saved, but the 
majority are going down and they are taking a fighting chance of it in the way of 
deceiving you to go along with them. That is the reason both Books, the Bible and the 
Holy Qur’an, teach us not to let the archdeceiver deceive us. 
11 But the devil is doing it night and day. Why do you think he has these twenty-four 
hour talk shows talking among you and with you, if it is not to get you to agree with them 
so that you will go along with them to their doom? 
12 Certainly they hate me and the Muslims who follow me. But their hatred does not 
make any difference with us, just as long as Allah (God) does not hate us. Their hatred 
goes for nothing if Allah (God) is not hating us. As it is written, "He whom Allah 
Befriends is not disgraced." Allah (God) has always backed up His people, who are of the 
righteous and who believe in Him from ancient time, until this day. 
13 Fear not. Lift up your heads in the pride of truth and love for you Black man and the 
God of the Black man. 
14 The dissatisfied must be removed from the satisfied of Allah (God) and His people of 
righteousness. The lost-found Black aboriginal people in America have the greatest gift 
coming to them of any people who lived in the past. They will have a new growth put 
into them and they will be changed in the twinkling of an eye, as it is written in the Bible 
and in the Holy Qur’an. This change will take place after Satan has been conquered and 
cast out of the earth from among the aboriginal Black people to whom the white man is 
no kin.


--- PAGE 69 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24  
Confusion, Confusion of People Confusion, Confusion of People Confusion, Confusion of People Confusion, Confusion of People  
 
1 Now the rise of America’s once slave into the knowledge of self in the spirit of Allah, 
in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad (the son of Man), the Author of the 
Resurrection of us the mentally dead is causing untold confusion among the heads of 
state. 
2 The scripture is being fulfilled wherein it prophesies that in these days (meaning the 
end of the wicked world of Satan), rulers are against rulers -- kings against kings. In the 
days of the prophets, there were no heads of government who were given the name 
president. Rulers were referred to as rulers and as kings of the people. 
3 The prediction of the prophets, who wrote our future before we lived is now coming to 
pass. The slaves (or a foolish people, as they are referred to by Moses) are vexing the 
slave master. Today, as these prophecies are now being fulfilled, we are not surprised at 
the truth God gave to us through the mouths of His prophets coming to pass, as it was 
prophesied. 
4 The master must give up his slave and the slave must give up his master, regardless of 
his desire to remain with his master. It is the purpose of God, Himself to separate the two 
so that He can give the slave justice and equal chance for survival, as the slave master has 
been exercising power over the slave. 
5 America is being torn to pieces politically as Pharaoh’s political party was in the days 
when Jehovah went after the freedom in Israel. 
6 Egypt was plagued with droughts, great hail, storms, rain, and fire, according to the 
Psalms, running side-by-side (fire and water). These plagues now are visiting America 
from Almighty Allah (God). 
7 Our people, who have no knowledge of the Book and scriptures, can make grave errors 
in trying to continue with the old world of the Black man’s enslavers and enslavement. 
8 There are many of our people -- especially among yesterday’s leadership -- who desire 
to lead the shackled slave into more secure shackles for the sake of the master and for the 
fear of the master’s dislike of the leadership. 
9 This found among the spiritual leaders more than among the political leaders of Black 
America, which makes manifest to you that the spiritual leadership fears not the God of


--- PAGE 70 ---
truth and justice, but fears the enemy of God (God is the author of freedom, justice and 
equality of man). 
10 We must have unity with the Black Nation of the earth, of which you and I are 
members, and who are leaving in search of us, since now having the knowledge that we 
were bound in the chains of slavery in the Western Hemisphere of our earth. We cannot 
come forth, making the steps of freedom towards a free people, until the shackles have 
been cut to allow our steps to be made freely. 
11 It is written so plainly in the last book of the Bible that the fearful and the unbelieving 
leadership and their followers of the enemy (the beast) -- and the scripture does not try to 
hide giving the slave master one of the worst names, as he is like a savage beast against 
the Black man of America and the world (people of God) -- shall go down with the beast 
in a lake of fire. 
12 Our unity with God, Who has already appeared among us in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom praise is due forever, will set us in heaven while we live and on 
this earth, our national home.


--- PAGE 71 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25  
America’s Loss of Friendship America’s Loss of Friendship America’s Loss of Friendship America’s Loss of Friendship  
 
1 Bible, Obad. 15, "...As thou has done, it shall be done unto thee." America has done the 
worst work of deceiving other peoples and making false friendships with them. Now her 
turn has come. No one wants to trust her for friendship, for she has deceived many 
nations. 
2 Rev. Ch. 12 (Bible) prophesies of America under the worst names that could be given 
to a human being: serpent, snake, Satan, devil, and the deceiver of the people of the earth. 
Therefore, the Black man is warned in Rev. 18:4, "...Come out of her, my people..." This 
scripture warns the Black man to give up Babylon, which is a symbolic name, meaning 
America. America has tormented the Black Man. Now a tormentor is after her. The 
Divine Tormentor, says that we should not be partakers of the divine torment coming 
against America from Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, 
to Whom praises are due forever. This means, "separation." We must separate ourselves 
from America so that we will be saved from the stroke of the Master Who Is God 
Himself. Allah (God) is whipping America with all kinds of calamities. 
3 I have been writing for many years that America must be punished for her evil done to 
her Black once-slaves, who are so-called free-slaves now, and who continue to suffer the 
same, or worse, punishment under the children of the white slave master, than their white 
fathers imposed upon our Black fathers under servitude-slavery. 
4 America has not only lost and is still losing friendship all over Asia and Africa,...but 
she is now losing friendship right here with her next-door neighbors, Central and South 
America. 
5 The manner -- the ill-treatment and dislike with which they received the President’s 
Fact-Finding Committee -- made it seem as though they should have been on the other 
side of the earth. Steps had to be taken to protect their physical self in a country which is 
right next-door to America. 
6 However, the scripture must be fulfilled; they shall eat America’s bread and burn her 
body with fire. 
7 I quote from Rev. 17:16, "And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these 
shall hate the whore...and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire!" The ‘horns’ here are 
a symbolic reference to Central and South America (America’s satellites).


--- PAGE 72 ---
8 This means that America’s gifts and what-not will be accepted, but this does not mean 
that America has bought their sincere friendship. They will take all the gifts which 
America offers, but still this does not mean that America has their heart. 
9 America is careful not to give any help to her Black once-slave for four hundred years 
to do something for themselves. America wants to keep her Black slave tied while she 
watches their movements. 
10 If we go to her asking America for a territory so that we can live to ourselves, she 
turns a deaf ear to us. We helped America for four hundred years, in every respect as 
though we were one-half owners of the country. We have gotten nothing in return but 
beatings, cheatings and shootings down on the highway. 
11 If we think that there is a God of Mercy (and there is One)...should we not think that 
He will sympathize with the poor Black slave to receive justice from his master? 
12 The Black slave helped to make America rich. Would Allah, (God) be silent forever? 
Being the God of Righteousness and Justice, would He not take to Himself the work of 
aiding the poor Black people against their evil oppressors? 
13 America wants everyone to help her bemoan all of her set-backs but when she causes 
others to fall...breaks up the countries of other peoples and destroys their independence 
and freedom, she laughs and prides herself as doing a great thing. She puts her feet upon 
their economic neck and destroys their independence as a nation. 
14 All this now returns to America. The little nations are now awake. They had looked 
for true friendship from America but instead America deceived them. 
15 Again, I repeat, the Bible prophecy..."As thou has done, it shall be done unto thee." 
There is no friend for America. Also it is written in the Bible, "In the day of thy fall, none 
shall help thee...." 
16 Why? Because you, America, have been and are an aide of the destruction and fall of 
other peoples. So who should help you in the day of your fall? This is what Allah (God) 
wants to bring home to America through His prophets. 
17 The Holy Qur’an refers to America in this kind of prophecy: "When her doom comes 
there will come one calamity after another." As soon as she thinks she is getting over the 
sore made by a previous calamity, another will attack her. 
18 America is undergoing all that is prophesied against her. It is nothing new. It is well-
known. 
19 We have been eating the bread of affliction and suffering the poisonous bites of our 
white slave master. It has caused actual death of our proper mental way of thinking. The 
natural brain of the Black slave is poisoned and cannot think for itself.


--- PAGE 73 ---
20 So Allah (God) is asking us to separate from white America. But the mentally dead do 
not want to go from her for they have not yet gotten the knowledge of truth of our God, 
Allah and His Mercy for them. 
21 The Black - slave - children are victimized by the white slavemaster, because of the 
condition the white - slave - master brought our Black slave-fathers up in. They do not 
readily hear the right answer to the problem. Regardless, to how I cry in their midst, they 
are poisoned and mentally dead.


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 26  
Will America Repent? Will America Repent? Will America Repent? Will America Repent?  
 
1 This is a great question. America knows her evil-doings against us; but to repent of it, I 
doubt it much. She feels that if she tries to make up with us for her evil-doing to us, she 
would be inviting her disgrace among the nations of the earth. Her determination is to try 
and keep the so-called Negroes from believing in the true God, Allah, and the true 
religion of Islam, which is our salvation. They are using many tricks now to deceive the 
so-called Negroes. The foolish so-called Negroes are falling for them. 
2 False friendship is not able to stand up for very long; an enemy is just not able to put 
over false friendship for long. You should be able to know them and their tricks as long 
as they have been putting them over on you. 
3 According to the Holy Qur’an (60:1), friendship relations with enemies of Islam is 
forbidden. "O, you who believe, do not take my enemy and your enemy for friends: 
Would you offer them love while they deny what has come to you of the truth, driving 
out the apostle and yourselves because you believe in Allah, your Lord?" 
4 In this kind of doings, the foolish so-called Negroes will be trapped. There are even 
some weak Muslims who ignore this warning. Some even go as far as to marry the 
enemies of Islam, and they even hate me for teaching the truth of the enemies. But Allah 
is with me, and I have no right to worry about the doings of the people after knowledge. 
The enemy does not love either you or me. As the next verse teaches: "If they find you, 
they will be your enemies, and will stretch forth towards you their hands and their 
tongues with evil, and they ardently desire that you may disbelieve." "They would slay 
you with their hands, and speak evil to and of you with their tongues." 
5 You must remember that you do not like one who befriends your enemy. How much 
does God dislike you for making love with his enemies? The enemy does not have to be a 
real devil. He could be your father, mother, brother, husband, wife or children. Many 
times they’re of your own household. Today is the great time of the separation of the 
righteous Muslims and the wicked white race. 
6 The wicked are not by any means asleep to the knowledge of the time. They are really 
on the job of truth. You must know the truth whether you accept it or reject it! Ask 
yourself these questions: 
7 (1) If Christianity is the religion of Jesus, why is it that the wicked (white race) 
represents it, instead of the righteous or holy people of the East (Islam)? (2) Why has not


--- PAGE 75 ---
the Holy City Mecca allowed it to be taught within her? (3) Why is not Jerusalem the 
capital of Christianity instead of Rome, Italy? (4) If Christianity was the religion of Jesus 
and the white race is Jesus’ beloved people, why did He preach the "doom" of the white 
race and coming of a new world? 
8 This people will most certainly carry to their doom many of our people because of our 
peoples’ fear and love of them. Look out of your door or window; see the Black woman 
sitting in the car close in the arms of your and her enemy. The enemy does not love her. 
He only wants to disgrace her and you and keep her from seeing the hereafter. You 
cannot have any such freedom with his women, and especially not in front of his door. 
Love of them will get you the hell.


--- PAGE 76 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 27  
The Troubled America: No Peace The Troubled America: No Peace The Troubled America: No Peace The Troubled America: No Peace  
 
1 America, in trying to hold her place as the greatest power among the nations of earth, is 
one of the most troubled countries on earth today. 
2 The world has never before seen the top rulers of the land leaving their offices to visit 
nations abroad. The purpose of these visits to foreign countries is to make peace with 
them after years of troubling them. 
3 America brought all of her troubles upon herself. She alone is to be charged with being 
the cause of the troubled world and people today. 
4 America loves meddling into other people’s affairs. She just cannot stay out of other 
people’s business, whether they be a two-cents worth soap-box teacher or presidents and 
kings of countries. 
5 America’s actions fit the description of the prophecy (Bible) "The beast has eyes 
around about." This refers to the mechanical listening devices with which America listens 
in on other people’s private affairs, as well as her listening in on foreign governmental 
affairs. This also refers to her powerful telescope. 
6 America goes abroad and makes war against other people. Then she charges them with 
making war against her when she is the one who is guilty of the war-making. 
7 The Bible says Allah (God) will destroy those who delight themselves in making war.


--- PAGE 77 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28  
Is Modern America as Merciless as Ancient Ninevah Is Modern America as Merciless as Ancient Ninevah Is Modern America as Merciless as Ancient Ninevah Is Modern America as Merciless as Ancient Ninevah  
 
1 "Woe to the bloody city! It is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not; The 
noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing horses, 
and of the jumping chariots." (Nahum 3:1,2) 
2 America answers this prophecy of the ruins of ancient Ninevah. Ninevah was full of 
lies and robbery; so is America. "The prey departeth not." The poor so-called Negroes in 
America are the prey and they refuse to depart from America regardless of the evil 
treatment they receive. Though the whips and the clubs of their enemy are heard night 
and day upon the heads and backs of the prey (so-called Negroes), they still do not desire 
to depart from America. 
3 Ancient Ninevah, according to her history, was full of chariots that made much noise 
and the prancing horses carrying the chariots in full speed that the prophets described 
them as "jumping chariots." So it is in America today: her cities are filled with 
automobiles and the noise of them is heard every hour of the day, rattling past our doors. 
4 She is full of blood from murdered people. She also fills another prophecy made in 
Habakkuk 2:12: "Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city by 
iniquity!" 
5 America was founded and built with blood and established by iniquity. She killed the 
aboriginal inhabitants (Indians) to establish herself as an independent people at the great 
loss of lives of the original owners. Her great progress has been made by the work of 
iniquity. She has robbed many people; and the blood of her slaves, the so-called Negroes, 
has stained the earth here and elsewhere, stained by her hands. 
6 The lawless people kill their own leaders and assassinate their rulers. Anyone who 
opens his mouth for justice for the poor prey (so-called Negroes) is seized, prosecuted, 
and in many cases slain because he dared open his mouth for the oppressed against the 
oppressors. 
7 Woe to America! She has established a government with blood. The murderers seek to 
kill the innocent all the day long. Regardless of the people’s choice of a ruler, if chosen, 
he should be obeyed and given a chance to serve the people until that people dispossesses 
him for another.


--- PAGE 78 ---
8 It is very evil, very shameful and savage in these enlightened days of education and 
science for America to be charged with killing her rulers and great men of wisdom and 
science without due process of law. 
9 There is no justice for us, the so-called Negroes, in a government whose citizens are 
free to kill until satisfied and then turn upon their rulers and slay them. What chance have 
we under the rule of such people? We live under the very shadow of death all the day 
long. 
  
10 The assassinated President Abraham Lincoln, by John W. Booth in Washington, D.C., 
April 14, 1865 -- who died April 15, 1865 -- was successful in freeing our parents from 
servitude slavery; to weaken the slave master’s strength against the Federal Government. 
For this he paid with his life. 
11 President James A. Garfield, assassinated by Charles J. Guiteau, July 2, 1881, in 
Washington, D.C. and died September 19, 1881. President William McKinley, shot 
September 6, 1901, Buffalo, new York, by Leon Czolgosy, and died September 14, 1901. 
President John F. Kennedy, assassinated November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas, by the 
accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, and died minutes later. All four of these presidents 
were known to have spoken and acted sympathetically towards the so-called Negroes, 
and they paid with their lives for doing so. 
12 There are others who had attempts made upon their lives. Mr. Huey P. Long, U.S. 
Senator of Louisiana, was shot September 18, 1935, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, by Dr. 
Carl A. Weiss, and died September 19, 1935. Mr. Long preached "share the wealth." And 
for this he paid with his life. 
13 There is no justice for the poor, the so-called Negroes in America as long as they are 
subjects under the American flag. A great attempt is now being made on the poor, lost 
found, so called Negroes to deceive them by making false friendship, and the passage of 
Civil Rights bills, and forcing themselves to accept the lost-found (so-called Negroes) 
into their social equality. 
14 This is only a trap for us. To accept it will make us enemies of God and our Black 
people of Africa and Asia who are our true friends. It would be totally ignorant on our 
part to be swept away to our doom by accepting these maelstrom promises of social 
equality temptations. Our ignorant masses cannot be trusted under the charms 
(temptation) of un-alike. But in the end you will regret your actions. 
15 If America wants to offer us a better side of her, why not offer something of 
permanent good, such as a portion of the country (a few states) for our ever-increasing 
population? Will the white man fool himself in continuously making promises to us that 
he knows he cannot fulfill? He has his own problems of unemployment, with the ever-


--- PAGE 79 ---
increasing unemployed of his own kind fleeing from Asia and Africa, plus the loss of 
foreign trade. 
16 Can we hope for him to care for us and our children forever? No! We need a place on 
this earth that we can call our own, and go to work and produce our own needs; and this 
will provide us with employment for our unemployed. Let no man deceive you; we are 
face to face with a change of worlds.


--- PAGE 80 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 29  
Fall and Rise of Nations Fall and Rise of Nations Fall and Rise of Nations Fall and Rise of Nations  
 
1 The title of this chapter is taken from the 13th Chapter of the Holy Qur’an entitled "The 
Thunder." 
2 We have past histories that teach us of the fall and rise of many nations. However, in 
this day -- after this destruction of the nations, there will be no rise of these destroyed 
nations because Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad to 
Whom praises are due forever, will destroy those who cause evil to spread far and wide. 
He will destroy those who love to make war on others, as it is written, Ps. 68:30. 
3 During the whole time of the mischief-maker (devil) -- six thousand years on our planet 
-- there has been one war right after another. There has never been any peace among 
them. You cannot live with them in peace. Peace was never in the nature of the white 
race. 
4 The white race was made to destroy the peace from the earth and they have just about 
destroyed the peace from the earth. The Bible, Isaiah, as it is written, "The people know 
not the way of peace." 
5 Why should peace-lovers want a world to live in where there is no peace? If peace can 
be established, the nations want peace, but they cannot have peace until the power of the 
peace-breaker has been broken. 
6 America is angry over the possible freedom of her Black once-slave to go for himself 
and to set up self-independence. America is angry and does not want the Black slave to 
seek some other nations to help him. 
7 There are other nations whose populations run into hundreds of millions of people and 
these hundreds of millions of people of other nations have sympathy for the Black man in 
America. They hope to help the Black man in America to be free to go for self, while 
white America is working with all of her might in order to prevent the nations from 
giving any aid to the Black Man in America.


--- PAGE 81 ---
8 If other nations give Black man in America any aid, white America wants to hinder us. 
9 A people who are that wicked against the Black slave, whom they have had for four 
hundred years -- Allah (God) should not have any pity on His destruction of them -- nor 
should the nations of earth pity white America, because white America is wicked beyond 
your and my imagination. 
10 White America turned the world into evil, filth and indecency. You cannot go out into 
the streets accompanied by your decent families without your being made ashamed of the 
work of the white man. He has made it lawful for people to go nude if they want to do so. 
11 It is a dangerous world for a person who loves to live in peace and who desires to keep 
his own property as well as his life -- it is a dangerous world. 
12 The rise of ancient Babylon -- with her persecution of the righteous among her and 
with her hatred of the Jews and their religion -- Babylon was brought to naught. Is 
America better than ancient Babylon? No! 
13 The people of Noah committed the same evil and the same unsightly filth that is going 
on here in America, today. But, the evil and filth of the present day America, is being 
committed on a larger scale than that committed in the day of Noah. The people of Noah 
were drowned and destroyed. 
14 So it was with the people of Lot. In Sodom and Gomorrah wickedness and filth had 
become the order of the day. Those wicked people were removed from our planet earth. 
Is America any better? No! America is worse than that ancient people. 
15 White America sees that we, the Islamic believers, the Muslims, want to do something 
for self and our Black kind. But white America opposes us to a degree that she destroys 
our cattle, our farm instruments and our machinery. 
16 White America wants to destroy our lives. White America is planning to destroy our 
lives, but Allah (God) too is planning, and Allah (God) is the Best of the planners. The 
fall and rise of nations! 
17 The fall and rise of nations! The quickest way for America to hasten her fall is to try 
and to mistreat and to do evil to me and to my followers. The quickest way for America 
to receive her approaching hour (doom) is for America to always to try to find some way 
to block the success of Allah (God) in guiding me and those who are following me. 
18 America! As soon as white America learned that we are trying to purchase wholesale 
quantities of low-priced merchandise from Japan for the benefit of all of my Black people 
in America -- America goes in to make it hard for me and my followers to purchase and 
to receive anything from outside of America at a lower price than we pay to America. 
This is evil on the part of America.


--- PAGE 82 ---
19 America will have to learn us! America will have to learn that we the Black people in 
America are the brothers of the Black people, the Brown people and the Yellow people. 
20 We have many Muslims in these lands and to try to interfere with the success of the 
Muslims in America, which is coming from Allah (God) Himself -- Allah (God) will 
continue to confuse America; and she will have the loss of her victory in any land and 
among any people on earth. Fall and rise of nations!


--- PAGE 83 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30  
She Had Become The Habitation of Devils (Rev. 18:2)She Had Become The Habitation of Devils (Rev. 18:2)She Had Become The Habitation of Devils (Rev. 18:2)She Had Become The Habitation of Devils (Rev. 18:2)  
     
 
1 This is America, the glory of the world in wealth, sport and play, with her merchants 
ships ploughing the high seas carrying her costly merchandise throughout the population 
of the nations of the earth. (Bible, Rev. 18:19). 
2 The ships of America can be seen everywhere...in every port of the nations of earth. 
Her great navy is built to command the high seas. Her decks are mounted with great 
bristling rifle-barreled guns. The decks of her ships are covered with planes with which to 
carry deadly bomb-shells to pour on other nations who dare now to reject her entrance 
into their waters. The writer, (John), foresaw America threatening and daring the nations 
to disobey her order to allow her entrance. America’s navy planes fly high in the air with 
their deadly bombs held ready to drop on the towns and cities of other nations who dare 
to attack her. 
3 The sky over America is shadowed with thousands of planes, but yet the grievous 
destruction awaits America. America sends planes flying out into space by means of the 
most modern rockets designed for space-travel! 
4 At home, America’s country is as the prophet foresaw and prophesied of it; America is 
covered with planes and her army is standing ready to stop inside rebellion. The prophet 
who foresaw all of this readiness and preparation for the world showdown of military 
might, says, "Woe to the land shadowing with wings..." (Bible Is. 18:1). 
5 America takes a look around the dead piece of our earth...the moon. She wants to see if 
they can do her harm. America takes a look at Venus and Mars to see if there are signs of 
any gods on these planets who are capable of warring with her. America boasts of her 
ability to kill the civilization of earth three times over and have an army left to attack 
anywhere else that an enemy may rise up against her. 
6 Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar, who were the world rulers of their day and time, made 
great boasts. Pharaoh also made great mock of Allah (Jehovah) and His power to attack 
Pharaoh. In the Holy Qur’an, Pharaoh said to Moses concerning Allah, The Lord of the 
Worlds, Chap. 20:49: "Who is your Lord, O Moses?" Pharaoh said to his slave, Moses, in 
words to say, "You take another God besides me? Holy Qur’an, Ch. 20:71," ... "So I 
(Pharaoh) shall cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides..." But Israel took another


--- PAGE 84 ---
God Allah (Jehovah) besides Pharaoh and they did not lose their hands and feet on 
opposite sides. 
7 The people cry about death and destruction playing havoc over America, but they never 
cry about the evil that they are committing and which is the cause of this destruction 
coming into her borders bringing floods, rain, ice, hail and earthquakes daily and nightly 
somewhere on the surface of the land of America.  
8 The Bible refers to America by the name, Babylon, and teaches us, Rev. 18:2, 
"...Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the 
hole of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird." This is true, for 
America has accepted immigrants of the most evil and lewd character from Europe. 
America has filled her country with evil and indecency and there is no good in the works 
of America. America hates the doers of good and seeks to destroy them. This is the cause 
of the fall of America.  
9 You can bear witness to the deadly storms and twisters that are striking America in the 
areas where some of you live. Can you not see that Allah (God) is after you for the evil 
done to His people (Black man). 
10 The rich, the wealthy and powerful rulers of America, from the mayors of cities, the 
police commissioners up to the President work to oppose the Black once-slave’s return to 
his own. All of this hastens their doom, as the Bible, Ps. 2:4, teaches us, "He that sitteth 
in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision." 
11 Allah (God) laughs at their struggle to bring to a naught His aims and purpose of 
freedom, justice and equality to His Black people. Allah (God) has them (heads of 
America) in derision and confusion to the limit of their wits. In another place, the Bible 
teaches us, that He (Allah) will turn them backward. (Is. 44:25) 
12 Evil and filth are the god and worship of America. Never has a people on the face of 
the earth become so bold in their evil practices never before America has there been a 
nation on the face of the earth where scores of murders take place daily and nightly. In 
one large metropolitan city of America, the death rate is terrific...children kill 
children....male is against male and female is against female, destroying each other. 
13 The woman has no shyness. American designers and manufacturers dress the woman 
up in about one third of a dress and turn her out partially nude before the public. You 
would not expect to witness this in a country that preaches Christ Jesus and has churches 
dotting here and there throughout the land. You can hardly walk two or three blocks in a 
city without walking into the door of a church. The Christians profess to be the most truly 
righteous people in the country. All night long their voices are heard on the air preaching 
Jesus Christ, the prophet who lived two thousand years ago. He is dead and cannot hear 
the prayers of anyone, not even his own. The Christian preachers try to fool you by 
telling you that if you pray to the prophet Jesus that he will hear you. This is false. He


--- PAGE 85 ---
cannot hear you. If it were true, why cannot they get him to hear them when they call for 
peace anywhere? 
14 Their doctrine is used to deceive the Black man, so that he will stay on his knees 
praying to something from which he will never get an answer. He will never get any 
answer from a dead prophet. 
15 What kind of little girl can we expect from a mother who is walking around one-half 
naked and is displaying herself to the world, dressed in such a dress that no animal would 
wear? There is more shyness displayed in animals than there is in the so-called Christian 
American dressed in a mini-dress. 
16 The Black woman should be too proud of herself to disgrace herself in the same 
manner as her white slave-mistress. The Black man should be sent to prison for being 
such a fool as to allow his wife and daughter to go out and show their nude selves to the 
public. 
17 Nudity originated from the white race. Now they want to say to the world that "I am 
the guide." The guide to what? The Holy Qur’an says that they lead you to nothing but 
filth and evil. The Bible is referring to the people of America when it is referring to the 
people of Sodom and Gomorrah. Allah (God) destroyed them when he saw that it was 
good to do so. (Gen. 19:13). As it was with Sodom and Gomorrah, so it will be with 
America.


--- PAGE 86 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 31  
"Mystery Babylon, The Great" "Mystery Babylon, The Great" "Mystery Babylon, The Great" "Mystery Babylon, The Great"  
 
1 According to the English interpretation, the word "mystery" mean unknown, uncertain, 
obscure, concealed, a secret, kept to oneself, between you and me, locked up, something 
that has not been or cannot be explained. In theology it is a supposed truth of fact of great 
religious import which is beyond human comprehension. In the time of the translation of 
the Bible into English, some or all of the scholars were either without spiritual 
understanding or downright crooks who sought to hide that truth in the Book that they 
thought would reveal to the world their untrue selves. The "Mystery Babylon" had not 
come into existence. 
2 In ancient times Babylon, under the Kings Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar, was the 
great city of idol worship and evil. She was the Queen of Evil -- rich and well fortified. 
But this "Mystery Babylon" must refer to a future city or people. No city or people 
answers the description better than the cities and people of America. This "Mystery 
Babylon" just could not be the ancient Babylon as we know her history. 
3 You must remember that I am interested in bringing the truth to my people as clear as 
sunshine. So be not disturbed in seeing and hearing it the clear and simple way; for my 
people are the blind, deaf and dumb of the nations of the earth. They must be taught the 
truth by one who knows it. I am he who knows the truth, and I have been missioned from 
the Lord of the Worlds to tell the truth, whether it is to your liking or disliking. 
4 America (and her future) was not known in those days when the Bible was being 
translated into the English language. Not until 1611 did the translators bring into 
existence what is known as the King James Authorized Version. According to history, 
there were several attempts made before to get the Bible to the people in the English 
language, but they were met with opposition. 
5 America was discovered in 1492. These first translations of the Bible were far more 
near the truth than these later translations. The so-called Negro slaves were not given the 
King James Version to read until it was over three hundred years old. The white slave 
masters were not  
interested in "educated religious Negroes" (and are not today). The so-called Negroes 
now must understand that which was hidden from them by their slavemasters.


--- PAGE 87 ---
6 The "Mystery Babylon, the Great" is none other than America. This "Mystery Babylon" 
is full of riches, hatred, filth, fornication, adultery, drunkenness, murder of the innocent 
and idol worship. "Mystery Babylon" is full of names of blasphemy. America is full of 
various religious faiths of the most ignorant kind. She was once the greatest slave buyer 
and seller. She has the greatest merchant marine service, the world’s greatest export 
shippers in the merchandise of wheat, beasts, sheep, horses, chariots, gold, silver, iron, 
brass, wood, slaves, fine flour, corn and many others. 
7 You must know that all of the Revelation, or at least 90 percent, is directed to America. 
The seventeenth and eighteenth chapters should open the so-called Negroes’ eyes to the 
white race and white Christianity. There is no hereafter for the white race. Some few who 
are in Asia will stick around for a while.


--- PAGE 88 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32  
Babylon Could Have Been Saved, But She Was Not Babylon Could Have Been Saved, But She Was Not Babylon Could Have Been Saved, But She Was Not Babylon Could Have Been Saved, But She Was Not  
 
1 America seems to be the answer to many of the Bible’s and the Holy Qur’an’s 
prophecies. It is mentioned in Jeremiah (51:9) that ancient Babylon could have been 
healed but was not, for her wickedness was such that she was neither healed nor forgiven. 
2 The charges against ancient Babylon, according to her history, were that she persecuted 
and imprisoned the Jews. She brought them into captivity from Jerusalem after the taking 
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. 
3 Neguchadnezzar was also punished for his part in the enslavement, according to the 
ancient history of Babylon. King Neguchadnezzar had among the Jews whom he held in 
captivity, Daniel, a prophet of Israel. The King did not love Daniel and his prophethood, 
but he was able to get Allah’s prophecy of the destruction of Babylon from Daniel. But 
remember, he still held Daniel as a slave and a prisoner with the other common Jews. 
4 Under King Belshazzar, Daniel was still alive and was used for the revealing of God’s 
aims and purposes against Babylon. 
5 After studying the history of the destruction of ancient Babylon under these two kings, 
we have a very good graphic picture pointing to a future people and country. The words, 
"We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed" do not say why she was not 
healed. Was there a possible chance for the Babylonians being forgiven because of the 
evils done to the Jews, the sacking of Jerusalem, the destruction of their temple, and the 
bringing out from her temples sacred vessels to be used for sport under Belshazzar’s 
reign? Could this crime of the Babylonians be forgiven? And if not forgiven, what does 
this teach us? 
6 Is not the history of ancient Babylon’s unforgiven evils a sign that a future enslavement 
of God’s people (the American so-called Negro) will not be forgiven? Yet, there may be 
a chance, as Babylon had, but they will not do that which God desires them to do so that 
He may pardon them and forgive them and prolong their time. 
7 The Revelations of John’s prophecies were that they repented not of their evil deeds but 
blasphemed the very name of God (Rev. 16:9). Therefore, when a man is guilty of a great 
evil done against the cause of God and His people, he cannot be forgiven unless he seeks 
forgiveness himself.


--- PAGE 89 ---
8 We see this in the working of the fall of America today. I say fall, for most surely this is 
the divine fall of America, as it was of ancient Babylon for its evils done to the Jews. 
9 Even to this late date, America does not want to repent of her evil done to her Black 
slaves. I have given her a right chance, but she does not want to do justice by her free 
slaves to get an extension of time from Allah. She should free the slaves indeed. The 
ignorant ones who want to stay with her just because they are too lazy to accept their own 
responsibilities, or too much in love with the unalike white people who have attracted 
them to such an extent that they have become a charm -- want to remain with this white 
master even if they are just given food and shelter -- this type of people is not wanted by 
any nation. No nation wants slaves on the basis of taking the responsibility to care for 
them when they can care for themselves. 
10 The American Black once slave for four hundred years had now become a free proud 
slave, and a lover of the children of the once slave-masters. 
11 The refusal of white America to do something about justice for her so-called free 
slaves is bringing her into the same type of judgment that God brought upon ancient 
Babylon. 
12 Jeremiah (51:45) mentions a warning to the people of God to flee out of Babylon. 
Could this be referring to the captive Jews in ancient Babylon? If God called the ancient 
Jews His people, it was for a sign of a future people that He would choose to call His 
people (The American so-called Negro). 
13 The Black people of America today are called His chosen people by God Himself, 
chosen by Him to build a new government based upon truth, freedom, justice and 
equality. This type of government is to live forever and never to be removed from the 
people, according to Daniel’s prophecy of a kingdom of God set up in the last days -- the 
government of which will not be left to the people. God Himself will be the head and the 
ruler. 
14 In ancient Babylon’s history, the enslaved Jews were ordered to flee out of her midst 
and be delivered, every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord, Jeremiah (51:45.) 
15 The last book of the Bible, the Revelations of John (18:4) makes this a little clearer. 
Both prophecies are similar but the one in Revelations is warning a people to flee out of 
Babylon so that they..."Be not partakers of her sins," of Babylon and receive not of her 
plagues." 
16 This showed that God was going to plague Babylon; and that His people should not 
suffer the divine plagues sent upon Babylon. They are ordered to flee out of her. 
(Jeremiah 51:45.) This is a future prophecy of a future Babylon similar to the ancient 
Babylon under the rule of Nebuchadnezzar. The history of these two kings of ancient 
Babylon teaches us that they held slaves who were trying to serve the right God.


--- PAGE 90 ---
17 The coming of Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are 
due forever, was for the deliverance of the lost-and-found people (Black) from a four-
hundred year-old enemy who has never shown them anything but evil, murder and death. 
Being very angry, as it was written of Him and as I know it to be the truth, He desires 
nothing more than freedom, justice, and equality for us, the once lost and now found 
Black members of our nation, the original Black nation of the earth. 
18 America now is at war with God through God’s people (the so-called Negro.) The 
confusion and the plagues of the country with disasters, one after another, is divine 
retaliation against white America’s evil doings and intentions, against her once-slaves 
and her false friendship, which has her opening her homes to integrate the people of God 
with them who by nature are different or foreign. The white man has poisoned our 
people’s minds so thoroughly that they fight against their own God and salvation to gain 
the favor of their own enemies. 
19 The call of Islam, the true religion of God to us, the once-slaves of America, is the 
same call telling us to flee out of the American way of life so that our lives may be saved 
from the divine destruction of a non-repentant enemy (Jeremiah 51:45.) 
20 Divine plagues and foreign wars are now destroying the American standards of life 
and money. Her deceitful, filthy temptations, now being displayed before her once-slaves 
in the world, are designed to make the once-slave an enemy of his God and of his own 
salvation; and are designed to make them take part with them against the aim and purpose 
of Allah, which is to set the so-called Negro in heaven while he lives. 
21 A prophecy relating to America is mentioned in Isaiah (47:1) as a "virgin daughter" of 
ancient Babylon’s history. As we all know, America is the last, the greatest and the 
richest remaining power of the white nations. But now she is falling and the prophet 
Isaiah says, "Come and sit down in the dust," humble yourself, for you are no more called 
delicate. 
22 The filthy display by white American Christians, walking around half nude, sitting 
before their pastors in their churches with dresses halfway up their thighs for the pastors 
to stare at their nude forms goes on. The pastor should actually be standing at the door 
telling such disgracefully dressed people that he preaches the word of God and that God 
warns us to be clean, both internally and externally, and that we should not tempt the 
nation to do evil and filth. But he opens his church doors and is happy to have them in 
rows sitting before his eyes, knowing that this is against the teaching of God; turning his 
house of God into the worship of filth and evil. 
23 Can the church survive? Can Christianity survive these days of divine judgment 
against America? 
24 The Revelation reads, in a prophecy relating to America, that she had in her a "hole 
for every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird" (Revelation 18:2.) All 
hateful people have a haven to America. Though the scientists and scholars of the


--- PAGE 91 ---
religion of Christianity know these words to be true, they desire yet to see the already-
made blind, deaf and dumb so-called Negro go to his doom with them; and since they are 
by nature evil, they tempt them. The Holy Qur’an teaches that they only lead you to filth 
and evil. This is perfectly manifested today in America among its people ruled by the 
white man. The very conscience of an individual knows that these evils we see today are 
not accepted by God. 
25 The desire to marry and integrate among people whom God has made to be His and 
our enemies is beyond one’s imagination. 
26 Jeremiah (51:46) prophesies violence in the midst of Babylon (a future Babylon) and 
"ruler against ruler." Is not this true of the American government and people today? "Her 
whole land (people) shall be confounded" (Jeremiah 51:47.) Is not this true of the 
American government and people today? They are fast becoming confounded. "And all 
her slain shall fall in the midst of her" (Jeremiah 51:47.) Every hour in the day and night 
people are being murdered and killed in America throughout her cities and highways. 
Murdering and killing is the order of the day in America.  
27 The Bible mentions that God used a destroying wind (Jeremiah 51:1) against those 
who opposed His purpose and aims. Is it not true that day and night somewhere in 
America there are destructive tornadoes and storms destroying the property and lives of 
Americans? 
28 Go to sleep to the reality of the judgment of America, a repetition of ancient 
Babylon’s judgment, if you like to be caught in the snare. As God has said, He laid a 
snare for ancient Babylon (Jeremiah 50:24) and ancient Babylon was taken in that snare. 
29 So it is in America. Long before America ever thought that she should repent of her 
evil done to her slaves or reject repentance, God hath set the snare to catch her. America 
is now in the same snare that God set for ancient Babylon. Will America repent that she 
should be healed or will she ignore it?


--- PAGE 92 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 33  
Modern Babylon is Falling Modern Babylon is Falling Modern Babylon is Falling Modern Babylon is Falling  
 
1 We say "modern" when we refer to something comparing it to the past. This name 
"Babylon" begins in Genesis 10:10 (Bible). In Gen. 10:10 it is spelled "B-a-b-e-l." But 
the same name seems to have changed itself into the name Babylon as we come to the 
most late-day history of this name. 
2 Babel (Babylon) -- According to the history of Babylon throughout the Bible, Babylon 
is referred to as something prophesied as having a failure upon her progress and rise. 
3 In Psalms 137:18, David prophesies that Babylon was made to be destroyed. We know 
of nothing other than the devil and his works that was actually made to be destroyed 
spiritually. 
4 The devil was not made to exist forever. This is verified by both the Bible and the Holy 
Qur’an and by all writers and teachers of scripture. So, here, Babylon seems to refer not 
only to some town or city, but it also seems to refer to a race or a nation of people. 
5 Ancient Babylon, as is known by all of us, was a city under the reign of 
Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar. The fall of Babylon was final. Babylon was never to be 
rebuilt after her fall. And Babylon was never rebuilt. 
6 This points to the same prophecy of the devil and his kingdom in the Revelation of 
John (Bible) -- that Satan and his kingdom would be burnt up and it would never rise 
again. 
7 In the Epistles of Paul there is a prophecy of the devil and his kingdom "that the devil 
was made for fuel for the fire." The Holy Qur’an refers to this prophecy in these words: 
"Fuel of hell is men and stones." 
8 So the "fuel of hell is men and stones" -- we do not know why stones are put there with 
men -- it could be referring to the hardness of the stone and to the hardness of the heart 
and the hardness of the wicked against truth and righteousness. 
9 The book of Revelation (Bible), it is prophesied here that an angel heralded a warning 
to the people that Babylon is falling. He then tells why Babylon fells. Babylon fell 
because she...."is become the habitation of devils, and the hole of every foul spirit, and a


--- PAGE 93 ---
cage of every unclean and hateful bird." The "foul spirit" here is used to tell us that the 
people of Babylon were filthy. 
10 The term, "a cage" -- this tells us that her cities and her country became a cage for 
people of filth. The Bible teaches us that the God referred to the people of Sodom and 
Gomorrah as being people whose doing and work was such that it came up and stunk in 
His nostrils. (But I think that if the God would get a good smell of this modern wicked 
filth here He would think the smell of Babylon in His nostrils was like the smell of a 
flower compared to the wickedness of today.) 
11 Babylon is used as an example for some distant people or their history. According to 
the prophets, this name Babylon is something that begins in Genesis and ends in 
Revelation. It is found throughout the entire Bible; therefore, we must not look at it as 
one personal part. We must not look at it as spelling out to us the ancient only. 
12 In Jeremiah, (Bible) we see a daughter of ancient Babylon. He calls the people "the 
daughters of ancient Babylon." These people are not the old parents, but they are the 
daughters from those parents. 
13 The daughter of ancient Babylon refers to a more late and modern civilization whose 
people give themselves over to the practice of the same evil that the people of Ancient 
Babylon practiced. But, the modern people were more capable of improving on the 
practices of the people of ancient Babylon. Therefore, he calls this modern people "the 
daughters of ancient Babylon." 
14 Isaiah (Bible Is. 47:1) asks this people, the daughter of Babylon, "Come down, and sit 
in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne....for thou 
shalt no more be called tender and delicate." 
15 The daughters of Babylon seem to have been a very rich people and they had fallen 
from a state of great wealth. Isaiah used Babylon as a pretty girl whose lovers used to be 
plentiful because of her wealth and attractiveness; now she has become ill-looking and 
has no more attraction upon the people. So he said, sit down in the dust, you are no more 
respected and attractive to the people. 
16 The prophet Jeremiah warned ancient Babylon that she had a daughter coming. This 
daughter meets the fate destined for Babylon: she was made to be taken. 
17 Satan was made to be taken and destroyed. Why? Because she had become a place 
where evil was practiced. She was like a bird that goes out and associates with birds other 
than her own kind, and then she becomes a hateful bird -- she is hated by the other birds. 
18 Babylon fills herself up with people of that sort. The U.S.A. came into the Western 
Hemisphere and chased and all but anniliated the Indians. But America invited every one 
of the poor class who wanted to come from Europe to make themselves at home here in 
America, the Indians’ country.


--- PAGE 94 ---
19 All of the poor and evil citizens of Europe, America welcomed them. She invited 
every race of the earth to come and join in with her in a free country where evil and filth 
are openly practiced without hindrance. 
20 America has done just this. She has filled up her country with all evil people. America 
did not allow Islam, or a preacher of Islam, to come into her country; America did not 
want a good religion taught. America made a religion that she could rule and control 
herself. He made it attractive to the eyes and ears of those who see and hear it by teaching 
them basically that there were three Gods instead of teaching them the teachings of 
Moses and the prophets -- the teaching of one God. 
21 America makes it possible to her God-Head that if one of them does not like you, you 
may please to another and if one does not let you by, one of the three will. This is 
contrary to the very law of nature. It is contrary to America’s own mathematical 
language. In mathematics it is not possible to put three (3) into one (1). 
22 So, America, having this religion, contrary to the truth, today the Author of Truth is 
condemning her (America). America is nothing but a foul and evil place to live. She has 
no respect for her own self nor for anyone else. She will disrobe in the public and go 
nudist.  
America even has nudist colonies wherein if you desire to go nude you can do so if the 
public does not want you. 
23 In the Bible, Rev. 18:4,5 in the Revelation of John, a people are warned to flee out of 
her. Here, we get the name Babylon to become a modern day people. The voice of an 
angel warns the people of a certain class to fly out of Babylon. "...Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her 
sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities" (as being an 
evil people). So the angel notifies us saying, "Babylon the great is fallen." Today, we see 
this same thing. 
24 There is no people to be warned to come out of another people that answers to the 
description of this warning so clearly as the so-called Negro in America of lost-found 
people of our own Black kind does. 
25 Here, the so-called Negro is warned to fly out of her and not to be partakers of her 
judgment -- her torment. The angel says, so much evil has she done to thee Rev. 18:6, 
"Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her 
works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double." 
26 Allah (God) in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due 
forever, said to me that there is nothing that you can do to her in the way of evil that 
could match the evil that she has already done to us.


--- PAGE 95 ---
27 This is why the Revelator calls the people of modern Babylon "beasts," for they live 
the kind of life of wild beasts. They have no mercy for themselves or for anyone else. 
They are made merciless although there are a few who will believe and escape the doom 
of her brothers. This is their reward just by faith. 
28 But the Black man is created by the Creator, by nature, and he was made blind, deaf 
and dumb by his kidnaping lord and master, the white slave-master. I do not think that 
you could overlook the most positive truth here, in this article, that we are now living in 
the call of angel to us, to come out of her. The "her" here means the wicked world of the 
devil. 
29 Since we the Black people were kidnaped and forced into this world (of the white 
race) we must be forced out of this world. It is not that you my people will accept by just 
having the freedom to accept of your own choice. No. You will have to be punished, 
divinely beaten and destroyed until you accept Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are Due forever, as your God and Saviour, as I and thousands of my followers are 
doing. 
30 Do not think that the 144,000 prophesied of, are the only ones who will be saved. The 
144,000 refers to the first converts -- "the first ripe fruits to God and His Messenger, the 
first ripe fruits of God and the Lamb." 
31 Another prophecy warns us that "Babylon is falling never to rise again." In this 
warning it teaches you that the country and people of modern Babylon will become like 
the people and city of ancient Babylon that was destroyed and has not risen up a people 
or a city since its destruction. 
32 I warn you my Black brother and Black sister that unless you believe in Almighty God 
Allah, Master Fard Muhammad, as I do and receive the name of the holy and perfect God 
you will never see the hereafter. 
33 The Bible warns you and me that on the final destruction of the wicked, Allah (God) 
will say to the angel that He has to usher in the judgment to bring His people to Him 
everyone that is called by His name. For He gives His people His name so that He may 
save them. So that they may be the servant of Allah (God) as they were the servant of the 
white slave-master. 
34 As long as you are in the name of the white slave-master, you belong to the white 
slave-master. And regardless to what you believe and regardless to how mighty you think 
that you are, you will not be accepted by the Black people and the God of our Black 
people if you have the name of white people and if you are in the religion called 
Christianity. 
35 The fall of America is now going on! She is falling! The cause of her fall is 
universally known, as it was with ancient Babylon. The fall of ancient Babylon was


--- PAGE 96 ---
known. The great prophet Daniel, the mouth-speak of God, was in her midst; and his 
people (the Jews) were enslaved. 
36 In ancient Babylon, according to history, during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar and 
Belshazzar, the Jews suffered under the ruthless law of these two kings against the Jewish 
God, religion, and people. These two rulers of ancient Babylon disrespected everything 
regarding the sacred religion and worship of Jehovah by the Jews. 
37 They took Jerusalem and captured the nobels of Israel. They raided and sacked the 
city and the Jews’ house of worship. They made mockery and shambles of all that stood 
for Jehovah and the Jews. 
38 They made mockery of the prophets and the sacred vessels that God had King 
Solomon make and put in the house of worship of the Jews so that they should be sacred. 
39 Nebuchadnezzar and his nephew (or grandson according to some historians) 
Belshazzar gave the Jews no honor and no respect whatsoever. Under both of their reigns, 
God made an example of them to serve as an example of a future people’s opposition and 
disrespect of God and His people. 
40 Master Fard Muhammad, Who is Allah in Person, wants to make it clear that He has 
chosen the American so-called Negroes to be His people. The truth that He gives to them 
and they, themselves, are sacred before His eyes and the world of the righteous. Showing 
disrespect to God and His people is inviting the punishment and doom of God. 
41 A careful observer or seeker of truth of the time and history being made in these times 
can easily see how well the history of ancient Babylon, its rulers and its people fits in 
with the histories of the rulers and peoples of America and England. 
42 America’s enslavement of the so-called Negro and England’s enslavement of people 
fit so completely with the history of ancient Babylon that it cannot be denied that the 
ancient history of the Babylonian empire and people was prototypical of America.  
43 America wants everyone to believe she is right in her wicked dealings with the people 
of earth. With her might of arms commanding the high seas and the land around the 
glove, she wishes everyone to think she is right in building up arms and forts in foreign 
countries and on their shores a bristling, deadly navy with guns trained on foreign 
peoples’ towns and cities, as a dare without any cause. This only shows her pride and 
daring aggressive acts against people who would like to be at peace. 
44 She has her feet standing on twenty or thirty million Black people, brought out of their 
native land and people -- from their God and their religion -- by her fathers and have 
forced them to remain under her feet of power for the past four-hundred years. She 
deprived them of the knowledge of self, the white race, their own people and their 
religion.


--- PAGE 97 ---
45 For three hundred years she did not allow them to worship any religion at all -- not 
even her own religion of Christianity. She robbed them of their divine rights. 
46 Now with her great show of temptation put before the same slaves and the world at 
large, she should not be surprised to see and feel the hand of God writing her doom on 
the wall of her government.


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 34  
The Judgment of America The Judgment of America The Judgment of America The Judgment of America  
 
1 The great dreadful days of the Lord have now come to America -- the land and people 
who worship evil and indecency. Robbery, murder, rape, famine and deceit are the order 
of the day in America. 
2 If there is anything like a God of Righteousness -- if there is anything like a God of 
Truth  
-- should not He raise himself up and take His place and put an end to such evil as is now 
going on in America? 
3 People cannot walk the streets of America today without subjecting themselves to 
robbery, murder or rape. America is a wicked land...everyone is against the other. 
4 Righteousness, justice and freedom are despised and fought against regardless to the 
clear knowledge of God’s hourly punishment and destruction of America by his divine 
plague of storms. But this is as it is written of America in the Book of Revelations, in the 
Bible...’they continue their evil way and did blaspheme the God Who has power over the 
plagues. They hated the name of Allah, the Great Mahdi...they hated the name of His 
Messenger...but nevertheless that does not stop the judgment and the destruction of 
America. 
5 Look at the wicked devils in Alabama. They are against us while we are trying to be at 
peace with them, but there is no peace in them. We have done nothing to them. They are 
against us just because of the idea that we are Muslims and Black people. 
6 The white man has had his way of ruling the Black people for so long that he thinks 
that he still has the power to do so while in reality the white man has come to the end of 
his time of power to rule the Black people. 
7. Regardless to Allah’s (God’s) Retaliation to the  white man for his evil acts done to the 
Black man, the white man still keeps inviting the retaliation of Allah (God). The white 
man must remember that he cannot win today over Allah (God) and His Servant, for He 
has power over the fraction of an atom. 
8 The judgment of America. Judgment has come to you America. Woe to you who seek 
to fight against Allah (God) and against His aim and purpose. Woe to you America. Allah 
(God) has made you blind to His judgment and therefore you are committing suicide. He


--- PAGE 99 ---
has made you blind on purpose...to give you the full dose of His wrath, for when a man 
does not know the danger of fire, then he can fall headlong into it. 
9 America has mistreated the Black man for four hundred years and she does not think 
that there is ever a God Who will accept her Black slave and return on her head the 
injustice done to her Black slave. 
10 This is the day and time in which America could benefit from what Allah (God) has 
revealed to me and from the work that I am doing among my Black people...turning them 
from doing evil into righteousness. As it is written in the Bible, "Babylon could have 
been healed;" and there was a possible chance for her healing, if she had not gone to the 
extreme by making fun of the God of the Jews and their temple in Jerusalem and 
belittling the power of the God of the Jews, to retaliate. 
11 The Bible prophesies of the plagues that would come upon America -- and these 
plagues are falling on America now, and yet she will not repent. For America continues 
to kill and deprive the Black once-slave of righteousness and justice. Even though the 
Black slave wants to go from America, she wants to hold on to him and America does not 
want to let her Black once-slave go. America holds the Black once-slave for a prey. 
12 Woe to America. Her day has arrived. She would not heed the warning. I begged her 
to let us be separated from her on a little territory and a state to ourselves and to let us be 
responsible for our own survival, only to get out from under her injustice; but she 
refused. So it was with Pharaoh in the time of Moses. God went down to Egypt to make 
Israel and her enemies, the Egyptians, an example for a future people so that this may 
serve as a sign of what we see going on in America today. 
13 The four (4) Great Judgments that Allah (God) promises to destroy America with are 
now coming upon her...hail, snow, drought, earthquake. Allah (God) has reserved His 
treasures of snow and ice to be used against the wicked country America in the day of 
battle and war. These are some of Allah’s (God’s) w eapons, the storms that we see going 
on. 
14 The white man of America is not blind and ignorant. He has known these prophecies 
of his doom for a long time before we knew it, for the white man translated the Bible and 
he knows what he put in his translation of that which was written in the Bible. 
15 The judgment of America. All love and respect of the wicked has gone from them. 
They do not love each other nor respect each other. They have pulled off their clothes and 
disgraced themselves. This is also a plague. You see some of the white people rehearsing 
the cave days of their fathers, and they are not ashamed to do so. They come out with 
long, straggly hair as their fathers did in the days of the cave. This is Allah (God) forcing 
the white man to bear Him Witness that they were really once the cave man. Yet a few 
foolish, unlearned Black People follow the white man. It is a shame to pull off their 
clothes and grow hair down their back and over their face. By misleading the Black man 
into following the way of the white man’s cave days, the white man is again telling the


--- PAGE 100 ---
world how he has deceived the Black man and is now making the Black man manifest 
that he is too weak to seek his own. 
16 For nearly forty years I have been preaching to the Black man in America that we 
should accept our own; and instead of the Black man going to the decent side of his own, 
he goes back seeking traditional Africa, and the way they did in jungle life and the way 
you see in some uncivilized parts of Africa today. They are not using barber’s shears, and 
razors to keep themselves looking dignified as a civilized people should look. The Black 
man in America accepts the jungle life, thinking that they would get the love of Black 
Africa. Black brother and Black sister, wearing savage dress and hair-styles will not get 
you the love of Africa. The dignified people of Africa are either Muslim or educated 
Christians. But Africa today does not want Christianity. Do not think that you will get a 
home in Africa after this war if you are Christian. To get a home in Africa after the war, 
you will have to be Muslim. 
17 The Judgment of America. She is made manifest. As it is written in the Bible, 
(Revelation), "She is a cage of every unclean and hateful bird" (every unclean and hateful 
human being.) 
18 America, America your day has come for the evil done to your Black slave. America 
you cannot repay that evil with another evil of trying to tempt the Black slave by offering 
them your white women. That does not help you in this day, but it does condemn you as 
being a double-crosser...that you will even offer your Black once-slave your girls and 
women to do with them as they please, if they will just follow you. 
19 The judgment of America. "Babylon could have been healed but she was not healed." 
20 America is just beginning to experience sorrow, mourning, grief and distrust from the 
anger of God and man. 
21 According to both the Holy Qur’an and the Bible, there will be plenty more of the 
same. In these two books, one can easily find everything foretold that is happening today. 
The time will grow so troublesome that (according to the Holy Qur’an) children will 
become gray headed, and (according to the Bible) great heart failure will become a 
disease upon the people, who have the anger of God (the American people). 
22 The fourth beast in the Revelations of John in the Bible -- and of which Daniel 
describes as a very dreadful and well armed beast, whose workings are that of death upon 
the weak -- refers to America. She has no respect for the poor and the unfortunate. 
23 Daniel’s description of the ribs between the teeth of the beast is in reference to this ill-
treatment, subjection, and ruthless behavior by the devil to our people. 
24 This America ladens the poor with heavy sentences -- long prison terms -- and refuses 
to let the prisoners go free. This is due to her heartlessness and lack of compassion for the 
Black man of America.


--- PAGE 101 ---
25 This beast (white man) lies in wait around the Black man’s homes and prowls the 
streets at night in wait for an excuse to wreak his ruthlessness on his poor prey (the Black 
man). If the Black man raises a hand to protect and defend himself, he is shot dead, and is 
unable to defend himself against false charges. 
26 This beast keeps our people in sorrow and unhappiness by depriving them of equal 
opportunities. The Black man’s wages are calculated by white wicked accountants, 
preventing the so-called Negro from saving by skyrocketing (in the view of the poor) the 
prices of the necessities of life. 
27 This white beast prosecutes, imprisons and kills those who preach freedom and justice 
for the poor so-called Negroes. The white man does not want the so-called Negroes to 
leave America; but she will not divide the spoils of America (the country which she has 
taken by the force of arms and killing its aboriginal owners, the Indians) with them. 
28 This beast sets up evil and indecency to be idolized as a God. She disguises good for 
evil and she covers the earth with filth, making it fascinating so that men will bow down 
and worship evil for good. She sets brother against brother for her joy; then she kills both 
of them. 
29 Woe to America, the murderer and deceiver of the people. The God of Justice and 
Truth has pronounced a judgment against thee -- and by no means will you escape. You 
have made mockery of Him, God, and His people and His word, the truth. 
30 You have been judged and found wanting to the so-called American Negroes, the lost 
and now found members of the aboriginal Black nation of the earth. 
31 Come, unite with Allah, and me. Go to your own. You won’t have to go anywhere if 
you only will unite with your own. Heaven awaits you wherever you may be.


--- PAGE 102 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 35  
America Surrounded with The Judgment of Allah America Surrounded with The Judgment of Allah America Surrounded with The Judgment of Allah America Surrounded with The Judgment of Allah  
 
1 The four great judgments that Almighty Allah (God) is bringing upon America are rain, 
hail, snow and earthquakes. We see them now covering all sides of America, as the Holy 
Qur’an prophesies curtailing on all her sides. And these judgments would push the people 
into the center of the country, and there they would realize that it is Allah (God) Who is 
bringing them and their country to a naught. 
2 Job, in the Bible, prophesied that Allah (God) has the snow and ice to use as His 
weapon in the day of war and battle against the wicked. We hear and read in the 
newspapers today of how great, hill-like, little mountains of snow are pushing down from 
the north not only in the northern states of Minnesota, North and South Dakotas and 
Montana; but now the snow is in the New England States and they are declared to be 
disaster areas. The announcer of the disaster of snow in the New England States said that 
there have never been such great quantities of snow. All up and down the coast to the 
Carolinas, the rain takes up where the snow leaves off. 
3 All around the Southern Border of America, storms are raging. There are tornadoes and 
heavy rains and more storms are on the way - one right after another. And in the North 
and Far West and in the East, America is surrounded with the judgments of Allah (God). 
There are earthquakes and the sea is raging. The Pacific Ocean is now angry and is raging 
and tossing up great waves as never before. 
4 Why should these things hit America? The Revelations teach you why. It is because 
America is filled with devils and has such unclean persons living in America. That is true 
under the symbolism of a hateful bird. Every filthy, slimey, wicked person comes here 
for a haven, where he can do any wickedness he wants to do -- the country is open and 
welcomes that type of person. 
5 As we see -- the few little Muslims, whose name, Muslim means those who have 
submitted to the will of Allah (God) -- how the enemy hates us and seeks to do all the 
evil he possibly can against us, by falsehood. 
6 These are not the days of Noah, Lot and Abraham, nor are these the days of Moses. 
These are new times, the enemy does not get away in punishing the righteous just 
because he hates them. 
7 Allah, the God of Righteousness, is with us and He just Laughs at those who try to fight 
against Him. He has destroyed whole nations with less than the power of rain, hail, snow


--- PAGE 103 ---
and earthquakes. The Holy Qur’an has the record of people even being destroyed by 
gnats. Allah (God) does not have to have something great. He does not have to go to 
work and get a block of iron or a mountain and throw it on them. He uses that which is 
with you, against you. 
8 The forces of nature are great weapons as we see them in play upon America. Storms 
after storms of snow and ice are rolling in from the North and are pushing great drifts that 
are just covering up everything. What can you do with a God like that? 
9 Job prophesied that Allah (God) has His weapons stored up to use in the day of battle 
and war with the wicked. He just takes some snow and covers them up. 
10 The Holy Qur’an says that Allah (God) destroyed people with just cold wind. He froze 
them. Do you think that you can get away with fighting Allah (God)? No wonder the 
second Psalms says that He will sit in the heavens and laugh at those who are trying to 
fight against Him. He will have you crazy. It is true. 
11 The heads of the governments of the Christian world are confused, and they do not 
know that they are confused. Why? Because their greatest desire was to confuse us. Now 
Allah (God) has taken the confusion out of us and put it into them. 
12 Eat, America. Help yourself to the dessert that you have prepared for us. You eat it. 
All praises are due to Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad. 
13 We went to Alabama -- and to any state that we go to -- we pay a high price per acre 
of land that our fathers’ labor has already bought for us. Now he wants to kill us if we act 
humble and peaceful and want to buy back some of our own labor. 
14 I laugh at some of the things that I hear coming out of Alabama -- and not only 
Alabama, but every other state in the union. They do not know the time in which they are 
living. Allah (God) is well able to take the country from you and give it to whom He 
pleases. It is in your Bible, read it for yourself. He took the kingdom from the wicked and 
gives it to whom He pleases -- those who will bring people into righteousness. 
15 America is surrounded with the judgments of Allah -- the four great judgments of rain, 
hail, snow and earthquakes and confusion in the heads of state.


--- PAGE 104 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 36  
Four Great Judgments of America Four Great Judgments of America Four Great Judgments of America Four Great Judgments of America  
 
1 To be plagued with too much rain will destroy property and lives. It swells the rivers 
and creeks. Too much rain floods cities and towns. Large bodies of water at the ocean 
shore lines will be made to swell with unusually high waves, dumping billions of tons of 
water over the now seashore line. 
2 Rain destroys property and kills cattle by drowning them in low lands. Rain destroys 
the hiding places of vicious beasts and reptiles bringing them out fighting in small towns 
in peoples’ homes and farms. 
3 Rain weakens and destroys railroads, truck line beds and bridges. Rain undermines 
foundations of all types of buildings. Rain makes the atmosphere too heavy with moisture 
causing sickness. 
4 Wind with rain can bring destruction to towns and cities, bringing various germs, 
causing sickness to the people. It produces unclean water by the swelling of streams and 
destroying reservoirs of pure drinking water used for the health of the people. Rain is a 
destructive army within itself. Hail stones are also a property and life destroyer. 
5 Snow is of the most dreaded plague when it comes in great drifts from five to thirty-
five feet. It buries your property and lives. It destroys your highways, your cities, and 
your concrete and gravel in towns and cities. It puts a great burden of expense upon the 
cities. It puts a great burden of expense upon the city to repair it. The cave-in of roofs of 
homes, the cutting off of homes, the cutting off of transportation, isolating areas, brings 
about starvation. And communication is destroyed with the icing of communication 
wires. 
6 Snow looks pretty because of its clean look. Almost everything of nature is beautiful, 
but it can be turned into death and destruction against man. 
7 Snow is prophesied to be one of the weapons that God will use against the wicked 
(America), Job 38:22, 23. Hail also is mentioned in the same two verses, where God 
plainly tells us that He has preserved it against the time of trouble, against the day of the 
battle and war. 
8 The Holy Qur’an also teaches us that God used snow, rain, wind, hail, earthquakes and 
fire against former wicked people.


--- PAGE 105 ---
9 Is America any better than the people we read about in the history that God destroyed? 
No, she is not as good. These people were not as wicked as the American people. 
10 Earthquakes can destroy towns and cities instantly. America is in the grip of divine 
judgment. America is in the position toward her once slave, so-called Negro, as Pharaoh 
was with Israel as his slave. She is in this position because of the injustice done to the 
American so-called Negro slave, brought to America over four hundred years ago, and 
refuses to let them go free. 
11 They only say that you are free, knowing within that you are not able to leave them 
without anything. But the injustice continues to increase. Now they plan death. 
12 So this God was predicted by the prophets to come to the defense of this people (so-
called Negroes) in the last days after they served the enemy for four hundred years. The 
Bible declares Abraham in Genesis that God would judge the people to whom his people 
(Abraham’s) would be in bondage. 
13 This does not mean Israel. This means the present Black people, the members of their 
Black nation, who have and are fulfilling their prophecy. 
14 God, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, will not be defeated. The more evil, 
deceiving, tricking and making of false promises to the American so-called Negro only 
increases America’s divine chastisement -- doom. 
15 America knows that her trouble lies in her mistreatment of the Black man, the so-
called Negro, but she is too wicked to give up tricking the Negro and deceiving him on 
false promises. She just cannot stop. The opportunity is too open, and she thinks that 
there is no one to hinder her. 
16 But God has chosen us to be His people, and He delights in fighting the enemy. 
According to the history of the former people, He delighted Himself by going forth 
against them when they exceeded the limit. So it is with America.  
17 They must be separated. America will not agree to see the Negro separated from her 
until she has suffered divine punishment, as Pharaoh suffered. The same thing that other 
evil nations suffered before them is now coming upon this people. 
18 She seeks to keep her slaves robbed of opportunity and wealth. She envies success 
coming to American Negro free slaves. She charges them high prices to keep them down. 
She deceives them through a few of what we call "Uncle Toms" in the political circle, 
clergy class and all professional classes. 
19 She offers them little favoritism to help her work against their own people -- the Black 
people. But they, too, will suffer along with the enemy of justice of the poor so-called 
Negro.


--- PAGE 106 ---
20 They must be separated. Envy and hatred are growing between the two people, 
regardless of their preachings of social integration. The truth must come. 
21 What is better than the program you find I have written. You two (Black and white) 
cannot get along in peace since you never have gotten along in peace. 
22 Do you know why the white American does not like to talk with you about separation, 
and why he calls separation of the two people the wrong solution for peace between the 
people? He knows that it is promised and that God will do it. Then, why do they not 
agree with separating themselves from you and me, and we from them? Why are the 
Black man and white man all over the earth now in disagreement with each other to live 
in peace? Do you know why? 
23 Oh, foolish American so-called Negro, seek some of this earth that you can call your 
own to live on in peace. Unite and ask the government for a portion of America. 
24 This is what we need -- somewhere to live to ourselves and let the white man live to 
himself. The two people are not brothers. They are alien to each other. God did not make 
them brothers to each other. 
25 I ask you, my brother and sister, to learn this and learn it quickly and fly for your life 
to the refuge of Allah. Come follow me.


--- PAGE 107 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 37  
America’s Land Being Divinely Curtailed America’s Land Being Divinely Curtailed America’s Land Being Divinely Curtailed America’s Land Being Divinely Curtailed  
 
1 Holy Qur’an, Ch. 13:41, "See they not that We are visiting the land, curtailing it of its 
sides? And Allah pronounces a doom -- there is no repeller of His decree. And He is swift 
in calling to account." 
2 Black Man in America, there is no one as blind as you are in seeing what is going on 
against America. I have warned you for nearly forty (40) years that Allah (God) in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, came to me and 
gave me the knowledge of the truth; and I have been preaching it to you continually. 
3 Now you see what is going on. As America has done, so now it is being done unto her. 
America has surrounded the countries of other peoples. She has blown their cities to 
pieces and she has killed their inhabitants. Those who were left alive she put to flight, 
running for shelter from the destruction by America’s might. 
4 It is very sad and horrible to look at the things that America had done, which are now 
coming on this country. For many years -- centuries of years, America has lived a 
luxurious, wicked life, while hating her Black slaves and depriving them of justice -- 
shooting them down on the streets, on the highways and in the woods and fields, for 
nothing. She did it just because she felt that she had the advantage; and she wanted to kill 
Black people, as she was made to do. 
5 Bible Ps. 10:8, "He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places doth 
he murder the innocent: his eyes are set against the poor." 
6 Up until this very minute, she is seeking to destroy the Black man in America and to 
deprive him of the freedom to do for self. America never desires a departure of the Black 
slave from his white slave-master. America wishes only to hold the Black slave in order 
to continue to treat him with evil. 
7 Pharaoh’s hatred and injustice to Israel, in Egypt, in the time of Moses, should serve 
America as a warning; but she has fallen head long into the throes of the destruction of 
Allah (God). 
8 America runs to and fro seeking a way out, but she does not try to justify her Black 
slave for justice and equality among the nations of the earth. America made us into 
nothing and she used us to mock us before the nations of the earth.


--- PAGE 108 ---
9 But a God with unlimited wisdom, knowledge and power, is now befriending the Black 
slave and He has chosen the Black slave to be His people. But the foolish Black people 
have yet to come into that knowledge; that Allah (God) is their best friend and that He is 
here to save them from the destruction of a people who have shown enmity and hatred to 
us all of our lives. America divided us one against the other. The Black man in America 
is so divided against each other that you seek all of the time to do evil against each other. 
10 You cannot even befriend them lest they take advantage of it. They call you a fool for 
trying to befriend them, as it was with us, by midway Technical School. 
11 Midway Technical School came to us for help. We gave them that help to keep them 
from falling. It cost us thirty thousand dollars to set them free of their back rent and other 
bills that they had. Take a look at how they have turned on us for the purpose of wrecking 
all of the beautiful businesses set up for them and others to enjoy on the south side of 
Chicago, Illinois.


--- PAGE 109 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 38  
The Fall of America Foretold, Separation is the Ans wer The Fall of America Foretold, Separation is the Ans wer The Fall of America Foretold, Separation is the Ans wer The Fall of America Foretold, Separation is the Ans wer  
 
Holy Qur’an 81:6,7,12 
And when the cities are set a fire. 
And when men are united. 
And when the hell is kindled. 
  
1 The Folding Up is the title, taken from the first verse of that chapter, in which the above 
verses are found. 
2 When the sun is folded up (Holy Qur’an 81:1) symbolically prophesies the folding up 
of a recorded work -- a record of what people have done, as its use will no longer be 
necessary. This chapter refers to what takes place in the resurrection. 
3 One party is recorded as a beginning, while the other party is discontinued. We see this 
clearly being made manifest today. War causes the destruction of civilizations. Wars 
destroy the cities and towns of a nation. This chapter, 81, of the Holy Qur’an is now 
being fulfilled. 
4 The sun and the stars, mountains, camels and wild animals are all mentioned 
metaphorically in the first four verses of this chapter, and are not without significance. 
5 The coming of God referred to by the prophets is to unite a people who have been 
divided against self by their enemies. He chose these people for building a better world. 
6 The Bible’s Revelation refers to the destruction of the beast and his chief instructor, the 
dragon. The name beast given here is not referring to four-footed animals but to a people 
whose rule is like that of a savage beast. 
7 Theologians, most of them from the time of Martin Luther (who I think was the author 
of these terms -- "beast" and "dragon") especially the late Pastor Russell and Judge 
Rutherford (founders of the Jehovah Witness sect) take the term "dragon" to refer to the 
pope of Rome -- the father of the Christian church and the Christian religion.


--- PAGE 110 ---
8 This is the first time since we have been lost in this part of the earth that we want to 
unite the Black nations of the earth into one under the guidance of God Who is now 
present. 
9 Why do you (slavemasters) want to hold them; for hostages, prey? You do not need 
them. Your machines do the labor that the slaves used to do. Why not let them go? 
10 You want to go to war against Allah and the freedom that Allah came to do for your 
slaves? Before you, Pharaoh had the same idea. He did not want Israel to go free in a land 
to themselves. Pharaoh lost the war against Allah and was drowned in the Red Sea. The 
losers of this war will land in a lake of fire, not water. 
11 If white America wanted to free her slaves, she could easily do so. This would be 
simpler and easier than what she is doing: killing and provoking them through police 
force, national guards and finally the U.S. Army, as we see in Detroit, Michigan. 
12 America’s actions show us two things: Firstly, she wishes to cause fear among the so-
called Negroes, with a display of many deadly weapons, but Allah is removing the fear. 
13 Secondly, she fears to approach her unarmed slave unless she is armed. This has been 
the historical relation between the white man and his slave. 
14 The white man seeks the leadership of the so-called Negroes to help him keep the 
dissatisfied slaves subject to him without complaints about injustice. The white man’s 
motto: "Nigger, you should be happy. You are better off than many of your Black kind 
with a job." 
15 The white slavemaster brought our fathers here to do the slave work. Our free labor 
has made the white slavemasters richer than their brethren (Europeans). Do they offer us 
any of this land they took from the Indians? 
16 The twenty two million so-called Negroes should be seeking some of this earth on 
which to live and build an independent nation out of self. The white master only offers us 
a job. 
17 Allah, God, has said to, Elijah Muhammad, that He intends to free the American so-
called Negro "at any price." 
18 For four hundred years you (slavemaster) have been killing the so-called Negro 
without receiving any resistance and regardless of his peaceful way with you. 
19 We, the Muslims, have tried to live in peace here in America. There is not a single 
incident in our thirty-six years of history where we have ever made an aggressive move 
against you, but you have attacked us several times. We have proved to the world that 
you are impossible to live with in peace.


--- PAGE 111 ---
20 "Ye have condemned and killed the just and he doth not resist you." James 5:6 
21 You have destroyed many towns, cities and people. As thou have divided the so-called 
Negro, one against the other, so Allah shall divide you and your brethren. 
21 "As you have done to others so shall it be done to thee." Bible 
22 "When the cities are set on fire." This is a sign of the end of you as a power.


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 39  
The House Doomed to Fall The House Doomed to Fall The House Doomed to Fall The House Doomed to Fall  
 
1 We cannot deny the fact that the Christian West is responsible for this universal 
corruption in the land and sea. 
2 From the same corruption that their own hands have wrought will come their doom. 
3 The Christians preach that which they do not do and cannot do; such as "Love thy 
neighbor." I have as yet to meet one who loved his neighbor as he did himself; "Thou 
shall not kill." I have as yet to meet such a Christian. 
4 They even fight against each other, rob and kill each other, but yet represent themselves 
as world peacemakers -- with whom? 
5 The great deceivers of the world will reap what they have sown. Have they not 
corrupted many people and nations under the guise of good, peaceful, loving Christians? 
6 The Christian West is full of the worst crimes, practicing evils and indecencies to the 
fullest and seeking to practice them on other nations as well. 
7 Universal tempters are ever parading before the world their bold half-nude girls and 
women. They are before your eyes in almost everything. Murder, gambling, robbery, 
drunkenness, drugs, adultery, lying -- there is hardly any end to it. 
8 Their land and seas are filled with deadly weapons of war; their islands of the sea are 
filled with corruption by all the nations of earth, for they are proud and boastful and are 
now hated and despised according to their wishes. 
9 Their religion Christianity is a curse to us (the Black man) and is full of slavery 
teaching. They have poisoned the Bible with their adding to and taking from the truth. 
Now their doom is in sight. It is their own work. 
10 They command the sea with their powerful navies, parking them off the shores of 
other nations. They secure air bases on their soils to place their deadly bomb -- carrying 
planes within easy striking distances of those whom they fear to be their enemies. Is this 
not the easy way to make enemies?


--- PAGE 113 ---
11 Is this the act of a real Christian, the followers of Jesus whom they preach came for 
the peace of mankind and to teach the sheathing of the sword and the turning of the other 
cheek? 
12 Where is a good Christian among this race? 
13 They love meddling in other people’s affairs. They are in every fight or war -- it 
matters not with whom or where -- but yet crying "Peace! Peace!" with every deadly 
weapon of war to provoke other nations to war. 
14 Shall not the God of Peace and Justice deal with you and your troublemaking as He 
did with those before you? 
15 I warn every one of you, my people -- fly to Allah with me for refuge. As I warned 
you, the judgment of this world has arrived! Get out of their slave-making Christianity 
and into the right religion, Islam. The house you are in shall surely fall and never rise 
again.


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 40  
The Destruction And Fall The Destruction And Fall The Destruction And Fall The Destruction And Fall  
 
1 The destruction and fall of the world that we have known is now without a doubt, in 
process. When we refer to the world, we are referring to the world of the white man, for 
the world of the Black man has yet to come in. 
2 The world of the Black man, by divine guidance, is now merging in on the old world of 
the white race. This makes the destruction and fall of the world of the white man 
imminent. 
3 Here in America we can see nothing but the fall of America. It is no secret. It is obvious 
to the eyes that are open. If we want to close our eyes and minds and claim that we do not 
see and understand, then we will be falling ourselves. 
4 This refusal to see is fool-hardy for regardless to how we may desire to see the old 
world stand, we do not have the power to stave off the destruction that causes the world 
of the white man to fall. 
5 The destruction and power that is bringing about the fall of the world of the white man 
is coming from Allah (God). In the past history of the world of the white man, there 
never was a time of destruction of his world like the present time. 
6 It is useless for you to try to prevent the fall of the white man’s world. There is no 
checking it. The white race has not tried to do the right thing...justice. The doing of 
justice would have checked her fall (Bible, Jeremiah). But America was never willing; 
and even at this hour she is not willing to do justice by those whom she has mistreated. 
She has dealt injustice to her Black once-slave for the nearly five hundred years that she 
has been in the Western Hemisphere. 
7 America has constantly burdened the poor Black slave with every evil that she could 
imagine. Her evil scientists who have invented more and more evil practices have not 
been able to invent anymore evil than that which they have already put out. 
8 Day and night without a let-up the white man mistreats the poor Black slave. Now since 
heaven and the God of Peace, Justice, Freedom and Equality has come to the Black slave, 
the white man is trying to make everyone that recognizes the truth deviate from it.


--- PAGE 115 ---
9 The white man says," Do not accept it." He makes the Black man a hypocrite against 
his own salvation. The white man trails the ones who have not as yet accepted the truth of 
their salvation, and he promises them that which he will never be able to fulfill. 
10 America is falling. She is now losing the power and authority that she was enjoying in 
foreign lands. Her fall is very visible. Wherever her authority has been exercised the 
people are now crying out in one voice, "Leave us, leave us; American’s go home to 
America." The citizens of other countries are telling the American citizens, "Leave us." 
America no longer has friends. 
11 America and England deposited their little brother, Israel, on foreign soil, Palestine, 
which is Arab land. They deprived the Arabs of their own land and sent them into exile. 
This injustice against the Arabs is now costing America the power and authority that she 
once exercised in the East. She is on her way out of the Near East. This means bloodshed 
and plenty of it. 
12 In the Near East, there stand navies which are neither American nor British...they are 
there to drive America out. The skies over there are beginning to thicken with foreign 
planes, carrying deadly weapons, guns and bombs. They will not be satisfied as long as 
Israel is in Palestine. The boil has come to a bursting point. We are in a troubled world. 
We are in a world that is now erupting. 
13 Black man, who was once a slave in America, you have a way of escape. The way out 
is not on your own terms. It is on the condition that you submit to Allah (God) and come, 
follow me. This is the only way out. I am the door and I have the key to your salvation. 
Reject it and die. 
14 We are in a world that is falling. It will soon be going up in flames. In Berlin, 
Germany, the cold war between the East and West will soon erupt into a hot war. It will 
never be settled in  
peace. East and West Germany must and will fight it out with all the deadly weapons that 
the war-scientists have planned and perfected for the final showdown. 
15 You do not have to worry too much about whether or not America is coming out of 
Asia. Certainly America is coming out of Asia. The odds are against her staying there. 
But I warn you, my Black people, my Black brother here in America, that while she is on 
the way home, we the Black people are standing in the cross-fire. The only hope that we 
have is to fly to our refuge in Allah (God). 
16 Look at what is going on to the south of us. Look at the many hi-jackings, sticking up 
of planes. America is afraid to put a stop to the hi-jacking for she knows that she is going 
to run into more than she expects. 
17 Who would have thought that the big power (America) would suffer such disgrace in 
this day and time? This is to teach you and me, Black brother, that the great power


--- PAGE 116 ---
(America) is becoming weak and she is falling. I say, Black brother, join onto your own 
kind. Come follow me, for the world that you and I have known, will soon be known no 
more.


--- PAGE 117 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41  
The Day of America’s Downfall The Day of America’s Downfall The Day of America’s Downfall The Day of America’s Downfall  
 
1 Allah manifests the fall of America. He desires to make America fall as a warning to 
her brothers in Europe. White Americans and Germans -- Allah has taught me -- are the 
most wicked of the white race. The wicked deeds that have been performed and are still 
being performed by white Americans upon the so-called Negroes (their slaves) are the 
worst in the annals of history. 
2 They have been clever enough, in their wickedness, to make the so-called Negro slaves 
love them -- though they are their open enemies and murderers. Allah, in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom be praise forever, now judges the American whites 
and is causing America’s fall and total destruction. Egypt, under Pharaoh, is an example -
- fulfilling the signs and other prophecies of the doom of this people as foretold by the 
prophets from Noah to Jesus. 
3 Moses and Jesus are the most outstanding prophets in the history of the Caucasian race 
for the past four thousand years. There are several other contemporaries, but Moses and 
Jesus are the major prophets of the white race’s history. The whole of the civilized world 
today -- as prophesied in Isaiah -- is against the white man of America. Allah hates the 
wicked American whites and threatens to remove them from the face of the earth. 
4 Since white Americans, and the white race in general, have deceived the entire world of 
Black people and their brethren (brown, red and yellow), Allah now is causing these 
people to wake up and see the white race as it really is -- the created enemy of the darker 
people. As we see today, there is a general awakening of the darker people into the 
knowledge of self and the knowledge of their age-old six thousand years (enemies all 
over the earth.) The American white race cannot sincerely give the so-called Negroes 
(their slaves) a square deal. She only desires to deceive them. 
  
False Equality  
5 Today America is trying -- against her will -- to give the so-called Negro civil rights 
(which is against the very nature and will of the white race) for the first time since the 
Black man has been here. America falsely offers him social equality in certain parts of 
the country. This social equality consists mostly of permitting the American Black race to 
mix openly with the white man and his woman (the devils). The actual idea, however, is 
to grant the so-called Negro social equality among the lower class of whites. This is done


--- PAGE 118 ---
so that the scriptures -- wherein they prophesy that the white man tempts and corrupts the 
so-called Negroes with his women -- might be fulfilled. 
6 God has taught me that the white race was grafted unalike, and being unalike, it is able 
to attract the Black man and Black woman, getting them to do all the evil and indecency 
known to the white race. 
  
Doom Prophesied  
7 One of the prophets of the Bible prophesied in regard to America, "As the morning 
spreads abroad upon the mountains, a great and strong people set in battle array." (Joel 
2:2). This is the setting of the nations for a showdown to determine who will live on 
earth. The survivor is to build a nation of peace to rule the people of the earth forever 
under the guidance of Almighty God, Allah. With the nations setting forth for a final war 
at this time, God pleads for His people (the inheritors of the earth; the so-called Negroes). 
8 The so-called Negro is the prey of the white man of America, being held firmly in the 
white man’s power, along with two million Indians, who must be redeemed at this time -- 
and will be, if the so-called Negro turns to his Redeemer. The problem of the American 
Black man is his unwillingness to be separated from his four hundred year old enemies. 
The problems, therefore, is harder to solve -- especially with the enemy trying to 
fascinate the Negro with his lower-class girls and women, arraying them partly nude 
before the Negroes in every public news media (cheap daily newspapers, and magazines, 
radio, TV) and the Negro is quick to imitate. 
9 The problem between these two people -- separating and dignifying the so-called 
Negroes so they may be accepted and respected as equals or superiors to other nations -- 
must be solved. This is God’s promise to the so-called Negro (the Lost and Found 
members of the original Black Nation of the earth). This promise was made through the 
mouths of His prophets (Bible and Qur’an): that He would separate us from our enemies, 
dignify and make us the masters, after this wicked race has been judged and destroyed for 
its own evils. 
10 But, as I said, the solving of this problem -- which means the redemption of the Negro 
-- is hard to do since he loves his enemies. (See Bible: Deut., 18:15, 18; Psalms, Isaiah, 
Matthews, 25:32; and Revelations, Chapter 14.) 
11 The manifestation of Allah and judgment between the so-called Negro and the enemy 
of God and the Nation of Islam will make the so-called Negro see and know his enemy 
and himself; his people, his God and his religion. 
  
Rejection of Self


--- PAGE 119 ---
12 We hear the statements of Black educational, political, and Christian classes, which 
express their love for the white man, publicly asking to be his brothers, if not his 
brothers-in-law. Now this class wants to make it clear to the world that they really love 
the white race and not the Black race. This means they want to be white instead of Black. 
The devils have made them hate Black. They reject the thought of Black ever being the 
ruler or equal with the ruler. They ask boldly for inferiority -- not only for themselves, 
but for their people. 
13 They want to absorb themselves and their kind (especially the so-called American 
Negro) into the race of white people, thus ending the Black race. This is just the opposite 
with Allah (God), myself, and my followers. We "want out completely." We want no 
claim to kinship with a people who, by nature, are not our kin. Read from Genesis to the 
Revelations in the Bible, and from Sura 2 to Sura 114 of the Holy Qur’an. 
14 By no means are the so-called Negroes and the whites kin. God did not create them 
brothers, nor did He create them to ever become brothers. One is created an enemy 
against the other; and since the righteous are more powerful than the wicked, Allah, the 
God of righteousness, set a time of reckoning for the enemy (the white man) of the 
righteous. 
Separation  
15 We want separation. We want a home on this earth we can call our own. We want to 
go for self and leave the enemy who has been sentenced to death by Allah (Rev. 20:10-
14) from the day he was created. (See this subject in the Bible and Qur’an). No one -- 
white, Black, brown, yellow or red -- can provide to me by any scriptures of Allah (God), 
sent by one of the prophets of Allah (God), that we should not be separated from the 
white race: that we should believe and follow the religion dictated, shaped and formed by 
the white race’s theologians. 
16 The coming of Allah and the judgment of the wicked world is made clear by the 
prophetic sayings of the prophets. The so-called "reverends" and the proud intellectual 
class are doomed to destruction with the enemy if they remain with him instead of joining 
onto Allah Who loves them and Who will deliver them and the Nation of Islam. 
17 The so-called Negro masses must be warned of the grave mistake they make in 
following the leadership of those who love and befriend their murderers. This will not get 
them freedom or civil rights. 
18 America is falling. Her doom has come and none, said the prophets, shall help her in 
the day of her downfall. In the Bible, God pleads with you to fly out of her (America) and 
seek refuge in Him (Rev. 18:4). It certainly will change your minds about following a 
doomed people 
-- a people who hate you and your kind, and who call one who teaches the truth about 
them a hater. They are the producers of haters of us. We are with God and the righteous.


--- PAGE 120 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42  
The Days of Trouble The Days of Trouble The Days of Trouble The Days of Trouble  
 
1 The days of trouble have now come to us from Almighty God Allah -- the God 
Who is the real owner of the heaven and earth.  
2 Allah (God) created for Himself a heaven and then He let it out to a foreigner 
(white race) for them to enjoy themselves in it for a while.  
3 They have proved unworthy of such glorious creation, and now the God Who is 
the owner of this heaven and earth is ready to take over and rule it for Himself.  
4 Never no more, will the earth nor the heavens of the earth be let out, to non-
owners.  
5 It is a great wisdom, taught to us, in letting new creatures (white race) try their 
knowledge of mastering that which they were not made to master -- which we knew, 
when we made them, that they would not be able to master the original creation for 
long.  
6 For as long as we, the Black people, are of the planet, there is no new creature that 
could be put in order for ruling that which we already have, and we are in it.  
7 It is such a wise piece of work that has been done. The wisdom, knowledge and 
understanding of the originator of this creation is just.  
8 There is no comparison anywhere to make -- there is no such thing that the 
originator can put the planet aside out of the whole and let someone else take over.  
9 This race, the white race, has not been successful in ruling according to their will, 
and according to a real owner, for the white race had to use the originator’s 
material that He Himself had created.  
10 There is nothing of which the white man can call himself the creator.  
11 So, therefore, since the white man continued to make trouble, which by nature he 
was made to do, we do not see any way out of trying to live with the white man in 
peace.  
12 The nature of the white man is ever causing unrest among themselves and among 
us too. The white man just cannot make peace for himself, because of his nature.


--- PAGE 121 ---
13 Today, God has decided that we, the Black people, cannot get along with the 
white man in peace, and that the white man must be removed.  
14 The white race wanted to remove us, the Black people. But in order for the white 
man to remove us (the Black man) he would have to remove the whole entire 
heavens and make the heavens void of anything like life.  
15 Then from a void we would have to start all over again and create life, for the life 
in the universe is life that we, the Black people, have established.  
16 Therefore, to get away from our own life, (which was created by the Black man) 
so that a new life could come in, we would have to rid the space of life, which 
belongs to us, the Black man -- and when the space was rid of the life that we (Black 
people) had created, another one would have to create life of his own making.  
17 We, the poor Black people here in America, must be changed into a new and 
different people altogether, so Allah (God) Whom came in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, taught me.  
18 But, not a complete make of us -- we will be renewed from what we are in now -- 
and we call it a new thing. There will come a day when we (the Black people) will 
have a completely new thing for man and earth and the heavens above us! But, 
according to the scientists, God will cause this to grow into a new thing -- not a 
complete destruction of the old where there is no root tog row something from -- not 
at this time!  
19 The things that Allah (God) would like to do now, and will do, is to destroy the 
works of the devil -- as the devil would like to destroy God’s work, which God has 
created.  
20 The devil cannot destroy God’s creation because the devil had no part in the 
creation of the first creation. Since the devil had no part in the first creation, this 
makes the devil unable to lay hold to the power that would destroy the first work (of 
God).  
21 The main thing, which I keep mentioning enough to make you disgusted is -- 
something for the Black man in America, who has spent his life long in sleeping, in 
ignorance of the knowledge of that which he is in.  
22 But as soon as the Black man can awaken to the knowledge of this that he is in, 
then he can lay hold to that which he did not have knowledge of, which is that the 
Black man is the creator of the first creation.


--- PAGE 122 ---
23 Allah (God) wants to put the Black man back into power and the way the Black 
man can be put back into power is: Allah has to make the Black man all over again 
to master the power after giving the Black man the authority.  
  
24 Look at the poor once-pitiful Black man in America -- look at how he strives to 
reach for himself, and is now making a fast progress in that which God leads for 
Him to Understand --  
25 The Black man’s conversation is changed -- the Black man’s way of thinking is 
changed -- his actual physical form is changed -- It is a great thing that has come to 
the Black man in America. The Black man in America is getting happier and 
happier.  
26 It is not hard for the Black man in America to get rich, for he is getting rich from 
his own wisdom. No one has given him anything.  
27 As the Bible teaches you of the Prodigal Son -- ‘no one gave unto him, but he is 
getting rich, so fast, that God chooses the Prodigal Son to become the head of the 
house that he strayed away from!  
28 The future of the Black man is so beautiful that we can hardly comprehend it! 
The biggest thing that stands before us is qualification --- and readiness. Let us get 
qualified to master the house that God is giving to us, before someone tries to rob us 
of that mastering of the house. If they rob us of the mastery of the house, I am sorry 
for us.  
29 I say to you, Black brother and Black sister, do not be foolish. The kingdom of 
heaven will be given to you and to me. Have patience to receive it.  
30 But, to get the house into our service, it is like a mother giving birth to a baby -- 
the baby must mature in that which he is in. As a baby matures in the womb of the 
mother in order to be born, so the Black Man must mature to be born into a new 
world that the Black man must build himself. These are the days of trouble.


--- PAGE 123 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43  
Plagued by God, America is Doomed Plagued by God, America is Doomed Plagued by God, America is Doomed Plagued by God, America is Doomed  
 
1 With the end of the rule of the white race over the Black people of earth in sight -- 
face to face -- we have to deal with each other according to the actual facts which 
exist between the two nations (Black and white).  
2 With the nature and desire of the white race to continue their rule and subjection 
of the darker people even though the white man recognizes these facts, he will 
continue to try holding onto his rule; his subjection; his thinking of what he has 
acquired under such rule -- that which is his and he cannot give up the prey -- his 
concession -- the merchandise which he has exploited out from under the noses and 
eyes of the real owners (Black man). 
3 He is willing to shed the blood of his own people and that of others to hold onto 
that which he calls his legal possessions the spirit aroused in the Black man says, 
"NO" -- that the continent and what is on and under its surface belongs to him and 
his people (Black nation). This spirit and knowledge is now not only confined to 
Africa and Asia, the Black, brown, and yellow people, but it actually is now arising 
in the American so-called Negro, the true lost and found brother of the Black man 
throughout the earth -- whether it be Africa or Asia, he is the brother of them all.  
4 It is the desire of the white race to continue to hold power and authority over 
Black Africa, whether it is in Rhodesia or elsewhere. They will just have to give it 
up. England, Germany, Italy and France -- especially England, France and skeleton 
Germany -- seem to be the die-hards.  
5 The white men in Rhodesia would be acting wisely if they would realize that one 
day, sooner or later, they must pack up and leave. Wherefore I quote the Bible 
prophecy concerning the separation of nations, again today, as it was before: "Every 
man must go to his own." This is the clearest and most direct justice that God and 
man could agree upon.  
6 The white man cannot live in luxury unless he has the Black man and his place of 
possession in subjection of his will. But, as I repeatedly say in this paper and in all of 
my writings, "You cannot make God and His prophets liars," nor can we reverse 
the time of their prediction in which these things would take place. So the time has 
come.  
7 This is nothing but justice; that we have possession of what is our own. The white 
man is conscious of the fact that he deceived the Black man of the knowledge of the


--- PAGE 124 ---
Black man and his possessions. But that particular authority was given divinely; 
temporarily. But, by the same Divinity, it is now being taken from the white race.  
8 The white race is facing doom because she will not act according to justice and 
righteousness -- which was not by nature put in her. But this is known and her race 
is frightened concerning her future, as we see here in America.  
9 The white man recognizes his coming doom and many of them would rather die 
here than to do elsewhere, outside of America, to try to defend what they call "their 
own independent sovereignty." Some have poured gasoline over themselves and 
committed suicide by setting themselves afire.  
10 This is a very new and open act of a people who want every other people (Black, 
brown, yellow, and red) on earth to fight their wars to save their independence.  
11 A ruthless and brutal people like America, England, and Germany should be 
ashamed in this modern time to look for these people, whom they have robbed, 
killed, murdered and brought under subjugation by force, to think that today they 
should be so soundly asleep that they ignore the time and the authority that they can 
unite, as the European has been doing against Black Africa and brown and yellow 
Asia.  
12 As the Book says to the white race: "As Thou hast done, so shall it be done unto 
thee."  
13 The white man must return to Europe and concentrate on that continent for his 
future -- or else concentrate on his death instead of his life -- for they can no longer 
rule the Black man. The Black man now knows where his home is and he now is 
rising up to take possession of that which is his.  
  
  
CHAPTER 44  
  
America’s Doom Feared  
1 Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, 
for finding and offering to set us in heaven at once, on our submission to Him 
entirely!


--- PAGE 125 ---
2 We fear the doom of America that is now cutting her to pieces. The prophecy 
teaches us that her doom will come in one day -- death and mourning came in one 
day. One day means one year.  
3 even after that she shall utterly be burned with fire. Divine prophecy is that 
America will suffer isolation from the nations of the earth.  
4 The Revelations of John of the Bible prophesy of America’s doom. America is 
spoken of under the savage name of a beast and dragon who will oppose the 
Messenger of God and all those who seek to follow him.  
5 Beast and dragon are the names used to represent America because of the nature 
and the characteristics of this people -- evil and haters of his Black once-slave.  
6 The beast or dragon trails the woman seeking to destroy the Messenger and his 
followers, the new converts. The Messenger of Allah is referred to as the woman 
with the new born baby, with a vicious beast-like enemy trailing her (the Messenger 
of God) everywhere that he goes.  
7 The beast does this to prevent the messenger and His followers from making 
progress in making friends with his own Black people who will help the Messenger 
to convert and unite his Black people -- not only in the United States of America, but 
the whole world of the Black Nation.  
8 To unite and fly out of our enemies who seek to destroy and kill you and me night 
and day does not just mean leaving America. But it means also to leave the ideology 
and all that America represents.  
9 ‘And the nations (Europe and Asia) stood afar awa y off for fear of her burning 
(U.S.A.) And for fear of her Divine Plagues.  
10 To you, my Black people, the end is now.  
11 Who said that you were going anyplace? Heaven and hell are both a condition of 
life. They are not places. The devils make hell for you, and God, in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, makes heaven for you 
and me.


--- PAGE 126 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America - CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44  
America’s Doom Feared America’s Doom Feared America’s Doom Feared America’s Doom Feared  
1 Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, 
for finding and offering to set us in heaven at once, on our submission to Him 
entirely!  
2 We fear the doom of America that is now cutting her to pieces. The prophecy 
teaches us that her doom will come in one day -- death and mourning came in one 
day. One day means one year.  
3 even after that she shall utterly be burned with fire. Divine prophecy is that 
America will suffer isolation from the nations of the earth.  
4 The Revelations of John of the Bible prophesy of America’s doom. America is 
spoken of under the savage name of a beast and dragon who will oppose the 
Messenger of God and all those who seek to follow him.  
5 Beast and dragon are the names used to represent America because of the nature 
and the characteristics of this people -- evil and haters of his Black once-slave.  
6 The beast or dragon trails the woman seeking to destroy the Messenger and his 
followers, the new converts. The Messenger of Allah is referred to as the woman 
with the new born baby, with a vicious beast-like enemy trailing her (the Messenger 
of God) everywhere that he goes.  
7 The beast does this to prevent the messenger and His followers from making 
progress in making friends with his own Black people who will help the Messenger 
to convert and unite his Black people -- not only in the United States of America, but 
the whole world of the Black Nation.  
8 To unite and fly out of our enemies who seek to destroy and kill you and me night 
and day does not just mean leaving America. But it means also to leave the ideology 
and all that America represents.  
9 ‘And the nations (Europe and Asia) stood afar awa y off for fear of her burning 
(U.S.A.) And for fear of her Divine Plagues.  
10 To you, my Black people, the end is now.  
11 Who said that you were going anyplace? Heaven and hell are both a condition of 
life. They are not places. The devils make hell for you, and God, in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, makes heaven for you 
and me.


--- PAGE 127 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45  
America Hastens Her Own Doom America Hastens Her Own Doom America Hastens Her Own Doom America Hastens Her Own Doom  
 
1 The ultimate aim of this world should be known to everyone, especially the 
righteous. We classify the righteous as being the people who belong to the right God, 
the God of righteousness, truth, freedom, justice and equality of the nation of 
righteousness.  
2 Today, the so-called American Negroes must be resurrected and made to know 
and understand the fate of anyone who will follow or be deceived by the arch-
deceivers.  
3 The strongest and most powerful weapon the arch-deceivers have at their disposal 
is to deceive the world of righteousness (the Nation of Islam). They do not stop at the 
common, ignorant Muslims, but reach also for the scholars and scientists of Islam, 
who should be aware of their trickery and deceit.  
4 We are in a world that is passing out of existence -- and she is putting up a fight 
(war) to destroy the nation of righteousness. Be aware! To try to oppose the success 
of Allah’s truth only hastens the doom of falsehood  and its teachers.  
5 The world of evil makes its first attack on the world of righteousness, thereby 
clearly showing herself as being the enemy of righteousness. When she thinks she 
has built up a strong enough force to attack the righteous, she does so which, as I 
said before, hastens her own doom. Falsehood cannot be victorious over the truth in 
the day of truth. The resurrection is a day of truth. The resurrection is a day of 
truth, as it triumphs over falsehood.  
6 The archdeceivers force war against themselves. Their ultimate aim is to do as 
their people always have done -- try to destroy the preacher of truth and those who 
believe and follow him. This was the aim of Cain when he slew his brother, Abel, 
and the aim of the dragon when he sought to destroy the woman (the Messenger), as 
it is written in Revelations 12:4.  
7 The lost-found members of that nation should be taught to know the ultimate aim 
of this world. God has visited them, and has prepared a teacher (in myself) to teach 
them, thereby making it easy for them to understand and recognize this world and 
its secret, ultimate aim. It is even given in the Bible, in Revelations 12:9. There it 
speaks of the members belonging to the righteous nation, and shows that through 
deceit, Satan causes them to become as himself -- against the truth, peace, justice, 
safety and security one would enjoy if he only were not deceived.


--- PAGE 128 ---
8 Under deceit, the weak minded -- who have no understanding or knowledge of the 
archdeceiver (the devil, satan) -- are made preys in the hands of the archdeceiver. 
This will bring about war as a showdown between the God of righteousness and the 
God of unrighteousness (the devil). It already has begun.  
9 God must fulfill His promise to show Himself as God over all the powers of heaven 
and earth, and men on earth. As it is written (Thessalonians 2:9), "He comes after 
the workings of Satan." Satan has been given the power, knowledge and authority 
to deceive as many as he could before the appearance of God or the universal 
manifestation of the presence of God. He was given this power in the beginning, 
according to Chapter 2 and 7 of the Holy Qur’an, an d according to the Bible in 
Genesis 1:26, Revelations 6:4,8, and Revelations 12:3,4.  
10 We have known all our lives that the devil was a great deceiver, an enemy of 
God; and that he wished to be the victor, with his knowledge of superior arts in 
deceiving the people of God.  
11 He desires to cast them down, disgrace them and make them accept his deceit 
before the very face of God in the general resurrection of the dead.  
12 The so-called American Negroes -- as I have repeatedly taught in my articles, 
sermons and lectures to my people -- are the spiritually dead. They have been 
touched and paralyzed to death by the archdeceiver through his missionary 
teachings, his literature, his personal conversation and by accepting his advice.  
13 God has given to me a very strong and invincible truth that will defend, protect 
and prevent you from falling victim to the arch-deceiver. Read these, and treasure 
them; they are your life. Ignore them, and it is your death.


--- PAGE 129 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 46 CHAPTER 46 CHAPTER 46 CHAPTER 46  
The Great Days, The Terrible D The Great Days, The Terrible D The Great Days, The Terrible D The Great Days, The Terrible Days of God ays of God ays of God ays of God  
 
1 We must not forget how we are warned by prophecies for one hundred years and 
for one thousand years that an end must come to his world.  
2 The rulers of this world must be removed and the crown must be taken off and 
placed upon another head, and they will rule in justice and righteousness.  
3 The people of this world have now become so wicked and so fearful of the 
consequences of their own rule until the almost thoughtless vision is gone, and 
fearfulness has taken hold of the people.  
4 Their head is going to and fro to the nations of the earth to find a way of peace 
between the heads of the nations. "A Great Time! A Troublesome Time! A Terrible 
Time!"  
  
5 The hearts of the people all begin to weaken and to fail because of what is going on 
and what they see is coming!  
6 America and her people have lived so rich and so joyfully in wickedness, murder, 
robbery and hatred of one another until it has hardened their hearts so much they 
are made to think that they can make friends and live on with those upon whom 
they had no mercy.  
7 They crushed all the weak nations of the earth with their power and brought them 
into the clutches of slavery. They forced other nations to bow. They pushed their 
borders around the earth as Nebuchadnezzar did in his days and time.  
8 But, in those days, Nebuchadnezzar boasted -- and think over it, England made 
the same boast. England used to boast that the sun did not set on her empire. Take a 
look at England, today. There is no British Empire for the sun or moon to set on!  
9 This morning, May 30, 1972, the radio news announcer said that they found mines 
in the Chicago River. This makes it altogether more frightening: for if a mine 
should blow a ship up in the city limits it would be dangerous to the lives of the 
people.


--- PAGE 130 ---
10 And just think over this. The Chicago River runs through the down-town section 
of Chicago, Illinois! No one wants to frighten the people more, but the frightening of 
the people sometimes does good.  
11 "The Great Days, the Terrible Days!" People are just being shot down on the 
streets; right in their homes; or while walking the streets. They are blown down as 
though their lives are nothing. "The Great Days, The Terrible Days!"


--- PAGE 131 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 47 CHAPTER 47 CHAPTER 47 CHAPTER 47  
America’s Dreaded Destiny America’s Dreaded Destiny America’s Dreaded Destiny America’s Dreaded Destiny  
1 America and her people have been here, according to history, since a few years 
after Columbus, the explorer. She conquered the aboriginal red Indians, the 
original owners of the land, whom she found here and took it for a home for herself 
and kind. She has continued conquering until her conquering power has gone 
around the earth affecting every civilized nation; submission to her will. She was 
successful in forcing other people to bow to her will -- whether they liked it or not.  
2 Now it is the hand of God which is after America to force her into submission -- a 
hand from which we have no defense as it is written and prophesied in the Bible, 
under the name of Babylon.  
3 Jeremiah 51:25: "Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the 
Lord, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, 
and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain."  
4 Jer. 51:53 says: "Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she 
should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come unto her 
saith the Lord.  
5 America is under a destruction similar to that of ancient Babylon. In the Bible, 
Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Revelation of John prophesied concerning her. Babylon, 
there-mentioned is a future Babylon, and not a Babylon of the past.  
6 America has enslaved all of the so-called Negroes and her evil mistreatment of 
them is similar to ancient Babylon’s enslavement and mistreatment of the Jews, 
according to the scriptures. It took the hand of God to bring the king of Babylon 
and his people into submission to the power of God. 
7 He brought the surrounding kings and their power against ancient Babylon in the 
prime; the height of her glory -- the hand writing on the wall -- the casting of Daniel 
and his followers into a fiery furnace; making drunk the people of God with their 
strong wines and then mocking them -- so has America done to the so-called Negro.  
8 America makes him drunk with wine, whiskey and beer and then laughs at him. 
She put him into the fiery furnace -- burned him at the stake while sitting around 
with her families, drinking intoxicating drinks and laughing at the burning flesh of 
God’s people.  
9 There is no justice whatsoever. As Revelation gives it, "She made all the world 
drink of the wine of her fornication." But an end is coming to such evil doings.


--- PAGE 132 ---
10 America has lived in peace -- so far as foreign war is concerned. She has 
destroyed other peoples and their towns and cities. She has leveled them to the 
ground. She is still prepared to do the same with her great stockpile.  
11 She says she has enough bombs and destructive weapons to destroy all human 
beings on the face of the earth three times, and still have some left. Of this she 
boasts. But Allah (God) has said to me that He will destroy America. He will bring 
her to her knees (humiliation).  
12 The destruction sent to ancient Babylon and recorded in the Bible is the answer 
to most of what He has said to me will come upon the now rich America. Rain, hail, 
snow and earthquakes  
-- these weapons all belong to God. America, how do you fight an army like this?  
13 The four mentioned weapons of Allah (God) cannot be ignored. The whole year 
has been a year thus far of Allah (God) plaguing America day and night with 
storms, rains, floods; killing and destroying property.  
14 And now the coming winter -- hail has been falling in some places the size of golf 
balls, baseballs and footballs.  
15 The rain continues to fall in places and a dreadful snow blizzard is now in the 
workings. A cold wind is brewing in the North to come against America, as it is 
written and prophesied in Job 38:22-23: "Hast thou entered into the treasures of the 
snow? or has thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have reserved against the 
time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?"  
16 Earthquakes are now again to be recognized, touching America lightly -- but 
nevertheless they are here. With all of her wealth and preachings of Christianity, 
she has not been a good Christian herself. As Jeremiah says: "Arise, get you up unto 
the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the Lord, which have neither 
gates nor bars, which dwell alone."  
17 This corresponds to America. She lives situated between the two greatest bodies 
of water of the earth, the Atlantic and the Pacific. And she is very careless. She 
rejoices in her evil and filth as though she is self-protected from the divine hand of 
God.  
18 Jer. 50:31 prophesies: "Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the 
Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee." Allah (God) is 
visiting America with great destruction which He has to pour upon wicked America.  
19 After their mistreatment of the so-called Negro for four hundred years, she 
desires now to deceive them and to cause them to suffer with her and share in her 
doom.


--- PAGE 133 ---
20 Jer. 50:6 -- "My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them 
to go astray, they (white and Black preachers of Christianity) have turned them 
away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten 
their resting place." (Their native people and country).  
21 Jer. 50:7 " All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, 
We offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of justice, 
even the Lord, the hope of their fathers."  
22 Since the white man has made the so-called Negro as wicked a person as himself 
now, these are the words that he speaks: "They are just as evil as we; therefore, 
Allah God is against them, too." The so-called Negro repeats the same and says the 
white man is no worse than the so-called Negro.  
23 The white man has opened all of his doors and avenues of temptation to lure the 
Negro in for total destruction.  
24 Again we have a warning to leave a people with whom God is angry as the people 
of ancient Babylon were warned to do.  
25 Jer. 51:45 -- "My people, go yet out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man 
his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord."  
  
26 All of the plagues, destructions and judgment which Allah (God) used to destroy 
the wicked and disobedient from the time of Adam until this day will be brought 
upon America. Then she will be burned with fire. This is the time of trouble that 
shall bring America into insanity.


--- PAGE 134 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 48 CHAPTER 48 CHAPTER 48 CHAPTER 48  
The Dreadful Ti The Dreadful Ti The Dreadful Ti The Dreadful Times of America mes of America mes of America mes of America  
1 America, and especially North America, has entered into the time that was 
predicted by Moses and the prophets between him and Jesus. In the 24th chapter of 
Matthew there is a prophecy made by Jesus of the present time of America, without 
mentioning her name.  
2 He referred to the country as a world, because this part of the earth is referred to 
in many places, by prophets and by Jesus himself, as a wilderness. The name 
America is not yet 500 years old, so the prophets referred to it as a wilderness in 
their prophecy.  
3 It is terrible. I use the word "terrible" because it is not a thing that can be 
described as something mild, or something that is moving slowly, nor something 
that can be recognized as easily by the common people.  
4 It is clear to all who can see that America has reached the stage about which she 
always has been warned. She always has wanted to keep it a secret, because of her 
so-called Negro slaves.  
5 She never desired for the slave to know too much of what was in store for her, 
because of her enslaving and mistreating her slaves. She has reared them for the 
past 400 years -- and she knows them. She knows how they think and how they react 
to her teachings, and she knows their fear of her. She knows her slaves, but the 
slaves do not know America -- their slavemaster.  
6 The great, dreadful and awful day (doom) is now in the doors and windows of 
America, and of the church -- the religion of America. As long as Christianity 
worked, America thought she was safe, because it is one of the most deceiving and 
outright misleading religions of the world.  
7 Allah (God) taught me that, if carefully examined, everything in the religion of 
Christianity is designed to make a slave out of Black people. If Christianity was in a 
wet rag and wrung out, every drop would write slavery for the Black man.  
8 The world knows this now but the spiritually blinded, deaf and dumb American 
so-called Negroes, to whom I am calling and appealing to reason. I am calling them 
to reason with me on the truth and their own salvation, that is now in truth of self 
and kind and of the enemy of self.  
9 There will not be an end to the clashes between Black and white America -- and 
throughout the world -- until wrong, evil, murdering, deceiving and robbing the


--- PAGE 135 ---
poor Black man of the earth, is destroyed and righteousness and justice are 
practiced.  
10 This is the day of God Almighty to set up justice and equality throughout the 
earth. He is to free the Black man -- the American so-called Negro -- from his 
deceitful, evil and murderous enemies.  
11 America wishes to oppose Allah (God) in this work of bringing justice and 
freedom to her once slaves, but this is just what Allah (God) wants. He (Allah) wants 
America to attack Him, to get the fight started and to bring His judgment against 
her with the fullness of His strength and power.  
12 America is bringing about political gloom. Here politicians are unable to carve 
out a future for America. The plan of deceiving the so-called Negro politicians to 
work against their own freedom, justice and equality (salvation) that Allah (God) 
has brought to them, is making the so-called Negroes in high offices become the 
enemy of his own people’s freedom, justice and equa lity.  
13 Such offices are held out as a bribe to get Black politicians to work against the 
spread of the truth of their salvation. They are happy -- and their boss knows that 
they are -- to have a place near him in such offices just for the purpose of trying to 
oppose Allah and His Messenger in freeing the poor Black man who is in the mud.  
14 This is causing the political confusion and complete destruction of the house 
divided against itself.  
15 I am asking, in the name of Allah, that the American government agree on the 
separation of her once slaves and their master. Of course, Allah (God) is sufficient.  
16 We want a home on this earth we can call our own. We do not want to be slaves 
anymore to white people. We do not want to be free "Uncle Toms" for white people. 
We want to do something for self and go for self. However, America, with her blind, 
deaf and dumb politicians and clergy class of the so-called Negroes, will bring a 
swift destruction upon their heads, along with the doom that is inevitable against the 
enemy.  
17 It is not twenty years in the future -- nor fifteen years. Let no one deceive you. It 
is here at our doors now. The dreadful plagues and confusion of America are 
beginning to boil. Their fuel making it boil will not cease until it is boiled down to 
the last of the dregs.  
18 The present promise of a better future that America is making to the so-called 
Negroes will prove to be false. All of her false promises to the American so-called 
Negroes, will be short-lived by both -- because the time of her doom has approached. 
America would have to do a miraculous thing of justice (a square deal) to turn it 
back.


--- PAGE 136 ---
19 A fantastic show of tempting the Negro to filth and evil will not work. It takes 
justice to work, to postpone the dreadful days of America. America’s loss of world 
friendship is speeding her doom.


--- PAGE 137 ---
Th Th Th The Fall of America e Fall of America e Fall of America e Fall of America  
CHAPTER 49 CHAPTER 49 CHAPTER 49 CHAPTER 49  
Lull Before The Storm Lull Before The Storm Lull Before The Storm Lull Before The Storm  
1 I am afraid for you, that you will receive what the people before you did receive. 
Allah (God) is very angry with America and the tricknology that she uses on the 
dead to keep them dead. You are very disappointing to Allah (God) and to the 
original Black man who knows himself (a very few) of course.  
2 The false show of a glorious future that the wicked is putting on is at hand. We 
must remember Daniel’s prophecy, that "at the end of the war desolations are 
determined." But before this happens Allah (God) will bless the people with a good 
time, as He did the people of the past, who wronged themselves and who did not pay 
attention to the prophet’s warning among them. Allah (God) destroyed them. They 
thought that they were fooling Allah (God) but Allah (God) surprised them!  
3 He made the people rejoice for a short time, with a show of great prosperity and at 
the height of their great prosperity suddenly, He destroyed them. This is the 
merciful law that Allah has put in nature.  
4 Allah (God) lets a dying person rally before the end. America is going to do the 
same. America will rally and people will think that she is going to have a great 
future, and then the end will come in that kind of time.  
5 America’s end will not come while she is going around with her head hanging 
down and with heart aching and failing because of the things that are coming on her 
nation. No, she will be made to enjoy good times.  
6 The stock market, going up, and lots of shares being sold -- this makes any man 
think that everything is all right. But, this is only "The Lull Before The Storm."  
7 And the Bible warns America of what happened before her. Ancient Babylon 
enjoyed a fulfilling position at her time. But King Darius came against her at the 
time of her full enjoyment of wealth, drunkenness and her laughing at the slaves 
that she had made of Israel. King Darius came with his army and overcame the 
sleeping guards who were sleeping on the security of their life.  
8 The Bible prophesies that the enemy will say, "Come, let us go up and destroy her 
whose city is not fenced in." And they will come from afar. They may come at noon-
day, or they may  
come at rising in the morning, or in the afternoon. But, nevertheless they will come 
at a time that you thought not.


--- PAGE 138 ---
9 After the war -- "and unto the end of the war, desolations are determined....and 
that determined shall be poured upon the desolate." (Bible Dan. 9:26-27) I want you 
to know that, that which will be poured means: it is the deprivation of you, America, 
of your ever getting back into power again to attack the nations of the earth.  
10 Europe will become one of the worse war areas of all the world; more dreadful 
than Viet Nam and other places that you are planning on going into. Asia will look 
like child’s play when compared to what is going to  happen in Europe. The prophets 
say," Woe to the land that is shadowed with wings." This means America whose sky 
is filled with planes.  
11 Most all of the judgements and troubles which are pointed out in the Bible are 
pointed at America. Study them for yourself.  
12 America, right up to today -- with all of her battles with her outside enemies, 
never loses sight of the inside -- her poor old Black Slave -- she does not want him to 
do anything. She wants him to be deceived. She does not want him to accept his 
salvation that Allah (God) is offering the Black once-slave, here in America.  
13 Allah (God) Is Offering the Black once-slave heaven at once. This He has proven 
to everyone that believes in Allah (God) and follows me. I am the Door. By no means 
can you get by except you come by me. Your prayers will not be heard unless my 
name is mentioned in them. I am saying that you cannot get a prayer through to 
Allah (God) unless you mention me in your prayer. Try it and see. I am satisfied 
those who know this will bear me witness.  
14 I have the key to your salvation, and I have the key to your hell. I can, if you will 
let me, pull you out of hell and set you into heaven. Then I can keep you in heaven; 
or I can keep pushing you and push you into the punishment of hell until you 
acknowledge that there is no God but Allah Whom came in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever and that Elijah Muhammad is 
His Servant.  
15 There is no escape for you today. The only way is through me to Allah (God). Me 
first, for you cannot get to Allah (God) without getting to me first.  
16 "The Lull Before The Storm" -- America is trying with all of her might to hinder 
you from getting into heaven. America makes promises to you, and she makes 
promises to me, but she does not intend to fulfill them.  
17 Some of America’s financial people promise to loan us millions of dollars; but 
when it comes time to do so, they vanish. But the day will come when we will be able 
to do the same thing to them. It is entirely up to them to make good of this day for 
themselves and their people by submitting to the truth themselves as the Bible says, 
"The Gentiles shall come to the light of thy rising."


--- PAGE 139 ---
18 America wants to destroy God and me, and she wants to destroy you by deceiving 
you against following me. America lifts up all of my hypocrites and advises you to 
follow them, while she knows that you will be the loser.  
19 Look what she has done for Malcolm. America named universities after him in 
order for you to follow Malcolm. Malcolm turned from Allah (God) and me and 
started to follow them. America will lift up anyone of you that will disobey Allah 
(God) and myself and come to them. You see how they are doing. Everyone that is a 
hypocrite to Allah (God) and me, America will raise him up for you to follow. 
America will glorify his name.  
20 Malcolm was no lover of white people. He only tied to them in order to get a 
chance to fight me. But he was not a lover of them -- Malcolm was a double-crosser. 
He tried to get to me with their help, as it is written and prophesied that he would 
do. His name is not written there in the name of Malcolm in the history -- another 
name is used but his work is there in the history of the hypocrites in the life of 
Muhammad. He tried to take advantage while Muhammad was sick. You find this 
in the writings of Washington Irving and even some science writers of Islam. They 
can tell you Malcolm’s history.  
21 But the enemy fools you. He did not like Malcolm, but with Malcolm working 
against me, he used Malcolm. They knew that Malcolm had learned the history of 
me, and he was not able to change it.  
22 And even if the enemy would glorify them, they will come to a naught for their 
time as a ruling-power over Black people, is up. They knew that better than 
Malcolm did. They set up for worship all hypocrites against me. Suppose we would 
worship China and Russia against them? But we do not worship them for Allah 
(God) is most sufficient -- more sufficient than all their nations.  
23 Allah (God) does not see them as a power and force against him. They are so little 
and weak in their power. They cannot fight against Allah (God) and win. The more 
you fight against Allah (God) the more you will lose yourself.  
24 From the Bible, and from this chapter, from now on, if you do not know that he 
is tricking you by making you to follow hypocrites -- it is your doom.  
25 Just watch it. He trails me. He goes down to the Bahamas and everywhere that he 
thinks that I am going, or where I have been. This is written. I do not fault him for 
doing what is written of him. I try to do that which is written of me. I do not fault 
him for what is made by nature to do. Nor should he fault me for what by nature I 
am. But I fault you if you let this little transitor of this life and our enemy deprive 
you of a great future for yourself.  
26 We could buy hospitals and places to educate and train our people into the 
superior education of the nations of earth. But you would rather give your money


--- PAGE 140 ---
over to white Americans and let them spend it on what they want to, and they pay 
you a little interest. We offer interest too; the highest of interest. But you do not 
trust us.  
27 So we will build right along without your help. We are going to be the winners. It 
is prophesied that we who believe will be the winners. And my work, that was 
prophesied of me before I was born, you see it today.  
28 Try and find a successful one who is working in opposition to me. None of you 
who are trying to aid the devil against me will be successful in doing so. And the 
devil knows that. He is not trying to do these things himself...only with you. He 
knows that he will not be successful in stopping my progress...not him nor several 
times his number, as long as I am with Allah (God) and He is with me and that will 
be all the days of my life.


--- PAGE 141 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 50 CHAPTER 50 CHAPTER 50 CHAPTER 50  
Fire Fed With Fuel Fire Fed With Fuel Fire Fed With Fuel Fire Fed With Fuel  
 
  
1 The subject of this chapter is taken from the Holy Qur’an Chapter 85:5.  
2 We do not hope for peace as long as we add to the war that which serves as fuel to 
a fire. The fire cannot go out as long as we keep it burning by adding more fuel. A 
dying, burning fire is increased when more fuel is thrown into it.  
3 There are a lot of people who are so anxious for peace so that they can return to 
committing that which they lack and love -- idling, sport and play.  
4 The world that we live in desires first of all to hide the truth to keep the Black man 
who is made blind, deaf and dumb by the scientific tricknology of the white race, so 
that the white race can continue to carry on the same deceiving and wickedness that 
they have been practicing.  
5 How can we expect peace where the method used to bring about peace is the same 
method that started the war -- instead of finding a right solution and then practicing 
the right solution?  
6 I say these things for the sake of my own Black people, for they are so ignorant to 
the knowledge of the truth of the time in which we are living. What they would like 
to do cannot be done, for the time to even continue to do what you are doing, is up.  
7 We must remember again the prediction of the Bible. It has foretold these times, if 
we understand the Bible. It most certainly teaches us that there is no peace for the 
wicked.  
8 There is no people who preach such a thing as peace and as being true followers of 
the prophet Jesus, as much as the white Christians do. Day and night the air-waves 
are full of their preaching. To hear them, you would think that they are the 
prophets Moses and Aaron. As the words of the Jesus put it, "They sat in Moses’ 
Seat."  
  
9 The white Christians are great deceivers. The pope of Rome cannot bring peace to 
the Christian church, for he is not enjoying peace himself.


--- PAGE 142 ---
10 So who is that people then that the Bible prophesies of in the Book of Isaiah that 
"He will extend peace to them like rivers?" Surely it cannot be the present Christian 
white race for they are the ones who are breaking the peace.  
11 "Fire Fed with Fuel" -- leaving your own home and country you go to another 
man’s home and country to make trouble for that people and then accuse that 
people of being the trouble-maker. It is the attacker who is guilty of that which 
follows the attack.  
12 I say to you Black people, you can get away from that old misunderstanding of 
the time. You are not living in a time in which you may be expecting a settlement of 
the war that will give you what you have always been used to -- sport and play and 
foolishness.  
13 Actually now is the time that you and I should be wise enough to understand that 
we should think for self and do for self. If you do not know how to do for self, you 
should follow the man to whom Allah (God) has given that knowledge to teach you 
how to do for self.  
14 With the oceans filled with the fleets of the white Christians and the skies clouded 
with their death-dealing planes over other peoples’  territory could you tell them that 
they should submit to you for peace? If you are able to force them to their knees or 
to destroy them, then I say yes. If that was the situation then I would say that they 
should submit and let you triumph.  
15 But you cannot force them to their knees. They have been preparing for a war 
like this for nearly a century; or rather I should say, they have been preparing and 
working faithfully for a half a century to entertain the attacker with the same type 
of weapon and better weapons than the weapons you are attacking them with. If you 
resort to worse weapons they have worse weapons also.  
16 So we are in a time when argument to the contrary of peace is like heaping fuel 
on a fire -- it keeps it burning. We are living in an evil time.  
17 I believe, and maybe many hundreds of thousands believe as I do, that the 
President of the United States of America had good intentions toward the citizens of 
America when he took over the presidency, but the time is against him.  
18 For the past four thousand years and more Allah (God) has already given the 
prophecy through the mouth of His prophets of the doom of the wicked. Now is the 
time and we cannot do anything but take it, and it is dangerous to add fuel to an 
unwanted fire.  
THE FIRE IS THE WAR!


--- PAGE 143 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 51 CHAPTER 51 CHAPTER 51 CHAPTER 51  
Men’s Hearts Failing: Fear Men’s Hearts Failing: Fear Men’s Hearts Failing: Fear Men’s Hearts Failing: Fear  
 
  
1 How true the prophecy of Jesus, Lu. 21:25-26 concerning the present time. We 
bear witness that the sea and waves are roaring and that fear is now covering the 
nations as shown by the unusual heart failure that is now occurring among men. 
These are signs of the end of the present world.  
2 The sea and ocean are heaving up tidal waves to un-imaginable heights that man 
has never witnessed before on earth. This is another plague that is upon the wicked.  
3 Since the Holy Qur’an teaches that the judgment would be such that the earth 
itself would act as though a revelation had been revealed to it because of its perfect 
obedience to the Law of Allah on that Day.  
4 Allah will use the power that is in the earth and in the sea against the world of evil. 
The white race think that they have control of the power of the earth, sea and air.  
5 It was prophesied that for a time they would subdue and have the use of the power 
of the sea and ocean until He Comes Whose right it is to rule.  
6 The heavens and the earth belong to Allah (God). Now it is His time to rule.  
7 There is much prophecy concerning the terribleness of the judgment of the 
wicked.  
8 The power that is in the water is in the Hand of Allah (God) to use it against whom 
He pleases. The earth, wind, rain, snow and ice and earthquakes are controlled by 
Allah (God). 
9 It is a fearful sight to see the Display of His Power with the forces of nature 
bowing and submitting to His Will. I should warn you that this is now coming into 
action against the Western world. There will be the destruction of whole fleets at 
sea. Those which are capable of lying on the ocean and sea bottom will be destroyed.  
10 The die is set, with a foolish people, who like, in the time of Noah, could not see 
the sign of the rain, bringing on the Flood even after the clouds began to darken the 
sky. They did not see the on-coming rain until it actually started to rain.


--- PAGE 144 ---
11 So it is with America. They pay no attention to the signs of the judgment that is 
now taking place. As the Bible prophesied in Rev. 16:9, they..."blasphemed the 
name of God, which hath power over these plagues...". How many in America and 
the city of Chicago disbelieve and even mock and swear at the Name of Allah, Who 
has power over the forces of nature on land, sea, and air.  
12 Allah (God) is now doing as it is prophesied: Holy Qur’an, Chap. 13:41, 
"...visiting the land, curtailing it of its sides." The foolish still are foolish until he is 
cast into a narrow place and cannot turn to the right or left, as it was with the 
donkey that Baalam was riding. He came to a narrow place between two walls. He 
could not turn around. He had to stop face to face with the angel or be destroyed. 
Bible Nu. 22:23-26.  
13 Let it be remembered that Allah (God) came forth for the Redemption (to 
Deliver) the American Black People from their tormentors. Whether we like it or 
not, He Will Do This. This is the work of Allah (God) which is in effect.  
14 Let America use the history of the fall and destruction of ancient Egypt and her 
Pharaohs. Let their histories serve as a warning. They all were brought to naught 
for their evil done to a people whom Allah (God) has chosen for an example of these 
last days...the lost-found Black slaves and their slave masters.  
15 The Holy Qur’an, Chap. 30:41, is perfectly true in its prediction of a present day 
nation’s sea and land power. "Corruption has appear ed in the land and the sea on 
account of that which men’s hands have wrought."  
16 The most grave mistake that the Black Man is making today is his trying to hold 
on to the belief in the return of Jesus or that he lived and preached the saving of the 
white man’s world. This is false. Jesus did not pre ach this. See Bible, Jn. 17:9. Jesus 
had a few disciples. Jesus also cursed the Jews, not to mention that he was trying to 
save them...or the Caucasian people.  
17 They are teaching a tricknology that the white man uses to deceive the Black 
Man. They do this so that our people will not understand that Jesus declared 
himself against the world of the Caucasian race, Bible Jn. 8:44. He also declared 
that the word of truth had no place in this white race of people. They have proved 
this to be the truth by their mistreatment of you and me.  
18 The white race has never worshipped any prophet, before or after Jesus as a 
Divine Man of Allah (God). It is against their very nature to do this. That is why 
they kill all of the prophets they are able to kill. They deceive the people against 
believing in the prophets of Allah (God), for they were made in their nature to be 
the enemy of God and His Representatives.  
19 Before the time is out, they will be forced into submission to the will of Allah 
(God). This will not be done for the purpose of converting the white race Allah


--- PAGE 145 ---
(God) will force them into submission to prove that He is able to make everything 
bow to Him in submission.  
20 This is in fulfillment to the prophecy, Bible Is. 45-23, "...unto me every knee shall 
bow; every tongue shall swear.." The Bible says, Mt. 25:32, "And before Him shall 
be gathered all nations:..." The Holy Qur’an has a similar prophecy, "that you shall 
see all nations kneeling before Him."  
21 This includes everybody, regardless to their color. Everything in the universe 
obeys the natural law in which it was made subject to by Allah (God).  
  
22 On the coming of Allah (God) He now makes everything bow to Him, whether 
you believe or disbelieve. Holy Qur’an 3:82. It does not make a difference to Him 
whether you are the devil or the righteous...all must bow in submission to the will of 
Allah (God), on the judgement day. We are now living in the days of judgment.  
23 Black Preachers, you will waste your time in leading yourself and those who 
follow you to hell by holding onto Christianity. Rev. 19:20. You cannot keep them in 
Christianity.  
24 Christianity was not the religion of Jesus, Moses or any of the prophets who came 
before them.  
25 It would have been a farce on the part of Allah (God) to have waited until just 
2,000 years ago to give the right religion to the world of man.  
26 Allah (God) gave man the right religion, Islam, in the beginning of His creation 
of the heavens and the Earth. Allah (God) has not changed. His religion is Islam, 
entire Submission to His Will.


--- PAGE 146 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 52 CHAPTER 52 CHAPTER 52 CHAPTER 52  
Hell Erupts Hell Erupts Hell Erupts Hell Erupts  
 
1 Why are the nations angry? Who are the nations that are angry at the 
resurrection of the dead?  
2 The 18th verse of the 11th chapter of Revelation in the Bible plainly teaches us 
that these nations are angry and mad because of the rise of the dead and that God 
Himself was the source of the power behind the Resurrection or Rise of the mentally 
dead people (the Black man).  
3 It is these slave-holders who have been the real cause of the mental death of the 
people the Revelation relates to as being deprived of Justice. God comes to give 
them justice and to justify them as being equal to their slavemasters as human 
beings. As you know from the four hundred years of legal slavery and free slavery of 
the American so-called Negroes, they have never been recognized even as human 
beings. As one devil says, they are only three-fifths of a human being.  
4 It is true that the history of our treatment by the devil slavemaster practically 
made our parents and ourselves less than human beings. This is why I teach that the 
main rights we should seek first are human rights.  
5 The American so-called Negro fell in love with his slavemaster and his 
slavemaster’s children because of unalike attracting them and their brothers in 
Africa; therefore, the manifestation of the enemy devil in the Resurrection makes 
the dead to see that which causes them to be mentally dead.  
6 In the parable of the donkey who balked upon meeting with the angel, he saw that 
the burden he had been carrying on his back was false (Baal). So in the resurrection 
of the mentally dead so-called Negro, they are rising to the knowledge of self. This 
knowledge makes them balk or refuse to continue carrying the slavemaster as 
something to worship. This has angered the slavemaster as the donkey’s refusal 
angered Baal.  
7 Baal set about whipping and beating the donkey to force him as usual to carry and 
respect him as his master. This use of force to compel the once-slave (the Black 
Americans) to remain with them even now in order to make them members of their 
society is only false recognition of the Black American, this lost and now-found 
people of the Black nations of Asia and Africa.


--- PAGE 147 ---
8 This continuous cruelty by their white slavemasters, inflicted upon the American 
so-called Negro, has angered God as the cruelty the Egyptians inflicted upon the 
Israelites during the time of Pharaoh angered Jehovah. This is a repetition of 
Israel’s history and of Pharaoh’s evils in these mo dern times: the appearance of 
Jehovah and of Moses, the servant of Jehovah, to announce to Pharaoh the end of 
Israel’s slavery. Pharaoh became angry and went to work and tried to obstruct and 
bring to naught Jehovah’s delivery of Israel throug h his servant Moses. This 
brought Pharaoh to his end, and he and his army were cast into the Red Sea because 
they tried to prevent the freeing of Israel by their God Jehovah.  
9 The angry nations refer to white America and Europeans, who are also enslavers 
of the Black man. Take for instance the part that England, Belgium, German, 
France and Italy have all played in the enslavement of Black Africans and Black 
people throughout Africa, Asia and here in the Americas (North and South 
America).  
10 There is no such thing in the nature of white people as justice and freedom for 
Black people; especially not for Blacks in the Western Hemisphere. Now their anger 
is running them mad and they are attacking and killing each other. There is no such 
thing as peace among them, nor can they produce peace for others. The Holy 
Qur’an refers to this condition as the kindling up of hell (Chapter 81:12).  
11 Never before have you witnessed the evil that is preaching far and wide every 
hour of the day in America and Europe; England and America being -- not the first 
-- but the chief -- slavemakers of Black people. They dislike the idea of having Allah 
dispose of their power over the Negro, though they knew this was coming (the loss of 
their slaves).  
12 This is the time of the increase of knowledge. God has given the Black man of 
America more light into this increase of divine knowledge than any blacks elsewhere 
because He chose to make for Himself a great nation out of the former slaves of 
America.  
13 White America is angry at God for resurrecting the Black slaves into the 
knowledge of self and his slavemaster. This means that they are entering into a war 
with Almighty God Allah to try to oppose the truth of God preached by the 
Messenger of God. Read the second Psalms.


--- PAGE 148 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 53 CHAPTER 53 CHAPTER 53 CHAPTER 53  
The Great Commotion The Great Commotion The Great Commotion The Great Commotion  
 
1 The great commotion of the government and people of America; the civil unrest, 
insurrection, mental excitement, and noise confusion -- there is no action that is 
being taken, nor can there by any action taken, that would bring the people to a 
better condition of civil action.  
2 The white American people have practiced evil and injustice to the man in the 
mud, the Black slave, for so long that they think that there would never by any 
divine action taken against them, for such evil and injustice. But this is what is now 
affecting -- it is the actions of divine justice for the poor man (Black slaves).  
3 Allah (God) in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due 
forever, has the power, and He is using His power on the wicked to bring them to 
their knees. Allah (God) is the greatest and there is no equal to Him. Allah (God) 
can take us by our own way of thinking and spin us as though we are a play-toy. We 
cannot fight a successful fight against Him. He is too powerful. He listens in on our 
thinking and He is capable of making us to think and to do that which He desires to 
be done.  
4 The great commotion today is witnessed by the nations of the earth, for it is 
America whom Allah (God) is after for her mistreatment of the poor so-called 
Negro (lost-found original Black members of their nation). America mistreated and 
killed her Black once-slaves for sport, but America’s day is drawing to a close and 
she will not have the freedom to mistreat the Black once-slave, much longer. As the 
mistreatment of the Egyptians practiced against Israel came to an end, so will the 
mistreatment of the Black slave by white America come to an end.  
5 America has so blinded and made deaf and dumb, the Black Man in America, her 
Black once-slave, that she makes empty promises to the Black slave and he will 
accept her false promises and forsake the true promises of Allah (God) in the Person 
of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, Who is here offering 
us heaven at once.  
6 The great commotion will continue in America until this commotion has destroyed 
the power of opposition.


--- PAGE 149 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 54 CHAPTER 54 CHAPTER 54 CHAPTER 54  
The Calamity The Calamity The Calamity The Calamity  
 
1 The title of this chapter is taken from the Holy Qur’an, Ch. 101:1-4.  
"1. The calamity!  
2. What is the calamity?  
3. And what will make thee know how terrible is the calamity?"  
2 In the English language, according to Webster’s D ictionary, the word calamity 
means, "a state of deep distress or misery caused by major misfortune or loss, or a 
great event marked by great loss and lasting distress and affliction."  
3 Such calamity is now prevailing in America. It is getting worse daily.  
4 The third verse of this Chapter (Holy Qur’an 101: 3) asks a question: "And what 
will make thee know how terrible is the calamity?" The answer is given in verse 
four:  
4. "The day wherein men will be as scattered moths,"  
5 We do not have to ask anyone whether or not this warning of the Holy Qur’an is 
now being fulfilled. We see the fulfillment of this prophecy with our eyes and hear 
with our ears, these great calamities that are now striking America. We see the great 
division, the great disagreement, disunity and murder of men. We see the great 
amount of raping and murdering of girls and women. There is great robbery and 
thieving going on every hour of the day and night.  
6 There are great storms and adverse weather conditions. There are minor earth 
tremors and hailstorms. There are signs and wonders of signs being displayed in the 
heavens, in the earth and on sea and land. There is unusual behavior of children. 
There is unusual love or dislike of children by mother and fathers and the 
destruction of the process of childbirth. There is the great calamity of starvation and 
great destruction of health and of lives by the use and administering of poison 
drugs, which is practiced upon those who are free and those who are bound.  
7 What has been known as America is threatened today with total destruction. 
America is destroying herself in her effort to destroy her Black slave. The water and 
air of America are being polluted by chemico-bacteriologists.


--- PAGE 150 ---
8 America’s scientists of war conduct dreadful experiments on how best to kill 
human beings by the millions and wipe out the life of whole continents.  
9 These are the days of fulfillment of prophecy of not one, but of many calamities. 
But in all of these preparations of the destruction of human life by the devil,...Allah 
(God) too has plans to save His people.  
10 Allah (God) has claim over the Black slave as being His people and the white 
slave-holder is angry because of the loss of the Black slave by virtue of this claim.  
11 Allah (God) comes to take the Black slave away from the enemy white slave-
holder and join the Black slave onto his own kind again. The enemy white slave-
holder hates this, but Allah (God) has the power to force the enemy white slave-
holder to submit to His will.  
12 It is the will of Allah (God) that the enemy white slave-holder let the Black slave 
go free. Allah (God) promises concerning the white slave-holder and the Black slave, 
Bible Is. 43:6, "I will  
say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, 
and my daughters from the ends of the earth;" (America)  
13 Since Allah (God) has now claimed the Black slave (given them the truth), Allah 
(God) has called the Black slave (who has accepted the truth) by His name. The 
Black slave who has accepted the truth of His greatness in being one of the righteous 
aboriginal nation of his kind belongs to Allah (God). The Book must be fulfilled 
wherein it prophesies that He will claim them to be His own; elect.  
14 At such time as the destruction of America, if Allah (God) has chosen some of the 
people of America (the Black slave) to be His people, there would not have been any 
flesh saved from America.  
15 The Bible, Mk. 13:20, teaches us, "And except that the Lord had shortened those 
days, no flesh should be saved; but for the elect’s  sake, whom he hath chosen, he 
hath shortened the days."  
16 It is vital...the Black slave must know that this is the time of the judgment of both 
the white slave-holder and the Black slave. The Black slave must learn to know his 
place in the judgment. The place of the Black slave is with Allah (God) and his own 
Black people. The Black slave had been deprived of knowledge of his God and his 
own Black people.  
17 Allah (God) has come and brought the Black slave the truth. If the Black slave 
refuses to accept the truth, he will be destroyed for willingly and knowingly 
rejecting the truth when the truth has come in his midst.


--- PAGE 151 ---
18 Calamity! calamity in the country of America. No secret can remain hidden, for 
the chastisement of Allah (God) will not let you hide it.  
19 As one writer prophesied in the Bible (Is. 18:1), "Woe to the land shadowing with 
wings..." This prophesy is referring to America which has a cloud of planes 
shadowing the skies over America almost daily.


--- PAGE 152 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 55 CHAPTER 55 CHAPTER 55 CHAPTER 55  
Can America Exist? Can America Exist? Can America Exist? Can America Exist?  
 
1 The coming of the white man to the Western Hemisphere was for the purpose of 
expansion away from his brethren in Europe. Europe was divinely given to the 
white race as a home when they were driven out of Arabia six thousand years ago to 
abide there on that continent until their day of reckoning comes to them.  
2 These are the days of reckoning for the white race as their religious scholars and 
scientists agree. But because of their nature (evil) they cannot help doing evil things 
against the righteous.  
They make war against the righteous (the Black man) to prevent him from 
accepting righteousness and the doings of the righteousness.  
3 Today the Black man in America is a prey into the strong, powerful hands of his 
enemies (the children of their slavemasters).  
4 For four hundred years the slavemasters have mistreated their slaves and now in 
the day of their redemption they are doing everything possible to deceive them from 
accepting their salvation that Allah now offers to the Black man of America.  
5 So strong is Allah’s love for us that He now desi res nothing but a total destruction 
of America.  
6 They hate me with a bloody hatred, and they try to kill me for teaching the truth 
to my people. They do not want the Black man of America to enjoy freedom, justice, 
and equality.  
7 Look at what they did to Martin Luther King, a man who was trying to be their 
brother, a man who publicly taught that he did not want to draw the white man’s 
blood. He said if there was any blood to be spilled, let it be the Black man’s blood. 
His word came true. Poor Man.  
8 He was without the knowledge of self, his God and religion and so filled with fear 
of his four hundred year old enemies, that he could never get salvation for his people 
from their enemies.  
9 America has been blessed ever since her fathers came across the Atlantic out of 
the confines of Europe until this day. Now for her evil done to her slaves, God 
threatens her with total destruction.


--- PAGE 153 ---
10 America and Germany are the most evil of the white race. These two 
governments have been blessed, but they have not shown any worthwhile respect to 
Allah for His blessings.  
11 Allah caused people out of all nations of the earth to come to America (They 
came seeking a heaven in her but those who came were evil too), as the Revelation in 
symbolic language teaches (Revelation 18:2) "And he cried mightily with a strong 
voice, saying Babylon (America) the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the 
habitation of devils, and the hole of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean 
and hateful bird." There is no people nor country on the earth who will fill this 
prophecy better than America and her people.  
12 She has become a house filled with evil practices with every member of the 
nations taking part.  
13 Yet she has been blessed with her great harvest of food which is enough to feed 
the nations of the earth; with her great advancement into the heights of mechanical 
knowledge and with her great wealth in silver and gold that enabled her once upon 
a time to command the value of silver and gold of the world. But, as it is written, in 
all of this growing up of wealth and power, the ax of justice was laid at the root of 
this great tree of prosperity and authority of the nations of the earth to be used by 
the holy one to put a stop to their evil practices and injustices to the righteous.  
14 America has prospered from the labor of her Black slaves. She pays the Black 
man high wages and salaries and then takes them back from him though the high 
cost of living. This high cost of living or trying to live according to the way the white 
man lives, keeps the Black man down. And when he has acquired the education of 
the white man but is unable to compete with the white man, he becomes dissatisfied 
to the degree of creating trouble to find a way to self prosperity against the will of 
the white man which is to keep the Black man in a condition of poverty, want and 
disregard as an equal human being. Yet, while the white man teaches that all human 
beings are created accordingly, at the same time hr obs the Black man of a chance to 
be the equal of other human beings?  
15 Can America exist with all of her wicked doings against the Black man in 
America in a state of inequality with other human beings?  
16 The continued existence of America in the way of government and power over 
people other than her own depends on the way she will continue to treat her once 
slaves (the Black people of America) due to the prophecy of the Bible from Moses to 
Jesus and Muhammad.  
17 The Prophetic sayings of these prophets teach us that a coming showdown 
between Allah (God) and the slave holders of His people (Blacks of America) must 
come to pass.


--- PAGE 154 ---
18 The time has arrived of this prophecy of a Defender coming to defend the prey 
(so-called Negro) who is held in bondage by the white slave holders who have and 
are still mistreating the prey to the extent that the world is in sympathy with the 
prey for justice.  
19 Now it is prophesied that a just Ruler will come -- and He has come -- to set up a 
rule or kingdom under the law of justice for a people who have lived under the law 
of injustice by unjust rulers. This must be fulfilled if the next government for the 
people universally is going to be under such a glorious rule of Freedom, Justice, and 
Equality.  
20 It is natural that the old ruler will oppose a new ruler coming to remove him and 
his authority to rule the people he will fight to keep his place and authority over the 
people. This is why Allah threatens His opponents with the final declaration of war 
that will end the opponents’ opposition to His law of righteousness.  
21 I have been writing for many years of the coming doom of the world of 
Christianity and mainly America who is the root and the cause of this present 
judgment of America.  
22 The judgement of America is due to the way that she has treated the so-called 
Negroes (Black people of America) for four hundred years. The very hour in which 
I am writing, America is still mistreating her once slaves with the worst kind of 
treatment every accorded human beings.  
23 America practices the way of her father’s treatment of the American so-called 
Negroes, under what she calls a law of freedom but this "freedom" is only in word -- 
not in practice.  
24 The slavemasters children’s blood, heart, and wa y of thinking toward the once 
slave is the same as their fathers’. 
25 They find it so free to beat and kill the once slaves (so-called Negroes) at will that 
they will continue this practice of mistreating and murdering the slaves day and 
night because there is no law of justice for the Black man of America who was the 
property of the fathers of America’s white citizens.  
26 America never thinks in terms of being equally punished for the wrong done to a 
so-called Negro.  
27 The Bible’s parable of Baal riding the donkey mu st be remembered. When the 
angel went to settle the unjust mistreatment of the donkey by Baals, the angel found 
Baal still beating and forcing the donkey to carry him, right in the presence of the 
visiting angel, who was carrying a sword to bring about justice between the two.


--- PAGE 155 ---
28 It is almost impossible to say that America can exist. If America is to exist 
(America’s ruling power) it would make prophets of the bible and even the Holy 
Qur’an prophesy other than the truth. It is impossible to make them out liars who 
wrote the doom of the race, that it would come at a certain time and that certain 
time is now know.  
29 The time can be prolonged if the great Madhi, the Messiah, that the world had 
been looking for to come for two thousand years, desires; for He does what He 
pleases.  
30 This does not mean that He would change the idea of the doom and destruction 
of America. But if He pleased He could extend her time if she did almost a 
miraculous thing like submitting to the righteousness taught and delivered to the 
mentally dead slave (the so-called Negro). This is the only way America could exist; 
by bowing in submission to the will of God, taught by His Messenger.  
31 The time that we are now in is a time of the anger of God against the evil-doers. 
It is a time that the God of righteous rejoices to repay the evil-doers for their doings, 
and to reward the righteous for their righteousness. Therefore, to curb this set day 
of doom, demands for the doing (righteousness) which, by nature, was not put in the 
white race. But they may yet be smart enough to bow to put a stay to their execution 
for a few days longer; not by intermixing with her slave to enjoy as long as they are 
blind, deaf, and dumb, and do not understand. This act only hastens their doom, 
while the foolish blind, deaf and dumb so-called Negro does not even know that he is 
being blind, deaf and dumb to his slaughter.  
32 There is no such thing that their evil will rule peace. Also the wicked, according 
to the prophets Jeremiah and Isaiah, are the ones who have destroyed the peace 
from among men.  
33 My advice to the white man is to make haste. Get in a hurry, if you want to live. 
Bow and submit to that great truth and righteousness, the will of Allah.


--- PAGE 156 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 56 CHAPTER 56 CHAPTER 56 CHAPTER 56  
What Will Be The End of The War? What Will Be The End of The War? What Will Be The End of The War? What Will Be The End of The War?  
1 Many of you may think that if America ends her war in Asia this will bring peace 
and prosperity to the people of America. Perhaps, someday, there may be a lull in 
the war, but not now.  
2 If America and Asia can find a way to bring about a cessation of the war between 
each other this does not mean that peace and prosperity is assured; not at this time.  
3 There is still the cold war in Berlin, between America and Russia and in other 
parts of Europe, to be reckoned with. Europe will become a dreaded spot when 
America leaves Asia. It is true, as the prophets have predicted, that America must 
come out of Asia, or be thrown out.  
4 Each, America and Russia, the two most powerful war-factors of the world, is 
seeking to maintain their rule over the nations of earth, and even to conquer outer-
space. This will not last long. In their travel and investigation into space, Allah, 
(God), is permitting them to peep into His great, unequaled creation of power and 
might the heavens and earth. The Holy Qur’an, teaches that when Allah (God) gets 
ready to destroy a people He opens the doors of heaven to them. He gives them a 
peep into His great wisdom and secrets. But this does not mean that this adds power 
to the enemy to be able to war against the Creator. The reason for all of this is due 
to the fact that Allah (God) is setting up a kingdom of righteousness, freedom, 
justice and equality.  
5 Black Brother, do not look for a high paying job drawing a big roll of money, after 
the war, unless with the help of Allah (God), you prepare this for yourself, which I 
advise you to do.  
6 The most dreadful divine judgments that have ever been witnessed by man are 
now coming on America. America is the divine target because she could have 
bettered herself in the divine eyes of Allah (God), Who came in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever. But America did not and will 
not better herself, as it is written and prophesied, concerning Ancient Babylon and 
Egypt. "We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed:..." Bible, Je. 51:9, 
(because she was not willing to do justice by her captive Jews from Jerusalem).  
7 So it was with Pharaoh when Allah (Jehovah) went after Egypt, (Bible ex.). 
Pharaoh refused to give justice to Israel and made war against Allah, (Jehovah), 
and His Prophet, Moses, to prevent, Israel, from going free of Pharaoh’s 
enslavement of them.


--- PAGE 157 ---
The Fall of The Fall of The Fall of The Fall of America America America America  
CHAPTER 57 CHAPTER 57 CHAPTER 57 CHAPTER 57  
The War: America Cannot Win the Victory The War: America Cannot Win the Victory The War: America Cannot Win the Victory The War: America Cannot Win the Victory  
 
1 It is impossible for America to be the victor in this universal war because of divine 
intervention against her. Although she has enough deadly material manufactured to 
try to win, can she win against Allah (God)?  
2 She boasts of her material and being able to destroy the people of earth thirty 
times. If she was left free to use her material maybe America could win, but the 
divine die was set against her long before she ever became America.  
3 She can try and boast of her idea of mind to deceive her Black slaves, but she will 
deceive herself and them. America is made manifest, by Almighty God, in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, that she is 
total and deadly enemy against her once slaves.  
4 For many years, I have written that America’s greatest sin is her evil done to her 
Black slaves. Allah (God) intends to repay her for what she has done.  
5 She deceives the Black slaves right at the point of total destruction. She tries to 
woo the so-called Negro with false and temporary promises by offering him high 
political jobs to keep him from turning his attention to self and kind. The Black 
politician could and should use his political knowledge to benefit self and kind.  
6 White America isolates the Messenger of God from their minds with these false 
promises and makes them to hate the Messenger of God and to work against him 
although the Messenger of God is working for the interests of the Black slaves.  
7 The eyes and ears of Allah (God) are open, looking and listening to their actions. It 
is not necessary for Allah (God) to use mechanical devices. Allah (God) is physically 
real and He has real physical eyes and ears. He is capable of seeing and hearing 
everything we do and say. He has power to defeat us in our plans which are against 
His plans.  
8 The American slave-holders want to deceive the so-called Negro into believing that 
Allah (God) is not paying attention to them. The white man wants them to believe 
that he is the god that they should pay attention to.  
9 I warn my people who believe in the idea that the white man is the god they should 
pay attention to. You will come up the loser.


--- PAGE 158 ---
10 Allah (God) is backing me up in the work He has given me to do. The work He 
has given me to do is for your own Black salvation. If you think that you have 
salvation with the white man, then go ahead with him. I am not here to force you 
against your own will, but I want you to know that if you are looking to white 
America for your salvation you are headed with them to your and their destruction.  
11 There is no hope for America to win the war. There is no hope for the Black man 
in the future of America for America has no future for herself. She will not be able 
to win the war.  
12 The scholars and the scientists know that America cannot win. It is not just I, 
alone, saying this.  
13 Scholars and scientists will tell us America cannot win and we know by divine 
prophecy that America cannot win.  
14 If it were just Russia, China, Viet Nam and Korea using their judgment of how 
best to destroy each other, maybe America could win; for she has as much as they 
have in war material and scientific preparation.  
15 America is capable of going out of the atmosphere of the earth and to fight them 
from there, but she will not be able to go out of the atmosphere of the earth and 
destroy the Black Man of the Earth.  
16 It is only a mistake that one should believe in America’s ability to build a way-
station in the air or on the moon for she will not be able to use it against us, for the 
divine plan is set to destroy her.  
17 We have many things out there in space that can be brought into action against 
America or any other nation today; for Allah is the Greatest.


--- PAGE 159 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 58 CHAPTER 58 CHAPTER 58 CHAPTER 58  
The Mother Plane The Mother Plane The Mother Plane The Mother Plane  
 
1 The Mother Plane was made to destroy this world of evil and to show the wisdom 
and mighty power of the God Whom came to destroy an old world and set up a new 
world.  
2 The nature of the new world is righteousness. The nature of the new world cannot 
be righteousness, as long as unrighteousness is in its midst.  
3 The same type of plane was used by the Original God to put mountains on His 
planets.  
4 Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are due forever, is wiser than any god before Him as the Bible and the Holy 
Qur’an teach us. He taught me that this place will be used to raise mountains on this 
planet (earth). The mountains that He will put on this earth will not be very high. 
He will raise these mountains to a height of one (1) mile over the United States of 
America.  
5 This reminds us of the prophet’s prediction of th is time of the destruction of the 
old world and the bringing in of a new world: "Behold, the Lord, maketh the earth 
empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth aborad the 
inhabitants thereof." (Bible Is. 24:1)  
6 There are planes in various nations today, but this is the mother of them all.  
7 Why? Because this type of plane was used before the making of this world.  
8 Why should God make such a sign of His power to destroy a nation? Because this 
is the final destruction of that people who have opposed God in His purpose and 
aims for Justice and Righteousness.  
9 The white race is not a people who were made righteous and then turned to 
unrighteousness; they were made unrighteous by the god who made them (Mr. 
Yakub).  
10 Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are due forever, taught me that this Plane is capable of reaching a height of 
forty miles above the earth. His words could have been a sign meaning forty years, 
in which the Plane would go into action and not referring actually to forty miles.


--- PAGE 160 ---
Allah (God) does not speak one word that does not have meaning. Every word that 
He speaks has meaning.  
11 The Mother Plane, according to what has been described of it by the devil 
scientists, is capable of not only staying up for long periods of time; but it is also 
capable of eluding the scientists. They want to attack and destroy it; but if a plane 
did get close enough to attempt to carry out this purpose, it would be destroyed 
instead. The white man has learned that this is not a place to be played with. Planes 
come out of the Mother Plane.  
12 In the 1930's Canadian newspapers reported that they saw the wheel (Mother 
Plane). It came down out of the sky. They admitted that it looked like a great city, 
and that something came down from it; it appeared to be a tube, but the tube-like 
thing went back up again.  
13 Allah (God) Who came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are due forever, taught me that after six months to a year, the Mother Plane 
comes into the gravity of the earth. It takes on oxygen and hydrogen in order to 
permit it to stay out of the earth’s gravity until it needs refueling again.  
EZEKIEL’S PROPHECY  
OF THE WHEEL  
14 Ezekiel saw the Mother Plane in a vision. According to the Bible, he looked up 
and saw this Plane (Ez. 1:16) and he called it a wheel because it was made like a 
wheel. A Plane that is wheel-shaped can turn in any direction, at any time. He 
admitted that the Plane was so high that it looked dreadful, and he cried out, "O 
wheel" (Ez. 10:13).  
15 Ezekiel saw great work going on in the wheel and four living creatures "and their 
work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel." (Ez. 1:16). And when the 
living creatures went, the wheels went with them: and when the living creatures 
were lifted up from the earth, the wheels, were lifted up Ez. 1:19. The power of the 
lifting up of the four creatures was in the wheel.  
16 The four creatures represents the four colors of the original people of the earth.  
17 There are five great powers of the nations of the earth. These five Powers are the 
Black, Brown, Yellow, Red and white. Of the four Original Powers, the Red is not 
an equal Power. The vision shows the four creatures being lifted up from the earth. 
When the wheel was lifted up, they were lifted up and when the wheel stood, they 
stood. This means that they waited upon the movement of the wheel.  
18 In Ezekiel’s vision concerning the wheel, he sai d that he heard the voice of one 
tell the other to take coals of fire and to scatter it over the cities; this means bombs.


--- PAGE 161 ---
It could mean fire too, however. The Plane is to drop bombs which would 
automatically be timed to burrow quickly to a position of one mile below the surface 
of the earth where they are timed to explode.  
19 Allah (God) taught me that these bombs are not to be dropped into water. They 
are to be dropped only on the cities. It will be the work of the wheel. The wheel is 
the power of the four creatures, namely the four colors of the Black man (Black, 
brown, yellow and red). The red Indian is to benefit also from the judgement of the 
world.  
20 We must remember that God comes to separate from the righteous that which is 
hindering the righteous from making progress and to destroy the effect of the poison 
of that which has opposed the righteous. The effect of the poison will be fully 
destroyed after the destruction of the source of the poison, which as poisoned the 
righteous.  
21 It is like one being bitten by a rattlesnake. Quickly medication is administered in 
order to minimize the effect of the poison upon flesh and blood until a complete cure 
is effected; and the patient recuperates and is well again.  
22 It is useless to try to ignore Ezekiel’s vision of the wheel, for the make and the 
destructive work of the wheel was foretold before it came to pass.  
23 The disbeliever believes that which he sees present and not that which is 
prophesied to come. That is why he is the loser and takes the course to hell, because 
he disbelieves in that which is prophesied to come about a particular day.  
24 This is what the enemy is trying to do today with the Black Man. He is 
fascinating him with sport and play and indecency and the doing of evil to keep him 
from going to the God Who is present.  
25 You never thought the day would come when you would see your wife, mother 
and old grey-haired women walking down the street today, half-nude. A few years 
ago they would not have dared to come out into the public like that. But now they do 
so because the devil has put his  
approval on this kind of attire. They desire to please the devil. They do whatever the 
devil bids them to do. The devil desires to take the Black man with him to his doom.  
26 Let us not classify the prophets as liars and ignore their prophecies for we may 
cause our self-destruction through belief in the devil instead of belief in the God of 
Righteousness.  
27 There is no known equal of the Mother Plane. This is the reason why she is called 
the Mother Plane.


--- PAGE 162 ---
28 The Mother Plane is made for the purpose of destroying the present world. She 
has no equal.  
39 Do not marvel at the make of this plane, since it is from the God Who made the 
universe of floating planets and stars which are supported only by the Power of 
Allah in their rotation in their orbits.  
40 Allah (God) Whom came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are due forever, taught me that the Mother plane is a little human-made 
planet. Is it not simple for  
Allah (God) to make a new planet if He wants to?  
41 The Mother Plane is capable of staying out of the earth’s gravity for a whole 
year. He is capable of producing her own sphere of oxygen and hydrogen, as any 
other planet is able to do.  
42 The Mother Plane carries the same type of bomb on her that our Black scientists 
dropped on the planet earth to bring up mountains out of the earth after the planet 
earth was created.  
43 The knowledge of how to do this has not been given to the world (white race), nor 
will they ever get this kind of knowledge. The knowledge of the world is limited. If 
the devil would get this type of knowledge we could just say that we are goners. 
However, they are not able to attain this type of knowledge.  
44 What does a six day old baby (white race) look like trying to compete with a six 
year old child (Black Nation)? For the six year old child can run all out in the yard 
and play. He can eat solid food. The power of the six day old baby is limited.  
45 The knowledge and power of this world’s life (wh ite race) is limited. The world of 
the white man was made from what he found and what he has seen and learned 
from the work of the original Black man. The white race is far from being able to 
equal the power and wisdom of the original Black man.  
46 The Mother Plane and her work is a display of the power of the mightiest God, 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever. Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, is the Wisest and Best Knower; He is 
the Mightiest of Them All.  
  
47 "O wheel," says the prophet Ezekiel. She was so high up in the sky that she 
looked dreadful.


--- PAGE 163 ---
48 She is capable of staying away from you who plan the destruction of her. She is 
capable of confusing you who would try to reach her with your means of 
destruction.  
49 There are scientists on the Mother Plane who know what you are thinking about 
before the thought materializes (Holy Qur’an Ch. 50:16). Therefore, it is impossible 
to try to attack the Mother Plane. She can attack you, but you cannot attack her.  
50 The Mother Plane can hide behind other stars and make herself invisible to the 
eye because she does not have to wait on a power from the earth. She can produce 
her own power to go wherever she desires to go in space.  
51 The Mother Plane is not like your little bullets or cameras which are powered by 
your limited power.  
52 The Bible prophesies that today Allah (God) wishes to make known to use that 
He is God. He wishes to be respected as the superior God. He wishes all life in the 
universe to know that He is the greatest.  
53 The Muslim recognizes Allah (God) to be the greatest. He always repeats "Thou 
art the greatest. There is no god Like unto Thee, None deserves to be served or 
worshipped besides thee."  
54 O mighty wheel. I repeat, that there is plenty of significance to the make of the 
Mother Plane. There is much significance to the course of operation of her work.  
55 Space here in this book is limited, but what Allah (God) taught me concerning 
the Mother Plane could be put into book-form.  
56 O wheel, made to rock the earth and to heave up mountains upon the earth. O 
wheel, destroyer of nations. No wonder the prophet Isaiah prophesied that the 
"earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard..." (Bible; Is. 24:20).  
47 Let us seek refuge in Allah (God) from the destructive work to come from this 
Mother of planes.


--- PAGE 164 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 59 CHAPTER 59 CHAPTER 59 CHAPTER 59  
The Decision The Decision The Decision The Decision  
 
1 Holy Qur’an, Chapter 78:2 "Of the tremendous anno uncement."  
2 "The Day of Decision." We are now living in the time in which we must decide on 
what we shall do. It is very important that we arrive at a solution, come to a definite 
agreement.  
3 You, Black man of America, are holding back your decision. You are waiting 
because of the people who have brought this Day of Decision to us by their way of 
rule. Their rule is in the way of injustice.  
4 Now the God of Justice is before us, and we must decide upon whether or not we 
will accept a change of rules or remain under the present rule that is passing from 
the scene.  
5 We must decide rightly in order to relieve the people of the pressure of injustice. 
Let our decision be for the benefit of our present and our future generations.  
6 We have no objection to that person who makes up his mind to remain in what he 
is already in. However, this announcement of great importance is laid before you 
and me so that we may come to some kind of decision: agreement on what we shall 
do about the truth of this announcement.  
7 The announcement is the truth. It is asking us to decide on whether or not we are 
going to accept the truth or remain in falsehood. It is called "The Day of Decision." 
Decide this day which God you shall serve -- the God of freedom, justice and 
equality or the same old wicked god whose rule Allah (God) is here to bring an end 
to.  
8 The wicked rulers veil the eyes of the people with falsehood so that the people may 
take falsehood for truth and truth for falsehood. This is what the Bible and Holy 
Qur’an teaches us.  
9 All of the important announcements made by the prophets from Moses to the 
present day -- the enemy of truth has deceived the people and made the people think 
that they were listening to falsehood. They made the people think that the prophet 
and his God were too weak to prevail over falsehood with truth.


--- PAGE 165 ---
10 What is said here in this writing is directed to the Black man in America. He is 
the real one who must decide on whether or not to remain in what he is in or accept 
a better world that is ruled by the God of freedom, justice and equality.  
11 My Black brother, I want you to know that you are in a pitiful condition here in 
this day in which the announcement is being made to you to make up your mind 
about what you are going to do. In plain words, I wish to write here and tell you that 
you do not have a long time in which to decide on what you want to do.  
12 Thinking that you have a long time to decide is the mistake that people made in 
the past. Noah’s people and Lot’s people were the l osers for ignoring the 
announcement from these worthy prophets. They waited, for they thought that what 
they had was going to continue to be.  
  
13 We here in America do not have to wait and see; for America is folding up under 
divine chastisement and destruction is taking place before your and my eyes. Also, 
the Bible and the Holy Qur’an prophesied of these d ays and what is going on. These 
days are the days of judgment of Allah (God) against the wicked.  
14 To see ‘more’ may mean the end of your life and my life as it was with the people 
of Noah and Lot who waited to see ‘more’. They coul d not come to a decision point 
of agreement. They waited and maybe you too will wait.  
15 To wait for the truth to be fulfilled means that we will suffer the consequences of 
the truth -- for not accepting the truth. "The Day of Decision."  
16 As there were opponents of the prophets in the past, we have opponents of the 
prophet in this modern time. With all of the warning that was given before these 
days, we could make our decision so easily.  
17 Remember the people of Noah had no prophets nor scripture before Noah. 
Again, remember that even as late as the time of Moses, the people of Moses, the 
Israelites, had no previous scriptures before Moses.  
18 You, Black brother, are better off. You have all the scriptures that were given to 
prophets throughout the whole six thousand years of the white man on the planet 
earth. And then you will be so foolish as to delay in making a good decision until you 
see something happen and as the Holy Qur’an and Bib le teaches us, or until you see 
the angels coming in the clouds of heaven before you make up your mind. But still 
probably you would reject that. Surely it will come in the clouds of heaven. But as 
the Holy Qur’an teaches you, it will not be a good day for you who have waited for 
such time. When the angels come in the clouds of heaven they will not be coming to 
do anything like preaching or giving you further knowledge. It is prophesied that on


--- PAGE 166 ---
the Day of judgment the angels will come to execute judgement on you for not 
believing and to save those who do believe.  
19 The preacher, the Messenger, is the first to be judged. Then the angels come to 
execute judgment on those who did not believe the Message. The angels in the time 
of Lot are a good warning to you today. Those people were lost, for the angels came 
to execute judgement on the opponents and disbelievers of Lot and the cities of the 
plaine where he was living.  
20 "The Day of Decision" only means the resurrection and judgment of the present 
world. As Jesus prophesied, as it was in the Noah, Abraham, and Lot, so it will be 
today. They were eating and drinking having a "good time" as they called it; but it 
is not a "good time"; it is a wicked time.  
21 The history teaches us that by waiting they were the losers; but yet, it will be the 
same, today. It is the same, for it is going on now. You are rejecting this truth and 
you are accepting falsehood instead.  
22 Naturally, the enemy of truth is angry with the Bearer of the Truth because by 
nature the enemy was not made of truth. He was made of falsehood.  
23 But again the Book (Bible) teaches that "Whosoever believe, the same shall be 
saved." This is truth, whether he is white or Black. If a white man, woman, boy or 
girl believes, even though by nature thy are not the real righteous, their faith will get 
them out of the hell that Allah (God) threatens this world with. And their time will 
be prolonged. I am sure that you know this. They also know this. A remnant of them 
will escape if they have the faith in Allah (God) and His Religion, Islam, and Jesus 
prophesied in the Bible,...that even though an enemy give one of his least ones 
(believers) a drink of water, and that being an act of goodness, the God will Not 
deprive that act of goodness of its reward.  
24 Make up your mind. Come to a right decision. I warn you.


--- PAGE 167 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 60 CHAPTER 60 CHAPTER 60 CHAPTER 60  
When Ye Shall See All These When Ye Shall See All These When Ye Shall See All These When Ye Shall See All These Things Things Things Things  
 
1 Jesus prophesied that when we see the fulfillment of the prophecy of this time, 
then we should know, by such acts of the people, -- strange actions that we have 
never witnessed before -- carried on by the people -- "Know that it (the end) is near, 
even at the doors."  
2 The Bible prophesies in Daniel and Matthew, saying that this is a time that man 
has never seen before, and man will never see such time again, after this time!  
3 Strange happenings -- the prophecies of Jesus said that parents will be against 
children, and children will be against parents. Do you not see these things being 
fulfilled today, right in our eyes?  
4 Not only are parents against children and children against parents, but parents 
are murdering their children and children are murdering their parents!  
5 In some families, the parents kill the children and then commit suicide themselves! 
This is going on, today, in the old U.S.A., where the gospel of Jesus is preached 
every hour of the day somewhere in the land!  
6 In this time, in which we are now living, there is no respect for dignity -- the 
President leaving the country to travel afar, to meet with rulers of foreign countries 
to discuss the strange things that are happening, and the strange things that will 
happen between the nations.  
7 The beautiful and rich country of America, to which many people of Europe and 
Asia migrated, seeking refuge -- in this country, as the prophecy is now coming into 
fulfillment...("...in that day and time everyone will begin to go away from America, 
instead of coming to America!")  
8 As the Revelation (Bible) teaches us of the prophecy that "they will stand afar off 
and see the fire of her (America’s) burning and for fear of it they will lift up their 
hands and their voices. They will lament for her!" 
9 America’s trade is cut off and all of her delicious and delicate things that she used 
to have in trade -- it is all gone! In one hour (one day) it came to pass, here in the 
Western Hemisphere!


--- PAGE 168 ---
10 The most wicked people who ever lived on the earth are in the Western 
Hemisphere, as the Bible teaches us that God said, that to Him this is like Sodom 
and Gomorrah.  
11 He (Allah) (God) did say that "The wickedness of the day of Noah and his people, 
and Lot and his people, (the Sodomites) was no more than child’s play compared to 
the wickedness of today, for they are highly educated -- they are scientists at making 
wickedness for themselves."  
12 Day and night, up and down the streets, people are killing, murdering each 
other! We do not know very much about what is going on in Europe, but we do see 
it right here in this city of Chicago, Illinois! The radio and the television announce 
to the public that murdering and killings are taking place continually.  
WHEN YE SHALL SEE ALL  
THESE THINGS!  
  
13 Today, there is great disrespect of one another! Mother and daughter are 
walking the streets in shame to the public of decent-minded people! They are 
throwing their clothes aside from their bodies, trying keep nothing covered, but 
their shame! And some barely cover their shame!  
14 "As it was in the day of Noah and Lot, so shall it be in the day of the coming of 
the son of man.  
15 The Son of man comes to judge man and mankind. The day, the day, the day had 
come!  
16 As Daniel prophesied, (Bible, Dan 9:26,27) "...and unto the end the war 
desolations are determined." "...and for the overspreading of abominations he shall 
make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured 
upon the desolate."  
17 Just think about it! At the end of the war, desolation; so that puts an end to the 
hope of those who expect to see a great boost of prosperity after the war!  
18 In the day of Noah, the children of the Sodomites came out happy that morning, 
and that was the end. They saw a cloud making up. They just considered that it was 
a regular rain cloud, but that was the end!  
19 In the Bible prophecy of Jesus (Matt. 24:38,39), "For as in the days that were 
before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,


--- PAGE 169 ---
until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and knew not until the flood came, and 
took them all away."  
20 In the time of Noah, the people of Noah were having parties as you are doing 
today, and that day was the end.  
21 In the time of Sodom and Gomorrah, they were so wicked that they were willing 
to go to war with the angels (in the house of Lot). 
22 The sodomites attacked the angels of God, Who had power to destroy the 
Sodomites almost instantly. The Sodomites warned that they had been waiting the 
Angels visiting the house of Lot!  
23 A terrible time is gradually approaching upon us. A time so terrible until it will 
make children grey-headed, the Holy Qur’an teaches us.  
24 The Bible teaches us that it will be a time never witnessed by man and there will 
be such time in the hereafter. It is a great time. Day and night storms are writhing 
the country. It is storming day and night!  
25 The Holy Qur’an prophesies of calamities, one ri ght after the other. This we are 
witnessing with our own eyes. O America, O America, where shall ye flee?  
26 The Holy Qur’an teaches us (Black man) to take refuge in Allah. Today, people 
laugh at you if you invite them to do righteousness. They make mock of your doing 
right.  
27 So did the people of Noah and Lot, as it is said so beautifully in Jesus’ prophecy, 
"So shall it be in the day of the coming of the Son of man."  
28 When ye shall see all these things, that you now see, know that it is here; We are 
living in the end!  
29 My Black people, I say fly to Allah (God) for refuge, and come, follow me. I may 
look weak, but, through me, you will find refuge in Allah.


--- PAGE 170 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 61 CHAPTER 61 CHAPTER 61 CHAPTER 61  
The Judgment Nears The Judgment Nears The Judgment Nears The Judgment Nears  
1 Everywhere that we look, and everything that we can think about, marks the end 
of this world. There never was a time in the history of the United States of America 
that the President goes out to try to visit the heads of all of the nations that seem to 
be somewhat his equal!  
2 He is like a criminal who has committed a crime and he hopes for mercy from 
those whom he has committed the crime against! We cannot escape our doom when 
it comes, teaches the Holy Qur’an, and the Bible.  
3 They showed no mercy at all to the Black slave. They treated the Black slave 
worse than any human being has ever been treated. They continue to do so, in the 
face of divine judgment.  
4 They remind you of the parable of "The Rich Man and the Poor Man." As long as 
the rich man enjoyed luxury, he cared nothing about luxury for his slave, Lazarus.  
5 Then, at last the rich man fell into poverty and he was unable to get help, even for 
himself. 
6 The Bible says of the poor Black slave that "none helped them." Now the rich man 
gets in the place of his once slave. The rich man can witness how it feels to be a poor 
man.  
7 The parable says, "at last the rich man died. And in hell he lifted up his eyes." He 
saw his slave in the bosom of Abraham, in the heaven that the slave had been 
promised that he would get into. It was such a beautiful heaven that the poor slave 
was lolling around in.  
8 The rich man cried out to the slave to share hell with him. (He asked the slave to 
bring him a drop of water in hell.) He knew that if the slave tried to get to hell with 
a drop of water, the slave would never get to heaven.  
9 The rich man would be happy if he received a drop of water to ease his pain and 
torment. But if the slave could not come to him with a drop of water, then go to 
some of the rich man’s brothers, who the rich man knew were bound to get a taste 
of the same hell that the rich man was in.  
10 The rich man said, "Father Abraham, if you will not let Lazarus come to me, 
then send him to my brothers." In worlds to say, "They are bound to get hell, too."


--- PAGE 171 ---
11 So, I say to you, the time is not far off. This parable is now in the working. I say 
to you my Black Brother Lazarus, "try to stay in the bosom of Abraham," because 
no man came to us, as the Bible teaches us. No man came to the poor Lazarus (Lost-
Found). No one aided him.  
12 I have been begging for help to borrow money saying that we would give the 
extreme interest. No one has come to our aid yet. The white man has tried to prevent 
everyone who would give us a little help.  
13 So Allah (God) came to help us from ourselves. May Allah (God) bless us to do 
his will and bless us to please Him, for Allah (God) is the only help that we have.  
14 I do not care what interest we offered, no one wanted to loan us. They know that 
we are well worth the loan, but they do not want us to be helped. They figure we 
going too fast as it is!  
15 But, O rich man. O rich man! your day has come. Your fall has come and no one 
will help you. They do not want to come near. They see divine destruction licking its 
tongue about you, on all sides, they do not want to get near to you.  
16 Europe is standing afar, and will not come near. She does not want anything of 
you. Europe sees your doom and she does not want any herself.  
17 Woe to the white slave-master. "In Hell He Lifted Up His Eyes!"


--- PAGE 172 ---
The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America The Fall of America  
CHAPTER 62 CHAPTER 62 CHAPTER 62 CHAPTER 62  
The Worst is Yet To Come The Worst is Yet To Come The Worst is Yet To Come The Worst is Yet To Come  
 
1 According to radio and television, and according to individual conversation -- and 
according to conversation heard between government officials concerning their 
problem of trying to find a way to peace for their people -- and a way to find 
stoppage of the fall of their money market and unemployment -- and a stoppage to 
the revolutions between the dissatisfied and the dissatisfied -- and to find a way to be 
able to eat -- and to keep the hungry eating from his own labor -- pacification is 
offered but it does not satisfy.  
2 With nations rejecting peace offers and nations laughing and making mock of you 
for ever seeking peace and friendship -- as it is written, ‘Peace is desired more than 
fine gold!’ 
3 Now to see all of these things coming to pass -- things that we did not know that we 
would see. We did not know that we would see such a Goliath -- such a giant -- 
falling.  
4 Goliath! who has defied the nations of the earth t come out and fight with them, as 
Goliath did before Israel. Now, nations make mock of the great giant of the earth, 
America.  
5 The sword within and the sword without! Trouble seems to have no end. And with 
tens of millions of free Black slaves crying for freedom, justice and equality from the 
white slave-master -- and the white slave-master wanting to deceive the Black slave 
and make promises that the white slave-master does not intend to fulfill to his free 
Black slave --  
6 And with the free Black slave thinking that he will eat some crumbs of freedom, 
justice and equality from his white slave-master -- the free Black slave will be 
gravely deceived!  
7 The white slave-master cannot free himself from his enemies, not to think of the 
white slave-master freeing himself from the consequences of the dissatisfied world.  
8 So, with "The Worst Yet To Come," I say to you my Black brothers and my Black 
sisters fly to Allah; and come follow me! There are some intelligent white people 
who know and who will bear witness with me that the worst is yet to come!


--- PAGE 173 ---
9 Look at Texas! There is a warden at a certain prison-house who sends the 
believers (Muslims) to the Temple so that they may listen to the truth which is their 
salvation today; to accept the truth.  
10 I think that this is a very wise warden. It is like Ahab’s general (Bible). The 
general knew that Ahab was wrong and that Elijah was right.  
11 Ahab’s general took four hundred of Elijah’s fol lowers and hid and fed them 
with the bread of Ahab in order to save them from hunger while they were in 
captivity to Ahab.  
12 I say to you leaders, remember the above-said of this writing, that "The Worse Is 
Yet To Come!" As the Bible teaches us that "a time would come that had never 
come before," and that those who understood -- ‘their hearts would be failing them 
with fear and their eyes would go away in their holes" for looking at the things that 
they saw coming on their people -- the trouble! the destruction! and the plagues!  
13 Look at the earthquakes that are taking place. Those earthquakes are on their 
way here. We are feeling the earth shaking under our feet across the country!  
14 As the Holy Qur’an prophesies to us, "you will h ear it coming from distant places 
with vehement raging and roaring!"  
15 America is best all around now with troubles and destructions which have 
happened. America thought that she was immune to the troubles and destructions 
which are going on in other nations.  
16 Now the same trouble and destruction that you read of as happening in other 
countries and to other nations -- these same troubles and destruction, with their evil 
and gruesome sound, are knocking on the door of America!


--- PAGE 174 ---
What the Muslims Want   
  
This is the question asked most frequently by both whites and blacks.  
The answers to this question I shall state as simply as possible.  
  
1. We want freedom. We want a full and complete freedom. 
2. We want justice.  Equal justice under the law. We want justice applied equally to all, 
regardless of creed, class or color. 
3. We want equality of opportunity. We want equal membership in society with the best 
in civilized society. 
4. We want our people in America whose parents or grandparents are descendents from 
slaves to be allowed to establish a separate state or territory of their own, either on this 
continent or elsewhere. We believe that our former slave masters are obligated to provide 
such land and that the area must be fertile and minerally rich.  We believe that our former 
slave masters are obligated to maintain and supply our needs in this separate territory for 
the next 20 or 25 years, until we are able to produce and supply our own needs. 
Since we cannot get along with them in peace and equality after giving them 400 years of 
our sweat and blood and receiving in return some of the worse treatment human beings 
have ever experienced, we believe our contributions to this land and the suffering forced 
upon us by white America justifies our demand for complete separation in a state or 
territory of our own. 
5. We want freedom for all Believers of Islam held in federal prisons. We want freedom 
for all Black men and women now under death sentence in innumerable prisons in the 
North as well as the South. 
We want every Black man and woman to have the freedom to accept or reject being 
separated from the slave-masters children and establish a land of their own.


--- PAGE 175 ---
We know that the above plan for the situation of the Black and white conflict is the best 
and only answer to the problem between two people. 
6. We want an immediate end to the police brutality and mob attacks against the so-called 
Negro throughout the United States. 
We believe that the Federal government should intercede to see that Black men and 
women tried in white courts receive justice in accordance with the laws of the land, or 
allow us to build a new nation for ourselves, dedicated to justice, freedom, and liberty. 
7. As long as we are not allowed to establish a state or territory of our own, we demand 
not only equal justice under the laws of the United States, but equal employment 
opportunities-NOW! 
We do not believe that after 400 years of free or nearly free labor, swear and blood, 
which helped America become rich and powerful, so many thousands of black people 
should have to subsist on relief or charity or live in poor houses. 
8. We want the government of the United States to exempt our people from ALL taxation 
as long as we are deprived of equal justice under the laws of the land. 
9. We want equal education, but separate schools up to 16 for boys and 18 for girls on the 
condition that the girls be sent to womens colleges and universities. We want all Black 
children educated, taught and trained by their own teachers. 
Under such a schooling system we believe we will make a better nation of people. The 
United States government should provide free all necessary text books and equipment, 
schools and college buildings. The Muslim teachers shall be left free to teach and train 
their people in the way of righteousness, decency and self respect. 
10. We believe that intermarriage or race mixing should be prohibited. We want the 
religion of Islam taught without hindrance or suppression. 
These are some of the things that we, the Muslims, want for our people in North 
America. 
-The Honorable Elijah Muhammad


--- PAGE 176 ---
What the Muslims Believe  
  
1. We believe in the One God whose proper name is Allah.  
2. We believe in the Holy Quran and in the scriptures of all the Prophets of God. 
3. We believe in the truth of the Bible, but we believe that it has been tampered with and 
must be reinterpreted so that mankind will not be snared by the falsehoods that have been 
added to it.  
4. We believe in Allah's Prophets and the Scriptures they brought to the people.  
5. We believe in the resurrection of the dead, not in physical resurrection but mental 
resurrection.  We believe that the so-called Negroes are most in need of mental 
resurrection; therefore, they will be resurrected first.  
Furthermore, we believe we are the people of God's choice as it has been written that God 
would choose the rejected and the despised.  We can find no other persons fitting this 
description in these last days more than the so-called Negro's in America.  We believe in 
the resurrection of the righteous.   
6. We further believe in the judgement.   We believe this first judgement will take place, 
as God revealed in America.  
7. We believe this is the time in history for the separation of the so-called Negro's and the 
so-called white Americans.  We believe the black man should be freed in name as well as 
in fact.  By this we mean that he should be freed from names imposed upon him by his 
former slave-master.  We believe that if we are free indeed, we should go in our own 
people's names, the black peoples of the earth.  
8. We believe in justice for all whether in God or not.  We believe as others that we are 
due equal justice as human beings.   We believe in equality as a nation of equals.  We do 
not believe that we are equal with our slave-masters in the status of "Freed slaves".  
We recognize and respect American citizens as independent peoples, and we respect their 
laws that govern this nation.


--- PAGE 177 ---
9. We believe that the offer of integration is hypocritical and is made by those who are 
trying to deceive the black people into believing that their 400-year-old open enemies of 
freedom, justice and equality are, all of a sudden, their "friends".  Furthermore, we 
believe that such deception is intended to prevent black people from realizing that the 
time in history has arrived for the separation from the whites of this nation.  
If the white people are truthful about their professed friendship toward the so-called 
Negro, they can prove it by dividing up America with their slaves.  
We do not believe that America will ever be able to furnish enough jobs for her own 
millions of unemployed in addition to jobs for the 20,000,000 black people.  
10. We believe that we who declared ourselves to be righteous Muslims should not 
participate in wars that take the lives of humans.  We do not believe this nation should 
force us to take part in such wars, for we have nothing to gain from it unless America 
agrees to give us the necessary territory wherein we may have something to fight for.  
11. We believe our women should be respected and protected as the women of other 
nationalities are respected and protected.  
12. We believe that Allah (God) appeared in the person of Master W. Fard Muhammad, 
July, 1930, the long awaited "Messiah" of the Christians, and the "Mahdi" of the 
Muslims.  
We believe further and lastly that Allah is God and besides HIM there is no God and He 
will bring about a universal government of peace wherein we can live in peace together.

