=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Elijah_Muhammad.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 202
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:53:32.209664
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Elijah Muhammad and Islam


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
Elijah 
Muhammad 
and Islam
Herbert Berg

NEW YORK UNIVERSITY PRESS
New York and London


--- PAGE 5 ---
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY PRESS
New Y ork and London
www.nyupress.org
© 2009 by New Y ork University
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Berg, Herbert.
Elijah Muhammad and Islam / Herbert Berg.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978–0–8147–9113–4 (cl : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0–8147–9113–1 (cl : alk. paper)
1. Elijah Muhammad, 1897–1975. 2. Black Muslims—Doctrines. 3.
Black Muslims—Relations—Islam. 4. Islam—Relations—Black 
Muslims. 5. Islam—United States—History. 6. African American 
Muslims—United States—History. I. Title. 
BP223.Z8E414 2009
297.8’7092—dc22    [B]    2008042973
New Y ork University Press books are printed on acid-free paper, 
and their binding materials are chosen for strength and durability. 
We strive to use environmentally responsible suppliers and materials 
to the greatest extent possible in publishing our books.
Manufactured in the United States of America
1 0987654321


--- PAGE 6 ---
To H.H., M.P ., S.J., and C.B.C.P .,
each of whom cried to me, 
“Hey, why not ask for more?”


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
Contents
  Acknowledgments ix
  Introduction 1
1 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 5
2 The Life of Elijah Muhammad 31
3 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’an 53
4 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah 75
Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
5 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 105
6 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 127
  Notes 147
  Bibliography 177
  Index 187
  About the Author 191


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
ix
Acknowledgments
I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to all those insti-
tutions, scholars, and friends without whom I would not have had the 
wherewithal to complete this study. Much of my early research was sup-
ported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Social Sciences and Human-
ities Research Council of Canada, a summer research stipend from the 
University of North Carolina–Wilmington, a summer stipend from the 
National Endowment for the Humanities, and a research grant from the 
American Academy of Religion.
I am grateful to colleagues and friends who were so generous with their 
time and support over the years: Drs. William E. Arnal, Willi Braun, Walt 
Conser, Matt Eshleman, Russell McCutcheon, Diana Pasulka, and Tom 
Schmid. Although they may not realize it and may even deny it, some of 
them have shaped me as a scholar and some have given me advice and 
encouragement at just the right time. Thank you also to Jennifer Ham-
mer (my editor at NYU Press), Stephanie Smith, and the two anonymous 
readers who read the manuscript and whose valuable suggestions signifi-
cantly improved this book.
Finally, I would like to thank my frien ds Steve, Bill, Darlene, Willi, Jo-
hannes, Helen May, Stephanie, Josh, and Sarah. Without their love and 
friendship this study and much else would not have been possible or 
worth it.


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
1
Introduction
In early 1972 Elijah Muhammad granted a rare interview. Al-
though at the time he seemed to be at the center of a movement beset 
by inner power struggles and external opposition, the frail and dignified 
leader of the Nation of Islam sat calmly, allowing sixteen journalists to 
ask whatever they wished. With poise and in his awkward English, Elijah 
Muhammad answered their questions about God, Islam, Blacks, Whites, 
and his mission as the Messenger of Allah:
For forty years I have been a target for assassination, but I do not pay any 
attention to that kind of talk. That does not annoy me, because I know 
God is on my side to protect me, Who Came in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad To Whom Praises Is Due forever.
A good Muslim is one who observes and obeys the laws of the Reli-
gion of Islam, designed by God, Himself. . . . [There] will be a New Is-
lam to what the old Orthodox Islam is today. It will be altogether a New 
O n e ....  Th e  O l d  I s l a m  w a s  l e d  b y  w h i t e  p e o p l e ,  b u t  t h i s  o n e  w i l l  n o t  b e .  
This Islam will be established and led by Black Muslims only. . . . Islam in 
America is to reclaim our people and put them in their own. This is the 
Resurrection of our people in America.
This is the Resurrection I refer to of our Black people in America. And 
this is the place that they must come up first. They are in the “crossroads” 
here and they have to be pointed out the right way to go out. I do not 
mean to say they go out of America, but out of the evils of America. . . .
They were made unrighteous by the slavemasters. They are not even 
charged with it. Y ou are forgiven everything of evil, on your accepting 
Islam—your Own. That is all God Asks you to do today, go back to your 
Own. Y ou are forgiven for everything, because all the evil you did in the 
past, it was not you, it was the slavemaster who made you do evil.
Y es, they [slave owners] were, by nature, made unrighteous. Their 
nature was that. . . . That included all white people then and all white


--- PAGE 13 ---
2 Introduction
people now. They were made unrighteous. . . . Whether they are actually 
blue-eyed or not, if they are actually one of the members of that race, 
they are devils.
I did not choose myself. God chose me . . . I do not have visions, but 
I do have voices, at times. . . . I know God. I was with Him about three 
and about four or five months. I know His Voice. And when He Speaks, 
I  k n o w  i t ....  I t  w a s  [ f r o m ]  H i m  t h a t  I  h a v e  l e a r n e d  a l l  t h a t  I  a m  n o w  
teaching. I do not know anything of myself. It is what He Has Given 
m e ....  I  w o u l d  o n l y  w a n t  t o  b e  r e m e m b e r e d  f o r  t h e  w o r k  t h a t  I  d o  i n  t h e  
Name of Allah. That is what I want to be remembered for.
1
Elijah Muhammad’s answers highlight the problematic and dichotomous 
nature of Islam as he understood it. His commitment to Islam as a reli-
gion was personal, genuine, and momentous. His understanding of Islam 
was racial, provocative, and anomalous. Critics have always tended to fix-
ate on the latter characteristics at the expense of the former. If we are to 
fully understand Elijah Muhammad, his Nation of Islam, and the rebirth 
of Islam that he spearheaded in America, this dual nature of his formula-
tion of Islam cannot be neglected.
Moreover, in light of ongoing concerns about a clash between West-
ern and Islamic civilizations,
2 it is ironic that hundreds of thousands—if 
not millions—of Muslims living in the United States were directly or in-
directly converted to Islam via the uniquely American formulation of this 
religion by Elijah Muhammad. Approximately 30 percent of the United 
States’s six to eight million Muslims are African American,
3 making Islam 
the second most popular religion among African Americans. Although 
the vast majority of these African American Muslims are now Sunni Mus-
lims, many (or perhaps their parents or grandparents) were introduced 
to Islam through the Nation of Islam, a movement that was exclusively 
Black, segregationalist, and militant. Its leader for over forty years, Eli-
jah Muhammad, was therefore arguably the most important person in 
the development of Islam in America, eclipsing other prominent figures 
such as Noble Drew Ali, Wali Fard Muhammad, Malcolm X, Louis Far-
rakhan, and Warith Deen Mohammed (originally known as Wallace D. 
Muhammad).
Despite his unrivaled prominence, Elijah Muhammad is rarely treated 
as a major figure in Islam. Quite rightly, he has been examined for his 
influence in the transformation of African American politics, economics, 
and psychology. But this book is unique in focusing exclusively on Elijah


--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction 3
Muhammad as a religious figure and, in particular, on his relationship 
with Islam and other Muslims. The hitherto limited scholarly attention 
given to Elijah Muhammad—at least from scholars of religion and schol-
ars of Islam—especially when compared with, for example, that given to 
his Egyptian contemporary Sayyid Qutb (d. 1966), who is the ideologue 
of many contemporary Islamist groups, is due in part to the general per-
ception of many Muslim and Western scholars that Elijah Muhammad 
was not “truly” a Muslim.
4 Most other Muslims believe in the absolute 
oneness and uniqueness of God (which precludes God taking any human 
form), the termination of prophethood with Muhammad (d. 632 C.E.), 
and the oneness of all humanity. Instead, Elijah Muhammad taught that 
Fard Muhammad, the founder of the Nation of Islam, was the incarna-
tion of Allah and that he himself was Allah’s Messenger, and he preached 
about the depravity of the “white devil” and advocated the physical sepa-
ration of Whites and Blacks. At times Elijah Muhammad certainly helped 
foster the opinion that his movement was simply a sociopolitical one, 
with statements such as, “It is far more important to teach separation of 
the Blacks and the Whites in America than prayer. ”
5 And yet, his followers 
called their god “ Allah, ” saw Muhammad as his prophet, prayed five times 
a day, looked to the Qur’an for the basis of their beliefs and practices, and, 
most significantly, called themselves Muslims.
What this book does not do is answer the question, “Was Elijah Mu-
hammad a Muslim?” This seemingly simple question may be read in at 
least three overlapping ways. (1) It may be asking whether Elijah Muham-
mad was “one who was submitted” (that is the literal translation of the 
Arabic word “ muslim”) to Allah. If by “ Allah” one means Wali Fard Mu-
hammad, then he was most certainly a Muslim. Even if by “ Allah” one 
means a deity generally believed to eschew human form, he may still 
have been a Muslim. His son, Warith Deen Mohammed, who is widely 
accepted as a “real” Sunni Muslim, believes that his father was indeed a 
Muslim.
6 In any case, the scholar’s mandate—even that of the scholar of 
religion—does not and should not include delineating the acceptable con-
ceptions of a deity that may or may not exist. That job belongs to proph-
ets, messengers, imams, preachers, theologians, and the like. (2) It may be 
asking, as a Muslim might, whether Elijah Muhammad will be rewarded 
with paradise on judgment day. This question is of course unanswerable 
by the human scholar. (3) Or the question may be taken as an attempt to 
decide whether Elijah Muhammad’s beliefs and practices bear enough of 
a resemblance to those of other Muslims to merit being labeled “Muslim. ”


--- PAGE 15 ---
4 Introduction
This third framing of the question is the one most likely to be asked by 
scholars. Interpreted in this manner, the question seems nontheologically 
motivated, unlike the first two interpretations of the question. However, 
this way of framing the question is problematic, resting on an underly-
ing notion that the essence of Islam can be reduced to a specific set of 
beliefs and practices. Either this set has been handed to the scholar by the 
religious authorities who claim for themselves exclusive rights over the 
word “Muslim, ” or the scholar has placed himself or herself in the role of 
a religious authority who can determine the truth or validity of religious 
claims. No matter how the question is interpreted, it will not be answered 
in this book, which seeks to avoid the theological pitfalls outlined above 
by remaining agnostic on the issue of whether Elijah Muhammad was 
a Muslim or not. However, the very fact that the question “Was Elijah 
Muhammad a Muslim?” has been asked is of great import; the question 
and the enormous lengths to which Elijah Muhammad went to defend 
his status as a Muslim demonstrates, at the very least, that he is a figure 
in Islam.
Therefore, this book seeks to understand him as such, opting for so-
ciological and psychological approaches rather than theological ones. 
More specifically, by contextualizing Elijah Muhammad within the larger 
Islamic tradition, this book seeks to understand him as Muslim (as both 
he and his opponents defined the word) through a detailed examination 
of his religious context, his life, his use of the Qur’an, his relationships 
with other Muslims, his legacy, and his own religious convictions. It ar-
gues that to understand him, his movement, and his significance, scholars 
of religion must abandon the prejudice that he was not a real Muslim or 
that he was merely superficially Muslim. Even his political, economic, and 
social agendas were inextricable from his religious one. His devotion to 
promulgating these agendas for forty years despite persecution and ridi-
cule was born in, and sustained by, his fervent beliefs in Allah, in the au-
thority of the Qur’an, and in his having been commissioned by Allah to 
bring African Americans back to their original religion, Islam. Regardless 
of how different these beliefs are from those of other Muslims, only by 
essentializing “Islam” is it possible to consider Elijah Muhammad outside 
the context of Islam.
A remarkable parallel can be drawn with the relationship of the Church 
of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons) and the rest of Christian-
ity. Mormons disagree with other Christians on such fundamental issues 
as the nature of God, the prophethood of Joseph Smith, the openness of


--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction 5
the Christian canon, the conception of the afterlife, and the hierarchy of 
authority within the Church. Many mainstream Christian churches and 
certainly most conservative Christian denominations, such as the South-
ern Baptist Convention, do not consider Joseph Smith and his followers 
Christians, whereas Mormons insist that “Mormonism is Christianity; 
Christianity is Mormonism; they are one and the same. . . . ”
7 Be that as it 
may, the life of Joseph Smith, his religious claims, and the movement that 
he founded cannot be understood outside the context of Christianity—
even if a scholar feels the need to usurp ecclesiastical authority by ruling 
that Smith and his Mormons are not Christians. Thus, the uniqueness of 
this book lies in its focus on the primacy and centrality of Islam for Elijah 
Muhammad and on his “Muslim-ness. ” Through this focus, it forcefully 
demonstrates that to consider him otherwise is to misunderstand and dis-
tort the man, his teachings, and his movement.
Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam, of course, did not simply 
emerge in an Islamic contextual vacuum. Therefore, chapter 1 explores Is-
lam among African Americans and within America in general prior to 
Elijah Muhammad. Although Elijah Muhammad’s perseverance, his mes-
sage of anger and hope, and his unique rhetorical skill convinced thou-
sands of African Americans to accept his version of Islam, many Afri-
can Americans already offered ferti le ground for his ministry. Vestigial 
memories that many African slaves had been Muslims may have survived. 
White American islamicism, while quite negative about Islam, contained 
several characterizations of Islam that would have made it quite appealing 
to African Americans, such as its perceived hostility to Christianity and 
Europe and its identification with Africa. And, just prior to the birth of 
the Nation of Islam, the missionaries of the Ahmadiyya movement and 
of Drew Ali’s Moorish Science Temple of America began to preach their 
particular formulations of Islam among African Americans. These fac-
tors, then, set the stage for Elijah Muhammad’s mentor and the enigmatic 
founder of the Nation of Islam, Fard Muhammad, and the development of 
the movement Elijah Muhammad would lead for over four decades.
Chapter 2 outlines the life of Elijah Muhammad, including his life be-
fore the Nation of Islam, his tutelage under Fard Muhammad, his strug-
gles to keep the movement alive during years of persecution and impris-
onment, and his astounding success from the late 1950s through the tur-
bulent years of Malcolm X. The last decade of Elijah Muhammad’s life 
appears superficially as a period of malaise but was actually a time of 
economic successes and growth for his movement. Divisions within the


--- PAGE 17 ---
6 Introduction
Nation of Islam and renewed struggles for power began as the effects of 
serious illnesses and advancing age made it increasingly obvious that their 
Messenger would soon need a successor.
To Elijah Muhammad belongs the greatest credit for having introduced 
the Qur’an to most African American Muslims. The earlier Moorish Sci-
ence Temple’s most Islamic feature was the use of the word “Koran” for 
the scripture “written” by its founder, Drew Ali. In that regard, the Nation 
of Islam was clearly much more “Islamic. ” The status of the Qur’an for Eli-
jah Muhammad, and the use he made of it, are the subjects of chapter 3. A 
comparison between Drew Ali’s Koran and Elijah Muhammad’s use of the 
Bible and predictions of a future scripture highlight Elijah Muhammad’s 
unique understanding of the role of the Qur’an within his formulation 
of Islam. His understanding of the Qur’an was not monolithic, however. 
As he became more familiar with the Qur’an and then experienced the 
negative reaction of other Muslims, his relationship to the Qur’an evolved. 
Chapter 4 continues this exploration with a more detailed look at Elijah 
Muhammad’s exegetical framework and teachings in light of some major 
themes in his writings.
Elijah Muhammad and his followers may have honored the Qur’an and 
insisted on being called Muslims, but many of the beliefs and practices 
of the Nation of Islam as elucidated by Elijah Muhammad struck other 
Muslims as heretical and even unislamic, so much so that many Muslims 
strongly object to the use of “Islam” to describe Elijah Muhammad’s move-
ment. The last two chapters address the issues behind these objections.
Chapter 5 focuses specifically on the mutually suspicious, even hostile, 
relationship between Elijah Muhammad and many other Muslims, and on 
the various ways scholars have understood the relationship between Islam 
and Elijah Muhammad. Most scholars recognize that he took the under-
developed teachings of Fard Muhammad and produced a viable religious 
movement. However, some scholars maintain that “Islam” is merely a ve-
neer for a militant civil rights movement, or that his was a millenarian 
sect, whose strong racial and political agenda was garbed in Islamic lan-
guage. Even those scholars who maintain that Elijah Muhammad must be 
considered a Muslim ask what is the best way to understand his role in 
Islam: as a racial exegete? a jihadist? He has even been recast as a “proto-
Muslim” or “crypto-Muslim, ” who guided African Americans through a 
temporary “unorthodox”—albeit absolutely necessary—stage so that they 
could eventually be brought to Sunni Islam.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction 7
Finally, the Muslim legacy of Elijah Muhammad is evaluated in chap-
ter 6 through an examination of his two main successors, Warith Deen 
Mohammed (originally named Wallace D. Muhammad) and Louis Farra-
khan. The tension between orthodoxy and heterodoxy
8 embedded within 
the Nation of Islam by Elijah Muhammad himself led to the rupture be-
tween these two successors. However, regardless of whether Elijah Mu-
hammad is viewed as a “true” Muslim or not, it was his genuine personal 
attachment and dedication to the religion of Islam that spurred him to 
engage in the mythmaking that not only led tens of thousands of African 
Americans directly to Islam and several million more indirectly but also 
made Islam part of the religious landscape of America.


--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
9
1
American Islam 
before Elijah Muhammad
Many Africans who made the Middle Passage were Muslims. 
The story of how their religion was all but extinguished in the United States 
is a remarkable one. Just as intriguing is its seemingly spontaneous reap-
pearance under the charismatic but unlearned and unassuming Elijah Mu-
hammad. Although Elijah Muhammad and his Nation of Islam were almost 
entirely responsible for bringing African Americans to Islam during the 
twentieth century, a closer examination reveals that Islam was not unheard 
of even in the 1930s when he himself converted. Some African Americans 
were aware that many of their African ancestors had been Muslims when 
brought as slaves to North America. They were stripped of this religion al-
most immediately (as they were of their names and other elements of Af-
rican culture). Nevertheless, the association of Islam with Africa remained. 
This association was strengthened by white American islamicism. Although 
the white American view of Islam was quite negative, Islam’s presumed an-
tithesis to Christianity and its alleged opposition to slavery would have been 
intriguing and appealing to many African Americans.
These vestiges of, and imaginations about, Islam made the fertile ground 
that allowed the seeds of Islam to be sown, first by Ahmadiyya missionar-
ies and then by Noble Drew Ali. These movements and the socioeconomic 
conditions of African Americans, especially those who lived in northern 
urban centers but had recently migrated from the rural South (including 
Elijah Muhammad himself), made them particularly receptive to the radi-
cally new formulation of Islam promulgated by Wali Fard Muhammad.
Islam Comes to America
The first Muslim—in fact, the first Muslim African slave—in North Amer-
ica was a Moroccan named Estevan (also known as Estevanico, Esteban,


--- PAGE 21 ---
10 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
Estebanico, Black Stephen, or Stephen the Moor). In 1527 he landed in 
what is now Florida with an ill-fated Spanish fleet, for whom he was a 
guide. Only four of the 506 men who were part of the fleet survived the 
first year. They wandered for eight years among Native Americans, but 
when the three Europeans were finally able to return home, Estevan stayed 
behind in Mexico. Later, he served as a guide for another expedition, this 
one north into modern New Mexico, where he was killed by natives in 
1539.
1 Given that even historians had long ignored him, it is not surprising 
that Estevan’s origin as a Muslim had no impact on later African Ameri-
cans.
2 Likewise, the many other early African Muslims within the Spanish 
and French parts of colonial North America had no discernible religious 
influence on later African Americans.
American Slaves
Any vestigial influence of Islam on the twentieth-century African 
Americans of Elijah Muhammad’s time came from their slave ancestors, 
first shipped to the New World in 1501. It is not certain how many of the 
half a million or so
3 Africans brought to colonial North America and later 
the United States as part of the transatlantic slave trade were Muslims. The 
data is scarce because those who recorded it were not generally interested 
in slaves as Muslims. Moreover, Muslims and their descendents might 
be reluctant to divulge Muslim practices or ancestry. However, scholars 
estimate that over half of these slaves were from West Africa, where Is-
lam was prevalent, and perhaps 15 percent
4 of these West African slaves 
brought to North American were Muslims. These estimates are based not 
only on the names recorded in the ledgers of slave owners but also on 
the religious and ethnic milieu of principle regions from which the slaves 
originated. These figures are supported by other documents such as run-
away notices, which contained names, descriptions, and, occasionally, in-
formation about geographical or ethnic origins.
The vast majority of these slaves were stripped of their names, their re-
ligion, and their culture. However, Sylviane A. Diouf argues that African 
Muslims resisted.
That Islam as brought by the African slaves has not survived does not 
mean that the Muslim faith did not flourish during slavery on a fairly 
large scale. . . . Muslims were not absorbed into the cultural-religious


--- PAGE 22 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 11
Christian world. They chose to remain Muslims, and even enslaved, suc-
ceeded in following most of the precepts of their religion. 5
Historian Michael A. Gomez shares this view and contends that many 
Muslim slaves
made genuine and persistent efforts to observe their religion; and even 
though they perpetuated their faith primarily within their own families, 
in some cases they may have converted slaves who were not relatives . . .
[and some] ostensibly Christian worship practices and artistic expres-
s i o n s...  p r o b a b l y  r e fl e c t  t h e  i n fl u e n c e  o f  t h e s e  e a r l y  M u s l i m s .
6
This claim is supported by evidence from the sparse but important bio-
graphical and autobiographical reports of former slaves, such as those of 
Job Ben Solomon (d. 1773), Ibrahim Abd ar-Rahman (d. 1829), Lamine 
Kebe (d. after 1837), and Umar ibn Said (d.1864). Several of them were 
able to obtain their freedom and return to Africa, and some wrote ex-
tensively in English and Arabic—a unique characteristic among African 
slaves, for the arrival of Islam in Africa had encouraged literacy.
7 It is also 
clear that a few of them adopted a Christian façade in order to secure 
their return to Africa, suggesting that many slaves may have maintained 
secret connections to Islam. However, what influence these men might 
have had on the later Elijah Muhammad is unknown; he did not mention 
them in his extensive writings. It seems more likely, since he was born and 
raised in Georgia, that Elijah Muhammad may have heard of Bilali Mo-
hammad and Salih Bilali and their descendents on Georgia’s Sapelo Island 
and the nearby St. Simon’s Island, respectively. These two friends and oth-
ers in Georgia made a concerted effort to preserve within their commu-
nity and families their Muslim heritage, elements of which survived well 
into the nineteenth century.
8 Gomez concludes that “the Muslim presence 
in coastal Georgia . . . was active, healthy, and compelling. ” 9 Moreover, 
relatively positive attributes were associated with Muslim slaves; these 
Muslims were thought by slave owners to be a “more intelligent, more 
reasonable, more physically attractive, more dignified people” than other 
Africans.
10 Similarly, these African American Muslim slaves occasionally 
displayed a sense of superiority over non-Muslim slaves.
There is no evidence, however, that Elijah Muhammad had a direct 
connection to these Muslims who were geographically so close to him.


--- PAGE 23 ---
12 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
He was raised in a Christian household. Both his father and grandfa-
ther were Christian preachers. Besides, even the Muslims of the Georgia 
coast had by the beginning of the twentieth century begun converting to 
Christianity (though there is evidence of both syncretism and dissimu-
lation).
11 In Brazil and the Caribbean, elements of Islam survived in the 
syncretic religions of Candomble, Macumba, Umbanda, Voodoo, and 
Santeria, yet no such continuity is evident with Elijah Muhammad’s reli-
gious formulation.
12
American Islamicism
Elijah Muhammad was no doubt influenced by these vestiges of Islam, 
as well as by the white American perception of Islam. This perception has 
been described by Timothy Marr as “islamicism, ” which he defines as an 
“Islamic orientalism that essentializes Islam, often in distorted and inac-
curate ways. ”
13 Americans’ islamicism goes back to the colonial period and 
certainly did not begin with Elijah Muhammad, nor in 1979 with the Ira-
nian revolution, nor, for a younger generation, on September 11, 2001.
American islamicist cultural rhetoric from the seventeenth through the 
nineteenth centuries was deployed to universalize national experiences 
and practices. Marr focuses on two types of islamicism: the domestic vari-
ety, which “othered” Islam as the idealized antithesis of domestic Ameri-
can situations, and the comparative variety, which involved the personal 
encounters of Americans with actual Muslim cultures. Islam was initially 
constructed as a cultural enemy, one that was despotic, anti-Christian, and 
morally corrupt, whereas America was imagined as democratic, Chris-
tian, and virtuous. This is demonstrated in the (mostly fictional) litera-
ture about Muslim spies and white Christians enslaved by Muslims, and 
in American interpretation of the events of Barbary captivity, the Tripoli-
tan War, and the Greek war of independence from the Ottoman Empire. 
Later, American Protestant Christian millennialism and missionary activ-
ity to convert Muslims saw the removal of Islam and the consequent re-
turn of the Jews to the “Holy Land” as necessary precursors to the return 
of Jesus. The eastern Muslim (i.e., Turkish) empire was identified with 
various elements within the Book of Revelation. This eschatology allowed 
Protestants to understand the persistence of Islam simply as a temporary 
scourge that was part of a divine plan (to punish errant Christians). Three 
points are worth noting with regard to Elijah Muhammad. First, Islam is 
seen as the antithesis of white, Christian America. Second, Islam is largely


--- PAGE 24 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 13
identified with Africa even by white Americans. Third, the basic eschato-
logical model was also later employed by Elijah Muhammad, except that 
the protagonist and antagonist religions exchanged roles. Furthermore, 
the fear and hatred of Islam in Europe (which was almost as old as Islam 
itself) were inherited by European American descendents and so made it 
impossible for Muslim slaves to perpetuate their faith.
14 Ironically, Elijah 
Muhammad capitalized on this fear and hatred of Islam by Whites as he 
sought to persuade the African American descendents of those slaves to 
embrace Islam.
Later still, “Islam” was employed within the United States by the anti-
slavery and temperance movements. Though Islam prohibits alcohol con-
sumption and although most Muslims in the United States were slaves, the 
main strategy of these movements was ironically to associate both alcohol 
consumption and slavery with Islam, thereby hoping to make them unac-
ceptable to Americans. However, it is more likely that a second strategy 
employed by these two movements would have had a greater influence 
on Elijah Muhammad. Islam was also used to shame Americans in that 
“Turkish” lands prohibited alcohol and began antislavery reforms ahead 
of the United States. While direct influences of America’s Islamic history 
and perceptions on Elijah Muhammad are difficult to establish, it is clear 
that the practice of slavery by Muslims was initially unknown to him.
Moorish Science Temple
15
The first wave of Muslim immigrants came to the United States be-
tween 1875 and 1912, mostly from Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine. 
Many were quickly assimilated. Immigration laws passed in 1921 and 
1924 put quotas on immigration from particular nations, so the number 
of Muslims allowed to enter the United States was significantly curtailed. 
In the 1930s, immigration was only open to relatives of those already in 
the country. None of these immigrants engaged in any significant or or-
ganized missionary activity with African Americans. The first immigrant 
Muslims to do so were the Ahmadiyyas from India—beginning just a few 
years prior to the birth of the Nation of Islam.
The first Muslim missionary to the United States was Mohammed Al-
exander Russell Webb (d. 1916), a white American who converted to Islam 
while in the Philippines. In 1892 he visited India, where he may have come 
in contact with Ahmadiyya Muslims. After his return to the United States 
in 1893, he established the American Moslem Brotherhood in New Y ork


--- PAGE 25 ---
14 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
City and a Muslim publishing company. His primary goal was to dispel 
the negative stereotypes Americans had of Islam, rather than to convert 
Americans to Islam. Webb made a point of emphasizing that Islam taught 
equality and universal brotherhood, but this message apparently did not 
influence Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad.
A more likely source of influence would have been the well-known 
Caribbean, pan-Africanist Edward Wilmot Blyden (d. 1912). He was an 
ordained Presbyterian minister who often wrote of Christianity’s racism 
and its demoralizing effect on Blacks while extolling Islam’s unifying and 
elevating qualities. Likewise, Henry McNeal Turner (d. 1915), an African 
American bishop in the African Methodist Episcopal Church famous for 
his statement in sermons that “God is a Negro, ” severely criticized Chris-
tianity’s racism and was much impressed by the Muslims he encountered 
in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Certainly, the assumption of Islam’s blindness 
to race extolled by Blyden and Webb was not picked up by Drew Ali, Fard 
Muhammad, or Elijah Muhammad, though Blyden’s and Turner’s con-
demnation of American Christianity’s racism was. And, God as a “black 
man” would become a cornerstone in Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of 
Islam.
Despite the increasing presence of Muslim immigrants in American 
and the use of Islam in antiracist rhetoric, the first significant number 
of Americans calling themselves Muslims were the followers of an Af-
rican American who became known as Noble Drew Ali. Timothy Drew 
was born in 1886 in North Carolina to ex-slaves living among Cherokee 
Indians. Beyond these facts, very little is known of his life, for much of 
the traditional biography is inconsiste nt hagiography. It is said that his 
mother foresaw great things in him, but when she died, Drew was raised 
by an aunt who abused him until he ran away. While living with gyp-
sies, he heard a voice say to him, “If you go, I will follow. ” So he left, and 
though there are various versions of this tale, it seems that he became a 
merchant seaman at the age of sixteen and eventually arrived in Egypt. 
There he is said to have passed some sort of test in the Pyramid of Cheops 
and so was renamed Noble Drew Ali. In 1912 or 1913, in response to a 
dream that told him to found a religion “for the uplifting of fallen man-
kind, ” especially the “lost-found nation of American blacks, ” he created 
the Canaanite Temple in Newark, New Jersey.
16 Prior to this he had been a 
Shriner, from which organization he clearly adopted his religious symbols 
and paraphernalia. The sashes and fezes he adopted, as well as the affix-
ing of “El” and “Bey” after surnames, the prohibition of pork (in fact, all


--- PAGE 26 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 15
meat) and of intoxicants, the practice of praying (while standing) towards 
the East, the segregation of women during Friday services, and the use of 
the word “Koran” for his own scripture were all attempts to imitate what 
Drew Ali (often mistakenly) believed to be Muslim or Moorish practice.
17
When an Arab Muslim immigrant came into contact with Drew Ali’s 
followers in Newark in 1918, his more first-hand account of Muslim prac-
tice sparked tensions within the movement and led to a split. The Newark 
group became the Moabite Temple of the World, while Drew Ali relo-
cated to Chicago in 1919.
18 There, he formed the Moorish Divine National 
Movement, which in 1926 he incorporated as the Moorish Holy Temple of 
Science and two years later renamed again the Moorish Science Temple of 
America, Inc. In those years, his teachings also evolved, focusing increas-
ingly on race. For several years Drew Ali enjoyed considerable success, 
amassing perhaps ten thousand followers. However, rivalries emerged 
once again within the movement and, when one of those rivals was mur-
dered in 1929, Drew Ali was arrested. He was released on bond but, suspi-
ciously, died shortly thereafter.
Drew Ali’s teachings deserve some attention not only because several of 
them seem to have been picked up by Fard Muhammand and Elijah Mu-
hammad but also because of their significant divergence from the teach-
ings of other forms of Islam. Since this latter issue would also be raised 
by Muslims regarding Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam, the Moorish 
Science Temple offers an interesting comparison.
According to Drew Ali, African Americans are “ Asiatics” and Moors. 
Their ancestors were the Canaanites who descended from Noah’s son Ham. 
They are also descendants of the biblical Moabites. Their more recent an-
cestors inhabited West Africa, where they established the Moorish empire 
that ruled most of Asia and Europe. (Surprisingly, Ireland was considered 
one of its last strongholds, and so Celts, though white, were considered 
Asiatics and eligible for membership in the Moorish Science Temple.) The 
Blacks of America are therefore actually Moors, and their natural religion 
is Islam, not Christianity. Although Jesus was also a Canaanite, he was 
merely a prophet. The Romans killed him and then founded Christianity, 
deliberately distorting the racial background of Jesus so that white Euro-
peans could “claim him as one of their own and establish him as the head 
of their church. ”
19
The American portion of this myth begins in 1682 when, according to 
Drew Ali, the so-called Black Laws of Virginia exempted Moors (that is, 
Moroccan nationals) from slavery. In 1774 the Founding Fathers declared


--- PAGE 27 ---
16 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
only “Negroes” subject to slavery. Legally, therefore, Moors could not be 
slaves. Unfortunately, the Moors forgot their true identity as Moors and 
accepted the label of “Negro” and, as a result, the condition of slavery. 
Had they “honored their mother and father” and not “strayed after the 
strange gods of Europe, ” they would not have suffered slavery.
20
This myth is not particularly complex, but it has some interesting fea-
tures. First, it is difficult to discern what, if anything, makes this myth Is-
lamic. The religion from which the “Moors” are said to have turned away 
was Islam, but the Islamic terminology Drew Ali employed is limited, and 
there was clearly no effort to revise or incorporate Islamic mythology or its 
individual myths. This tendency is particularly evident in the scripture of 
the Moorish Science Temple, the Circle Seven Koran.
21 Muhammad is men-
tioned only twice, and very cursorily, once as “the founder of uniting of 
Islam, ” and once as the one who “fulfilled the works of Jesus of Nazareth. ”
22
Christian mythology is also largely ignored. The reference to Ham, though 
biblical, takes the Moorish Science Temple away from the core of Jewish 
mythology too. The figure of Ham, who was cursed by his father Noah, 
had been cited as biblical justification for slavery by some white Chris-
tians. Drew Ali seems to have accepted the genealogical claim being made 
but reinterpreted it to show that Moors had an ancient and noble past.
The purpose of this mythical Moorish empire was also to connect Af-
rican Americans with a proud heritage, thereby circumventing the then 
generally accepted picture of Africa, its inhabitants, and their American 
cousins as savage and uncivilized. The plausibility of both white racists’ 
claims about Africa as savage and those of Drew Ali about the glory of the 
Moorish empire were no doubt enhanced by the general ignorance of Af-
rica and its history. However, the myth of the Canaanites and the Moorish 
empire itself was an important strategy that supported the Moorish Sci-
ence Temple’s competition for the hearts and minds of the overwhelm-
ingly Christian African American population. To that end, Drew Ali also 
stressed that each race had its own religion. Europeans had Christian-
ity; the Moors had Islam. Love would replace hate only when everyone 
“worship[s] under his own vine and fig tree. ”
23
Drew Ali’s insistence that Christianity belonged to Europeans was not 
an endorsement of the equality of Islam and Christianity. He commanded 
his followers,
Neither serve the gods of their [the Europeans’] religion, because our 
forefathers are the true and divine founders of the first religious creed,


--- PAGE 28 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 17
for the redemption of mankind on earth. Therefore we are returning the 
Church and Christianity back to the European Nations, as it was pre-
pared by the forefathers for their earthly salvation. While we, the Moorish 
Americans, are returning to Islam, which was founded by our forefathers 
for our earthly and divine salvation.
24
The chronological and epistemological priority of Islam over Christianity 
would be a theme upon which Elijah Muhammad would greatly expand. 
What exactly Drew Ali was implying in the distinction between Christi-
anity’s “earthly salvation” and Islam’s “earthly and divine salvation” is not 
clear.
As for the portion of the myth that deals with slavery in America, Drew 
Ali did not dwell on the evil of slavery or the wrongness of Europeans for 
enslaving Asiatics but rather emphasized that Moors should never have 
been enslaved. Doing so was illegal; bu t “illegal” is not the same thing 
as “evil”—as slavery would be for Elijah Muhammad. Moreover, the fault 
is not seen as lying exclusively with white Americans. Moors forgot who 
they were (though the Founding Fathers and other Whites certainly had 
a hand in causing them to forget). Had they remembered, such things 
would never have occurred. For, by taking the Moorish name away and 
calling them “Negroes, ” “blacks, ” “colored, ” and so forth, “the European 
stripped the Moor of his power, his authority, his God, and every other 
worthwhile possession. ”
25 Thus, the myth serves as both a theodicy and 
a paradigm for his followers’ identity. It explains why slavery occurred 
and what must be done now. African Americans were being called to a 
spiritual return to their roots, which guaranteed them “love, truth, peace, 
freedom, and justice. ”
Thus, like his contemporary Marcus Garvey, Drew Ali rejected inte-
gration.
26 However, unlike Marcus Garvey, who advocated that African 
Americans physically return to Africa, Drew Ali sought instead a spiri-
tual return. This far more practical approach would be adopted by both 
Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad—though not Drew Ali’s open-
ness to other religions. For example, Drew Ali claimed Confucius among 
his predecessors, while Elijah Muhammad denounced both Buddhism 
and Hinduism (along with Christianity, of course) as enemies of Islam.
27
Moreover, while both would also adopt a similar position on the separa-
tion of Whites and Blacks, they would not adopt Drew Ali’s acceptance 
of the white race. Instead, they decried it as evil. Despite its indebted-
ness to him,
28 the Nation of Islam, with its more militant doctrines and


--- PAGE 29 ---
18 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
more charismatic leaders, would come to eclipse the Moorish Science 
Temple as the most visible and viable formulation of Islam among African 
Americans.
Ahmadiyya
The Ahmadiyya movement began with Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (d. 
1908) from Qadian in Punjab, in what is now India. He was particularly 
concerned about the Christian missionaries who came with British rule 
and the resurgent Hinduism of the Arya Samaj and the Brahmo Samaj 
(which were also responses to the British hegemony). His goals included 
not only defending Islam but also emphasizing piety and jihad (which for 
Ghulam Ahmad meant the propagation of Islam, not fighting the Brit-
ish). As his message developed in the 1880s and 1890s, it came to be more 
and more at odds with orthodox Sunni and Shi’i Islam. Most problematic 
were his claims to be the Mahdi (a messianic figure) and a prophet. All of 
his followers recognized him as a renewer of Islam (a mujaddid), but after 
his death his movement split—the Lahori Ahmadiyyas emphasized that 
he was merely a mujaddid whose statements about prophethood were to 
be understood metaphorically. The Qadian Ahmadiyyas split even further 
from other Muslims by emphasizing the prophethood of Ghulam Ahmad 
and the divine guidance of subsequent leaders of the movement. It is this 
latter group that in 1920 sent the first Muslim missionary to America—
Mufti Muhammad Sadiq.
By the time Muhammad Sadiq arrived in the United States, Drew Ali’s 
Canaanite/Moorish movement(s) had begun to spread along the major 
urban centers of the east coast of the United States, and immigrant Mus-
lims had begun establishing mosques and organizations, including that of 
Sāttī Mājid, an outspoken critic of Drew Ali. Sāttī Mājid made contact 
with Drew Ali, urging him to change the name of his Koran and challeng-
ing him to prove his claim to prophethood with miracles. Sāttī Mājid also 
attempted to enlist the support of the American government and went 
to court against Drew Ali. He was far more successful in Egypt and the 
Sudan, where he successfully had several fatwas issued against Drew Ali.
29
And, in 1924 Shaykh Daoud Ahmed Faisal founded the first Sunni Afri-
can American organization in New Y ork City. Faisal was born in Morocco 
but came to the United States via Grenada. Through his organization, the 
Islamic Mission of America, he worked to forge connections with the rest 
of the Islamic world, particularly through Muslim seamen in New Y ork


--- PAGE 30 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 19
City.30 A little later Duse Mohammed Ali, a Sudanese-Egyptian who men-
tored Marcus Garvey in pan-Africanism while he was in Great Britain 
and came to America in the early 1920s, established the Universal Islamic 
Society in Detroit in 1926.
Muhammad Sadiq’s message, unlike that of his contemporaries, was not 
focused on African Americans alone. His first converts included Ameri-
cans of both African and European ancestry. Sadiq emphasized making 
connections among Muslims of different racial and ethnic groups, and 
even among religions. Like the earlier Muslim missionaries in the United 
States, Sadiq ignored racism amongst Muslims but criticized Christianity 
for its racism—a theme Elijah Muhammad would develop. However, the 
subsequent opposition from some white Christian churches led him to 
focus his missionary activities more on African Americans.
Having converted seven hundred Americans, Sadiq returned to India 
in 1923. The movement continued to do well for several decades despite 
competition from the Moorish Science Temple and the Nation of Islam. 
The Ahmadiyya’s internationalist and multiracial concerns set it apart 
from the latter’s American political and racial focus. Perhaps the most im-
portant effect of the Ahmadiyya movement was to make available to Afri-
can Americans (and Elijah Muhammad) their 1917 English translation of 
the Qur’an—the very Qur’an Fard Muhammad would present to his most 
ardent disciple, Elijah Muhammad. This Qur’an (and its footnotes pro-
vided by its translator, Mawlana Muhammad Ali) would be cited continu-
ously by Elijah Muhammad for forty years, and along with the Ahmadi-
yya conception of the Mahdi would play a critical role in the development 
of Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of Islam.
The Suitability of Islam
Although no direct connection can be established between African 
Muslim slaves and their descendents and Elijah Muhammad and his fol-
lowers, the presence of the Ahmadiyya movement, the Moorish Science 
Temple, the Islamic Mission of America, and the Universal Islamic So-
ciety indicates that Islam was not unheard of among African Americans 
when Wali Fard Muhammad began to convert followers such as Elijah 
Muhammad. More significantly, the success of these Islamic movements 
among African Americans and later that of the Nation of Islam itself sug-
gests that some aspects of Islam must have been very appealing to many 
African Americans.


--- PAGE 31 ---
20 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
These aspects of Islam included the perceived intimate connection of 
Islam to Africa; Islam’s independence from white Europeans and their de-
scendants in the United States, who were almost exclusively Christian; the 
fact that the civilization and empires of Islam were not centered in Eu-
rope; and the fact that Whites seemed both to hate and fear Islam. These 
four aspects may have resonated with African Americans because of the 
legacy of African Muslim slaves or American islamicism. Obviously, the 
Moorish Science Temple and other Islamic movements not only capital-
ized on these aspects but also gave them greater currency by doing so. 
There were, however, other characteristics inherent in Islam that made 
it particularly suitable for African Americans in the early decades of the 
twentieth century: Islam had a reputation for resistance, especially to 
Christianity, and the Qur’an’s retributive justice would have seemed en-
ticing to those suffering because of anti-Black racism; compared to the 
trinitarianism of most denominations of Christianity, Islam had a fairly 
simple unitarian theology; Islam emphasized a conservative social ethic 
that was remarkably well suited to address some of the social ills that af-
flicted urban African Americans in the cities of the North; and the lack 
of an ecclesiastical hierarchy in Sunni Islam permitted (at least at first) a 
great deal of independence for charismatic leaders such as Drew Ali, Fard 
Muhammad, and Elijah Muhammad.
31 However, Islam had at least two 
major drawbacks as well.
First, Islam could not compete with Christianity in “name recogni-
tion” and infrastructure. Among African Americans, Jesus, Peter, and 
Paul were well known; Muhammad, Ali, and Umar were not. Bibles were 
readily available, even seminaries, but Qur’ans in English were hard to 
come by and there were no madrasas. This disadvantage was mitigated 
only somewhat by the activities of Ahmadiyya missionaries, the Moorish 
Science Temple, and other early Muslim organizations. However, as will 
be shown, the Ahmadiyya translation of the Qur’an into English had an 
enormous impact on Elijah Muhammad and through him on his follow-
ers in the Nation of Islam.
Second, Islam lacked a specifically African American political, social, 
and economic agenda or a liberation theology. This lacuna is hardly sur-
prising, given Islam’s origination in Arabia and its limited practice in the 
United States prior to the rise of the Nation of Islam. Elijah Muhammad, 
like Drew Ali before him, overcame this disadvantage, not by seeking 
some precedent among Muslim societies, but by drawing directly on the 
secular black nationalism of Marcus Garvey.


--- PAGE 32 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 21
Marcus Garvey was born in 1887 in Jamaica but came to the United 
States in 1916 after sojourns in Latin American and Great Britain. A year 
later he formed the first American Universal Negro Improvement Asso-
ciation (UNIA) chapter. Its goal, according to the 1929 constitution, was 
“to work for the general uplift of the people of African ancestry of the 
world. ” Garvey urged all Africans and their descendents to unite and, 
because of racial oppression, put their race first. Although others such 
as Edward Wilmot Blyden and W . E. B. Du Bois had advocated pan-
Africanism, it was Garvey who was able to turn the philosophy into a 
mass movement that by 1919 had some two million members and was 
said to have doubled in just two more years. Although Garvey did not 
express his pan-Africanism in religious terms, preferring a more pluralis-
tic approach, both Elijah Muhammad and Drew Ali made their formula-
tions of Islam explicitly racial. Garvey’s influence is obvious too in his 
economic program, the key feature of which was self-reliance, as dem-
onstrated with the UNIA ’s restaurants, grocery stores, and shipping line. 
The program was later adopted wholesale by Elijah Muhammad under 
the slogan “do for self. ” The secular nationalism of Garvey, with its em-
phasis on “back to Africa, ” also greatly influenced Drew Ali and Elijah 
Muhammad, though they preferred a religious return to the continent, 
not a physical one.
Garvey’s influence also caught the attention of the Bureau of Investiga-
tion (the forerunner of the Federal Bureau of Investigation). It actively 
sought to have Garvey deported, which occurred in 1927 after he had 
served a few years in prison in what appears to have been a trumped-
up charge of mail fraud. Garvey remained active until his death in 1940, 
and so his movement and those of Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad were 
in competition. Nevertheless, having incorporated or appropriated much 
Garveyism, both men gave Garvey his due. Drew Ali cast him as John 
the Baptist to his Jesus: “In these modern days there came a forerunner 
of Jesus, who was divinely prepared by the great God-Allah and his name 
is Marcus Garvey, who did teach and warn the nations of the earth to 
prepare to meet the coming Prophet. ”
32 Elijah Muhammad was somewhat 
more circumspect about both men:
I have always had a very high opinion of both the late Noble Drew Ali 
and Marcus Garvey and admired their courage in helping our people 
(the so-called Negroes) and appreciated their work. Both of these men 
were fine Muslims. The followers of Noble Drew Ali and Marcus Garvey


--- PAGE 33 ---
22 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
should now follow me and co-operate with us and in our work because 
we are only trying to finish up what those before us started. 33
It is noteworthy that Elijah Muhammad not only recognized them as Mus-
lims but also saw his work as a continuation of theirs. Elijah Muhammad 
generally portrayed only one man as having introduced Islam to African 
Americans and only one man whose work he was continuing: his teacher 
and god, Wali Fard Muhammad.
Wali Fard Muhammad
The biography of the founder of the Nation of Islam, Wali Fard Muham-
mad, is problematic and rife with contradiction. His story comes almost 
solely through his Messenger Elijah Muhammad, who only in the late 
1950s began to disseminate it through his speeches, radio addresses, news-
paper columns, pamphlets, and books. At about the same time, the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation took an interest in the movement and began 
to search for information about this mysterious Fard Muhammad. In both 
cases, therefore, our main sources for information about Fard Muham-
mad come after two decades of the movement’s development.
Allah in Person
The successor and main architect of the movement, Elijah Muham-
mad, taught that Fard Muhammad was born to the tribe of Quraysh in 
Mecca in 1877.
34 “ A l l a h  c a m e  t o  u s  f r o m  t h e  H o l y  C i t y  o f  M e c c a ,  A r a -
bia, in 1930. ”35 Prior to Fard’s birth, his father had planned for his son to 
search out his “lost people”—understood to be the “lost” nation of Blacks 
in America. To that end, though very dark himself, Fard’s father married 
a white woman so that his son would be able to move among the white 
people in whose midst the lost black people were located. (Even Elijah 
Muhammad in 1950 is quoted as saying that African Americans in Detroit 
had “not recognized him as being one of us. ”)
36 Fard Muhammad’s father 
was a scientist who gathered knowledge from around the world to prepare 
his son. Fard Muhamamd studied for forty-two years before traveling the 
world. His native language was Arabic, but he spoke sixteen languages and 
could write ten fluently. In addition, he had studied in England in prepa-
ration for a diplomatic career and had been visiting the United States for 
about twenty years. He had also enrolled in the University of Southern


--- PAGE 34 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 23
California. In 1930 he came to Detroit and gathered twenty-five thousand 
followers within a year.37
One of the earliest extended descriptions of Fard Muhammad’s mission 
portrays him as a savior and martyr:
He (MR. FARD MUHAMMAD, God in Person) chose to suffer three and 
one-half years to show his love for his people, who have suffered over 300 
years at the hands of a people who by nature are evil, wicked, and have 
no good in them.
He was persecuted, sent to jail in 1932, and ordered out of Detroit, 
Mich., May 26, 1933. He came to Chicago in the same year, arrested al-
most immediately on his arrival and placed behind prison bars.
He submitted himself with all humbleness to his persecutors. Each 
time he was arrested, he sent for me that I may see and learn the price of 
TRUTH for us, the so-called American Negroes (members of the Asiatic 
nation).
He was well able to save himself from such suffering, but how else was 
the scripture to be fulfilled? We followed in His footsteps suffering the 
same (persecution).
38
No doubt the parallels drawn between Fard Muhammad and the Chris-
tian account of the persecution of Jesus are intentional. Fard Muham-
mad’s persecution also had salvific and paradigmatic purposes for Elijah 
Muhammad.
39
The aforementioned “TRUTH” taught to Detroit’s African Americans 
by Fard Muhammad was that the “so-called Negroes” were members of 
the lost tribe of Shabazz from Mecca. He had come to resurrect this Lost-
Found Nation of Islam in America. The “black man” must return to his 
original religion, Islam, his original language, Arabic, and the law of Al-
lah. And although Fard Muhammad spoke of himself as the Prophet, he 
eventually introduced himself as the Son of Man—perhaps due to Elijah 
Muhammad’s prompting. At least some of his contemporary followers, in-
cluding Elijah Muhammad, thought of him as God in human form.
40
Elijah Muhammad also describes Fard Muhammad as the “Great 
Mahdi. ” While the term may have been adopted from contact with Ah-
madiyyas, the conception of “mahdi” is quite different in his use—it im-
plies divinity. Elijah Muhammad attested that Fard Muhammad said, “My 
name is Mahdi; I am God. ”
41 He also equated the name “Mahdi” with the 
angel with great power who descends from heaven according to Revelation


--- PAGE 35 ---
24 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
18:1. Elijah Muhammad explained, “This angel can be no other than Mas-
ter W . F . Muhammad, the Great Mahdi. . . . The Great Mahdi is indeed 
the most wise and powerful being on earth (God in Person). It is He who 
with a strong voice announced the immediate doom of America. ”
42 Eli-
jah Muhammad allowed Fard Muhammad’s names to proliferate: “Son of 
Man, Jesus Christ, Messiah, God, Lord, Jehovah, the Last (Jehovah) and 
the Christ”—all names employed by “the anti-Christs (the devils). ”
43
After Fard Muhammad placed Elijah Muhammad in charge of the 
movement, having given him the new surname “Muhammad, ” the new 
titles “Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam” and “Messenger of Al-
lah, ” an English and an Arabic Qur’an, and a list of 104 books to read,
44
Fard Muhammad disappeared in 1934. The reasons for his departure, as 
expounded by Elijah Muhammad, were twofold: (1) it was not necessary 
for him to remain once he had taught and prepared Elijah Muhammad; 
and (2) “the people are not worthy that God remain among them. ”
45
Elijah Muhammad was vague about whether Fard Muhammad would 
return. There were hints, he said, but as much prophesy suggested that He 
would not return as suggested that he would. He concluded, “I don’t ex-
pect Him to return in person, not like that, because there is to [sic] much 
for us to look forward to that He will not. It is not really necessary if He 
is going to send His Own people, as they’re referred to as angels, to gather 
the believers of my people, it’s not necessary. ”
46 However, Elijah Muham-
mad stated that he communicated with him at first via letters and, later, 
via inspiration.
47 Fard Muhammad also has a significant role to play in the 
future, according to Elijah Muhammad. In the millennium after the judg-
ment, “the disbelievers will cease to be. And to those who live in that time 
it shall be binding upon them to serve and obey One God: Fard Muham-
mad the Great Mahdi, or Allah in Person. ”
48
Wallace D. Ford
The Federal Bureau of Investigation collected extensive records on Wal-
lace Dodd Ford—whom they maintain was Fard Muhammad. However, 
his time and place of origin, according to these records, are still murky. In 
police records he is described as “white” with a “dark” complexion. His fa-
ther (Zared Ford) and mother (Beatrice Ford) came from Hawaii, but he 
was born in Portland, Oregon, in 1891. Other documents state that he was 
born in New Zealand on February 26, 1891, to a British father and Poly-
nesian mother and only arrived in Portland in 1913. However, he is also


--- PAGE 36 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 25
recorded as having moved to Los Angeles in 1913 after growing up in Port-
land. In Los Angeles, he was a restaurant keeper and married a woman 
name Hazel Barton, with whom he had a son in 1920. Police records indi-
cate that he was arrested on an assault charge in 1918 but was released. At 
the time, he was called Wallie Ford (which, obviously, sounds suspiciously 
like “Wali Fard, ” though the latter term is normally pronounced “Farrad”). 
In 1926 he was arrested twice, first for possession and sale of alcohol and 
later for the sale of narcotics. He was sent to San Quentin in June of 1926 
and released in May of 1929.
49
According to the FBI files, he came to Detroit in 1931 after a brief stop 
in Chicago. There he may have had contact with Ahmadiyyas, Muslims 
of the Moorish Science Temple, and Garveyites.
50 I n  D e t r o i t  h e  i s  s a i d  
to have been a silk peddler. “His customers were mostly Negro and he 
himself posed as a Negro. He prided himself as a biblical authority and 
mathematician. ”
51
For the three years Dodd Ford/Fard Muhammad was in Detroit, we 
need not rely on FBI reports alone. Eyewitness accounts were recorded by 
sociologist Erdmann Doane Beynon in 1937. According to these accounts, 
he was variously known as Mr. Wali Farrad (which more accurately re-
flects how the name “Fard” is usually pronounced), Professor Ford, Mr. 
Farrad Mohammed, and Mr. F . Mohammed Ali. He sold raincoats and 
silks. He encouraged African Americans to dress and eat as they did in 
their “home country” (that is, to avoid pork). His customers were inter-
ested in his information about their original homeland to the east, espe-
cially its people and culture. This interest often led to invitations to dinner 
or lunch, which in turn led Fard Muhammad to hold informal meetings 
in their homes. Soon he had enough followers and contributions to rent 
a hall for his meetings. His claims included that he came from royalty 
in Mecca but had abandoned his position to teach freedom, justice, and 
equality “in the wilderness of North America, surrounded and robbed 
completely by the Cave Man. ”
52
The main message of Fard Muhammad, as reconstructed by Beynon, 
was somewhat simpler than that given by Elijah Muhammad outlined 
above:
The black men in North America are not Negroes, but members of the 
lost tribe of Shebazz, stolen by traders from the Holy City of Mecca 379 
years ago. The prophet came to America to find and to bring back to life 
his long lost brethren, from whom the Caucasians had taken away their


--- PAGE 37 ---
26 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
language, their nation and their religion. Here in America they were liv-
ing other than themselves. They must learn that they are the original peo-
ple, noblest of the nations of the earth. The Caucasians are the colored 
people, since they have lost their original color. The original people must 
regain their religion, which is Islam, their language, which is Arabic, and 
their culture, which is astronomy and higher mathematics, especially cal-
culus. They must live according to the law of Allah, avoiding all meat of 
“poisonous animals, ” hogs, ducks, geese, ‘possums and catfish. They must 
give up completely the use of stimulants, especially liquor. They must 
clean themselves up—both their bodies and their houses. If in this way 
they obeyed Allah, he would take them back to the Paradise from which 
they had been stolen—the Holy City of Mecca.
53
Noteworthy is the absence of any claim to divinity. Fard Muhammad also 
issued new Islamic names to followers, seemingly following the practice 
of the Moorish Science Temple. Similarly, members of the Nation of Islam 
were not considered Americans, but citizens of Mecca.
54
During his ministry from 1930 to 1934 five to eight thousand African 
Americans joined the Nation of Islam in Detroit and Chicago. Not sur-
prisingly, all but a handful were recent migrants from the rural South.
55
This success led to more formal organizational structures, including a 
school (the University of Islam), security forces (the Fruit of Islam), do-
mestic training for women (the Girl’s Training and General Civilization 
Class), and a second in command (the Supreme Minister of Islam, Elijah 
Muhammad). Towards the end of his ministry, Fard Muhammad was seen 
less and less by his followers. Success had also led to difficulties. One of 
his ministers, Abdul Mohammed, who had served as the Supreme Min-
ister prior to Elijah Muhammad, rebelled in hopes of gaining control of 
the movement from Fard Muhammad. Also, when the police attempted 
to force the children in the University of Islam to return to public schools, 
there was a riot. And, in 1932 a member of the Nation of Islam was al-
leged to have performed a human sacrifice.
56 Perhaps in response to these 
growing troubles, Fard Muhammad receded into a more administrative 
role late in 1932. He rarely attended the temple, choosing to instruct and 
lead his followers through his ministers.
57
Fard Muhammad was arrested by Detroit police in May 1933. In the po-
lice report his ancestry was given as “ Arabian” and his profession as “minis-
ter. ” Furthermore, the “official report said Dodd admitted that his teachings 
were ‘strictly a racket’ and he was ‘getting all the money out of it he could. ’


--- PAGE 38 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 27
He was ordered out of Detroit. ”58 His departure caused his gathered follow-
ers to weep. He comforted them, saying, “Don’t worry. I am with you; I will 
be back to you in the near future to lead you out of this hell. ”59 For the next 
year Fard Muhammad lived in Chicago, where Elijah Muhammad saw him 
for the last time. After that, Fard Muhammad disappeared, despite con-
certed efforts by the FBI to ascertain his whereabouts. In an article written 
in 1963, it was asserted that Ford’s estranged wife, Hazel, claimed that he 
had returned to Los Angeles in 1934. Ford stayed for two weeks, visited his 
son, and then left by ship for New Zealand to visit relatives.
60 Elijah Mu-
hammad, on the other hand, stated in the early 1950s that he received his 
last letter from Fard Muhammad in March 1934 from Mexico.
61
While the Nation of Islam may dispute the police and FBI records, 
these records claim that the fingerprints from the Los Angeles police, San 
Quentin, and the Michigan state police are all identical. They all also listed 
Fard Muhammad as Caucasian or White.
62 Responding to the 1963 article, 
Elijah Muhammad offered one hundred thousand dollars to anyone who 
could prove that Wallace Dodd Ford was, in fact, Wali Fard Muhammad. 
For him, Dodd Ford was a “phony” and the accusations were part of the 
devils’ tricks.
63
Resurrecting the Lost-Found Nation of Islam
It is difficult to distinguish between the teaching of Fard Muhammad 
and those of Elijah Muhammad. First, the former’s teachings survive al-
most exclusively within the writings of the latter. Fard Muhammad’s writ-
ings are limited to three pamphlets. “Teaching for the Lost Found Nation 
of Islam in a Mathematical Way” is a seven-page pamphlet that, consists 
of a set of thirty-four mostly mathematical problems presented as having 
a deeper symbolic meaning. The other two pamphlets are known as “Les-
son 1” and “Lesson 2, ” and they consist of a series of fourteen and forty 
questions and answers, respectively.
64 Most of the major teachings of Eli-
jah Muhammad appear in these two documents, at least in nascent form. 
This is hardly surprising, however; the questions come from Fard Mu-
hammad as he examined his new minister; the answers came from that 
new minister: Elijah Muhammad.
65 The origin of these lessons is explicitly 
ascribed to Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad: “This lesson #2 was 
given by our Prophet, W . D. Fard, which contains 40 questions answered 
by Elijah Mohammed, one for the lost found in the Wilderness of North 
America, February 20th, 1934. ”
66


--- PAGE 39 ---
28 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
Second, Elijah Muhammad claimed that almost all of his teachings 
came directly from Fard Muhammad, even decades later. The teachings of 
Fard Muhammad as summarized by Elijah Muhammad included knowl-
edge of “ourselves, of Himself (God) and the devil, the Measurement of 
the Earth, other Planets and the Civilizations of some of the Planets other 
than Earth . . . the history of the Moon, and the history of the two nations 
that dominate the earth, black and white. ”
67
Some of the teachings focused on recognizable Islamic practices. Fard 
Muhammad told his listeners that “[y]our own people there in the East 
do not eat pork because it is unclean meat. They do not gamble, they do 
not drink, they are people of the highest civilization. ”
68 The more promi-
nent teachings, those about the origin of the white race, who made them, 
how they enslaved Blacks, and their coming judgment (particularly the 
doom of America), were new to Islam.
According to Elijah Muhammad’s version of Fard Muhammad’s teach-
ing, the black race is as old as the planet. Just over sixty-six hundred years 
ago, however, the evil genius Y akub was born. Though he was a member 
of the Black Nation himself, Y akub began converting people by promising 
luxuries. He had discovered the secrets of selective breeding and needed 
people for his eugenics program. His success eventually caused enough 
concern in Mecca that Y akub and his 59,999 followers parted company 
with the remainder of the Black Nation. On an island in the Aegean Sea, 
the embittered Y akub set up a 600-year program to breed an increasingly 
whiter and more evil people. After the six hundred years the newly created 
Whites returned to Mecca and soon managed to turn the Black Nation 
against itself. As a result, the Whites were driven at gunpoint to Europe. 
Moses was sent by Allah two thousand years later to try to civilize these 
hairy, naked, cave-dwelling, tree-climbing savages. Jesus and Muhammad 
also tried to convert these white devils. They failed, for it had been proph-
esied that the white race would rule the world for six thousand years and 
enslave black people in the Americas until the coming of Fard Muham-
mad to mentally resurrect the Lost-Found Nation of Islam.
69
The preceding race myth is the backdrop for the history of African 
Americans within the worldview of the Nation of Islam. Elijah Muham-
mad marked the 400-year period from 1555 to 1955 as particularly signifi-
cant. He stated that Allah taught that the ancestors of African Americans 
were deceived and brought to Amer ica in 1555 by a slave trader named 
John Hawkins in a slave ship, tellingly called “Jesus. ”
70 Elijah Muhammad 
wrote,


--- PAGE 40 ---
American Islam before Elijah Muhammad 29
In 300 years of slavery, we were lashed, beaten and killed; given no educa-
tion; and reared and cared for like the slave-master’s stock (horses, cows 
and other domestic animals). Our children were separated to different 
plantation owners. For the last approximately 100 years of so-called free-
dom, the so-called Negroes have been subjected to the worst inhuman 
treatment for any people who have ever lived on earth. They (the devils) 
have lynched and burned the so-called Negroes during the past century 
as sport for their wives and children to enjoy!
71
However, Fard Muhammad, Allah himself, came to “cut loose every link 
of the slave chain that holds us in bondage to our slave-masters by giving 
us a true knowledge of self, God and the devil and wipe away the 400 
years of tears, weeping, mourning and groaning under the yoke of bond-
age to the merciless murderers. ”
72
For the “white devils” the future was rather more bleak. Fard Muham-
mad promised to burn all of them—not one would survive. 73 The United 
States would burn for 390 years and it would take 610 years until the land 
was habitable again (for a total of one thousand years). Its destruction 
would come from a bomb dropped from a “Mother Plane” that would 
take some twenty-two years to build. Elijah Muhammad claimed that this 
Mother Plane was the size of a small planet and could carry fifteen hun-
dred bombers whose bombs could each churn up mountains from the 
earth. Moreover, Fard Muhammad taught that those of his followers who 
killed four devils “at the proper time” would be given free transportation 
to Mecca. This last teaching, not surprisingly, piqued the interest of the 
police.
74
The mention of Mecca, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad 75 may seem to 
be mere superficial references to traditional Islam. Y et it is important that 
Islam, if not its traditional Arabian mythology, still plays a central role 
in this race myth. It is the natural religion of the “black man, ” it is the 
religion of the prophets, and it is as old as Allah and the universe.
76 More 
importantly, it stands in opposition to Christianity, which “is one of the 
most perfect black-slave-making religions on our planet. It has completely 
killed the so-called Negroes mentally. ”
77 By that, Elijah Muhammad meant 
that it teaches Blacks to worship a false white, blonde, blue-eyed god. In 
effect, it teaches them to worship Whites. It also tells them to turn the 
other cheek when they are abused and to wait until the next life for jus-
tice. Just as the devil roamed on this earth, so heaven and hell were in 
the here and now—not in the hereafter. For him, Christianity was created


--- PAGE 41 ---
30 American Islam before Elijah Muhammad
by the white devils in their wickedness, while Islam comes from Allah. 
The two religions have battled in the past: Christianity was “bottled up” 
in Europe for nearly a thousand years by the coming of Muhammad and 
the subsequent spread of Islam, though from 1555 to 1955 Whites were free 
to roam the world and deceive its inhabitants.
78 And they will battle again: 
with Allah’s return, the war of Armageddon will be a religious war be-
tween Islam and Christianity.
Although it is not clear whether all of the details of these racial and es-
chatological myths can be traced to Fard Muhammad, it seems fairly cer-
tain that most of the main points can. Elijah Muhammad, it would turn 
out, was adept at elaborating these myths and at seeing in biblical and 
quranic passages and in contemporary events evidence to support this 
framework that had been supplied by Fard Muhammad.


--- PAGE 42 ---
31
2
The Life of Elijah Muhammad
Elijah Muhammad lived through some of the most racially tur-
bulent times in American history. He was born in 1897—a time of Jim Crow 
segregation and lynchings. As a young man, he experienced the worst of 
southern racism and eyewitnessed two separate lynchings. Later, he would 
be part of the Great Migration of over a million African Americans to the 
northern United States to escape the racism and poverty of the rural South. 
He discovered, along with the other migrants, that the North was also rife 
with racism. And, with the onset of the Great Depression, the North expe-
rienced poverty as well, which hit African Americans disproportionately 
hard. However, a new religion, Islam, would transform him and his under-
standing of the world. After several years of struggle with obscurity and 
imprisonment, his movement, the Nation of Islam, would achieve phe-
nomenal success and transform the lives of thousands of African Ameri-
cans, including Malcolm X. Y et, despite devoting himself to Islam and the 
“uplifting” of African Americans, he  would find himself reviled by other 
Muslims and even some leaders of the Civil Rights movement. Only after 
his death in 1975 was his remarkable influence on both American Islam 
and the African American struggle for equality truly recognized.
The sources for reconstructing the life of Elijah Muhammad must be 
used with caution. Given that Elijah Muhammad is a religious figure who 
arose so recently, the need for caution may seem surprising. For the most 
part, however, our early biographical information comes from only two 
main sources. The first is the Nation of Islam and consists mostly of ma-
terials penned or dictated by Elijah Muhammad himself. These materials, 
not surprisingly, are informed by what the man had become, not neces-
sarily by what he had been. The second source is the extensive FBI files 
on Elijah Muhammad. These, however, were produced by an organization 
that actively sought to discredit him. Neither set of sources, therefore, 
provides an unbiased account: the former set is often hagiographic, while 
the latter is often hostile.


--- PAGE 43 ---
32 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
Elijah Poole: From Georgia to Michigan
Elijah Poole was born in 1897 in Sandersville, Georgia. 1 His father, Wil-
liam Poole, was a sharecropper and a Baptist preacher. Some sources 
claim that he was known as Wali Poole, suggesting some vestige of Islam. 2
For his mother, Marie, who worked as a domestic servant, Elijah was the 
sixth of thirteen children.
3 But Elijah Poole was special in the eyes of his 
mother: she spoke of a vision that she had as a child in which she would 
give birth to a great man. And, even as a youngster, he was thought by her 
to display a pronounced race consciousness and leadership abilities.
4 In 
the eyes of his father, however, his son could be frustrating: at an early age 
Elijah Poole showed a disposition to Bible study, preaching, and, to his fa-
ther’s annoyance, theological questioning and debate. However, he would 
not follow his father’s footsteps, despite feeling an early call to preach; he 
could not bring himself to preach Christianity.
In 1900 the family moved to Cordele, Georgia. In the fourth grade Eli-
jah Poole dropped out of school to help support his family. He and his 
sister chopped firewood on their farm and went to town to sell it. On one 
such trip, he witnessed the lynching of an African American accused of 
insulting a white woman. At eighteen he worked for a white farmer who 
paid him only eight dollars a month to work from dawn till dusk. This 
farmer regularly whipped the wives of his African American workers at 
gunpoint. Later, Elijah Poole worked as a manual laborer in Georgia and 
served as a foreman. At the age of twenty-three, he saw his second lynch-
ing, after which the body was dragged behind a truck.
5 In 1923, at the age 
of twenty-five, after a white employer insulted him, he moved with his 
wife, Clara, and their two children to Detroit in search of a better life. 
Thus, he took part in the early phase of the Great Migration of African 
Americans from the South to the North between 1914 and 1950. Unskilled 
labor such as his was needed in Detroit’s factories, at least until the Great 
Depression. In 1929, Elijah Muhammad los t his job and was forced to go 
on relief. His wife, Clara, had to work to help support the family when 
her husband could not find work. The distress of long-term unemploy-
ment led him to drink: “one day, his wife had to come get him off the 
railroad tracks where he had fallen in a drunken state. ”
6


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 33
Elijah Karriem: Three and a Half Years with Wali Fard Muhammad
One of the eight thousand African Americans in Detroit who were swept 
into Fard Muhammad’s movement between 1930 and 1933 was Elijah 
Poole. He first heard of Fard Muhammad from his father, who knew Ab-
dul Mohammed, formerly associated with the Moorish Science Temple of 
America and once named Brown El but by then a follower of Fard Mu-
hammad. Elijah Poole and his brother visited Abdul Mohammed several 
times, learning Fard Muhammad’s teachings second-hand. After attend-
ing several meetings in 1931, Elijah Poole finally managed to meet Fard 
Muhammad. According to the later Elijah Muhammad, when they met 
for the first time after Fard Muhammad had finished preaching, he said 
to Fard Muhammad, “I know who you are, you’re God himself. ” Fard Mu-
hammad whispered back, “That’s right, but don’t tell it now. It is not yet 
time for me to be known. ”
7 There are several versions of this first encoun-
ter, each with a different emphasis:
When I first heard of Islam it was in Detroit Michigan, back in the early 
fall of 1931, and I heard that there was a man teaching Islam by the name 
of Mr. Wallace Fard. At that time He used the initials W .D. Fard, that was 
in Detroit Michigan. When I heard what was said, I wanted to meet Him 
and I finally did. When I met Him, I looked at Him and it just came to 
me, that this is the Son of Man that the Bible prophesied would come in 
the last days of the world, and I couldn’t get that out of me. I shook hands 
with Him and I said to Him, “Y ou are the One that the Bible prophesied 
would come at the end of the world under the name Son of Man and un-
der the name The Second Coming of Jesus. ”
And so, He looked at me a little stern, and then He smiled, put His 
head down beside my head then whispered in my ear and said these 
words, “Y es I am the One, but who knows that but yourself, ” and to “be 
quiet. ”
8
Initially, Elijah Poole referred to Fard Muhammad as “Master” or 
“Prophet, ” the latter title being one that he claims to have been the first 
to use.
9
Elijah Poole’s conversion was quite quick and dramatic. Perhaps his 
race consciousness and past experiences with Whites both in the South 
and in the North prepared him for the message of Fard Muhammad: Al-
lah is God; white people are the devil; “so-called Negroes” are Asiatics and


--- PAGE 45 ---
34 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
the original people; and freedom, justice, and equality would come only 
when the “so-called Negroes” return to their original religion (Islam), 
their language (Arabic), and the law of Allah (which includes the avoid-
ance of pork and liquor). Christianity, the religion of Whites, is innately 
inimical to Islam, and the Battle of Armageddon will be a war between 
Islam and Christianity in which the former will vanquish the latter.
Elijah Poole did not see Fard Muhammad for another month, but was 
informed via his wife that he had been given permission to preach. How-
ever, he was cautioned by Fard Muhammad not to speak too much of the 
“Son of Man”: “Y ou can do that after I am gone; don’t talk to [sic] much 
about Me. ” He was to give babies “milk”; they were not ready for “meat. ”
10
Elijah Poole described himself as studying the Bible intensely, looking for 
references to Fard Muhammad. He prayed fervently to Allah for the truth 
while alone in his closet. Consequently, he became a “hundred percent 
convert. ” Having come to this certainty, he finally answered his earlier call 
to preach; he began telling African Americans how to reform themselves, 
and about future events. Soon he was training to become one of Fard Mu-
hammad’s several ministers and was renamed Elijah Karriem.
Elijah Karriem and Fard Muhammad had a special bond and were con-
stantly together for almost two years, with teaching sessions about Islam 
often going through the night.
11 Elijah Karriem was given special teach-
ings. For instance, Elijah Muhammad later recounted.
I asked him, “Who are you, and what is your real name?” He said, “I am 
the one that the world has been expecting for the past 2,000 years. ” I said 
to Him again, “What is your name?” he said, “My name is Mahdi; I am 
God, I came to guide you into the right path that you may be success-
ful and see the hereafter. ” He described the destruction of the world with 
bombs, poison gas, and finally with fire that would consume and destroy 
everything of the present world.
12
Elijah Muhammad recorded several other unique interactions with Fard 
Muhammad. His teacher also gave him several Qur’ans, an Arabic one and 
two English ones, the promise of a future book, and a list of 104 books to 
read.
13 And, Elijah Muhammad was called to visit Fard Muhammad in jail 
each time he was arrested to witness his suffering.
The most pivotal event during this three and half years was Fard Mu-
hammad’s designation of Elijah Karriem as his “successor. ” According to 
later Nation of Islam teaching,


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 35
Prior to His leaving in 1934, W . D. Fard had a process of allowing his 
student ministers to select their own ministers from among themselves. 
They would always select the most articulate and charismatic person. For 
whatever reason, they never chose Elijah Karriem. One reason may have 
been his lack of command of the English language.
After the students made their choices for awhile, W . D. Fard said, “I’ve 
let you select yours for awhile, Now I’ll select Mine, ” He said. [sic] “Hey 
you over there Karriem!”
“Who me, ” said a humble, soft-spoken Elijah Karriem? [sic]
“Y es, you Elijah Karriem. Come up here with Me, ” He said. Elijah 
walked to the front of the class to stand beside W . D. Fard. “From now on 
this is My Minister, ” Mr. Fard said to everyone with His right arm around 
Elijah’s shoulder.
He chose Elijah Karriem as Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam.
14
Despite having this title conferred upon him by Fard in August 1934, Eli-
jah Muhammad still used the less superlative title of “Minister of Islam in 
North America” in his own publication, The Final Call to Islam, published 
slightly after Fard Muhammad’s departure. However, this same publica-
tion confirms that towards the end of their time together Elijah Karriem 
had been renamed again. He and his whole family were to share Fard 
Muhammad’s own last name.
15 If this anecdote is historical, it stands to 
reason that the troubles Elijah Muhammad would soon experience were 
born then, for other ministers would not have been pleased that this less 
educated and less articulate man was now their superior.
It would be hard to overstate the importance these three and a half 
years had for Elijah Muhammad and his sense of mission. He stated,
I am not ashamed to say how little learning I have had. . . . My going to 
school no further than the fourth grade proves that I can know nothing 
except the truth I have been taught by Allah. Allah taught me mathe-
matics. He found me with a sluggish tongue and taught me how to pro-
nounce words.
16
Elijah Muhammad may have been understating his own role in developing 
the teachings of Fard Muhammad. Elsewhere Elijah Muhammad explained,
He did not teach us that he was a prophet. We used to call him prophet. 
I made the followers calling [sic] him prophet because I do not know


--- PAGE 47 ---
36 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
exactly what great name to give him. No one called him prophet before 
me. First I thought that we should call him Master; later I thought that 
we should call him prophet, and later I told them that he neither of ei-
ther one; [sic] I said that we should call him the “ Almighty God” himself 
in person because, according to what he has taught us, that must be the 
work of God and not of a human being.
Thus, both the initial claim of prophethood and later claim of divinity 
for Fard Muhammad originated with Elijah Muhammad. Only after Elijah 
Muhammad made these claims on his behalf did Fard Muhammad even-
tually come to embrace them.
17 However, even the assumption that they 
collaborated may be overstating Fard Muhammad’s role in his elevation to 
divinity. Elijah Muhammad’s August 18, 1934, edition of The Final Call to 
Islam (published shortly after Fard Muhammad’s disappearance) still em-
ployed only the less lofty expressions “Prophet W . D. Fard” and “Prophet 
Fard Mohammed. ” It also made the argument that Fard Muhammad was 
the prophet foretold by Moses in Deuteronomy 18.
18 Fard Muhammad’s el-
evation to Allah in Person may well have occurred some time after his de-
parture from the scene. Thus, how much of Fard Muhammad’s purported 
teachings are his own creation and how much are the creation of Elijah 
Muhammad’s obviously genuine devotion is very difficult to judge.
Muhammad Rassoull, Gulam Bogans, etc.: Persecution and Prison
The struggle for control of Fard Muhammad’s movement in the vacuum 
created by his final departure in June of 1934 seems to belie Elijah Mu-
hammad’s claim that he had been explicitly designated by the founder 
to be his successor. It is certainly possible that the disregard with which 
some ministers held Elijah Muhammad continued despite his recent el-
evation to Supreme Minister. His new teaching that Fard Muhammad 
was not merely a prophet but the Son of Man and God himself clearly 
triggered opposition also—which again suggests that the elevation came 
more (or exclusively) from Elijah Muhammad. Given the numerous and 
varied versions of the conversation(s) in which Elijah Muhammad recog-
nized the divinity of Fard Muhammad, it seems as though they are apoc-
ryphal. Even if they are not, Elijah Muhammad’s motivation for elevat-
ing Fard Muhammad is obvious. Rarely does a prophet succeed another 
prophet. With Fard Muhammad elevated to godhood, the position of 
prophet to this new god was open. As Clegg points out, “the legitimacy of


--- PAGE 48 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 37
his leadership would be dependent upon convincing others that he alone 
had been favored by God in person and was uniquely privy to his will. ” 19
Soon the police were harassing him too under the pretense that chil-
dren in the University of Islam were being kept out of school. So, when 
a contract was placed on his life by a rival, Elijah Muhammad moved to 
the relative safety of Chicago. Then Theodore Rozier, whom he had left in 
charge of Detroit Temple No. 1, formed his own independent group. In 
Chicago, meanwhile, police harassment and renewed rivalry from “hypo-
crites” (led by his Supreme Captain and own younger brother, Kalot Mu-
hammad, and by his assistant minister, Augustus Muhammad) forced Eli-
jah Muhammad to leave his wife and family behind and flee once more. 
Elijah Muhammad described this period in these terms:
In the fall of 1934 most of the followers turned out to be hypocrites and 
they began to teach against the movement, and to join the enemies of 
the movement. The situation got so bad that in 1935 it was impossible to 
go among them because it seemed to me that over 75 per cent of them 
were hypocrites. And therefore I had to leave them to save my own life. 
Hypocrisy was arising even within my house; my younger brother, who 
was living in my house with another assistant minister, aligned against 
me because he wanted the teachings for himself. They joined my enemy 
here and in Detroit and they began to seek my life. So Allah warned me 
to leave again and showed me in a vision nine people; among them was 
my brother. Therefore I left to Madison, where they followed me; and Al-
lah warned me again to leave Madison.
20
Clearly, Elijah Muhammad felt persecuted, but this feeling only increased 
his faith in his sense of mission and guidance from Fard Muhammad. 
Over three decades later Elijah Muhammad still saw these tribulations 
as a proof and vindication of his unique, divinely ordained mission. He 
wrote, “my brother, Karlot’s [sic] fall served as a warning to the wist-
ful and proud leaders who want to take upon themselves the honor of 
the Messenger of Allah, without being chosen by Allah. ”
21 Whether his 
brother’s rebellion was based on mere ambition or doctrinal differences 
(presumably over the divine status of Fard Muhammad or lack thereof) 
is not known. In any event, most of the former membership of Fard Mu-
hammad’s Nation of Islam did not share Elijah Muhammad’s perspective. 
In Chicago only thirteen gave their allegiance to him and in Detroit, 
only 180.
22


--- PAGE 49 ---
38 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
After a brief stay in Milwaukee, the location of Temple No. 3, Elijah 
Muhammad moved to Washington, D.C. There he lived under the name 
Mr. Evans and read his list of 104 books in the Library of Congress. Us-
ing various aliases, he also traveled to cities on the east coast with large 
African American populations to proselytize. In 1939 he opened Temple 
No. 4 in Washington and led it personally, using the name Muhammad 
Rassoull. His success there brought him to the notice of the FBI and other 
law enforcement agencies. In 1941, his objection to black participation in 
a “white war” only increased the attention they gave him. Elijah Muham-
mad, with his fourth grade education and still one year shy of the 45-year-
old maximum, was still eligible for the draft. After months of surveillance, 
Elijah Muhammad, then living under the alias of Gulam Bogans, was ar-
rested in May 1942 for failing to register for selective service. The FBI in-
terrogated him and also arrested the ministers of other temples. After a 
few months, the bond money was raised and, fearing that he would never 
get to trial, he secretly made his way to Chicago. In September the FBI 
struck the Nation of Islam again, arresting Elijah Muhammad, his eldest 
son, and over thirty others. Most of them were convicted of draft dodg-
ing. Elijah Muhammad and a few subordinates were charged with, and 
convicted of, sedition and avoiding the draft. From 1943 to 1946, Elijah 
Muhammad found himself in prison—with his wife, Clara, serving as his 
connection to the remnant of his community. Denied a Qur’an by prison 
officials, Elijah Muhammad received pages copied by hand by Clara.
Almost two decades after Fard Muhammad disappeared, Elijah Mu-
hammad recounted these early years:
I have not stopped one day for the past twenty-one years. I have been 
standing, preaching to you through out those past twenty-one years, 
while I was free, and while I was in bondage. I spent three and one-half 
years in the federal penitentiary, and also over a year in the city jail for 
teaching this truth. I was also deprived of a father’s love for his family for 
seven long years while I was running from hypocrites and other enemies 
of this world and revelation of God.
23
Thus, Elijah Muhammad came to see this period as a time of persecution. 
These tribulations merely strengthened his sense of mission and destiny. 
And, when he was released from prison in 1946, the other would-be suc-
cessors to Fard Muhammad were long gone, and he could return to his 
family and remaining followers in Chicago.


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 39
Nevertheless, there was little left of the Nation of Islam when he finally 
emerged as the sole leader of Fard Muhammad’s movement. Although 
Elijah Muhammad had managed to maintain the temples in Chicago and 
Detroit, and to add one in Milwaukee and another in Washington, D.C., 
the Nation of Islam was collapsing. Whereas Fard Muhammad had had 
perhaps eight thousand followers in Detroit alone, in 1945 Elijah Muham-
mad had fewer than four thousand in all four temples combined.
24
The time spent in persecution and prison was not wasted, however. 
Not only did it strengthen his lifelong sense of mission and his followers’ 
faith in his authenticity, but this time in jail also marked an important 
turning point. Two of his greatest innovations were born in prison. First, 
Elijah Muhammad conceived of his economic program there, perhaps as 
a result of seeing the agricultural practices of the prison itself. Even before 
his release he had his followers pool their resources to purchase a farm. 
Soon there would be a small restaurant, grocery store, and bakery. From 
these humble beginnings, Elijah Muhammad began one of his greatest 
achievements in the forty years he led the Nation of Islam: the establish-
ment of an independent African American economy—the most tangible 
expression of his “do for self ” precept. Second, before being released from 
prison in 1946, Elijah Muhammad realized that no religious or political 
organizations were trying to help or rehabilitate this segment of the black 
lower class: criminals, pimps, prostitutes, and drug addicts. His decision 
to focus his efforts on this group was momentous. Through Elijah Mu-
hammad’s efforts the lives of many African American criminals, who had 
perhaps experienced the worst of white racism and who had the least 
hope, were transformed into the most loyal and ardent followers. One of 
those recidivists would become Elijah Muhammad’s greatest missionary 
and spokesman, Malcolm X.
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad: The Rise and Fall of Malcolm X
Malcolm X was born Malcolm Little in 1925 in Omaha, Nebraska. His 
youth made it inevitable that race consciousness would be a major focus 
in his life. His father was a reverend and active member in Garvey’s Uni-
versal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA); even at a young age he 
took his son to meetings. His father was harassed by white supremacists 
in Omaha and later also in Lansing, Michigan, where he had moved his 
family. The Little’s house was burned down, and when Malcolm Little was 
six years old, his father was murdered , probably by white supremacists.


--- PAGE 51 ---
40 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
The young Malcolm Little experienced the frustration of a racist school 
system, the extreme poverty of a family with eight children and no father 
during the Great Depression, and the separation of his family when his 
mother became mentally ill.
At the age of fifteen he moved to Boston, then later New Y ork, where 
he gradually became involved in va rious illegal activities that included 
gambling, selling and doing drugs, burglary, pimping, and carrying weap-
ons. However, in 1946 he fled back to Boston after having gotten on the 
wrong side of another criminal. There he was quite a successful burglar 
for a while. When he was eventually caught, he received a ten-year prison 
sentence. Malcolm X later attributed the harshness of the sentence for a 
first conviction to his sexual involvement with a white woman.
Malcolm Little only served part of his ten-year sentence, but by the 
time he was released in 1952, he was transformed. Early in his sentence, 
he earned the nickname “Satan” for his foul language, especially with 
respect to God and the Bible. Meanwhile, most of his family converted 
to the Nation of Islam and began to try to convert their brother. As he 
began to learn more about, and to correspond with, Elijah Muhammad, 
he continued a self-education program he had begun some years earlier, 
but now much more intensively. His readings in history seemed to con-
firm everything Elijah Muhammad had taught him about the evils of the 
“white man. ” Soon he was proselytizing in prison and decided to devote 
the rest of his life “to telling the white man about himself—or die. ”
25
In the summer of 1952, Malcolm Little was paroled. He came to De-
troit, met Elijah Muhammad, and quickly began vigorously recruiting 
new Muslims in Detroit. Within a year, he became Temple No. 1’s assistant 
minister. And, for several months Elijah Muhammad personally men-
tored him. He soon recognized the value of his new protégé. Malcolm X 
was assigned to be the minister for Boston’s Temple No. 11, then Philadel-
phia’s Temple No. 12, and finally New Y ork City’s prestigious Temple No. 
7. From 1955 to 1959, Elijah Muhammad sent Malcolm X to various cities 
to hold rallies and help establish new temples. Malcolm X helped found 
numerous new temples and increase membership dramatically. That is 
not to suggest that Malcolm X was single-handedly responsible for all of 
these temples and converts. However, the growth of the Nation of Islam 
coincided with his ministry: in 1945 there were but four temples, a decade 
later there were fifteen, and by 1960 there were fifty.
26
The year 1959 would be a dramatic one for Malcolm X, Elijah Muham-
mad, and the Nation of Islam. In that year the white American public


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 41
became aware of their existence. In New Y ork City an innocent Black 
Muslim bystander to a scuffle was hit by a white police officer with a 
night stick. Instead of being taken to the hospital, he was taken to jail. 
In less than half an hour Malcolm X had fifty men of the Fruit of Islam 
standing in ranks outside the precinct. Not only was he successful in get-
ting the man medical treatment, but Malcolm X and the “Muslims” made 
the news.
27
Media attention increased with a five-part television documentary en-
titled The Hate That Hate Produced and a book about the Nation of Islam, 
Black Muslims in America , by C. Eric Lincoln. Furthermore, Time, U.S. 
News & World Report, Newsweek, Life, and Reader’s Digest all covered the 
Nation of Islam. Most of this attention was negative and, like the docu-
mentary, fixated on the word “hate. ”
28 To counteract this propaganda Mal-
colm X began the Nation of Islam’s own newspaper, Muhammad Speaks,
in 1959. But the attacks came from all sides. Harsh African American 
criticism came from officials of the National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP), Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and Thur-
good Marshall, who called the Nation of Islam a hate group and referred 
to them as thugs.
29 Sunni Muslims active with African Americans but not 
in the Nation of Islam, particularly Talib Ahmad Dawud and Jamil Diab,30
also denounced the Nation of Islam as unislamic.
The dramatic growth and financial success of the Nation of Islam al-
lowed Elijah Muhammad to visit Muslim countries at the end of 1959. He 
visited Turkey, Egypt, Sudan, and Ethiopia, leaving Malcolm X in charge 
of the Nation of Islam in his absence. Then he traveled to Saudi Arabia 
for the ‘umra (that is, the lesser pilgrimage). He had arrived at the wrong 
time to perform the greater pilgrimage, the hajj. Afterwards, at the be-
ginning of the new year, he left for Pakistan. This intimate contact with 
“orthodox” Muslims and their culture changed Elijah Muhammad’s un-
derstanding of Islam and his view of the place of his Muslims within the 
larger Muslim community.
31
Invigorated by his travels and the relative silence of his opponents, 
Elijah Muhammad resumed his speaking tours, in which he emphasized 
segregation. Malcolm X and others from the Nation of Islam even had 
a secret meeting with the Ku Klux Klan in Atlanta to discuss their mu-
tual opposition to integration as espoused by the Civil Rights movement. 
The leader of the American Nazi Party and several of his men in Nazi 
garb even attended a Nation of Islam rally at which Malcolm X spoke. 
While they shared the agenda of separation of the races, it is likely that


--- PAGE 53 ---
42 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
Elijah Muhammad used the presence of  these white supremacists to his 
own ends. A few years earlier in 1957, for example, J. B. Stoner, archleader 
and imperial wizard of the Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, and 
Elijah Muhammad traded hostile and public letters.
32 Stoner sent another 
letter to Elijah Muhammad in August of 1959, which was published in The 
Amsterdam News. In his rambling two-page letter, he wrote, “I have you 
black Muslims on the run and I will soon put you out of business. That 
being the case, why don’t you dissolve your Muslim nigger organization 
of Islam and tell your darkies to go home and be good niggers and stay in 
their place?”
33 The more hostile Stoner became, the more he played into 
the hands of Elijah Muhammad. These letters could only enhance Elijah 
Muhammad’s stature among African Americans, who would see such at-
tention as a sign that the Nation of Islam challenged, perhaps even wor-
ried, the KKK.
34 And yet, the presence of white supremacists at the Nation 
of Islam’s events highlights that Elijah Muhammad was in some ways not 
offering a new and radical solution to the race problems of the United 
States but instead a recapitulation of an older solution, albeit one that rad-
ically reversed the roles of Blacks and Whites.
35
Later, in 1961, Elijah Muhammad became ill and moved to Phoenix to 
convalesce. He gave Malcolm X autonomy over speaking engagements on 
the college circuit, but accompanied this license with a prophetic warn-
ing: “Brother Malcolm, I want you to become well known. . . . Because if 
you are well known, it will make me better known. But, Brother Malcolm, 
there is something you need to know. Y ou will grow hated when you be-
come well known. Because usually people get jealous of public figures. ”
36
This prophesied jealousy did not take long to manifest itself. Ironically, 
the man who made the prophecy was one of the first to succumb to it. 
Although Malcolm X worshiped Elijah Muhammad, the latter’s very lim-
ited education made him jealous of his protégé’s ability to speak at various 
prestigious colleges and universities. Initially, however, it was other high-
ranking members of the Nation of Islam who, perturbed by Malcolm X’s 
fame, began acting against him. By 1962 less and less about Malcolm X 
appeared in Muhammad Speaks (then edited by Elijah Muhammad’s son 
Herbert Muhammad), and the Chicago headquarters began discouraging 
Malcolm X from holding such large rallies. Also, the two main figures in 
the Nation of Islam had different visions for the movement: Malcolm X 
wanted to be more politically active (as in confronting police brutality), 
whereas Elijah Muhammad preferred a far more conservative, religious 
separatism.
37 The language of the Nation of Islam was militant, but Elijah


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 43
Muhammad made sure his followers obeyed the law and avoided violent 
responses—regardless of provocation.
Despite these growing tensions, in late 1963 Malcolm X was declared the 
Nation of Islam’s First National Minister by Elijah Muhammad. But then, 
at this pinnacle of his career, disaster struck. Malcolm X learned that Eli-
jah Muhammad faced two paternity suits from former secretaries—adul-
tery meant expulsion from the Nation of Islam. According to Malcolm 
X, he confronted Elijah Muhammad, the latter confessed, and they con-
curred that it was a “fulfillment of prophecy” (citing similar indiscretions 
by the biblical prophets David, Noah, and Lot). When Malcolm X began 
preparing other ministers to deal with this situation, however, he was 
charged instead with spreading the “rumor. ” Other high-ranking mem-
bers of the Nation of Islam who were jealous of Malcolm X’s rapid rise 
and influence in the organization saw their opportunity to drive a wedge 
between him and Elijah Muhammad. Later that year, President Kennedy 
was assassinated. Elijah Muhammad or dered his followers to make no 
comment. When Malcolm X did comment, saying that it was an example 
of “the chickens coming home to roost, ” he was summoned to Chicago, 
where Elijah Muhammad ordered him to remain silent for ninety days 
as punishment. Elijah Muhammad then made a conciliatory gesture to a 
mourning country by writing some relatively kind words about the presi-
dent, calling his death a “tragedy” and noting how every president (that is, 
Abraham Lincoln and John F . Kennedy) who makes positive statements 
about African Americans “pays for it with his life. ”
38 He also strongly and 
publicly distanced himself from Malcolm X’s comment:
[T]he following statement from Mr. Muhammad expresses the views of 
Muslims on the death of President Kennedy and in correction of a state-
ment made . . . by Minister Malcolm Shabbaz. “When Minister Malcolm 
addressed the public and mentioned the President’s death, he did not 
speak for Muslims. He was speaking for himself and not Muslims in gen-
eral. He has been suspended from public speaking for the time being. 
The Nation still mourns the loss of our President. ”
39
Malcolm X willingly submitted to his punishment, but in an effort 
to put him in his place, the report of the punishment was disseminated 
quickly throughout the Nation of Islam. In January 1964, Elijah Muham-
mad replaced Malcolm X as the minister of Temple No. 7 in New Y ork 
City. His intentions seem to have been to gradually remove Malcolm X


--- PAGE 55 ---
44 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
from the organization. Malcolm X endured these public humiliations and 
private trials. The final straw, however, came when Malcolm X learned 
that his death had been ordered—but his remaining friends within the 
Nation of Islam made sure that it was not acted upon. He left the Nation 
of Islam in March 1964.
40
Malcolm X then started his own organization, Muslim Mosque, Inc., 
based upon orthodox Sunni Islamic principles, and an associated political 
body, the Organization of Afro-American Unity. His turn to Sunni Islam 
was in large part due to his experiences during a hajj in April 1964. He 
came to believe that Islam could transcend even the racial divisions of 
Whites and Blacks in the United States, thus abandoning Elijah Muham-
mad’s racial teachings. After visiting Lebanon, Nigeria, Ghana, Liberia, 
Seneca, Morocco, and Algeria, Malcolm X gained a more global perspec-
tive and began to focus on human rights (as opposed to just civil rights). 
As a result of these changes, he also accused Elijah Muhammad of being 
a “religious faker”
41 and immoral, which led to a series of death threats 
against Malcolm X. Malcolm X was assassinated on February 21, 1965, in 
front of a large audience by several gunmen, some of whom were alleged 
to be members of the Nation of Islam.
42
It has been suggested that, although Elijah Muhammad never called for 
Malcolm X’s death, he contributed to the environment that made it likely. 
However, Elijah Muhammad specifically wrote, about a month before the 
assassination, “ Allah, the Holy Qur-an says, will not permit anyone to 
kill them, because death would take them out of their chastisement and 
grief. ”
43 Nevertheless, after Malcolm X’s assassination, Malcolm X’s former 
Temple No. 7 was set ablaze in retaliation, and death threats were made 
against Elijah Muhammad.
44
Even if Elijah Muhammad had no part in the assassination, these 
events affected him and his movement profoundly. For the first time, ab-
solute obedience to the Messenger became a major theme in his columns, 
along with a renewed and prolonged attack on hypocrites.
45 Malcolm X 
and his followers became the “chief hypocrites. ” 46 He launched a propa-
ganda campaign that portrayed Malcolm X as a power- and attention-
hungry traitor.
47 However, Elijah Muhammad mostly allowed others to 
heap vitriol on Malcolm X. For example, John Shabbaz’s letter to Mal-
colm X in Muhammad Speaks called him “the number one hypocrite of 
all time, ” claimed that to call him an Uncle Tom is “an insult to all other 
Uncle Toms on earth, ” and described him as “a dog returning to his own 
vomit. ”
48 The harshest and most sustained attack on Malcolm X came from


--- PAGE 56 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 45
Louis X (later, Farrakhan), who systematically critiqued all of Malcolm 
X’s activities and went so far as to say, “Such a man as Malcolm is worthy 
of death, and would have met with death had it not been for [Elijah] Mu-
hammad’s confidence in Allah for victory over the enemies. ”
49 Elijah Mu-
hammad’s own criticism of the “chief hypocrite” included statements such 
as this one: “This chief hypocrite is not with Allah; if he were with Allah, 
he would be with me. ” Elijah Muhammad seemed genuinely hurt by what 
he saw as Malcolm X’s betrayal: “If he is the last of the 22 million, I shall 
remind him of his evil and wicked acts done to me in return for the good 
that I did for him. He could not have risen against me if I had not given 
him so much knowledge of Allah and His religion. ”
50
A year after Malcolm X’s death, Muhammad Speaks  went silent on the 
issue of Malcolm X. Writing in the pages usually reserved for Elijah Mu-
hammad in Muhammad Speaks, John Ali was provoked to attack Malcolm 
X in 1969 when a school in Chicago was named after him. He said that 
Malcolm X was a mere student of Elijah Muhammad, and not a particu-
larly good one given that he later abandoned those teachings and opted 
for the “continuing rule of the white man. ” Malcolm X is lumped in with 
Jesus, Booker T. Washington, and Martin Luther King Jr. as dead figures 
whom Whites elevated and glorified in an effort to divide and mislead 
Blacks.
51 In the late 1960s, the fall of Malcolm X (like the earlier one of 
his own brother Kalot Muhammad) had become for Elijah Muhammad 
simply an example of what happens to hypocrites “who wish to scandalize 
and make mockery of Allah, His messages, and His Messenger. ”
52 By 1972 
Elijah Muhammad seemed to resent Malcolm X’s continued fame. In an 
interview he was asked to make an assessment of Malcolm X’s life. Elijah 
Muhammad refused to answer:
No, I would not lose any time with a man that has been talked and talked 
about for years. If the people do not have a knowledge of him after these 
many years, I am not going to waste my time with going into Malcolm’s 
history. Malcolm, I do not have any time to waste with him, as I think ev-
eryone knows Malcolm or did know Malcolm and they know Malcolm’s 
death. He was teaching, according to what I heard, and the people that 
were there should give a better report than me.
53
Malcolm X was not Elijah Muhammad’s only source of trouble. Also in 
the summer of 1964, his sons Wallace and Akbar Muhammad broke with 
the Nation of Islam. Wallace Muhammad had had doubts for a long time


--- PAGE 57 ---
46 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
and had moved to Sunni Islam while imprisoned for draft dodging a few 
years earlier. His decision to publicly disagree with his father’s teachings 
and to object to the decadence he saw in the officials of the Nation of 
Islam was difficult, given that he had ju st witnessed first-hand the harass-
ment of Malcolm X. After joining the “hypocrites, ” Wallace Muhammad 
was similarly excommunicated, harassed, and financially cut off. In re-
sponse, Wallace Muhammad then publicly revealed the Nation of Islam’s 
darkest secrets: adultery, alcohol consumption, and corruption. Akbar 
Muhammad, studying at al-Azhar in Cairo—Sunni Islam’s most presti-
gious religious university—also abandoned his father, though in a much 
less dramatic fashion. He too was labeled a hypocrite, though formally 
and publicly in the Nation of Islam’s newspaper:
On Sunday, November 26, 1964, at Muhammad’s Temple No. 7 in New 
Y ork City, a speech was made by Akbar Muhammad containing state-
ments and views which were not in keeping with the teachings and prin-
ciples of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah. It has 
therefore been decreed by the Messenger that Akbar Muhammad is no 
longer to be regarded as a follower of his father in what Allah has re-
vealed to his father in the person of Master W . F . Muhammad. Akbar is 
now classified as a hypocrite by his father and by all those who follow 
him.
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad, in the tradition of all great spiri-
tual leaders of modern and ancient times, will forever defend the truths 
entrusted to him by Almighty God, Allah, and neither kith nor kin nor 
defectors of Any Kind will be allowed to alter the obligation or the divine 
mission the Messenger is destined to accomplish for his people.
54
The stress of this turmoil forced Elijah Muhammad to take ninety days 
off and hand power over to his inner circle. Perhaps the only good news 
was his son Wallace Muhammad’s return to the Nation of Islam in 1965. 
With the death of Malcolm X, he had come to realize the cost of open 
rebellion. He publicly humbled himself before his father and the crowd 
gathered for the Saviour’s Day rally (the Nation of Islam’s annual holiday 
and convention to celebrate Fard Muhammad’s birth date on February 
26). These victories over the rebels, one now dead and the others hum-
bled, brought a brief respite to Elijah Muhammad. However, these same 
issues would reemerge in the next decade to threaten the Nation of Islam 
once again.


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 47
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad: His Final Decade
The Nation of Islam had weathered the storms of 1963 to 1965 reason-
ably well. Elijah Muhammad had not. Earlier he had had to convalesce 
in Phoenix for bronchial asthma, later he had to deal with stress and 
high blood pressure, and then in 1965 he was diagnosed with diabetes. 
By mid-1965 these continuing health problems forced him to once again 
hand the daily running of the Nation of Islam to his inner circle. His lead-
ership remained active, however. He urged his followers not to retaliate 
against the police in Los Angeles when they stormed the city’s mosque 
looking for weapons. He also made a half-hearted rapprochement with 
Martin Luther King Jr.—despite continuing to criticize his goal of integra-
tion. And later, perhaps because of the negative reaction to his response 
to Malcolm X’s assassination, Elijah Muhammad learned not to attack 
a foe once he was dead. When Martin Luther King Jr. died, he issued a 
simple condolence in Muhammad Speaks: “I extend my deepest sympathy 
and condolences on the loss of Dr. Martin Luther King. A great and cou-
rageous black man who died in the effort to get for his people that which 
belonged to them—FREEDOM. ”
55
Financially, Elijah Muhammad and his Nation of Islam seemed to be 
doing extremely well. He acquired more farmland in various states and 
a bank in Chicago. In the early 1970s he purchased a $4.4 million former 
Greek Orthodox church to house Temple No. 2 in Chicago.
56 With this 
wealth, generated from businesses, donations, and sales of Muhammad 
Speaks, extravagance and corruption continued to plague the Nation of 
Islam. Y et the grandiose financial projects, such as the new Temple No. 
2, required even more money than Elijah Muhammad could muster. This 
required him to make overtures to oil-rich Muslim countries in the Mid-
dle East. His goal was now to seek not legitimacy, but currency. However, 
he reciprocated with token gestures: his Muslims would now fast during 
Ramadan as the rest of the Muslim world did and not in December, as 
had been the established practice in the Nation of Islam.
57 H e  a l s o  c r i t i -
cized the State of Israel in Muhammad Speaks. His efforts were rewarded: 
Muammar Qaddafi, the president of Libya, gave Elijah Muhammad a 
three-year interest-free loan for $3 million, which funded the purchase of 
the church. By the time Elijah Muhammad died in 1975 he had some sev-
enty-six temples throughout the United States, most of them associated 
with a University of Islam. Membership was perhaps as high as one hun-
dred thousand. His business empire was worth $45 million and included


--- PAGE 59 ---
48 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
fifteen thousand acres of farmland, several aircraft, a fish-importing busi-
ness, restaurants, bakeries, and supermarkets.58
From 1965 to 1970 the Nation of Islam continued to grow in mem-
bership—erasing the defections that the tribulations of Malcolm X had 
prompted. For years, his own position was unassailable. In 1969, Muham-
mad Ali (formerly Cassius Clay), who had converted to the Nation of Islam 
in 1964 and whose boxing fame had served Elijah Muhammad so well in 
the immediate aftermath of Malcolm X’s departure, could be suspended for 
a year. Almost every issue of Muhammad Speaks during 1965 had devoted 
a page to stories and pictures of Muhammad Ali under the heading, “News 
from the Camp of the Champ. ” However, in April 1969 Elijah Muhammad 
claimed that Muhammad Ali’s main interest was money and his preference 
was for “sport and play” rather than Islam. Allah condemned sport as fool-
ish, according to Elijah Muhammad. Consequently, he was removed from 
“the circle of the Brotherhood of the followers of Islam under the Leader-
ship and the Teachings of Elijah Muhammad, for one (1) year in Class ‘F’” 
and was to be addressed not by his Muslim name but by the name Cassius 
Clay.
59 A year later, Elijah Muhammad issued a general condemnation of 
“sport and play. ” He cited Qur’an 44:38: “ And We did not create the heav-
ens and the earth and what is between them in sport. ” The devil therefore 
attempts to get people to do the opposite. The danger in sports and play-
ing, which for Elijah Muhammd include bowling, gambling, and games of 
chance, is their ability to distract black people from the approaching doom 
and to part them from their money, which could be better spent buying 
land to grow crops.
60 For several years, however, Elijah Muhammad still 
recognized Muhammad Ali as a “good Believer, ” but one who had to re-
pent before he could resume his official ministerial duties within the Na-
tion of Islam. Only in late 1974 was Muhammad Ali once again in good 
standing and once again extolled within Muhammad Speaks.
61
In 1970 Elijah Muhammad could also afford to replace John Ali, one 
of his closest advisors who, as the national secretary, controlled the Na-
tion of Islam’s financial resources. This period also marked the rise of new 
figures in the Nation of Islam, the most noteworthy being Louis X of Bos-
ton. Louis X had proved his worth during the Malcolm X controversy, 
abandoning Malcolm X (whose protégé he had been) and becoming his 
harshest critic. Just prior to his erstwhile mentor’s assassination, he even 
stated that he was worthy of death. Later, Elijah Muhammad gave him his 
seal of approval, replacing his ‘X’ with ‘Farrakhan’ and elevating him to 
the position of his National Representative.


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 49
Y et, tensions and rivalries within the various temples began to grow 
again, and between 1971 and 1973 open hostilities broke out even within 
Elijah Muhammad’s home territory, Temple No. 2 in Chicago. The various 
causes of the animosity were not unlike those that led to the break with 
Malcolm X. The activist younger generation was being stifled by the far 
more conservative older generation, and everyone was jockeying for posi-
tion in preparation for the battle over succession.
62 At Temple No. 2 the fo-
cus was on the powerful Raymond Sharrieff, the long-time Supreme Cap-
tain of the Fruit of Islam. After an attempt on his life in 1971, there was a 
series of reprisal killings that lasted until 1973. This intra-Muslim violence 
included the killing of the head of the Malcolm X Foundation, but culmi-
nated with the massacre at the house of Hamaas Abdul Khaalis, a former 
member of the Nation of Islam who had left the Nation long before Mal-
colm X. He was also a harsh Sunni Islam critic of Elijah Muhammad. On 
January 18, 1973, men burst into his home and brutally killed seven mem-
bers of his family, including four infants, the youngest of which was nine 
days old. Elijah Muhammad, however, was not implicated in the murders.
When another report of intra-Muslim warfare was made after killings 
at the Orthodox Muslim Mosque in Brooklyn in early 1974, Louis Far-
rakhan felt obliged to dismiss the media reports of a Muslim “feud” as a 
hoax. This incident, along with the 1973 murder of Khaalis’s family and a 
1972 murder in Baton Rouge, were dismissed by Farrakhan as part of a 
pre–Saviour’s Day rally propaganda campaign against Elijah Muhammad 
orchestrated annually by the American government.
63 Elijah Muhammad’s 
role in all this violence was probably indirect—he may only have helped 
to create the atmosphere, as he had done before Malcolm X’s assassina-
tion. In the early 1970s, for instance, he lashed out at the “hypocrites, ” 
even those within the headquarters in Chicago. Elijah Muhammad de-
clared that the hypocrites must be removed and charged that Temple No. 
2 was full of disbelievers:
The HYPOCRITES who . . . are not set in THE NATION OF ISLAM, 
must be removed out of our way.
No people nor organization, regardless to [sic] what it is, religious or 
political, can be successful with HYPOCRITES on its panel.
HERE IN CHICAGO, the die has been set. And, the material has been 
made according to the die. I hope Allah will Cause [sic] you to see, for I 
most certainly hope to get you removed out of our Temple No. 2, which 
is full of DISBELIEVERS as well as in other Temples where they go from


--- PAGE 61 ---
50 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
one to the other carry[ing] venomous poison of hatred against Brother 
and against Sister and those who are trying to live the righteous life with 
the Truth that will bring them into a HEAVEN AT ONCE.
He then warned his followers not to befriend hypocrites:
Being FRIENDS with the HYPOCRITES is dangerous. The Holy Qur-an 
warns you against taking them for friends, and the Holy Qur-an teaches 
you and me their disbelieving actions so that you may recognize them, if 
they be in your family or home, you cannot be successful trying to be-
friend one who is against your God and Truth, for he is against you for 
believing it.
He becomes your enemy, regardless; if it is your husband, wife, sons, 
or daughters. So, remember how the Holy Qur-an teaches us that the 
Messenger must be hard against such people; and I am. I just hope the 
day will come that I can weed them out, by the help of Allah, BECAUSE 
YOU (HYPOCRITES) ARE A GREAT HINDRANCE TO YOUR OWN 
SALV ATION AND THE SALV ATION OF OTHERS.
64
This might be a reference to Elijah Muhammad’s struggle with his own 
son Wallace Muhammad. “Hypocrites” would remain a common motif in 
Elijah Muhammad’s writing well into the 1970s, though the identities of 
the hypocrites varied.
65
Just as this destructive internecine fighting was subsiding, Elijah Mu-
hammad’s health was failing. Control of the Nation of Islam was already 
in the hands of others—at least for the day-to-day operations. The success 
of the organization and the earlier deterioration of his health had made 
that a necessity. He wrote less and less for Muhammad Speaks, and when 
he did it was often in the form of short and sometimes odd commands. 
During the first decade of his columns in Muhammad Speaks , Elijah Mu-
hammad had contributed about one or two pages of material. In those 
days, he would occasionally have an earlier column reprinted, or substi-
tute his column with an excerpt from Message to the Blackman in America
or the transcript of his Saviour’s Day speech. From 1970 onwards, how-
ever, more reprinted columns appeared. In the last two years of his life, 
less than one in ten issues of Muhammad Speaks had any new material 
from Elijah Muhammad.
The weakening of the hitherto strong central leadership may also ex-
plain the development of new heretical teachings (noted above in chapter


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Life of Elijah Muhammad 51
1) and the need for the National Secretary, Abass Rassoull, to issue warn-
ings against exploiting the Nation of Islam by selling unauthorized pic-
tures of Elijah Muhammad and against members of the Nation of Islam 
issuing “holy names” to themselves.
66
Elijah Muhammad, nevertheless, had steadfastly avoided anointing an 
heir apparent, making a point in early 1972 of saying he would not do so:
I do not do that. I cannot do that. I did not choose myself. God chose 
me and if He Wants a successor, He Will Choose that one. . . . I do not 
believe there is one coming up. . . . I don’t think God needs one, because 
when man and God have come face to face, as the old saying goes, then 
that is the end of it. . . . [S]o what would another one do? There is noth-
ing for him to do.
67
Perhaps somewhat naively, Elijah Muhammad believed that the Nation of 
Islam would continue to administer its resources without a successor and 
would function as a “Divine government. ” By 1974, when it was clear that 
the end was near, others at the top of the Nation of Islam hierarchy dis-
agreed and felt there would be much for a successor to do.
The various possible successors began once again to jockey for posi-
tion. Within the family, Wallace Muhammad, despite his occasional ex-
pulsions and decade-long absence from prominence, was the leading 
candidate. Elijah Muhammad put up no resistance to Wallace Muham-
mad’s growing prominence. Louis Farrakhan was the strongest contender 
outside of the family (with the possible exception of Raymond Sharrieff, 
who was also Elijah Muhammad’s son-in-law). It seems clear that the Mu-
hammad family—from the very top down—had no intention of allowing 
an outsider to wrest away control of the Nation of Islam.
68 Nevertheless, 
the struggle raged on the pages of Muhammad Speaks. In the month prior 
to Elijah Muhammad’s death, his son Wallace Muhammad made his first 
significant appearance in Muhammad Speaks in over a decade. His picture 
was among those attending a Nation of Islam fundraiser alongside other 
prominent leaders in the Nation of Islam, including Louis Farrakhan (the 
National Representative), Jam Muhammad (Elijah Muhammad’s brother), 
Abdul Karriem (the Western National Representative). At the fundraiser 
Wallace Muhammad was said to have been the first to speak, having been 
introduced by his uncle Jam (the host of the event), but Louis Farrakhan 
was named the main speaker.
69 However, when the mayor of Chicago de-
clared February 26, 1975, Nation of Islam Day, it was Wallace Muhammad


--- PAGE 63 ---
52 The Life of Elijah Muhammad
who accepted the proclamation on behalf of his father. However, the same 
issue of Muhammad Speaks devoted seven pages to the double marriage 
that linked Louis Farrakhan’s family with Elijah Muhammad’s.70
Although ill for decades, Elijah Muhammad had always managed to 
recover from his various ailments. However, in 1973 the ill effects of his 
age were far more noticeable; at the Saviour’s Day rally he even forgot 
the year of Fard Muhammad’s birth. Another recovery seemed likely, for 
a year later he was still the keynote speaker at the Saviour’s Day rally and 
at the end of the year he was able to travel to Mexico. Shortly thereafter, 
however, on January 29, 1975, he was checked into the hospital in Chi-
cago. A few days later he suffered congestive heart failure. Hitherto al-
most completely silent on this matter, Muhammad Speaks was forced to 
acknowledge his illness as the rumors spread. Other newspapers, such as 
the Chicago Defender, were the first to report Elijah Muhammad’s hospi-
talization and the grave status of his health. In fact, it was three days after 
his death when the first report of his illness was published in Muhammad 
Speaks. Moreover, this report merely discussed the numerous “get well” 
cards, telephone calls, and telegrams that were already arriving.
71
On February 25, 1975, a day before the annual Saviour’s Day rally was 
to begin, Elijah Muhammad died. By the time of his funeral three days 
later, his son Wallace Muhammad had been triumphantly proclaimed the 
new Supreme Minister. The Nation of Islam, which for forty years Eli-
jah Muhammad had struggled first to preserve, then to build, and then 
to protect from various outside forces, was about to be dismantled from 
within.


--- PAGE 64 ---
53
3
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’an
The question of whether the religious movement Elijah Mu-
hammad led for so long is “Islamic” is a challenging one. Were one to 
focus on doctrines such as the incarnation of Allah in the form of Fard 
Muhammad, Elijah Muhammad’s own status as the Messenger of Allah, 
the denial of the resurrection and contemporary nature of heaven and 
hell, the racial framing of Islam, and the focus on the racial conflict in the 
United States, it would certainly seem that Elijah Muhammad led a move-
ment that was fairly unislamic.
1 A comparison with the five principles of 
Islam—belief in Allah (including that he does not take material form), in 
angels, in prophets (the last of which is Muhammad), in scriptures, and 
in the Last Day (which involves the resurrection of the dead, judgment, 
and being assigned to heaven or hell)—seems to confirm that appearance. 
Y et were one to observe instead members of the Nation of Islam identi-
fying themselves as Muslims, worshipping a deity called Allah, praying 
five times a day, abstaining from pork and alcohol, and, most importantly, 
using the same scripture used by other Muslims, the Qur’an, one might 
come to the opposite conclusion. Even those problematic doctrines de-
tailed above find support in the Qur’an, according to Elijah Muhammad. 
This scripture is generally believed by Muslims to be the literal, eternal, 
incorruptible, and inimitable speech of Allah revealed to Muhammad 
the Prophet via the angel Gabriel. That Elijah Muhammad claimed the 
Qur’an to support his formulation of Islam vexed his Muslim opponents, 
for they asserted proprietary rights over its interpretation, and it puzzled 
his would-be African American converts, for they had no familiarity with 
this text.
Some African slaves in the early days of the nation had been well-
versed enough to be able to reproduce the Qur’an from memory in writ-
ing after many years of enslavement. However, not until Drew Ali intro-
duced his Circle Seven Koran  and Elijah Muhammad promulgated the 
Qur’an was the word “Qur’an, ” much less the text itself, widely known by


--- PAGE 65 ---
54 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
African Americans. It will clarify the context within which Elijah Mu-
hammad disseminated knowledge of the Qur’an if we examine Drew Ali’s 
Circle Seven Koran and Elijah Muhammad’s use of the Bible. This context 
highlights Elijah Muhammad’s unique and evolving relationship with the 
scripture of Islam.
The Circle Seven Koran
As we have seen, Drew Ali founded the Canaanite Temple in 1913 in New-
ark, New Jersey, and fifteen years later it evolved into the Moorish Sci-
ence Temple of America, Inc. He claimed that years earlier, in Egypt or in 
Mecca, his prophethood became manifest as a book: The Holy Koran of the 
Moorish Science Temple of America. (To avoid confusion, The Holy Koran
of Noble Drew Ali will be referred to as the Circle Seven Koran, the name 
used by his early followers because of the symbol on the cover.) It has 
also been asserted that this book was first published in 1916, but scholar 
Peter Lamborn Wilson suggests that there was no printed edition prior to 
1927.
2 Chapters 2 to 19 are very lightly edited material from The Aquarian 
Gospel of Jesus the Christ  by Levi H. Dowling, published in 1908. 3 How-
ever, more telling are chapters 20 to 44, which come from a Rosicrucian 
book entitled Unto Thee I Grant, by Sri Ramatherio, whose original pub-
lication may date back to 1760 but whose 1925 revision seems to be the 
one employed by Drew Ali.
4 Both of these originals were eighteenth- and 
nineteenth-century pseudepigrapha; the former claims to recount Jesus’ 
ministry in India and Egypt prior to his ministry in Galilee; and the lat-
ter consists of instructions on social and communal relationships, moral-
ity, and theology. The final chapters, 45 to 48, with their more numerous 
spelling and grammatical errors, seem to have been composed by Drew 
Ali himself. In these final chapters, Drew Ali outlines his view of Moorish 
history, including the origin of the Asiatic nation, the birth of Christianity 
in Rome, and the Canaanite origin of Egypt, the capital of the “Empire of 
the Dominion of Africa. ” He closes with an assertion of his prophetic mis-
sion. Except for the use of the name “ Allah” and two minor references to 
Muhammad (as the “founder of uniting of Islam” and as he who “fulfilled 
the works of Jesus of Nazareth”),
5 the contents of the Circle Seven Koran
owe nothing to the Qur’an or even Islam. In fact, elsewhere Muhammad 
was even listed with Confucius as one of Drew Ali’s predecessors.
6 There 
is only one reference to the Qur’an in the Circle Seven Koran: “The fallen 
sons and daughters of the Asiatic Nation of North America need to learn


--- PAGE 66 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 55
to love instead of hate; and to know their higher self and lower self. This 
is the uniting of the Holy Koran of Mecca, for teaching and instructing all 
Moorish Americans, etc. ”
7 This passage might actually be speaking of the 
Circle Seven Koran but, since Muhammad had also been mentioned as the 
founder of the uniting of Islam, this “Holy Koran of Mecca” is probably a 
reference to the Qur’an.
Aminah McCloud, a scholar of African American Islam, contends that 
“Islamic belief in the Moorish community focused on central quranic 
concepts such as justice, a purposeful creation of mankind, freedom of 
will, and humankind as the generator of personal action (both good and 
bad). Quranic principles concerning the nature of reality as spiritual 
and the nature of human existence as co-eternal with the existence of 
time also figured prominently. ”
8 The assertion that the Qur’an contains 
all of these concepts and principles is itself problematic. Moreover, even 
those that can be found in the Qur’an cannot be shown to have been the 
source of Drew Ali’s teaching. McCloud herself concedes that “[t]here is 
no evidence that the Moorish Science Temple of America had access to 
even most of the basic Islamic texts, with the possible exception of the 
Qur’an.”
9
If the contents of the Circle Seven Koran clearly bear no obvious rela-
tion to those of the Qur’an, what is the point of using the name “Koran”? 
After all, the people Drew Ali was addressing had little familiarity with 
the word and probably none with the contents of the text to which it re-
ferred. A clue to Drew Ali’s motivations is to be found in the packaging of 
the contents more than in the contents themselves. The cover of the Circle 
Seven Koran states,
The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science Temple of America
Divinely Prepared by the Noble Prophet Drew Ali
By the guiding of his father God, Allah; the great God of the universe. 
To redeem man from his sinful and fallen stage of humanity back to the 
highest plane of life with father God, Allah.
The Circle Seven Koran was meant to support Drew Ali’s claim to proph-
ecy. Prophets were associated with scriptures, which served as mani-
festations of their connection with God. Drew Ali’s claim to have been 
initiated in Egypt by passing the test of the high priest in the Temple of 
Cheops was unlikely to convince many. Drew Ali did perform miracles. A 
flyer announcing a May 16, 1927, meeting states,


--- PAGE 67 ---
56 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
Don’t Miss the Great Moorish Drama
Look! Look!
Come ye everyone and see
The Seventh Wonder of the World
...Th e  P r o p h e t  N o b l e  D r e w  A l i ,  w i l l  b e  b o u n d  w i t h  s e v e r a l  y a r d s  o f  
rope, as Jesus was bound in the Temple at Jerusalem
And escaped before the authorities could t[ake] charge of Him; so will 
the Prophet Drew Ali, perform the same act, after being bound by any-
one in the audience and will escape in a few seconds.
He also will heal many in the audience with[out] touching them, free 
of charge, as they stand in fr[ont] of their seats manifesting his divine 
power.
10
The point of these “miracles” is bluntly stated: they were meant to be seen 
as manifestations of “divine power. ”
However, to Drew Ali producing a scripture probably seemed a more 
expedient means of manifesting such power. He could not simply produce 
a new Bible, of course, since the Bible would have been fairly well known 
among his audience and Joseph Smith had done that recently enough 
with his Book of Mormon. It was precisely the unfamiliarity with the 
Qur’an that allowed him to adopt the name, even though in terms of sub-
ject matter, the Circle Seven Koran is more biblical than quranic. The same 
conclusion can be drawn from Drew Ali’s claim to have “[a]ll authority 
and power”
11 and his assertion that “to be a real Moorish leader you must 
study the Koran and the Divine Constitution that is handed down unto 
you by I, the Prophet. ”
12 His Circle Seven Koran  was the manifestation of 
his divine power, or tangible proof of his prophetic claims. His authority 
was not self-evident, and apparently he needed to convince his audience.
That the role of the Circle Seven Koran was to be emblematic of his pro-
phetic authority, and not authoritative in its own right, is evidenced by sev-
eral facts. First, other important Moorish Science texts rarely mention the 
Circle Seven Koran . Neither Charter: Moorish Science Temple of America
nor Moorish Science Temple of America: The Divine Constitution and By-
Laws use the word. Even Koran Questionary (also known as Koran Ques-
tions for Moorish Americans), which had to be memorized by followers, 
fails to employ the word “Koran, ” even though its title implies that it de-
rives from the Circle Seven Koran . Not only do the questions and answers 
lack references to the Qur’an and even the Circle Seven Koran, but they also 
are at odds with quranic conceptions of prophets, angels, and Satan:


--- PAGE 68 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 57
6. What is a Prophet? A Prophet is a Thought of ALLAH manifested 
in the flesh. . . .
38. What is an Angel? An angel is a thought of ALLAH manifested 
in human flesh.
39. What are Angels used for? To carry messages to the four corners 
of the world, to all nations.
40. What is our Prophet to us? He is an angel of ALLAH who was 
sent to bring us the Everlasting Gospel of ALLAH. . . .
81. What is the first name of the person into whom Jesus was first 
reincarnated?
  Prophet MOHAMMED, the Conqueror.
82. Was Satan to be bound then? Satan was bound in part.
83. When was the head of Satan taken off? 453 (Byzantine).
84. By whom? By Mohammed. 13
This absence of quranic material in the Koran Questionary may also have 
something to do with the Circle Seven Koran’s relatively late publication 
(in 1927, as opposed to 1916). Second, the Circle Seven Koran also had little 
ritual importance, unlike the Qur’an. A notable exception is found in Drew 
Ali’s tract, the “Prophet Sends Marriage Law to All Temples”: “Chapter 22 
from our Koran is to be read first to the husband and chapter 21 is to be 
read secondly to the wife. These are the instructions of marriage from our 
Holy Koran. Please obey the law as given you by your Prophet through 
your Governor. ”
14 Third, religious services after the death of Drew Ali began 
with a reading from the Circle Seven Koran, purportedly following a pattern 
established by Drew Ali himself. This reading was to be the basis for a ser-
mon. If this claim is accurate, it seems modeled more on Christian use of 
the Bible at churches than on Muslim use of the Qur’an at mosques.
One might also wonder if Drew Ali was familiar with the Qur’an and 
simply chose to ignore it. He makes at least one veiled reference to the 
original Qur’an. In a tract entitled What Is Islam?  Drew Ali states, “The 
Koran, the Holy Book of Islam, tells us that the final abode of man is the 
‘House of Peace, ’ ‘where’ no vain word or sinful discourse will be heard. ”
15
“House of Peace, ” which presumably derives from “ dar al-salaam, ” does 
not occur in the Circle Seven Koran , but comes from Qur’an 10:25. The 
second phrase appears in Qur’an 78:35. Since the English translation in 
this case is unique, Drew Ali seems to have had access to a translation of 
the Qur’an.
16


--- PAGE 69 ---
58 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
Later, it became clear that members of the Moorish Science Temple did 
see a close connection between their Circle Seven Koran  and the Qur’an. 
According to an FBI report in 1944, at least some members of the Moor-
ish Science Temple of America were aware that their Circle Seven Koran
“was not identical with that of the true Mohammedan but rather a mod-
ified concept called a Koran, which had been designed by the Prophet 
NOBLE DREW ALI. ”
17 Furthermore, when a Grand Sheik was asked if 
his organization employed the same Qur’an as all other Muslims did, he 
replied, “We have a revised Koran—at least, from the Arabic translation 
i n t o  E n g l i s h ....  [ W ] e  a l s o  h a v e  t h e  m o s t  s i m p l e  f o r m  t r a n s l a t e d  i n t o  
English. ”
18 Th e  c l a i m s  t h a t  t h e  Circle Seven Koran is a “modified” or “re-
vised” Qur’an are dubious at best. If indeed the claims go back to Drew 
Ali, and he had access to an actual Qur’an, then the Circle Seven Koran
seems a much more manipulative and conscious effort to invoke or lay 
claim to the older scripture’s authority.
On the other hand, it seems that Drew Ali had at least passing famil-
iarity with traditional Islam. He describes Muhammad and the origi-
nation of Islam in the Arabian Peninsula and the later contributions of 
Muslims to the world’s culture. He also wrote, “The Koran should be of 
interest to all readers. It is the Bible
19 of the Mohammedans, ruling over 
the customs and actions of over 200 millions of people. It is a work of im-
portance whether considered from a religious, philosophical, or literary 
viewpoint. ”
20 His actual level of familiarity with the Qur’an’s contents re-
mains uncertain, though it seems negligible. While aware of the Qur’an’s 
existence and role in Islam, Drew Ali seems largely to have ignored the 
Qur’an, for he had little need of it. Like the titles “Noble” and “Prophet, ” 
like the sashes and the fezes, and like the Moorish historical claims, the 
Qur’an validated his authority. What was important, therefore, was only 
the name itself: “Koran” and what it implied.
The Bible and the Qur’an
In sharp contrast, despite his frequent claims to be relaying the teach-
ings of Allah in the person of Fard Muhammad, Elijah Muhammad never 
claimed to have brought a scripture of his own from Allah—as Drew Ali 
had.
21 And he used the same Qur’an that other Muslims used. However, 
he too relied on a nonquranic text: the Bible. For him both the Bible 
and the Qur’an contained messages from Allah, and he urged his fol-
lowers to study them, but these messages had hitherto not been properly


--- PAGE 70 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 59
understood. Elijah Muhammad stated that Fard Muhammad had taught 
that both of these texts, like all scripture, were written by twenty-three 
scientists who pen a new book every twenty-five thousand years and then 
wait an additional ten thousand years before giving it to a prophet.
22 This 
is said to have occurred with the Bible and the Qur’an, but the signifi-
cance of this origin and the time span involved are unclear.
For Elijah Muhammad the Bible and the Qur’an are not equals. He 
declared that “[t]he Bible is now being called the poison book  by God 
Himself, and who can deny that it is not poison? It has poisoned the very 
hearts and minds of the so-called Negroes so much that they can’t agree 
with each other. ”
23 The poison of the Bible consists, Elijah Muhammad 
elaborated, in the accusations it levels at many of the prophets: Noah is 
accused of drunkenness, Lot of incest, and Jesus of having been born in 
an act of adultery. Such accusations are reminiscent of tahrīf—a standard 
Muslim polemic against Jews and Christians that charges them with alter-
ing their scriptures. More unique was his claim that there were “poison 
addition[s] of the slavery teaching” in the Bible, such as “love your en-
emies” and “turn the other cheek. ”
24
Despite this harsh condemnation, Elijah Muhammad availed himself 
of the Bible continuously. In two of his main monographs, The Supreme 
Wisdom and Message to the Blackman in America , he cited or referred to 
the Bible almost twice as often as he did the Qur’an. He explained, “I don’t 
mean to say that there is no truth in it. Certainly, plenty of truth, if under-
stood.”
25 This is where Elijah Muhammad could assume the role of exegete 
or mufassir. “The Bible means good if you can rightly understand it. My 
interpretation of it is given to me from the Lord of the Worlds. ” 26 This 
“understanding” seemed to have consisted of revealing the message for 
African Americans that had been allegorically and symbolically encoded 
in the Bible. John Ali, the long-time National Secretary of the Nation of 
Islam under Elijah Muhammad, stated, “Mr. Elijah Muhammad is bring-
ing a final truth to the people. He is revealing the secret of the symbols, 
parables, signs and prophecies of the scriptures. The Old Testament is a 
book of prophecy in parables, symbols and signs. The New Testament is a 
fulfillment of a prophecy whose time is now. ”
27 The true value of biblical 
stories and prophecies, therefore, resided in their explanations for con-
temporary and relevant past events, and in their paraenetic messages for 
African Americans. For example, Jonah, when he is swallowed by the fish, 
is like the “so-called Negroes” swallowed by America, who needed to turn 
to Allah for deliverance.
28


--- PAGE 71 ---
60 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
Of course, on a more practical level, there were two reasons for Elijah 
Muhammad’s frequent use of the Bible. First, members in the Nation of 
Islam were predominantly former Christians. Elijah Muhammad was well 
aware of this situation:
It is necessary for me to consult or refer to the Bible . . . because my 
people do not know any Scripture or ever read any Scripture other than 
the Bible (which they do not understand), I thought it best to make them 
understand the book which they read and believe in, since the Bible is 
their graveyard and they must be awakened from it.
29
Second, not only were his followers more familiar with the Bible, but also 
Elijah Muhammad himself was more acquainted with its contents than 
with those of the Qur’an—at least at first.
The Qur’an
Elijah Muhammad’s dedication to the Qur’an goes back to Fard Muham-
mad. According to Beynon’s 1938 article, “The Koran itself was soon in-
troduced as the most authoritative of all texts for the study of the new 
faith. The prophet [Fard Muhammad], however, used only the Arabic text 
which he translated and explained to the believers. ”
30 Given his unique 
doctrines, it is not surprising that Elijah Muhammad also had an odd un-
derstanding of what the Qur’an and its message were. It is tempting to 
think that these doctrines (as with Drew Ali) arose out of ignorance of 
the Qur’an’s content. However, this was not the case. Elijah Muhammad 
had read significant portions of the Qur’an, probably all of it. Even while 
he was in prison during World War II, his wife copied out verses from the 
Qur’an and sent them to him.
31 The translation of the Qur’an favored by 
Elijah Muhammad was that of the Ahmadiyya Muhammad Ali—the 1917 
first edition or possibly the 1920 second edition. He recommended the 
translation by Abd Allah Yusuf Ali to his followers as well,
32 but when the 
Qur’an is cited in his columns and books, it is invariably from Muham-
mad Ali’s text. This seems to have been the English Qur’an given to him 
by Fard Muhammad during their last meeting.
Elijah Muhammad’s dependence on this translation is made explicit 
when he refers his readers to specific footnotes in Muhammad Ali’s text 
and when he uses his subject headings.
33 It is not always clear if Eli-
jah Muhammad was aware that the headings provided by Muhammad


--- PAGE 72 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 61
Ali were not part of the Qur’an. For instance, Muhammad Ali has the 
section heading “Foreign Believers” for Qur’an 72:4–14. Elijah Muham-
mad performed exegesis on the heading just as he did on the sūra’s 
name and its verses. He wrote, “These verses are so plain that they do 
not need any interpretation, because these things have come to pass. 
Foreign Believers here mean white believers; not other than white. The 
chapter is headed under the name ‘Jinn. ’ Jinn here means the devil. ”
34
Elijah Muhammad frequently alters or miscopies words and phrases 
in the passages that he quotes. In these emendations, he often Ameri-
canizes the spelling or modernizes and simplifies the grammar, such 
as when “O soul that art at rest” is modified to “O soul that is at rest, ” 
though he does not always do so correctly. Elijah Muhammad also felt 
free to substitute synonyms and to capitalize and italicize words that he 
wanted to emphasize.
This translation, aside from Ahmadiyya tendencies, is not an unusual 
translation. It has been suggested that it is responsible for Elijah Muham-
mad’s belief that the Qur’an literally identified people with blue eyes as 
being unacceptable to Allah:
Mr Muhammad is thought to have drawn scriptural support for his racist 
theology from a mistranslated Ahmadiyyah Koran. Correctly written, a 
passage in the Koran states that God does not accept people with “blurred 
eyes. ” But the Ahmadiyyah version which Mr Muhammad purportedly 
consulted says that God does not accept people with “blue eyes. ”
35
Qur’an 20:102 reads, “On the day when the trumpet shall be blown, and 
we will gather the guilty, blue-eyed, on that day. ” To this verse Muham-
mad Ali appended the following footnote:
The word zurqá means blue-eyed, and thus it serves as an indication 
of the nations who are spoken of here as being gathered. According to 
[Baydawī], blue being the colour of the eyes of the Rúm (i.e. the Greeks 
or the Romans), who were the most hated by the Arabs, that colour was 
regarded by the Arabs as the worst colour for the eye. The word may also 
signify blind, in reference to the guilty being raised up blind on the resur-
rection day, for which see v. 124. (636, n. 1601a)
Clearly, Elijah Muhammad hardly needed a mistranslated Qur’an to find 
support for his “blue-eyed” devil doctrine. Furthermore, his followers


--- PAGE 73 ---
62 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
were also permitted to use the translation of the Qur’an by Yusuf Ali, 
whose footnote on the same verse is not significantly different.
While the Bible needed to be properly understood because of “poison” 
alterations, symbolism, and prophecy, the Qur’an was “without mistake” 
and perfectly pure for Elijah Muhammad. It came directly “from the 
mouth of Allah” (that is, not even mediated by an angel and prophet). 
Elijah Muhammad described the Qur’an as follows:
The book that the so-called American Negroes (The Tribe of Shabazz) 
should own and read, the book that the slavemasters have but have not 
represented it to their slaves, is a book that will heal their sin-sick souls 
that were made sick and sorrowful by the slavemasters.
This book will open their blinded eyes and open their deaf ears. It will 
purify them.
The name of this book, which makes a distinction between the God 
of righteous and the God of evil, is: Glorious Holy Quran Sharrieff. It is 
indeed the Book of Guidance, of Light and Truth, and of Wisdom and 
Judgement.
But the average one should first be taught how to respect such a book, 
how to understand it, and how to teach it.
Furthermore, “to get a real Holy Qur’an one should know the Arabic lan-
guage in which it is written. ”36 He also taught, “The Holy Qur’an will live 
forever. Why? Because it has Truth in it. I will not say it has some Truth 
in it. It has all Truth in it if you understand. ”
37 While most of this rhetoric 
seems in accord with what other Muslims might have said, his references 
to slavery and the Tribe of Shabazz make it clear that the Qur’an’s purpose 
was subsumed under Elijah Muhammad’s primary goal: to free African 
Americans from the religious, social, economic, and political corruption 
of Whites.
38 The Qur’an may not have suffered from the alterations and 
slave teachings found in the Bible, but even it still had to be interpreted 
by Elijah Muhammad—so that it would be understood correctly.
Generally, when Elijah Muhammad cited the Qur’an, his introduc-
tions were normally accompanied by simple paraphrastic commentary. 
For example, “Let us take a look at the opening of the second chap-
ter of the Holy Quran. Here Allah addresses Himself to us as being the 
Best Knower and that we must not entertain any doubts about the pu-
rity of His Book (the Holy Qur’an). ”
39 This was followed by Qur’an 2:2. 
He added, “ Allah Himself speaks in the Holy Quran, not like the Bible


--- PAGE 74 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 63
which mentions ‘Thus says the Lord. ’” 40 One is tempted to think that 
Elijah Muhammad simply was not familiar with passages in which Allah 
is spoken of in the second person or third person. However, in the very 
next paragraph he cited Qur’an 2:285—a passage that addresses Allah in 
the third person.
While the Qur’an was invoked as an authority, it was Elijah Muham-
mad’s racial teachings, especially his race myth and his eschatology, that 
provided the interpretive framework. The supremacy of his racial teach-
ings was evident in the title of his first major publication, The Supreme 
Wisdom. Although he argued for the holiness of the Qur’an and its unique 
suitability for African Americans, it is his own teachings from Fard Mu-
hammad, not those of the Qur’an, that were being called “supreme. ”
41 That 
is not to say that Elijah Muhammad would have seen any conflict between 
the two, as for him even his most controversial doctrine, the incarnation 
of Allah in Fard Muhammad, was ev idenced in the Qur’an. “I realized 
his intention why he was asking me insistingly to read the Koran. I was 
just to know who he was. ”
42 Moreover, his references to Fard Muhammad 
often drew on quranic vocabulary, indicating exactly how Elijah Muham-
mad read Fard Muhammad into the Qur’an. For example, borrowing the 
language of Qur’an 1:2, he wrote, “ All praise is due  to the Great Mahdi, 
who was come and has come, the sole master of the worlds .”
43
The Future Book and the Qur’an
Elijah Muhammad’s Allah never presented his Messenger with his own 
scripture, nor did Elijah Muhammad ever produce a new Qur’an himself, 
as Drew Ali had. He was quite content with the contents of the original—
properly understood, of course. Y et other Muslims found his statements 
about the Qur’an’s eventual replacement quite problematic. In the Supreme 
Wisdom, under the heading of “The Future Holy Book, ” Elijah Muham-
mad wrote,
The Holy Quran, the Glorious Boo k, should be read and studied by us 
(the so-called Negroes). Both the present Bible and the Holy Quran must 
soon give way to that holy book which no man as yet but Allah has seen. 
The teachings (prophecies) of the present Bible and the Quran take us up 
to the resurrection and judgement of this world but not into the next life. 
That which is in that holy book is for the righteous and their future only; 
not for the mixed world of righteous and evil.
44


--- PAGE 75 ---
64 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
Elsewhere, Elijah Muhammad stated that scripture expires every twenty-
five thousand years, at which time Allah, understood as the wise black 
man of Asia, writes a new one for the new era. There seems to be some 
inconsistency here in this teaching, for Elijah Muhammad had elsewhere 
also stated that the Qur’an will expire in some nine thousand years, which 
seems at odds with the statement above that it will “soon give way” to a 
new scripture. A more contemporary replacement of the Qur’an was im-
plied in this statement:
Then He told Me, “I will give you a Holy Qur’an when you learn how to 
read Arabic. I made it Myself. ” He showed Me that Holy Qur’an in Arabic 
on September last but I couldn’t read it. I could only recognize one letter 
in it, so I expect Him within a year to come back with the same Book. A 
Man given a job as I have been given can’t take the material things of this 
world to bring in as a foundation for another world. The things in books 
that I have read will not do for us to build a New World out of. We have 
to have New Teachings.
45
When asked specifically when this new book would appear and who 
would author it, Elijah Muhammad responded, “Well what’s in the book 
is not yet revealed. But this same Man, Master Fard Muhammad, is the 
very same One that this book will come from. And He said that He has 
already wrote the book, but He’s not ready to give it to the world. ”
46 Elijah 
Muhammad refused to speak more of it and knew none of its contents, 
for it was the scripture of the future, “the other side. ” No claims that this 
new holy book—this new Qur’an—has been revealed were made by Elijah 
Muhammad or by his followers even after his death in 1975. Clearly, the 
current Qur’an’s authority was not eternal, despite the claim that it would 
“live forever. ”
Elijah Muhammad’s Knowledge of the Qur’an
If the Qur’an is to be replaced one day and is referenced in the writings 
and speeches of Elijah Muhammad so much less than the Bible, why did 
he use it at all? Obviously, Fard Muhammad taught from the Qur’an, and 
Fard Muhammad gave Elijah Muhammad several Qur’ans in 1934: “He 
gave Me a Holy Qur’an in Arabic but I couldn’t read it so He got Me one 
in Arabic and English by Muhammad Ali of Pakistan. Later He found one 
by Yusuf Ali of Egypt and He brought Me that one. ”
47 Even in his earliest


--- PAGE 76 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 65
publications in 1934, Elijah Muhammad quoted the Qur’an. 48 To remain 
true to his belief that Fard Muhammad was Allah, Elijah Muhammad 
needed to give a central role to the Qur’an. Furthermore, Elijah Muham-
mad considered himself a genuine and devout Muslim,
49 and the scripture 
of Islam was the Qur’an. Once, when asked what credentials he had from 
Allah, Elijah Muhammad simply replied, the “Holy Quran. ”
50
Just as it is inaccurate to assume that the Qur’an was somehow pe-
ripheral to Elijah Muhammad, it is similarly incorrect to assume that his 
understanding of the scripture was static. If one examines his use of the 
Qur’an over time, it is obvious that his familiarity with the text and his 
willingness to invoke it as an authority changed with time. Three things, 
however, did not change. First, Elijah Muhammad relied entirely on Eng-
lish translations when reading the Qur’an. Second, the Qur’an was inter-
preted through the mythology provided by Fard Muhammad. Third, Eli-
jah Muhammad’s authority to interpret the Qur’an in whatever way he 
saw fit came from his status as the Messenger of Allah.
The core of Elijah Muhammad’s teachings can be found in his Supreme 
Wisdom: Solution to the So-called Negroes’ Problem; The Supreme Wisdom: 
Volume Two; and Message to the Blackman in America . The Supreme Wis-
dom is a 56-page booklet containing the essence of Elijah Muhammad’s 
earliest teachings. It was published in 1957 but consists in large part of 
material drawn from the “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” columns of 1956 in 
The Pittsburgh Courier . As the movement expanded rapidly in the 1960s, 
a less “poorly written and poorly organized”
51 summary of Elijah Mu-
hammad’s message was required. The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two and 
Message to the Blackman in America  seem to have met that need. 52 These 
works do not represent the complete written works of Elijah Muhammad. 
There were weekly columns in a series of different African American 
newspapers: for several years (1956–summer 1959) Elijah Muhammad had 
a weekly column in the Pittsburgh Courier, then in the Los Angeles Herald-
Dispatch (1959–May 1960), and finally in the Nation of Islam’s own paper, 
Muhammad Speaks. There were also several earlier short-lived newspa-
pers published by the Nation of Islam, such as the 1934 Final Call to Islam.
Elijah Muhammad also compiled or “wrote” several other books, includ-
ing How to Eat to Live (1968), for which see chapter 4; How to Eat to Live, 
Book No. 2 (1973); The Fall of America (1973), for which see chapter 4; and 
Our Saviour Has Arrived (1974). Other texts were posthumously compiled 
from columns and speeches. Many, however, were published relatively late 
and were composed of speeches, columns, and articles from as far back


--- PAGE 77 ---
66 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
as 1959 and from recycled parts of Message to the Blackman in America .
While none of these three books examined here focused exclusively on 
the Qur’an, together they supply chronological “snapshots” that highlight 
major developments in Elijah Muhammad’s approach to, and the growing 
familiarity of himself and his followers with, the Qur’an.
The Supreme Wisdom
The Supreme Wisdom: Solution to the So-called Negroes’ Problem  was 
Elijah Muhammad’s first major publication. Its fifty-six pages consist of 
a series of 150 independent pericopes, ranging in length from a few sen-
tences to several short paragraphs. Many may represent the teachings of 
Fard Muhammad as Elijah Muhammad remembered them. Passages on 
similar topics such as Allah, Christianity, eating pork, the hereafter, and 
prayer are grouped together, but not consistently.
Many of the quranic references in this book do not involve citations, 
but simply the use of quranic phraseology. For example, statements such 
as “I have the truth from the All-wise One, Allah, to Whom praise is 
due” and “ Anyone who desires to accept Islam . . . must pledge to serve 
and obey Allah and his Apostle”
53 ensured that when his followers read 
the Qur’an for themselves, they would read the ubiquitous phrase “obey 
Allah and his Messenger” as a reference to Fard Muhammad and Elijah 
Muhammad.
Sometimes quranic passages were cited verbatim and appeared with 
little or no explanation. For example, in the passage entitled “Holy Quran 
on the Hereafter, ” Elijah Muhammad wrote,
The Holy Quran Sharrieff and the Bible are filled with readings on the 
Hereafter. Here I shall quote only these beautiful verses from the Holy 
Quran (89:27-30): “O soul that is at rest, return to your Lord, well-pleased 
with Him, well-pleasing; So enter among My servants and enter into My 
Paradise. ”
54
Similarly, in the passage “ISLAM—The Perfect Religion, ” he wrote, “ Al-
lah says of Islam in the Holy Qur’an, ‘This day I have perfected for you a 
religion; completed my favor on you and chose for you Islam as a religion’ 
(Chapter 5:3). ”
55 Both seem innocuous. However, the former appears after 
several pericopes in which Elijah Muhammad argued that the hereafter is


--- PAGE 78 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 67
in the here and now, on earth and not a future spiritual existence. 56 The 
latter appears after a description of Islam as the original religion of all 
black humankind and as the religion of the tribe of Shabazz. Thus, the 
Qur’an is not speaking for itself but is instead speaking out of a particu-
lar context constructed by Elijah Muhammad. This technique makes the 
Qur’an appear to support his teachings.
57
A few explicit explanations are also provided for some of the quranic 
verses adduced by Elijah Muhammad. For example, he wrote,
“He it is who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the True religion 
that he make it overcome the religions, all of them, though the polythe-
ists may be averse. ” (The Holy Quran, 61:9)
In the above verse Allah (God) in the last days of this present world 
(of wicked infidels) states that He must destroy false religions with the 
True Religion Islam. It (Islam) must overcome all other religions.
58
Thus, according to Elijah Muhammad, the Qur’an, like the Bible, is a 
book of prophecy; its pages are full of allusions to the modern world. The 
Qur’an’s words are not so much addressed to seventh-century Arabs or 
even to the whole of humankind, but to African Americans. The Allah of 
the above verse is Fard Muhammad, and His Apostle is Elijah Muham-
mad. The latter is stated directly when “His Last Apostle” is given the par-
enthetical gloss “an Apostle whom Allah would raise from the lost and 
found people of the seed of Abraham in the Days of Judgement. ”
59 By also 
interpreting passages mentioning the Day of Judgment and Satan in the 
Qur’an as references to the present and to the white race, respectively, Eli-
jah Muhammad was able to bring much of the Qur’an into his mythologi-
cal framework.
60 And, since his followers would have virtually no famil-
iarity with a more traditional interpretation of the Qur’an, they too would 
have read the Qur’an through this framework. The observations that only 
a few quranic passages are cited, that they are treated in isolation, and 
that relevant verses from other parts of the Qur’an are not presented sug-
gest that Elijah Muhammad was not very familiar with the text. His use 
of quranic language, his citation of isolated quranic passages in the midst 
of other passages, and his proclivity to read quranic passages as prophecy 
suggest that his purpose was not so much to explain the Qur’an as to lend 
legitimacy through reference to it in his mythology of the origin of the 
races and the coming eschaton.


--- PAGE 79 ---
68 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two
The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two is also composed of short passages 
varying in length from a few sentences to a few short paragraphs, but is 
organized into twenty-two chapters. Virtually every pericope in the first 
Supreme Wisdom appears in some form in this revised edition.
61 Even a 
cursory examination of the new material indicates that the Qur’an contin-
ued to play only a small role in the teachings of Elijah Muhammad. Note-
worthy, however, is the increased use of “I say” instead of “ Allah says. ” 
Although the second volume is roughly twice the size of volume 1, only 
twelve new citations from the Qur’an are adduced. The Qur’an may be 
directly “from the mouth of Allah” for Elijah Muhammad, but he had an-
other source for divine words. He stated in his foreword,
Y ou perhaps wonder why we call this little book “The Supreme Wisdom. ” 
It is because most every word of it is from the Lord of the worlds, “THE 
SUPREME BEING, ” especially where you read of the History of the Cau-
casian Race; the History of the Black Nation and Prophets; the Doom of 
America—how she will be destroyed; the Hereafter; the Future of the so-
called Negroes—“Tribe of Shabazz;” what happened 66 trillion years ago, 
50,000 years ago and 6,000 years ago. All of the answers are directly from 
the mouth of Allah (God) in the Person of Master W . F . Muhammad, to 
Whom all praise is due, the Great Mahdi or Messiah, as the Christians 
say, and He is also the Son of Man.
62
Even though Fard Muhammad had “disappeared” over two decades earlier, 
Elijah Muhammad stated that Allah continued to reveal His truth to him.
In The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, quranic verses are cited with 
little or no explanation less frequently than in volume 1. Only in the pas-
sage entitled “The Holy Quran on Prayer” are quranic verses cited with-
out comment.
63 That is to say, the use of tacit explanation provided by the 
context of surrounding pericopes was dropped in this publication. More 
commonly, when a quranic verse was cited, Elijah Muhammad expressly 
demonstrated its relevance to his followers. For example, he explained,
The Holy Quran warns us against mixing the Truth with Falsehood. “ And 
mix not up the Truth with Falsehood, nor hide the Truth while you know .”  
(Chapter 2:42) But mixing up the Truth with falsehood is the policy of 
the devils, and nearly all the religious leaders of Christianity are guilty of


--- PAGE 80 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 69
it—because they don’t know which is truth and which is falsehood. The 
devils are really confused, thinking and planning against the truth and 
trying to hide falsehood.
64
The following example shows that Elijah Muhammad continued to read 
the Qur’an as a book of prophecy:
We are today being brought face to face with Allah (God) for a show-
down between Him and that which we have served as God beside Him. 
The lost and found members of the Asiatic nation are especially warned 
in the 112th Chapter of the Holy Quran against the worship of any God 
other than Allah, for it is Allah, in person who has found them among 
the worshippers of gods other than himself.
65
Obviously, he simply equated the quranic reference to “ Allah” with Fard 
Muhammad.66 These two passages illustrate well the development in Eli-
jah Muhammad’s basic approach to explicating the Qur’an. Normally, he 
reproduced the quranic passage and then paraphrased it. In so doing he 
identified key words in such a manner as to link the passage with his my-
thology or his perception of contemporary events.
Message to the Blackman in America
Message to the Blackman in America , first published in 1965, is quite 
different from the previous two publications. The passages are more orga-
nized and the thirteen chapters more coherent. Each chapter is still com-
posed of a number of passages, most of which are now several pages long 
and commonly begin with a quranic or biblical quotation offset under the 
title. However, for the most part, scriptural citations continue to be sub-
sumed under the mythology and/or applied directly to current events. For 
example, under “Islam, the True Religion of God, Part I” Elijah Muham-
mad writes,
“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the true religion, that he 
make it overcome the religions—all of them, though the polytheists may be 
averse. ” According to the Holy Qur-an 6:19 [sic] (the right Scripture for 
the Time).
In the above verse Allah (God) in the last days of this present world 
(wicked and infidel) states that he must destroy false religions with the


--- PAGE 81 ---
70 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
t r u e  r e l i g i o n  ( I s l a m ) ....  S e a r c h  t h e  S c r i p t u r e s  o f  t h e  B i b l e  a n d  t h e  H o l y  
Qur-an and be convinced. There are two other religions today that op-
pose the religion of peace (Islam) namely, Buddhism and Christianity. 
These two opposing forces will be removed from the people completely 
by the light of Islam, Truth, guided by Allah in the person of the Great 
Mahdi, Fard Muhammad. I am His Apostle. It will come to pass that you 
will not even find a trace of them.
67
Obviously, this passage is an expanded version of the one cited earlier 
from The Supreme Wisdom.68 Although Elijah Muhammad provided more 
detailed explanations, he did not alter his main exegetical techniques or 
framework. They still dominate in Message to the Blackman in America .
Some of this was due to habit, and some no doubt to the fact that this 
book was also in part a compilation of earlier materials.
69 However, some 
new developments in Elijah Muhammad’s approach to the Qur’an are 
evident.
A greater familiarity with and dependence on the Qur’an is attested to 
by the over two hundred quranic references in Message to the Blackman 
in America. The chapters on “Islam, ” “The Devil, ” “Prayer Service, ” “Hypo-
crites, Disbelievers, and Obedience, ” and “The Judgement” received the 
lion’s share. This is not surprising because the Qur’an contains much on 
these themes, even if most Muslims understand them somewhat differ-
ently than Elijah Muhammad did. The chapters on “ Allah Is God, ” “Origi-
nal Man, ” and “The Bible and the Holy Qur-an” also quote a number of 
quranic passages. Not surprisingly, chapters on “Program and Position, ” 
“Economic Program, ” “Persecution of the Righteous, ” “Land of Our Own, ” 
and “ Answer to Critics” have very few, if any.
Elijah Muhammad’s knowledge of the Qur’an developed over the 
forty-five years that he led the Nation of Islam. He began his career as 
the Messenger without a significant knowledge of its contents—though 
he was already citing it in articles as early as 1934. The 1956 newspa-
per report that his “knowledge of the Koran is of staggering propor-
tions”
70 seems somewhat hyperbolic. Over the years, his familiarity 
with the Qur’an increased—though he may never have memorized very 
much of it. This assertion is based on the published transcriptions of his 
speeches. His columns are replete with quranic quotations and so seem 
to have been written with a Qur’an in front of him; his speeches, in con-
trast, are often devoid of quranic references.
71 As we have seen, in his


--- PAGE 82 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 71
writings he began by simply citing quranic passages to support his po-
sitions, allowing context to convey meaning. Later, he became increas-
ingly explicit with his explanations, relying primarily on paraphrase 
and gloss. Despite an increased familiarity with the Qur’an and a slight 
shift in exegetical methods, there was virtually no development in the 
framework within which the Qur’an was interpreted. His reading of the 
Qur’an was always subsumed under hi s race and eschatological myths. 
Elijah Muhammad did not cite or deal with quranic passages that might 
seem to contradict him. For example, Qur’an 5:82, which contains the 
phrase “Y ou will surely find those closest in friendship to those who be-
lieve to be those who say ‘We are Christians, ’” was never discussed by 
Elijah Muhammad. Comparison with his exegesis of the Bible reveals 
that Elijah Muhammad probably only knew how to read scripture in 
one way. For him scripture either recorded in symbolic form the events 
of the past or contained prophecies about the most critical event in hu-
man history—the immanent destruction of the white world. It was the 
task of the interpreter, the Messenger of Allah, to discover and tease out 
these “historical” references to, or the relevant messages for, contempo-
rary African Americans.
The Authority of the Qur’ an
But was the Qur’an necessary for Elijah Muhammad? It had not been for 
Drew Ali; only the name was. Even apart from his personal convictions 
about the Qur’an because of Fard Muhammad’s commitment to it, Elijah 
Muhammad had good reason to invoke the Qur’an. It was a non-Chris-
tian scripture that his Christian re ligious competition could not invoke, 
and so it left him with a remarkably independent and unique message. It 
was also the source of unique and non-Christian rituals. And, its moral 
teachings were remarkably appropriate for addressing the social ills af-
fecting his followers. However, just as important, the Qur’an already came 
with a presumed religious “authority, ” and Elijah Muhammad could make 
that authority his.
That the Qur’an was not an absolute authority for Elijah Muhammad, 
however, was made clear by the mid-1960s, when the teachings of Elijah 
Muhammad became far more well-known outside the Nation of Islam. 
Not surprisingly, “orthodox” Muslims had begun to criticize those teach-
ings. Of these “orthodox Muslims” Elijah Muhammad stated, “Though


--- PAGE 83 ---
72 Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an
they do have the Holy Quran, many of them do not understand the 
meaning of it, and some of them believe everything that is prophesied in 
the Bible and the Holy Quran about a last Messenger or Prophet being or 
referring to Muhammad of 1,400 years ago. ”
72 Then he turned the Qur’an 
against these Muslims, arguing that each community’s Messenger must 
speak the language of that community. In fact “I give thee an Arabic Holy 
Qur’an that I may warn the Mother city” meant for Elijah Muhammad 
that Muhammad the Prophet had “received two books. One in a foreign 
language to Arabs and another in the original language [Arabic, presum-
ably]. Both called Holy Qur-an. ”
73 Such arguments were unlikely to per-
suade his Muslim critics. Elijah Muhammad could not compete against 
these Muslims, whose knowledge of the Qur’an and its traditional exege-
sis far exceeded his.
This fact may have spurred him to revive the doctrine of the fu-
ture book despite its failure to appear. Elijah Muhammad claimed that 
“[t]hough the Holy Qur’an is without doubt a true book, but it only takes 
us up to the resurrection of the dead not beyond. It does not give you 
real knowledge of Allah and the Devil because it refers to the coming of 
Allah as the Bible refers to the coming of Allah. ”
74 I n  t h i s  o b v i o u s  r e f e r -
ence to the future holy book, Elijah Muhammad made a slightly different 
claim than he had in earlier discussions of this book. The future book 
was now being invoked to undercut the authority of the Qur’an, since it 
no longer contained “all Truth. ” Also, those who would have appeared to 
have a greater claim to understanding the Qur’an’s Arabic content were 
being told they had misunderstood it. In essence, Elijah Muhammad was 
proclaiming that he, and not the Qur’an, had the final word. After all, he 
received his authority and knowledge directly from Allah. As early as 1957 
he stated, “I do not make mistakes in what I write pertaining to these two 
races...  I  h a v e  t h e  t r u t h  f r o m  t h e  A l l - w i s e  O n e  ( A l l ah), to Whom all 
praise is due. ”
75
Concurrent with increasing opposition from other Muslims to his for-
mulation of Islam and understanding of the Qur’an was Elijah Muham-
mad’s waning interest in other Muslims’ interpretations. Acceptance of 
members of the Nation of Islam as legitimate Muslims may have been 
necessary from white Americans because he required the freedom from 
harassment that being a legitimate re ligious movement would guarantee. 
The goal, therefore, was to be Islamic, but never “orthodox. ” By the early 
1970s Elijah Muhammad felt no need to be accepted by other Muslims—
he could simply dismiss them as deceived.
76


--- PAGE 84 ---
Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’ an 73
Although he could abandon other, non–Nation of Islam Muslims, he 
never abandoned the Qur’an. Drew Ali, having produced his own scrip-
ture, needed merely the name to claim prophetic authority. Elijah Mu-
hammad needed much more. His attachment to the Qur’an was rooted in 
his devotion to his Allah and his Islam. Moreover, for Elijah Muhammad 
the Qur’an was essential for the claim to “Islamic” legitimacy and author-
ity, and for its independence from Christianity, which was seen as the re-
ligion of the “devil white race. ” Y et none of these requirements dictated 
that Elijah Muhammad be bound by the traditional interpretations of the 
Qur’an.


--- PAGE 85 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 86 ---
75
4
The Major “Islamic” 
Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s 
Quranic Commentary
Since the Qur’an is thought by most Muslims to be the speech 
of Allah in the form of a book (a belief that closely parallels Christian 
theology based on John 1:1-14, which sees Jesus as the Word of God in the 
form of a person), the Qur’an is the primary source of all Islamic beliefs, 
practices, and laws. So, were one to question the validity of any of Elijah 
Muhammad’s teachings as Islamic, one would probably do so by contrast-
ing them with the teachings of the Qur’an. This, however, would be sur-
prisingly difficult to do, because the Qur’an was his scripture too, and he 
found support for many of his teachings within it. For over forty years 
Elijah Muhammad interpreted the Qur’an for his followers. He could be 
viewed, therefore, as the first and only major African American mufas-
sir—quranic exegete.
1
Elijah Muhammad produced no systematic tafsīr, or commentary on 
the Qur’an, and none of Elijah Muhammad’s writings even takes the form 
of traditional commentaries. Obviously, Elijah Muhammad with his odd 
doctrines felt no need to rely on traditional tafsīr bi-l-ma’thūr (transmitted 
exegesis) to understand the Qur’an. He was completely unfamiliar with 
the vast tafsīr literature produced over the fourteen centuries of Islam. 
Elijah Muhammad was well aware of the critiques by other Muslims of 
his teachings, but still felt no compulsion to defer to their interpretations; 
his interpretations came from Allah himself, and because he was Allah’s 
Messenger, those interpretations were beyond question. So, he was not a 
mufassir in the traditional sense despite the aforementioned forty years of 
reading and interpreting the Qur’an.
The way Elijah Muhammad adapted the Qur’an to the twentieth-cen-
tury African American milieu is evident in some of his most important


--- PAGE 87 ---
76 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
“Islamic” teachings. Oddly, for some of his teachings that seem to lend 
themselves to drawing on material from the Qur’an, such as his teach-
ings about Allah, creation, other prophets, the protection of women, and 
fasting, Elijah Muhammad felt no need to avail himself of the scripture. 
However, for discussions of his race myth about Y akub, his eschatology 
about the Fall of America, his regulations on diet, his polemics against 
hypocrites, and his description of prayer, he often does. These ten major 
themes within his formulation of Islam provide a good overview of the 
concerns of Elijah Muhammad and his exegetical techniques, that is, when 
he chooses to use any.
2 With this background the question of whether Eli-
jah Muhammad can be considered a real mufassir can be addressed.
The Theology of Allah(s)
There are two major ways in which Elijah Muhammad’s conception of Al-
lah differs from a more “orthodox” Muslim interpretation. First, he iden-
tifies Fard Muhammad with Allah. Since the Qur’an identifies a mushrik
(one “who associates” things or persons with Allah) as the antithesis of 
a Muslim, it is not surprising that Elijah Muhammad does not use the 
Qur’an to justify his conception. This does not prevent him from assum-
ing, however, that most quranic references to Allah are to Fard Muham-
mad. Second, he seems to ignore the doctrine that Allah is one. That is to 
say, Elijah Muhammad is not a strict monotheist:
There were more Gods than One god. We are just now coming into 
the One God. The One God is Present to Change the world into a new 
w o r l d...  a  w o r l d  o f  H i s  C h oice and of His Making. But, between This 
God there were many other gods, from the Creation until today. Each 
God had a limited time to rule. The time of rule of Y akub’s made man 
(white man) was limited to 6,000 years. But, before this one[,] God 
had 25,000–35,000 years to rule. Then, His Wisdom was replaced by 
another God. All of these Gods who rule from 25,000–35,000 years, 
were Black People. Do not get the idea that they were gods of different 
colors, as we never had any colored gods until the Black god Y akub 
made a colored god.
3
His willingness to admit that even Y akub was a god, who made a “colored 
god, ” indicates that Elijah Muhammad does not conceive of gods as nec-
essarily omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent, and eternal.


--- PAGE 88 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 77
One of the functions of these gods is to create scripture. In the Lost-
Found Lesson 2 , which is ascribed to Fard Muhammad but the bulk of 
which consists of Elijah Muhammad’s answers to Fard Muhammad’s ques-
tions, the origin of scriptures is addressed:
1. Who made the Holy Koran or Bible? How long ago? Will you tell us 
why does Islam re-new her history every twenty-five thousand years?
Ans.—The Holy Koran or Bible is made by the original people, who is 
Allah, the supreme being, or (black man) of Asia; the Koran will expire 
in the year twenty-five thousand. Nine thousand and eight years from 
the date of this writing [sic] the Nation of Islam is all wise and does ev-
erything right and exact. The planet Earth, which is the home of Islam 
and is approximately twenty-five thousand miles in circumference, so the 
wise man of the East (black man) makes history or [the] Koran, to equal 
his home[’s] circumference, [that is,] a year to every mile and thus every 
time his history lasts twenty-five thousand years, he re-news it for an-
other twenty-five thousand years.
4
Elijah Muhammad’s belief in a future book provided by Fard Muhammad 
may be linked to this belief—though it does not fit the 25,000-year frame-
work (even if one accepts his belief that the Qur’an is some fifteen thou-
sand years old, that is, written eighty-four hundred years before Y akub 
began his eugenics program).
5
The god in the person of Fard Muhammad had a unique function. He 
was to serve as a savior of his people. “Before we ever suffered ourselves, 
Master W . Fard Muhammad, our God and Savior, the Great Mahdi, Al-
mighty God Allah in Person, Himself suffered persecution and rejection. 
All for you and for me!”
6 The notion of “suffering” and “persecution” is 
reminiscent of Christianity’s god in the person of Jesus. However, Elijah 
Muhammad added that the Savior was not sent for the Jews, nor was he 
sent to save African Americans from sin in the Christian sense: “ A Sav-
ior has come to save you from sin, not because you are by nature a sin-
ner but because you have followed a sinner. Y ou have been taught by a 
sinner. ”
7 His desire to make this distinction from Christianity was made 
easier through his adoption of the Islamic term “mahdi, ” which refers to 
a messianic figure in Shi‘i Islam and in Sunni Islam (though the Mahdi is 
less accepted and less important in the latter).
Despite this more Islamic term, finding quranic support is problem-
atic. Elijah Muhammad wrote with regard to the many titles of Fard


--- PAGE 89 ---
78 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Muhammad, “These meanings are good and befitting as titles, but the 
meaning of his name ‘Mahdi, ’ as mentioned in the Holy Qur-an Sharrieff  
22:54, is better. All of these names refer to Him. His name, Fard Muham-
mad, is beautiful in its meaning. He must bring an end to war, and the 
only way to end war between man and man is to destroy the war-maker 
(the trouble-maker). ”
8 Oddly, neither Yusuf Ali nor Muhammad Ali, 
the translators of the Qur’ans employed by Elijah Muhammad, identify 
Qur’an 22:54 with the Mahdi. The verse contains the expression, “ Allah is 
the Guide” (“hādi” ), which is etymologically related to “ mahdi, ” but not 
identical to it. Therefore, it is unclear how Elijah Muhammad came to as-
sociate this verse with the Mahdi. However, because of the identification 
of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad as the Mahdi, an Ahmadiyya connection seems 
likely.
The Heavens and the Earth
Another role assigned to Allah in the Qur’an is that of creator. Elijah 
Muhammad does not have a creation story, but states that the earth as 
we know it is sixty-six trillion years old and was formed when God, fail-
ing to unite the people in one language as he wanted, decided to destroy 
the planet by blasting it in two. The Asiatic black tribe of Shabazz sur-
vived the division of the planet into earth and moon and settled in the 
Nile Valley and Mecca. Africa is, for Elijah Muhammad, East Asia.
9 He 
explained,
His idea was to force his rule upon the people of our planet and force all 
to speak the same dialect, which He was not able to do. Then he decided 
to destroy all, including the earth and Himself. He went to work by at-
tempting to drill a tube into the earth’s surface. It must have reached ap-
proximately the center of the earth. Then He filled it with high explosives 
which we call dynamite. However, it was 30 per cent more powerful than 
the present dynamite. Then He set it off. This explosion blasted away a 
piece of our then-earth, which according to the moon’s diameter is ap-
proximately 2,160 miles, or about 1/3 the size of our planet earth.
10
This moon turned and emptied its water onto the remaining earth and as 
a result, was unable to sustain life. Elijah Muhammad found this lack of 
water significant and claimed that dry riverbeds would be found on the


--- PAGE 90 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 79
moon. Furthermore, the moon’s separation from the earth and its current 
lifelessness symbolized the history of  African Americans, and its age of 
sixty-six trillion years symbolized the 6,600-year existence of the white 
race.
11
This revived interest in the moon in Elijah Muhammad’s writings 
of the late 1960s and early 1970s was sparked by man’s (i.e., “the white 
man’s”) landing on the moon. This ability reflected not their power, but 
Allah’s, who gave them the power.
12 Prior to the moon landing, however, 
Elijah Muhammad had suggested, following Qur’an 72:8, that the heavens 
are protected by guards and flames (meaning, for him, meteors). The lack 
of water and oxygen, and particularly the moon’s magnetic power, would 
kill the unshielded astronauts.
13
Fard Muhammad seems to have had a significant interest in astronomy, 
or at least the solar system (or perhaps just the “heavens”). While this is 
not a particularly prominent feature in the teachings of either man, Fard 
Muhammad taught Elijah Muhammad that, though the moon is lifeless, 
Mars is not.
Allah (God) Could Prevent the white man from seeing a creature of 
Mars. Allah (God) Talks with the Martians, for He Knows their language. 
I would like to see one of those people myself as Allah (God) Taught me 
what they look like. But that is up to Allah (God) whether or not he will 
let me see one. Allah (God) May Let me see one.
These people on Mars live to the age of twelve hundred years. 14 Elsewhere 
he warned,
Allah (God) taught me that the Original Black Man has pictures of the 
people on Mars and even has extracted their language and now under-
stands how to communicate with them in their own language. This, the 
white man would like to learn: if this is true or not, by his exploration of 
space and the planets. I am sorry, Mr. White Man, these are secrets that 
you are not permitted to learn. Y ou may be able to send a camera over 
the planets, but I advise you to stay away from them.
15
Once again, given the Qur’an’s focus on the heavens as signs of Allah’s 
power and goodness, Elijah Muhammad’s failure to cite the Qur’an in this 
context seems odd.


--- PAGE 91 ---
80 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Prophets and Prophethood
The same is true for Islamic prophets, who are mentioned ubiquitously 
in the Qur’an. This neglect is particularly evident in Elijah Muhammad’s 
elaborate reinterpretation of the life of Jesus. Mary became pregnant 
by Joseph out of wedlock—though they were engaged. Joseph was only 
willing to claim the child after he was told that his son would turn out 
be a prophet one day. After the birth of the child, Mary fled on a camel 
to Egypt to protect herself (as an unwed mother) and Jesus from Jews. 
Among the “black people” of Egypt, he was safe. There, he was told by 
an old prophet that he would be the last of the prophets to the Jews. 
After completing his schooling with the old prophet, Jesus returned to 
the land of the Jews—making no attempt to teach the Arabs and Blacks 
of Egypt or Africa, for he was never meant to be their prophet. After 
twenty-two years, Jesus learned that these “infidels” could not be re-
formed, and opted to sacrifice his life for Islam. After an altercation 
with a Jew in front of his store, Jesus was arrested. The reward for Jesus 
was fifteen hundred dollars if brought in alive and twenty-five hundred 
dollars in gold if brought in dead. So, the officer suggested to Jesus 
that, since he was planning to give himself up to be killed anyway, Je-
sus allow him to kill him painlessly with a knife. Jesus agreed. So the 
officer took Jesus to a deserted store (boarded up to protect the glass 
windows from stone-throwing boys). There, with his arms stretched out 
against the wall, and therefore in the shape of a cross, he was stabbed 
in the back through the heart. Jesus died instantly and pinned in that 
position until the authorities came. Jesus was embalmed and buried in 
Jerusalem.
No Christian is allowed to see the body, unless they pay a price of $6,000 
and must get a certificate from the Pope of Rome. The tomb is guarded 
by Muslims. When Christians are allowed to see Jesus’ body, they are 
stripped of their weapons, handcuffed behind their backs, and well-armed 
Muslim guards take them into the tomb. But, Muslims can go to see his 
body at any time without charge.
The source of this myth and its fairly elaborate details is unknown, but it 
clearly does not draw from material on Jesus in the Qur’an. Elijah Mu-
hammad was aware of the Ahmadiyya claim that Jesus died in Kashmir, 
but he dismissed it.
16


--- PAGE 92 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 81
Elijah Muhammad wrote that Fard Muhammad had taught him that 
it was Nimrod who was born on December 25, not Jesus, who had been 
born during the first or second week of September. Nimrod was born as 
an opponent to Moses’ teachings. Thus the teachings of Moses lasted not 
two thousand years but only seventeen hundred, for they were cut short 
by the three hundred years of Nimrod’s teachings. Nimrod was an “evil, 
devil man. ”
17
Very little is said about Muhammad and Moses. Moses attempted to 
civilize the white devils in Europe two thousand years after their creation. 
The prophet Jesus came to the Jews (i.e., those who had earlier followed 
Moses) only to have his message misinterpreted by the white race for its 
own purposes. He was followed by the prophet Muhammad, who helped 
keep the white Christians in check for a thousand years.
The only other messenger to receive attention is Elijah Muhammad. 
Not only had he been instructed face-to-face by Allah but Elijah Muham-
mad also continued to receive instructions from Fard Muhammad. In 
1972 he described these communications:
I do not say really visions, but I do have voices at times. . . . That comes 
when I am not, say, really confining myself to expect something like that 
or seeking something like that. That just comes—just so. . . . I know God. 
I was with Him about three years and about four or five months. I know 
His voice. And when He Speaks, I know it. . . . It is the Same Voice. In 
the past and at the present, I have not had to go into such things as fast-
ing and praying that I hear Him or see Him. Whenever I hear him, it is 
just so. Just like something happens all of a sudden out of a blue sky, like 
t h u n d e r ....  W h e n e v e r  t h e  t i m e  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t h a t  H e  S p e a k  t o  m e .  H o w  
often that takes place? I do not keep a record of it. . . . I have had Him 
Speaking to me in my ears now, in Person yes. There does not pass a year, 
that I do not Hear His Voice some time in that year.
18
That Elijah Muhammad was not merely claiming divine inspiration for 
his own ideas is made clear by his occasional willingness to admit that he 
had not received some knowledge from Allah. For example, with respect 
to the dietary habits of Martians, he said, “I do not know what they eat of 
their planet life, as Allah (God) did not Teach me what they eat. And I did 
not ask Him in the first place. ”
19 Likewise, he did not know exactly when 
the Fall of America would take place or when the future book would be 
revealed. Thus, not only did he distinguish between his ideas and those he


--- PAGE 93 ---
82 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
believed to come from Allah, but he also did not always get the informa-
tion he wished to receive from Allah.
Elijah Muhammad also did not comment on the founders of other ma-
jor religions. He did, however, occasionally comment on other religions:
The true religion of Allah and His Prophets Noah, Abraham, Moses and 
Jesus was Islam, and it is to overcome all religions. “ He (Allah) it is, who 
sent His Apostle with the guidance and the true religion, that he may make 
it overcome all other religions, though the Polytheists may be averse”—THE
HOLY QURAN 61:9. That is why the white race and the Indian Hindus 
have always been and are now enemies of Islam and Muslims.
20
In The Supreme Wisdom , Elijah Muhammad also comments on Bud-
dhism. In the pericope entitled “Christianity, Budhism [sic], and Islam, ” 
he stated, “What a difference there is between the three religions! The 
first teaches that there are three Gods, not one. It also requires worship of 
Mary, the mother of Jesus, and of the desciples [sic] of Jesus. The second, 
Buddhism, requires belief in ‘re-carnation, ’ [sic] and contains many igno-
rant practices. ”
21
Women
Generally, when Elijah Muhammad addressed issues related to women, 
he did so by telling men how they should protect and control their wives 
and daughters. Men were told, “The woman is the man’s field to produce 
his nation. If he does not keep the enemy out of his field, he won’t pro-
duce a good nation. ” This may be a reference to Qur’an 2:223 (“Y our wives 
are a tilth for you”). It is one of the very few allusions Elijah Muhammad 
makes to scripture on the subject.
His views on the nature and role of women were explicitly patriarchal, 
with a strong emphasis on men controlling women. He generally ad-
dressed men, not women:
Our women are allowed to walk or ride the streets all night long, with 
any strange men they desire. They are allowed to frequent any tavern or 
dance hall that they like, whenever they like. They are allowed to fill our 
homes with children other than our own. Children that are often fathered 
b y  t h e  v e r y  d e v i l  h i m s e l f ....  I s l a m  w i l l  n o t  o n l y  e l e v a t e  y o u r  w o m e n


--- PAGE 94 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 83
but will also give you the power to control and protect them. . . . Stop 
our women from trying to look like them [that is, the white race]. By 
bleaching, powdering, ironing and coloring their hair; painting their lips, 
cheeks and eyebrows; wearing shorts; going half-nude in public places; 
going swimming with them and lying on beaches with men. Have private 
pools for your women and guard them from all men. Stop them from go-
ing into bars and taverns and sitting and drinking with men and strang-
ers. Stop them from sitting in those places with anyone. Stop them from 
using unclean language in public (and at home), from smoking and drug 
addiction habits.
22
When he did address women directly, it was on a limited number of sub-
jects. These included prohibiting the marriage of his female followers to 
“foreigners”—defined in such a way as to include Muslims who were not 
part of the Nation of Islam. He also mandated the robes and head gear 
that he had designed; African tribal styles were forbidden. Failure to fol-
low these instructions meant a woman was no longer his follower.
23
The most oft-repeated directive for women was the practice of modesty. 
For several years, Muhammad Speaks included a short column with two 
drawings: the first was a white woman standing beside her daughter and 
the second a black woman and her daughter. All four are in miniskirts 
whose hemline is just above the knee. Although the captions changed, 
most commonly “The Shyless” and “The Disgrace” appeared over each, 
respectively. In between was Qur’an 7:27, which warns the “children of 
Adam” not to let the “arch deceiver” seduce them as he had seduced their 
parents (presumably, Adam and Eve) and then pulled off their clothes. 
Elijah Muhammad explained that Y akub did this to the black people who 
followed him from Arabia.
24 For him, miniskirts were Y akub’s white race’s 
efforts to strip black people naked once again. Elsewhere, he accused black 
women of being “half-nude” and “like wild game in the jungle” when they 
wore dresses that came above the knee. Elijah Muhammad urged women 
to wear dresses that came below the knee, and better yet, halfway down 
the calf of the leg, for “the woman who is modestly dressed, always looks 
better to a man. ”
25 Qur’an 24:31—“ And say to the believing women that 
they lower their gaze and restrain their sexual passions and do not display 
their adornment except what appears thereof. And let them wear their 
head-coverings over their bosoms”—the most obvious of several quranic 
verses for Elijah Muhammad to cite on this subject, is not cited.


--- PAGE 95 ---
84 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Fasting
Members of the Nation of Islam did not fast during the month of Rama-
dan, as most other Muslims do. Elijah Muhammad earlier explained the 
reasoning and the practice of the December fast:
We fast the 12th month of the Christian year to relieve ourselves of 
the once worshipping of that month as the month in which Jesus was 
b o r n ....
In this month of fasting, we shall keep our minds and hearts clean, 
and we shall not indulge in the eating of meats (land meats). Y ou may eat 
fish and such fat products which come from land animals such as butter 
and cheese.
In this month, we should keep our minds on Allah, Who came in 
the Person of Master Frad [sic] Muhammad; my God and your God and 
my Saviour and Deliverer and your Saviour and Deliverer to Whom be 
praised forever for giving us life after our mental death for the past 400 
years.
During this month, eat before day and after the sun goes down (if 
you wish) but not during the daylight hours. This also goes for drinking; 
drink whatever you are going to drink either before dawn or after dark. 
The eating before dawn is for those of us who love to eat breakfast in the 
mornings. But if you eat one meal a day, you may eat that meal either 
before dawn or after dark. It is best for your health’s sake, however, to eat 
one meal after dark.
Keep up prayer, and let us all be grateful to Allah for His coming in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad throughout the month of Decem-
ber and every month. And during this month, let there be no quarrelling 
or disputing in our homes or abroad.
26
Elsewhere, Elijah Muhammad adds that “fasting takes away evil desires. 
Fasting takes from us filthy desires. Fasting takes from us the desire to do 
evil against self and our brothers and sisters. ”
27
In the early 1970s, he declared that what Muslims, both his Muslims 
and “orthodox Muslims, ” do is not fasting. Abstaining from food for part 
of the day is not a fast. Only going two days, preferably three days, with-
out food can be considered a fast. He also challenged other Muslims’ fast 
during Ramadan in several ways. (1) Muslims fast to celebrate the revela-
tion of the Qur’an, but Elijah Muhammad pointed out that the Qur’an


--- PAGE 96 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 85
was revealed over a 23-year period. (2) Even so, the coming of the Qur’an 
should be rejoiced, whereas fasting aids in forestalling evil desires. Elijah 
Muhammad’s December fast, by contrast, was designed to “drive out . . .
the old white slave-master’s worship of a false birthday (December 25th) 
of Jesus. ” (3) Fasting, according to Elijah Muhammad, is something one 
does in hopes of receiving something. So, he asked, why fast when the 
Qur’an was first revealed without any fasting having taken place?
28 There-
fore, the switch to the fast of Ramadan a year later was a significant con-
cession on the part of Elijah Muhammad. Again, entirely absent from all 
of his discussions on fasting is any reference to the many passages in the 
Qur’an enjoining fasting and extolling its virtues.
Yakub and the White Devils
Given the limited use of the Qur’an by Elijah Muhammad for the afore-
mentioned “Islamic” themes, it is surprising that one of the main uses 
to which Elijah Muhammad put both the Qur’an and the Bible was that 
of proving the part of his myth of origins that deals with the white race. 
He finds support for even its least “Islamic” features: the creation of 
the devils by Y akub, their exile to Europe, and the six thousand years 
during which the white race was permitted by Allah to rule the world. 
This period has been a time of war and destruction in which they used 
their “tricknology”
29 and spread their wickedness over the whole earth. 
The greatest crimes of the white race were manifest in the invasion of 
America, the stealing of the land of the Native Indians, and the capture 
and enslavement of Africans. For three hundred years these slaves were 
forced to work and shed their blood for a nation that repaid them with 
hatred.
Elijah Muhammad supported many parts of this race myth with scrip-
tural references. According to him, that Whites were created by the origi-
nal black people is demonstrated by the use of the first person plural pro-
nouns “we” and “us, ” in both the Qur’an’s and the Bible’s accounts of the 
creation.
30 Thus, in the phrase, “Let us make man in our image” of Genesis 
1:26, the “us” refers to the 59,999 “black men and women making or graft-
ing them into the likeness or image of the original man. ”
31 The Qur ’ a n is 
specifically said to support this claim in 15:28: “Surely I am going to create 
a mortal of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape. ” The black mud 
is, for Elijah Muhammad, “the black nation. ”
32 Thus, the creation story in 
Genesis and its parallels in the Qur’an are seen as the record not of the


--- PAGE 97 ---
86 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
creation of humankind but of the creation of the white race. Adam repre-
sents the white race; the tree of knowledge of good and evil is the creator 
of the white race, Y akub; the tree of life is the Nation of Islam (that is, the 
black Muslim people); and the expulsion from the Garden of Eden is the 
exile to Europe.
33 Elijah Muhammad asserted that their time in the caves 
of Europe has a whole chapter devoted to it in the Qur’an—presumably 
Qur’an 18 (The Cave).
34 Even the respite given to the devil white race to 
make mischief in the world is “foretold” in the Qur’an. Elijah Muhammad 
explained,
The Holy Qur-an says: “But the devil made them both fall from it, and 
caused them to depart from that (state) in which they were; and we said: 
“Get forth, some of you being the enemies of others, and there is for you 
in the earth an abode and a provision for a time!” (The time here refers to 
the limited time of the Adamic race. The time is 6,000 years.)
35
The next verse speaks of Adam learning words from his Lord—“the Oft-
returning and the merciful. ” These terms describe Allah, not Y akub. But 
this interaction of Allah with Adam is incongruent with Elijah Muham-
mad’s interpretations. The apparent contradiction is not noticed, suggest-
ing that Elijah Muhammad tended to read the verses of the Qur’an as dis-
crete, unconnected entities.
A similar apparent inconsistent reading is evident in Elijah Muham-
mad’s discussion of Adam’s (that is, the white race’s) evil fondness for nu-
dity. He wrote,
Chapter 7, 26th Verse: O children of Adam we have sent down to you 
clothing to cover your shame, and clothing for beauty, and clothing that 
guards against evil. That is the best. This is the message of Allah that they 
may be mindful.
This is referring to the white race, after they stripped off their clothes 
and were naked in the caves and hillsides of Europe to remind them to-
day that they were given clothes to cover their body and shame, and then 
He clothed them with beauty, the clothing that guards against evil.
In his paraphrase, Elijah Muhammad makes clear that the expression 
“children of Adam” means the white race. Regarding the very next verse 
and just two paragraphs later, he wrote,


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 87
Chapter 7, 27th Verse: O children of Adam let not the devil seduce you 
as he expelled your parents from the garden, pulling off from them their 
clothing that he might show them their shame. He surely sees you. He as 
well as his host from which you see them not. Surely He made the Devil’s 
[sic] to be the friends of those who believe not.
Those who believe not is referring to the American so-called Negro 
(Black Man). The devil becomes their friends and guardians and they 
adopt indecency and the devil’s way of civilization, and thus become the 
enemy of God and their Nation of righteousness (Black Nation). And 
therefore, their doom is that of the devil’s (white man).
36
Here the devil is the white race and “those who believe not” are African 
Americans not of the Nation of Islam. Either Elijah Muhammad also per-
mits “children of Adam” to refer to the latter, or the former must rather 
awkwardly refer to both those who seduce and those who are seduced. 
This is only an issue when the two adjacent verses are read as connected 
to each other—which is not Elijah Muhammad’s wont.
By examining a longer, representative passage by Elijah Muhammad 
on this subject, one can see even more clearly his handling of scriptural 
materials:
The Bible and the Holy Qur-an Sharrieff are full of teachings of this 
bloody race of devils. They shed the life blood of all life, even their own, 
and are scientists at deceiving the black people.
They deceived the very people of Paradise (Bible, Gen. 2:13). They 
killed their own brother (Gen. 4:8). The innocent earth’s blood (Gen. 
4:10) revealed it to its Maker (thy brother’s blood cryeth unto me from 
the ground). The very earth, the soil of America, soaked with the inno-
cent blood of the so-called Negroes shed by this race of devils, now crieth 
out to its maker for her burden of carrying the innocent blood of the 
righteous slain upon her. Let us take a look at the devil’s creation from 
the teaching of the Holy Qur-an.
“ And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the 
earth one who shall rule, the angels said: “What will Thou place in it such 
as shall make mischief in it and shed blood, we celebrate Thy praise and 
extol Thy holiness”[”] (Holy Qur-an Sharrieff 2:30).
This devil race has and still is doing just that—making mischief and 
shedding blood of the black nation whom they were grafted from. Y our


--- PAGE 99 ---
88 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Lord said to the angels, “Surely I am going to create a mortal of the es-
sence of black mud fashioned in shape” (Holy Qur-an Sharrieff, 15:28).
The essence of black mud (the black nation) mentioned is only sym-
bolic, which actually means the sperm of the black nation, and they re-
fused to recognize the black nation as their equal though they were made 
from and by a black scientist (named Y akub).
37
Several observations can be made from this passage. First, Elijah Muham-
mad had no difficulty moving between the Bible and the Qur’an—though 
he hardly did so seamlessly. Second, individual verses are again treated as 
discrete entities and adduced as needed with little regard to their original 
context. Third, the verses are made to fit his narrative. That is to say, the 
race myth is the framework into which both quranic and biblical verses 
were placed.
The Fall of America
Along with the events of the creation of the white race, the eschatologi-
cal events that culminate around the “so-called Negroes” in America are 
among the most frequently and thoroughly discussed by Elijah Muham-
mad, who devoted numerous columns to the subject (that were later col-
lected into The F a ll o f A merica). For him, the events of the last day have 
been foretold in the Qur’an and the Bible. Allah in the person of Master 
Fard Muhammad, the Mahdi, the Messiah, came from Mecca in 1930 in 
fulfillment of the prophecies to resurrect the “mentally dead so-called Ne-
groes” and to initiate the end of the rule of the devil. The first of these 
tasks involved teaching Blacks the true history of the world and their true 
religion of Islam so that they could escape hell, which is the world of the 
Whites, and enter heaven, which is now, here on earth; there is no life be-
yond the grave in which one can hope for justice, freedom, and equality, 
just as there is no “spook” god. The second task involved the coming war 
of Armageddon. As we have seen, Allah will first punish America with the 
weapons of nature: floods, drought, hailstorms, fire, earthquakes, and so 
forth. Only territorial separation (achieved by dividing up the continental 
United States) will protect the (144,000)
38 Muslims from this punishment 
of white America. Later, Allah will destroy England and the United States 
using a spaceship known as the Mother Plane.
According to Elijah Muhammad, “The Mother Plane was made to de-
stroy this world of evil and to show the Wisdom and Mighty Power of


--- PAGE 100 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 89
the God Who Came to Destroy an old world and set up a new world. ” It 
is the wheel that appeared in Ezekiel’s vision. This Mother Plane, “a little 
human-made planet, ” can travel forty miles above the earth’s surface, but 
returns to the earth every six to twelve months for oxygen and hydrogen. 
According to Elijah Muhammad, the “devil scientists” are aware of its ex-
istence and have unsuccessfully sought  to destroy it. It can hide behind 
stars and make itself invisible. “There are scientists on the Mother Plane 
who know what you are thinking about before the thought materializes 
(Holy Quran Ch. 50:16). Therefore, it is impossible to try to attack the 
Mother Plane. She can attack you, but you cannot attack her. ” When it at-
tacks, it will do so with bombs that will fall upon cities only, burrow into 
the ground for one mile, and then explode. These are the same types of 
bombs that were once used to create the mountains on earth.
39
According to his early writings, the Fall of America should have be-
gun in 1965 or 1966. 40 “[I]t is the end of the time of the white race. This 
race of people was not created to live on our planet forever; only for six 
thousand years. ”
41 This dating is a bit confusing, for the prophesied four 
hundred years of being lost in the wilderness of North America came to 
an end in 1955,
42 yet the end of the 6,000-year rule of Whites was said to 
have occurred in 1914. The significance of this earlier year is also unclear, 
though it may be connected to C. T. Russell’s predictions of a 1914 Arma-
geddon and, later, Jehovah’s Witnesses’ assertions that 1914 was the begin-
ning of the last days. Elijah Muhammad probably came in contact with 
Judge Rutherford’s teachings through the radio broadcasts. According to 
one scholar, it was some time just prior to the year 1914 that the “brothers 
in the East” became aware of the “lost Nation in the wilderness of North 
America. ”
43 The date of judgment of the white world was therefore delayed 
approximately sixty years to allow African Americans time to reconvert to 
Islam.
44 On the other hand, Elijah Muhammad wrote of an extension be-
ing granted by Allah, depending on how the “righteous” were treated. He 
then echoed the claim that there can be no judgment until the “so-called 
Negroes hear Islam. ”
45 Whenever it is, “Hell” will then come to an end and 
the eternal period of “Heaven” will be ushered in.
Just as the first book of the Christian Bible, Genesis, figured very 
prominently in Elijah Muhammad’s account of creation, so its last book, 
the Book of Revelation, was the main source for the prophecies of “the 
Judgement, ” as he called it. It is Y akub, the father of the white race, who is 
said to have written the Book of Revelation. Sixty-six hundred years ago, 
while exiled to the Island of Pelan, he foresaw the future of the people he


--- PAGE 101 ---
90 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
had created. The Qur’an, with its vivid descriptions of the Last Day, also 
seems to have lent itself to Elijah Muhammad’s eschatological narrative. 
His methods were the same as those used for his race myth: the biblical 
and quranic materials are subservient to his larger narrative, with verses 
usually treated as discrete entities and cited as appropriate with simple 
glosses of ambiguous or symbolic terms.
Thus, the devil that Allah will destroy, according to Qur’an 7:14, is the 
white race.
46 Whites are also the “beast” of the Book of Revelation and the 
“man of sin” in II Thessalonians 2:2–9. 47 And, the Babylon of the Book of 
Revelation and of Jeremiah is America. Elijah Muhammad explained,
The description it [Rev. 18:2] gives is as follows: “ And he (angel) cried 
might[i]ly with a strong voice (with authority) saying, Babylon the great 
is fallen, is fallen and is become the habitation of devils (Allah has de-
clared the people to be a race of devils) , and the hole of every foul spirit 
and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. ” The description here given 
to the [sic] Babylon by the Prophets compares with the present history and 
people of America and their fall.48
Elijah Muhammad then identified the “unclean and hateful bird” as 
the “low-based, evil-minded” immigran ts to America whose uncleanli-
ness consisted of sexual promiscuity and homosexuality. The so-called 
American Negroes were addressed by the subsequent verse: “Come out 
of her that ye be not partakers of her sins and that you receive not of 
her plagues. ”
49 For Elijah Muhammad there was a sense of urgency, for 
America’s prophesied end, for which Qur’an 56:57–59 provides evidence, 
was imminent.
50
With regard to the battle between Islam and other religions, Elijah Mu-
hammad taught,
“He is it who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the True religion 
that he make it overcome the religions, all of them, though the polythe-
ists may be averse. ” (The Holy Quran, 61:9)
In the above verse Allah (God) in the last days of this present world 
(of wicked infidels) states that He must destroy false religions with the 
True Religion Islam. It (Islam) must overcome all other religions.
51
Through paraphrase and gloss, Elijah Muhammad interpreted this verse, 
traditionally thought to refer to the Prophet Muhammad’s mission to the


--- PAGE 102 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 91
pagans of the pre-Islamic Arabia, as referring to his own mission. The 
scriptural support for Elijah Muhammad’s description of the matériel to 
be used in this battle, the forces of nature, was drawn primarily from the 
Bible, such as Ezekiel 14:13, though Qur’an 44:10 was presented to support 
Allah’s promise to use drought. Other references that proved Allah’s pen-
chant for the use of natural disasters to punish evildoers, such as the use 
of water against the people of Noah, fire against Sodom and Gomorrah, 
and plagues against Pharaoh and his people, could have come from either 
scripture.
52
After this war and the Fall of America, there will be a time of joy and 
peace in the presence of Allah. There will be no war, sickness, gambling, 
cursing, and so forth. Hell will be at an end. The hereafter is, however, 
eternal and everyone will live much longer. Of course, there will be no 
bodily resurrection of the dead, nor will the living remain alive forever—
that is slavery teaching, according to Elijah Muhammad. The resurrection 
is a psychological, social, economic, and political one. None of the nu-
merous verses in the Qur’an that speak of physical resurrection was in-
cluded in this discussion—though elsewhere he made it clear that such 
verses are to be interpreted metaphorically. He adduced only the invita-
tion of Qur’an 89:27–30: “O soul that is at rest, return to your Lord, well 
pleased with Him, well pleasing. So, enter among my servants, and enter 
into my Paradise. ”
53
Again, a longer passage illustrates Elijah Muhammad’s handling of 
scriptural texts:
The day of decision between the dark races or nations was begun by God 
Himself in the person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom be praised 
forever, as is prophesied in the Bible: “Multitudes in the valley of deci-
sion, for the day (before or by 1970) of the Lord is near in the valley of 
decision” (Joel 3:14).
It is clear that the armies of the nations of the earth have geared them-
selves for a showdown between their forces and Allah and the Nation of 
Islam. We, the so-called American Negroes, the lost and found members 
of our Nation, are in this decision. The second and third verses of this 
same chapter (Chapter 3) read like this: “I will also gather all nations and 
will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat (Europe and Asia—
between black and white)  and will plead with them there for my people 
and my heritage (the lost and found, so-called Negroes) , Israel whom 
they have scattered among the nations and parted my land (between the


--- PAGE 103 ---
92 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
European white race) and they have casted lots for my people and have 
given a boy for a harlot and sold a girl for wine that they might drink” 
(Joel 3:2,3).
America has fulfilled this to the very letter and spirit with her slaves 
(the so-called Negroes) under the type of Israel. The Egyptians did noth-
ing of the kind to Israel when they were in bondage to them. In fact, and 
as God has taught me, the Bible is not referring to those people as His 
People, it is referring to the so-called Negro and his enemy (the white 
race). The seventh verse also gives us a hint in this way:
“Behold, I will raise them out of the place where you have sold them 
and will return your recompence upon your own head” (Joel 3:7).
The slave-masters of our fathers must reap what they have sown. Allah 
calls them to war in the ninth verse of the same chapter.
“Proclaim you among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the mighty 
men, let all of the men of war draw near, let them come up” (Joel 3:9).
All the mighty men of science and modern warfare have been called in 
an effort to devise instruments and weapons against God and the armies 
of heaven.
54
Once again, there are several features of note. First, Elijah Muhammad felt 
no obligation to include any quranic material. Second, he employed intra-
linear comments that identify (what were for him) ambiguous or sym-
bolic words or phrases. Third, the scriptural passages, both these from the 
Book of Joel and those previously cited from the Qur’an, appeared within 
the framework of Elijah Muhammad’s narrative of the Fall of America.
Towards the end of his life, Elijah Muhammad reiterated that all Whites 
are devils, but then in response to a white reporter’s question “Is there any 
hope for me?” replied in a manner atypical of, inconsistent with, and far 
more generous than, earlier statements on the issue:
Now, I must tell you the truth. There will be no such thing as elimina-
tion of all white people from the earth, at the present time or at the break 
out of the Holy War. No, because there are some white people today who 
have faith in Allah and Islam though they are white, and their faith is 
given credit. They are not born or created Muslims, but they have faith in 
what the Muslims are and [how they are] trying to live. It is only through 
Islam that white people can be saved. But you see there would be a Holy 
War (they call it a Holy War which means right is against wrong and 
wrong against right).
55


--- PAGE 104 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 93
Dietary Laws
Elijah Muhammad often wrote on the dangers of pork, which he had 
learned from Fard Muhammad. From 1965 onward, he published numer-
ous articles in Muhammad Speaks on what he considered a proper Muslim 
diet. Many of these articles reappeared in his How to Eat to Live, first pub-
lished in 1968, and in his How to Eat to Live, Book No. 2 , first published 
in 1973. Elijah Muhammad’s purpose in writing How to Eat to Live was 
to teach his followers how to attain good health and prolong their lives 
by controlling the food and drink they consume. Although this subject 
involves no significant narrative, similar patterns emerge with respect to 
Elijah Muhammad’s use of the Bible, the Qur’an, and his own authority.
The most prominent feature of Elijah Muhammad’s dietary regula-
tions was his prohibition of the consumption of pork. This prohibition, 
along with the requirement that his Muslims eat only one meal a day, was 
treated at length and mentioned continuously throughout How to Eat to 
Live. His main argument against pork rested on his own authority and 
his access to unique knowledge, divine or scientific. Elijah Muhammad 
argued,
Beyond a shadow of a doubt the swine is the filthiest and foulest animal 
h u m a n  b e i n g s  h a v e  r e s o r t e d  t o  f o r  f o o d ....  W o r m s  a n d  i n s e c t s  t a k e  t o  i t s  
flesh while in the farmer’s curing stage faster than to any other animal’s 
flesh. And in a few days, it is full of worms. . . . It is divinely pro[h]ibited 
flesh, and God (Allah) has prohibited you and me, my brothers and sis-
ters of the Black Nation, from eating it or even touching its dead carcass. 
Please, for our health’s sake, stop eating it; for our beauty’s sake, stop eat-
ing it; for our obedience to God and His laws against this flesh, stop eat-
ing it; for a longer life, stop eating it[;] and for the sake of modesty, stop 
eating it.
56
The Qur’an could have provided ample support for Elijah Muhammad’s 
prohibition. Qur’an 2:173, 5:3, 6:145, and 16:115 all forbid pork. How-
ever, these four verses were never explicitly cited. And although Elijah 
Muhammad stated three times that the food of (orthodox) Jews is ac-
ceptable according to the Qur’an, the passage that verifies this claim, 
Qur’an 5:5, was not invoked.
57 This oversight once again suggests the 
lack of a comprehensive familiarity with the contents of the Qur’an on 
the part of Elijah Muhammad. On the other hand, the Bible played a


--- PAGE 105 ---
94 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
relatively greater role in his arguments. The prohibition against swine 
in Leviticus 11:7–8, the warning to those who do eat it in Isaiah 66:17, 
and the casting of demons into swine by Jesus were all discussed at 
length.
58
Elijah Muhammad frequently employed the phrases “ Allah taught 
me” and “ Allah has said. ” But he clearly was not making references to 
the Qur’an when he did so: he meant Fard Muhammad. This is particu-
larly evident when he discussed animals not mentioned in the Bible or 
the Qur’an. For instance, chickens are dirty animals, but permissible to 
eat; beef, lamb, and camel are also permissible, but should be avoided if 
possible; rabbit, deer, raccoons, possums, turtles, turtle eggs, and frog 
legs are not permissible.
59 The distinction between Allah’s direct words 
and those mediated by the Qur’an was made explicit when Elijah Mu-
hammad stated, “The main thing Allah, as well as the Qur-an, reminds 
us of is that when it comes to meat and fish, Allah forbids us to eat the 
flesh of swine or of fish weighing 50 pounds or more. ”
60 At times, Eli-
jah Muhammad seemed very defensive, such as when he stated, “The 
hog is a grafted animal, so says Allah to me—grafted from rat, cat and 
dog. Don’t question me. This is what Allah has said, believe it or leave 
it alone. ”
61
Hence, it is not surprising that for many of his dietary regulations 
Elijah Muhammad saw no need to provide scriptural evidence. Among 
the foods whose consumption was prohibited were collard greens, turnip 
leaves, white potatoes, sweet potatoes, peas, beans (except for the small 
navy beans, both the “brown pink” ones and the white ones), cornbread, 
and, of course, pork. On the other hand, spinach, rutabaga, and rice were 
acceptable, but in moderation. There were no restrictions on garlic, on-
ions, fruits (better raw than cooked), whole wheat bread (as long as it is 
not fresh), and young pigeons. Elijah Muhammad justified these regula-
tions by saying that the prohibited foods were cheap foods given to slaves 
by their slave masters, unfit for human consumption, suitable only for 
hogs, or not digestible for those with office jobs.
62 The only scriptural al-
lusion was to Adam being told in the book of Genesis to eat whatever he 
wishes. Adam, of course, represents the white race for Elijah Muhammad, 
and so this passage from Genesis indicated, for him, that the white race 
eats much that is poisonous.
63
One of the only extended passages of scripture cited by Elijah Muham-
mad to justify his dietary regulations is Isaiah 65:1–5:


--- PAGE 106 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 95
I am sought of them that asked not for [me] (The lost-found members of 
the Black Nation are the ones who never sought after Allah, because they 
did not know how. The enemy did not teach them how to seek Allah, since 
they did not obey Allah, themselves); I am found to them (lost-found Black 
people—so-called Negro) that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold 
me, unto a nation that was not called by my name. I have spread out 
my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way 
that was not good (This is referring to Israel, to whom God sent prophet 
after prophet, to guide them into the right way, who rebelled against the 
right guidance and then made a religion called Christianity, after their way 
of thinking, and put the name of Jesus on that religion to make us drink 
down the falsity they added to Jesus’ teachings), after their own thoughts; 
A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that sac-
rificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick (they bar-
beque the hog upon bricks and call it their barbeque stand); which remain 
among the graves (the graves mean their homes) , . . . which eat swine’s 
flesh, and broth of the abominable things is in their vessels (this is refer-
ring to hog or swine in their vessels); which say, stand by thyself (This is 
referring to the Muslims, when it says stand by thyself), come not [near to 
me (]mean[s] only Israel or the white race, but the white race has made the 
so-called Negro follow his religion, say the same and especially those who 
claim santification [sic] in Christianity) . These are a smoke (the offensive 
smell of the cooking of swine flesh) . . . a fire that burneth all the day (the 
Christian is cooking the flesh of the swine all day long and the Muslims 
and the obedient servant of Allah (God), smell this flesh, prohibited by God, 
which is a stink to their nostrils, being cooked. They feel they are guilty of 
being partakers of the cooking and eating of the swine flesh, by smelling the 
poisonous odor.)
64
From this rather lengthy passage several notable exegetical techniques 
are evident. Once again the biblical material is more prominent than the 
quranic. Intralinear notes are common, many of them involving the gloss-
ing or specification of vague pronouns or terms—at least vague when 
taken out of their original context. This specification always transports 
the adduced text into a pronouncement on life and race relations in pres-
ent-day America. And in that sense, even Elijah Muhammad’s stipulations 
about dietary practice displayed a te ndency to be subsumed under his 
larger narrative on the rise and fall of the white race.


--- PAGE 107 ---
96 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
The Hypocrites
There are two subjects, hypocrites and prayer, for which Elijah Muham-
mad employed almost exclusively quranic materials. The former was dis-
cussed under the heading of “Hypocrites, Disbelievers, and Obedience” in 
Message to the Blackman in America . A discussion of this nature was en-
tirely absent from The Supreme Wisdom and almost so from The Supreme 
Wisdom, Volume Two. In the latter, only white Christians were identified 
as the “hypocrites of the first order. ”
65 The term “hypocrite” had initially 
applied to those followers of Fard Muhammad who opposed Elijah Mu-
hammad’s succession in Detroit in favor of some of Fard Muhammad’s 
other ministers. Later, Elijah Muhammad used the term for his rivals 
in Chicago in the mid-1930s. In his weekly columns, it began to appear 
in the middle of 1959.
66 The term would never disappear for long from 
Elijah Muhammad’s vocabulary, but it returned with a vengeance in the 
mid-1960s. As Claude Andrew Clegg explains in his biography, Elijah 
Muhammad,
perhaps out of paranoia and his decades-old sense of persecution, came 
to believe that extreme measures were warranted when internecine chal-
lenges to his leadership emerged. If it meant . . . eliminating the “hypo-
crites” (now defined as anyone he believed to be a threat to his suprem-
acy in the Nation) through suspensions, isolations, or even death, he was 
willing to do what was necessary.
67
The renewed interest in the issue of hypocrites in 1964 and 1965 was pre-
cipitated by several even ts, including the appearance of complaints by 
members of the Nation of Islam about Elijah Muhammad and other of-
ficials having spent too much money on homes
68 and especially the defec-
tions of Malcolm X and Elijah Muhammad’s sons Wallace and Akbar Mu-
hammad.
69 He did not pull punches even with family members, calling 
hypocrites the “the most hated of all people” and the “enemies of Islam. ”70
In 1968, in Muhammad Speaks,  he reprinted over ten times the same col-
umn railing against hypocrites. From 1970 to 1972 occasional articles and 
columns on the theme appeared every few months.
71
Elijah Muhammad was always vehement on the subject of hypocrites. 
In Message to the Blackman in America  he began by arguing that Qur’an 
32:3, “Thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner has come be-
fore that they may walk aright, ” referred to him and not to the Prophet


--- PAGE 108 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 97
Muhammad. Mecca had had previous warners, Abraham and Ishmael. 
The prayer of Abraham, which in Qur’an 2:129 asks for a messenger to 
be sent to his people, refers, therefore, to none other than Elijah Muham-
mad himself. Likewise, the future prophet of Deuteronomy 18:18, who 
would be a prophet like Moses, is Elijah Muhammad as well, and the life 
of Moses’ people is paralleled most closely by the “so-called Negroes of 
America. ”
72 Elijah Muhammad then launched into his diatribe against 
hypocrites. They are the most hated people; they are worse than disbe-
lievers; they seek to deceive believers, they only pretend to be believers; 
and they befriend the enemies of Islam. But, they shall not overcome the 
Messenger. In support of these declarations Elijah Muhammad cited or 
referred to a litany of quranic passages: Qur’an 2:9 and 15; 63:1–3; 4:150–52; 
5:53; 4:144–45; 47:23 and 25–28; 66:9–10; 104:1–9; 2:6–15; 4:107, 109, 113–15, 
and 124; 8:46; and 9:73–74.
73 For example, Elijah Muhammad wrote,
This Verse (4:150) reads like this: “Those who disbelieve in Allah and His 
Messengers and desire to make a dist inction between Allah and His Mes-
sengers and say, [‘]We believe in some and disbelieve in others; and desire 
to take a course in between[’] (4:151). These are truly disbelievers; and We 
have prepared for the disbelievers an abasing chastisement. ” . . .
This is going on today among my followers. Many of the hypocrites 
who go out from me will still say to you that they believe in Allah but do 
not believe that I am the Messenger of Allah. This is as if they said that 
they do not believe in either one of us. Y ou cannot get to Allah unless 
you come through a Messenger, Apostle or Prophet of Allah.
Elijah Muhammad then paraphrased the verse and introduced Qur’an 2:15 
by paraphrasing it as well. He then added the following discussion, which 
again highlights that the Qur’an’s message is entirely a contemporary one:
The Holy Qur-an (63:1) reads: “ When the hypocrites come to thee, they 
say: We bear witness that thou art indeed Allah’s Messenger. And Allah 
knows thou art indeed His Messenger. And Allah bears witness that the 
hypocrites are surely liars [63:2]. They take shelter under their oaths, thus 
turning [men] from Allah’s way. Surely evil is that which they do [63:3]. 
That is because they believed, then disbelieved; thus their hearts are sealed, 
so they understand not.”
They desire to make the Messenger think that they are true believ-
ers by saying they believe he is the Messenger of Allah, while in their


--- PAGE 109 ---
98 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
hearts they do not believe that he is the Messenger, and Allah knows 
what is in their hearts—that they are liars. They come in believing and 
then disbelieve. After their disbelief, Al lah seals their hearts so that they 
cannot understand or believe. In the 150th verse of the 4th Chapter, they 
are warned against trying to deceive Allah and His Messenger. They say 
that they believe in one and disbelieve in the other. But disbelief in God 
or His Apostle means a disbelief in both.
74
As his discussion of “Obey Allah and his Messenger” of Qur’an 3:31 makes 
obvious, hypocrisy and disobedience are almost equivalent for Elijah 
Muhammad.
75
The chief hypocrite, Malcolm X, received special attention. Qur’an 
68:10–16, traditionally identified with the Muhammad’s Meccan opponent 
Walīd b. Mughīra, is now identified with Malcolm X.
76 “I will never forget 
this hypocrite’s hateful acts against me, ” declared Elijah Muhammad. He 
warned the hypocrites,
According to the Bible and the Holy Qur-an, punishment is sure to over-
take hypocrites and those who seek to oppose Allah and his Apostle. I 
quote here a verse from the Holy Qur-an.
“Do they not know that whoever acts in opposition to Allah and His 
Apostle, he shall surely have the fire of hell to abide in it, that is the griev-
ous abasement” (Holy Qur-an 9:63).
That is the hell that the hypocrites and disbelievers will suffer, and it 
begins with their feeling of fear and excitement—fear that someone is go-
ing to do harm to them (as they plan to harm those they oppose).
77
Although it is not explicitly stated here, Elijah Muhammad seemed to be 
alluding to Malcolm X’s prescient statements prior to his assassination.78
In general, this attack on the hypocrites may seem atypical, but this 
was not entirely so. Elijah Muhammad did identify the appearance of 
opposition as a precursor to the Fall of America.
79 And, in all of these 
passages, Elijah Muhammad continued to rely on identifying unspeci-
fied groups, individuals, or activities mentioned in the Qur’an with his 
contemporaries and current events. As before, paraphrase was used to ap-
ply a quranic passage directly to a person or event, such as the defection 
of Malcolm X, but his explanations became longer and more detailed. In 
the citation of Qur’an 63:3 there was a parenthetical gloss that indicated 
that the hypocrites do not turn away from Allah’s way, but that they turn


--- PAGE 110 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 99
“men” away from Allah’s way. Elijah Muhammad used this technique con-
stantly when explaining biblical passages, but generally does not tamper 
with quranic citations in this manner. More generally, quranic passages 
were still treated in isolation, without reference to their historical context 
or even to their context within the Qur’an. More notably, for the first time 
Elijah Muhammad drew verses from several parts of the Qur’an simulta-
neously to support his position. This was not quite na  ∙zῑr (or “textual anal-
ogy, ” in which quranic passages with similar wording or themes are used 
to explicate each other). In other words, Elijah Muhammad is not using 
one verse to explain another. Also, on this subject, quranic passages were 
adduced with greater frequency than biblical passages, which may suggest 
a greater and growing familiarity with, and dependence on, the Qur’an.
Prayer
Elijah Muhammad’s discussion of Muslim prayer was another topic for 
which he drew more material from the Qur’an than from the Bible. Bibli-
cal references were largely restricted to passages that demonstrated the ef-
ficacy of prayer, such as Solomon’s prayer for forgiveness in II Chronicles 
6:36–39 and Jonah’s prayer in the fish in Jonah 2:2–4.
80
In The Supreme Wisdom Elijah Muhammad did little more than extol 
the virtues of prayer and quote the “Muslim’s oft-repeated prayer, ” Qur’an 
1 (i.e., the Sūrat al-Fatiha).
81 Prayer was also described as beautiful and 
recommended in The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, and to further en-
courage prayer, Elijah Muhammad simply cited passages in the Qur’an 
such as 20:30, 17:78, 17:116, and 29:45.
82 However, in Message to the Black-
man in America  he cited numerous quranic verses. “Surely prayer keeps 
(one) away from indecency and evil; and certainly the remembrance of 
Allah is the greatest (force) and Al lah knows what you do” (Qur’an 29:45) 
led off his discussion of “Prayer in Islam. ” And “O you who believe, re-
member Allah, remembering Him frequently and glorifying Him morn-
ing and evening. He it is Who sends His blessings on you, and so do His 
angels, that He may bring you forth out of utter darkness into the light 
and He is merciful to the believers (Prayer is better than sleep)” (Qur’an 
33:41–43) prefaced his “Significance of Prayer. ”
83 The former verse he then 
paraphrased and the latter he elucidated by stating, “This alone is salva-
tion, just to be brought out of the darkness of ignorance into the light of 
truth. Who is in more need of the truth than the American so-called Ne-
groes who do not have the knowledge of self. . . ?”
84


--- PAGE 111 ---
100 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Despite the relatively abundant citations from the Qur’an, much of 
Elijah Muhammad’s discussion of prayer was still connected to his race 
myth, eschatology, and belief that Fard Muhammad was Allah. In a de-
scription of the morning prayer, Elijah Muhammad explained that part 
of the prayer is known as “Fard. ” The significance of that, he elaborated, 
was as follows: “ And Allah’s using Fard as His name here on His coming 
teaches us that if we expect to be successful, we must bow in submission 
to the will of Master Fard Muhammad; the All Wise God in Person who 
is worthy to be praised and praised much. ”
85 Elijah Muhammad also in-
cluded a description of the prayer rituals with some discussion of their 
meaning in light of what he perceived to be the needs of the so-called 
Negroes and a critique of Christian prayer with some discussion of what 
it implied about white Christians.
In addition, Elijah Muhammad provided some suggested prayers, 
which he cited verbatim from an orthodox manual of prayer.
86 Perhaps it 
was this manual that was the source of the following curious passage:
“Observe prayers in the early morning, at the close of the day, and at the 
approach of the night. Prayers are good deeds which drive away the evil 
doing” (Holy Qur-an 11:116).
“Glorify Allah (by rendering prayers to Him) when it is evening and 
in the morning—praise to Him in the heavens and the earth—and in the 
afternoon and at noontide” (Ibid., 30:17).
“Put up then with what they say; and celebrate the praise of your Lord 
before sunrise, and before sun setting, and during the night do thou 
praise Him, and in the extreme of the day, so that thou mayest be well 
pleased” (Ibid., 20:130).
“Observe prayers at sunset until the first darkening of the night and 
observe reading (the Qur-an) at daybreak. Lo! The recital of the Qur-an 
(that is, rendering prayer) is ever witnessed. And some part of the night 
awake for it, a largess for thee. It may be that your Lord will raise thee to 
a praised state” (Ibid., 17:78–79).
“Take aid by observing patience and prayer” (Ibid., 2:45).
“When you have fulfilled your prayer, remember Allah, standing and 
sitting and lying on your sides. And when you are in safety then be steadfast 
in prayer. Verily prayer is a timed ordinance on the believers” (Ibid., 4:103).
“That which leads man to infidelity is neglect of prayers. ”
“No one of you must say his prayers in a garment without covering 
the whole body. ”


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 101
“ Allah accepts not the prayers of a woman arrived at puberty unless 
she covers her head as well as the whole body. ”
“The five stated prayers erase the sins which have been committed 
during the intervals between them, if they have not been mortal sins. ”
“The prayers of a person will not be accepted, who has broken his ab-
lution until he completes another ablution. ”
[“]Order your children to say the state[d] prayers when they are seven 
years of age, and beat them if they do not do so when they are ten years 
old. ”
“[‘]Tell me if any one of you had a rivulet before his doors and bathed 
five times a day therein whether any dirt would remain on his body?[’] 
The companions said, ‘Nothing would remain. ’ The Prophet said, ‘In this 
manner will the five daily prayers as ordered by Allah erase all minor 
sins. ’”
87
This passage is one of the very few in which quranic verses were allowed 
to speak entirely for themselves. Elijah Muhammad added no comments, 
interlinear or otherwise, as he normally did. Moreover, the quranic cita-
tions in this passage come from a hybrid of Rodwell’s and Pickthall’s trans-
lations of the Qur’an, not from Muhammad Ali’s. Furthermore, the pres-
ence of  ∙hadῑths (that is, reports of Muhammad the Prophet’s words and 
activities, which collectively comprise the Sunna)—virtually nonexistent 
in the rest of Elijah Muhammad’s wr itings—suggests that his discussions 
on prayer were atypical of his other writings and dependent on outside 
sources. These sources seem generally more orthodox in both their pres-
entation and concerns. For example, the subjects of ablution and modesty 
were consistent with Elijah Muhammad’s teachings elsewhere, but their 
presence within a discussion of prayer was unusual. Perhaps this passage 
indicates that Elijah Muhammad was far more willing to defer to other 
Muslims when the subject was not directly related to his main concern of 
race relations.
88
In addition to the Ahmadiyya translation of the Qur’an that he favored, 
Elijah Muhammad was, of course, dependent on many sources: instruc-
tion from Fard Muhammad, personal contact with other Muslims (and 
the literature of the Islamic Mission Movement of America), and vari-
ous other Christian writings and preachers, such as his contemporary, 
Judge Rutherford of the Jehovah’s Witnesses. The borrowing of ideas, in-
terpretations, and methods from these diverse sources, even if verbatim 
as with the preceding passage, should not be adduced as evidence that


--- PAGE 113 ---
102 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
Elijah Muhammad was not engaging in an act of interpretation. He was 
not merely compiling or manipulating the works of others; both the act of 
selection and the act of presentation in a given context are already acts of 
interpretation.
A Mufassir?
From this examination of the Qur’an’s application to the race myth, escha-
tology, dietary regulations, diatribes against hypocrites, and prescriptions 
for prayer, and the scripture’s noteworthy absence from his discussion of 
theology, creation, prophets, women, and fasting, it is quite evident that 
the question of whether or not Elijah Muhammad can be considered a 
mufassir is not an invalid one. Certainly he was not a typical mufassir, nor 
did he claim to be one. Only on rare occasions did Elijah Muhammad 
make it clear that he was providing commentary and doing so in a fash-
ion typical of other mufassirs. When he did, he would cite a passage of 
the Qur’an (with the verses in italics). Then, under the subheading “Com-
mentary, ” he would summarize or contextualize the verses and provide 
several paragraphs of explanation of the verses (in roman font).
89 At other 
times, he simply referred the reader to the verses and explained, verse by 
verse, what particular phrases meant. Occasionally, he invoked an ear-
lier Muslim authority, whom he usually cited by name. Those authorities, 
however, were Muhammad Ali and, less often, Yusuf Ali, the authors of 
the footnotes in the translations of the Qur’an that he used.
90
Significant sections of his Message to the Blackman in America , such 
as his political program of separation, his economic program of self-
sufficiency, and his demand for a black homeland within the continen-
tal United States, drew on no scriptural support—neither biblical nor 
quranic.
91 His reliance on biblical material over quranic material for 
some issues is also problematic, though perhaps the early Muslim mufas-
sirs’ dependence on biblical material (i.e., the isrā’īlīyāt ) establishes some 
precedent for Elijah Muhammad’s approach. More significant is the he-
gemony of his race myth and the situation in America over the traditional 
interpretations of the Qur’an (or the Bible, for that matter). It is not that 
the traditional interpretations are necessarily wrong, but for Elijah Mu-
hammad, scripture is more about the present than the past: “Everything 
mentioned in the Bible and Holy Qur’an such as plagues and judgments 
taking place in ancient times of the Bible and the Holy Qur’an against the 
opponents of Allah is to warn you and me that the same thing is coming


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary 103
upon America and Europe but America is No. 1 (first). ” 92 This interpre-
tation certainly appears unislamic—not unislamic in the sense of being 
opposed to Islam, but unislamic in the sense of not sharing many of the 
readily identifiable characteristics that make any belief, practice, and so 
forth seem Islamic.
At a more technical level, of the exegetical devices typically used by 
mufassirs—variant readings, early and pre-Islamic poetry, lexical expla-
nations, grammatical explanations, rhetorical explanations, periphrasis, 
analogy, abrogation, circumstances of revelation, identification, propheti-
cal tradition, and anecdote—only the last four are employed.
93 Elijah Mu-
hammad’s use of identification or specification ( ta‘yīn and tasmiya) in the 
form of glosses is quite obvious from the various passages cited above. 
One can even see the use of anecdote in the narratives that normally pro-
vide the framework for passages he cited. However, circumstances of rev-
elation and prophetic tradition can be said to be used by Elijah Muham-
mad only if one means by “prophetic” things that refer to Fard Muham-
mad and/or Elijah Muhammad. Given his apparent unfamiliarity with the 
Islamic exegetical tradition, and even Arabic, it is certainly reasonable to 
argue that Elijah Muhammad was not a mufassir.
On the other hand, historian John Wansbrough makes a useful obser-
vation with regard to the different narrative techniques found within the 
biography of the Prophet Muhammad (i.e., the sīra) that may be applica-
ble to Elijah Muhammad’s use of the Qur’an. He sees three types of tech-
niques in use in what he terms “haggadic” or “narrative” exegesis: they are 
the exegetical, parabolic, and paraphrastic. In the exegetical technique, ex-
tracts from scripture provide the framework for the narrative. In the para-
bolic, the narrative is the framework for frequent allusion to scripture. “In 
the exegetical style scriptural extracts, however discrete and truncated, ex-
hibit the canonical text; in the parabolic style scriptural allusions are im-
plicit only, exhibiting diction and imagery but not the verbatim text of the 
canon. ”
94 The third technique, by contrast, involves the “paraphrastic ver-
sions of scripture in the form of anecdote. ”95 All three of these techniques 
are evident in some form in Elijah Muhammad’s writings, particularly 
within the extended passages cited above.
96 Insofar as one is willing to see 
Ibn Ishāq (d. 768), the author of the Sīra, and Muqātil ibn Sulaymān (d. 
767), the author of a tafsīr, as mufassirs, one should recognize Elijah Mu-
hammad as a mufassir . The narrative framework provided by the earlier 
two mufassirs is not that of Elijah Muhammad, but the methods, the pro-
duction, and the purposes are much the same. For all three it is the story


--- PAGE 115 ---
104 The Major “Islamic” Themes in Elijah Muhammad’s Quranic Commentary
that matters: the quranic texts (and in the case of Elijah Muhammad, the 
biblical texts too) are subordinate conceptually (and often syntactically) to 
the narrative.
97 Wansbrough argues that the original context for haggadic 
or narrative exegesis is the popular sermon and that it had a central role 
in the process of community self-definition and formation.
98 Elijah Mu-
hammad’s writings are also rooted in the popular sermon. And the myth 
of Y akub and the white race of blue-eyed devils, their imminent destruc-
tion, the establishment of common practices in diet and prayer, and the 
attack on the hypocrites are clearly central to establishing and protecting 
his community of the Nation of Islam. And so, since he works toward 
these goals using the Qur’an and Islamic terminology, Elijah Muhammad 
is indeed a mufassir.


--- PAGE 116 ---
105
5
Elijah Muhammad, 
Other Muslims, and Islam
Was Elijah Muhammad a Muslim? Can the Nation of Islam be 
considered part of the larger Islamic tradition? These questions vex schol-
ars and Muslims alike. A broad definition of Islam might begin with the 
Five Principles of Islam: belief in Allah, angels, prophets, scriptures, and 
judgment day. Obviously, Elijah Muhammad’s teachings are at variance 
with several of these principles as traditionally defined. Not surprisingly, 
therefore, many Muslims have objected to some of the more prominent 
features of Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of Islam. They rightly ask, if 
the assertions that Fard Muhammad was “ Allah in person, ” that Elijah Mu-
hammad was Fard Muhammad’s Messenger, that heaven and hell are here 
on earth, that the white man is the devil, and so forth do not exclude one 
from the Islamic tradition, what does? Given these beliefs, many Muslims 
outside the Nation of Islam continue to vehemently object to the use of 
the words “Islam” and “Muslim” by Elijah Muhammad and his followers.
Several scholars are likewise hesitant to link Elijah Muhammad with 
traditional Islam. For instance, Sherman A. Jackson claims that “there was 
only the most perfunctory attempt to integrate even the most basic Is-
lamic doctrines and rituals into the religious life of the community, from 
the Five Pillars to the finality of prophethood resting with Muhammad of 
Arabia. ”
1
Many scholars, however, have attempted to minimize the differences 
between the Muslims of the Nation of Islam and “orthodox” Muslims. 
Aminah McCloud argues that the differences among the various Mus-
lim groups can be traced to the relative importance each places on the 
concepts of the larger and inclusive umma (community of believers) and 
narrower ‘asabiya (solidarity). This latter concept, which is a key theme 
of nation building, is in tension with the former, but Islam, according to 
McCloud, has always incorporated such diversity and multiculturalism.
2


--- PAGE 117 ---
106 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
Most other scholars seek to establish the Nation of Islam as a heretical 
sect, but one that is still part of Islam. C. Eric Lincoln acknowledges that 
differences exist, but argues that the Nation of Islam is a legitimate sect of 
Islam.
3 According to Steven Barboza, for most Muslims, calling members 
of the Nation of Islam “non-Muslims” might be going too far, but they 
still consider members of the Nation of Islam to be too politicized, racist, 
and/or heretical.
4 And recently, Claude Clegg concluded that “[o]verall, 
the basic outlines of both religious traditions do appear to overlap enough 
to allow the black organization to reasonably claim membership in the 
body of Islam, albeit as a heretical limb. ”
5 As discussed at the outset of 
this book, these rationalizations seem to place the scholar in the role of 
arbiter of orthodoxy—largely because scholars, like their Muslim coun-
terparts who have come to the opposite conclusion, still assume that there 
is something they can identify as “orthodox, ” “normative, ” “heretical, ” or 
“sectarian” Islam.
An even more vehement polemic suggests that the Nation of Islam 
does not even constitute a religion. Scholar of African American Islam 
Edward E. Curtis IV , however, demonstrates clearly that by any standard 
definition of religion, even one as simple and concise as the system of 
beliefs and practices relative to supernatural beings,
6 the Nation of Islam 
is a religion. “Of course, not every activity of NOI members was religious 
in nature, and it is important to emphasize that their religious activities, 
like those of all other human beings, were tied inextricably to their poli-
tics, social location, and their cultural orientations. ”
7 Thus, the issue for 
the scholar is not whether the Nation of Islam is a religion; it clearly is. 8
Curtis also points us in the right direction for the question of whether the 
Nation of Islam, whose members vocally state that they are Muslims, is a 
form of Islam:
[There is no] minimal definition of what it means to be a Muslim. In-
stead, wherever and whenever a person calls himself or herself Muslim, 
scholars should include this person’s voice in their understanding of what 
constitutes Islam. The mere fact that one has labeled oneself a Muslim 
indicates some sort of participation, however slight, in the process of Is-
lamic history.
9
If one were to attempt such a “minimal definition, ” however, despite the 
inherent difficulties of doing so, it might be something akin to “a Mus-
lim is someone who holds the Qur’an revealed to Muhammad to be the


--- PAGE 118 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 107
central authoritative source of his or her beliefs about Allah and what He 
has dictated for those who claim Him as their deity. ” Elijah Muhammad 
easily meets such a basic definition, even if he deviated from what most 
other Muslims claim Allah has dictated. One might be tempted to add 
to the definition the belief in the Sunna (the example of Muhammad the 
Prophet, which stands next to the Qur’an as the second most important 
source of Muslim belief and practice). However, not all Muslims have 
agreed on the role of the Sunna and what exactly comprises the Sunna. 
Even Sunnis and Shi‘is have separate collections. What they do agree on is 
the Qur’an, though that too is interpreted differently by them.
This point is not meant to minimize the tensions between Elijah Mu-
hammad and other Muslims, be they Sunnis, Shi‘is, and even Ahmadiyyas. 
Even with the latter group, whose translation of the Qur’an he employed, 
tensions emerged. In 1971 an Ahmadiyya Muslim criticized Elijah Mu-
hammad and the Nation of Islam on the radio. Muhammad Speaks re-
sponded by claiming that the movement originated in British India and 
was financed by Christians to help pacify Muslims who were revolting 
against British rule. It was also (very oddly) claimed that “[t]he move-
ment tailored the Holy Quran to meet the needs and objectives of the 
foreign occupier. ”
10 In fact, it is all of these tensions that merit further ex-
amination, for the growing animosity during the last decade and a half of 
Elijah Muhammad’s life between himself and other Muslims provides an 
insight into what he believed Islam to be and the role he saw for himself 
and his movement within the larger Islamic tradition.
Other Muslims on Elijah Muhammad
There were always a few Muslims from outside the Nation of Islam, such 
as the Pakistani author and regular columnist in Muhammad Speaks Ab-
dul Basit Naeem, who supported the efforts of Elijah Muhammad and 
had great respect for this Muslim leader. Some accepted—or, better, 
tolerated—his racialist form of Islam largely because it at least moved 
its followers closer to their understanding of what constituted “ortho-
dox” Islam. Naeem was unusual in his wholehearted embrace of Elijah 
Muhammad’s teachings.
11 In the mid-1960s he regularly contributed to 
Muhammad Speaks , where he would extol the achievements of Elijah 
Muhammad, chastise Muslims from the East for criticizing him, and re-
peatedly and vehemently lash out at Malcolm X.
12 For his introduction to 
The Supreme Wisdom, Naeem stated that he was aware that the teachings


--- PAGE 119 ---
108 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
of Elijah Muhammad were controversial for some Muslims. However, 
Naeem stated, “ As far as I am concerned, I consider the differences be-
tween Islam of the East and teaching of Mr. Elijah Muhammad to be of 
relatively minor importance at this time , because these are not related to 
the SPIRIT of Islam, which I am sure, is completely shared by all of us. ”
13
That is to say, for Naeem the ends justified the means, and he was confi-
dent that soon Elijah Muhammad’s followers would study the Qur’an and 
be instructed on the correct performance of prayers and other Islamic du-
ties.
14 In fact, in The Supreme Wisdom  Elijah Muhammad did encourage 
his followers (apparently with limited success) to read the Qur’an and to 
perform the five daily prayers. Later, Naeem again wrote what Elijah Mu-
hammad wanted said: “I do, however, believe that it is neither imperative 
nor entirely beneficial for my brothers and sisters in Islam in the Western 
Hemisphere to look to the ‘East’ for guidance and advice—especially in 
matters essentially ‘local’ in nature and character. ”
15 He argued further that 
Muslims of the East were a “live” people who were unaware why white 
people were regarded as “devils. ” Elijah Muhammad, on the other hand, 
was addressing a “mentally dead” people who were still under the tyranny 
of these devils. In fact, it is the Nation of Islam that might provide guid-
ance to their Eastern coreligionists: “I, for one, see no reason why the U.S. 
Muslims—followers of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad—could not be 
instrumental in reviving or giving a new meaning to the spirit of Islam. ”
16
Nevertheless, most Muslims outside the Nation of Islam who were aware 
of Elijah Muhammad were not so generous.
The first major Muslim critic to very publicly attack Elijah Muhammad 
was Talib Ahmad Dawud, who led a rival organization called the Mus-
lim Brotherhood USA. The two men exchanged theological and personal 
barbs in the printed news media. Dawud’s attack focused on predictable 
targets: the incarnation of Allah in Fard Muhammad, the demand for ra-
cial segregation, the future book, and the improper prayers used by the 
Nation of Islam:
Mr. Muhammad’s followers do not make prayer properly; they do not 
face the East and say their prayers five times a day, as all true Muslim’s 
[sic] do; their houses of worship are called “temples, ” while the houses of 
worship of the true Muslim’s [sic] are called Mosques....  A l l  t r u e  m u s -
lims believe that the Koran will be here until the day of Judgment, but 
Mr. Muhammad tells his followers that the Koran will be superseded by 
a book written for black people. Another basic difference, . . . the Muslim


--- PAGE 120 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 109
faith does not teach hatred of any particular group, but on the contrary, 
welcomes people of all races and colors so long as they abide by and live 
up to the teachings of Islam. . . . The true Muslims worship Allah, but Mr. 
Muhammad and his followers claim that Allah is a man named W . Fard 
Muhammad. . . .
17
Furthermore, he claimed that Fard Muhammad was a Turkish white man 
who was once a Nazi agent. He also accused Elijah Muhammad of being 
a fake, an ex-convict, and a teacher of racial hatred. Having recently com-
pleted his own hajj, Dawud asserted that Elijah Muhammad would be for-
bidden entry into Mecca since he was not a “true” Muslim.
18 Both he and 
his wife, the singer Dakota Staton, on separate occasions reiterated the 
last claim, trying to distance themselves from Elijah Muhammad. Staton 
stated that there is “absolutely no connection between Elijah Muhammad 
[sic] group . . . and the Muslim Brotherhood USA, of which I am a part, ” 
and Dawud maintained, “There is no connection whatsoever between the 
Moslem’s [sic] of Elijah Muhammad and the bonafide Muslims who wor-
ship Allah. ”
19 A few years later, Dawud announced plans to file a lawsuit 
to prevent Elijah Muhammad from using the words “Islam” and “Muslim” 
when speaking of the Nation of Islam.
Jamil Diab, a Palestinian Arab who came to the United States in 1948, 
was another outspoken critic of Elijah Muhammad. Although never a 
member of the Nation of Islam, he had served as the principal of Elijah 
Muhammad’s University of Islam. He was fired for teaching orthodox Is-
lam and then became the director of the Islamic Center of Chicago. Of 
the Nation of Islam, Diab argued,
This cult is totally lacking in the requisites which constitutes any Mus-
lim group. They have different religious books, prayers, their fasts, in fact 
the criteria by which Muslims and non-Muslims judge an organization 
or group to be an Islamic one—cannot be applied to this group. . . . The 
very cornerstone of Islam, universal brotherhood of man, black as well as 
white, has been turned into hatred by them. . . . [The Nation of Islam] is 
not now, nor has it ever been part of [Islam].
20
Diab’s questionable assertion of a race-blind Islam notwithstanding, the 
other claims, like Dawud’s, were problematic for Elijah Muhammad. Later, 
others, such as the Ahmadiyya Adib Nurud-din in 1962, also dismissed 
Elijah Muhammad’s teachings as absurd. These Sunni Muslim critics may


--- PAGE 121 ---
110 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
have had centuries of traditional Islamic doctrine on their side, but Eli-
jah Muhammad’s form of Islam had a significant head start within the 
African American community, and so their effect was limited.
21 However, 
since Malcolm X was the most visible and well-known spokesperson for 
the Nation of Islam, it fell to him to answer many of these challenges. 
Consequently, they may have provided an initial impetus for Malcolm X 
to reevaluate his mentor’s racial teachings.
22
This flurry of denunciations was in part prompted by the Nation of 
Islam’s sudden media attention from 1959 onwards. When it came to the 
attention of white America, it also came to the attention of other Muslim 
groups, many of whom hurried to dissociate their religion from what was 
being almost universally labeled as a “hate group. ” The denunciation from 
Muslims outside of the Nation of Islam continued throughout the 1960s 
and 1970s, but most of these critics had no significant support within the 
African American community. Nevertheless, these types of polemics even 
outlived Elijah Muhammad. For example, in the 1990s an early definition 
of Islam available on the internet asserted,
ISLAM, and so-called “Nation of Islam, ” are two different religions. The 
only thing common between them is the jargon, the language used by 
both. “The Nation of Islam” is a misnomer; this religion should be called 
Farrakhanism, after the name of its propagator. The religion of Elijah 
Muhammad and W . D. Fard died with their death because their officially 
and popularly elected successor, W . D. Muhammad, integrated the com-
munity with the Muslim community at large. . . .
23
The author of the definition, Asim Mughal, then juxtaposed standard Is-
lamic teachings with those of the Nation of Islam with regard to Allah, 
the Prophet Muhammad, the Last Day, the Qur’an, the Bible, the shahāda 
(the confession of faith: “There is no God but Allah; Muhammad is the 
Messenger of Allah”), prayer, almsgiving, fasting, pilgrimage, things per-
mitted and prohibited, and the role of the Sunna. Mughal concluded that 
the Nation of Islam is a “pseudo-Islamic cult. ”
24
Elijah Muhammad on Other Muslims
In the early years, Elijah Muhammad made no mention of tensions with 
other Muslims. His only significant critique was that some Arab Muslims 
continued to believe that they could convert Whites to Islam.
25 He also


--- PAGE 122 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 111
recognized that his goals and those of other Muslims differed. He asserted 
that the aim of Islam in America is
1. To teach our people the truth
2. Clean them up and make them self-respecting and unite them on 
to their own kind
3. Bring them face to face with our God, and teach them to know 
their enemies.26
Elijah Muhammad, of course, believed these goals to be compatible—
probably even identical—with the Islam of other Muslims.
In The Supreme Wisdom he painted a utopian image of Muslims in the 
East. These Muslims had no slavery, they had peace, they lived in the best 
and richest part of the world, they were true brothers and sisters to each 
other, and so on.
27 Elijah Muhammad, perhaps a bit naively, suggested 
that any black follower of his would be “welcomed with sincere and 
open arms and recognized by his light-skinned or copper-colored Arab 
brother. ”
28 This view was confirmed to him when Malcolm X sent a report 
from Arabia in the summer of 1959. He described Arabs as “many differ-
ent shades, ranging from regal black to rich brown, but none are white. ” 
He added that Arabs see African Americans as “our brothers of color” 
and that there “is no color prejudice among the Moslems. ”
29 However, 
several events dramatically changed his view of Muslims from the East. 
First, American Muslims not in the Nation of Islam attacked him as a 
non-Muslim. Second, he saw first-hand during his travels that the utopia 
he envisioned in the East did not exist. And third, even Muslims from the 
East denied that he was a Muslim.
Elijah Muhammad’s understanding that black people were (or were 
supposed to be) Muslims and white people were not (and could not be) 
Muslims caused problems for the movement. There were several incidents 
of Arab Muslims being refused entry into the Chicago Temple—presum-
ably because they were not black. Then came the criticisms of Diab and 
Dawud. These attacks were taken very seriously by Elijah Muhammad. 
His retort in his weekly column was both vehement and personal:
Talid Ahmad Dawud and his TV blues-singing Miss Dakota Staton (who 
the paper says is Mrs. Alijah Rabia Dawud in private life) and whom the 
world can hear her filthy blues and love songs and see her immodestly 
dressed, were successful last week in getting a chance to breathe their


--- PAGE 123 ---
112 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
venomous poison against me and my followers in this paper and in the 
local Chicago paper, The Crusader. Mr. Dawud is from the West Indies 
(Antigua) and was born a British su bject. He was known by the name 
Rannie (sounds like a devil’s name). He is jealous of the progress with 
which Allah (to whom praises are due) is blessing me and my followers, 
and this jealousy is about to run Mr. Dawud insane. (The Crusader er-
roneously called him an Imam.) Mr. Dawud and Miss Staton should have 
been ashamed to try to make fun of me and my followers while publicly 
serving the devil in the theatrical world. I do not allow my followers to 
visit such, nor do I allow my wife and the believing women who follow 
me to go before the public partly dressed. If they would, never would I 
claim them to be mine any more.
Mr. Dawud has been trying for some time to do me and my followers 
harm in the Islamic world through the Muslim Embassy in this country 
and abroad, but he is only hurting himself. 
30
It seems likely that this rivalry, though apparently one over doctrine, was 
motivated primarily by a desire of each man’s organization to be “the pre-
eminent Islamic movement in the United States, and to tap into patronage 
from Arab leaders. ”
31 For his part, Elijah Muhammad felt that Muslims 
from the East now living in the West had been corrupted, turning “them 
into hypocrites of the worst type. ” 
32
At this stage in the late 1950s and early 1960s, there were still no harsh 
words for the Muslims of the East. Even when Elijah Muhammad first 
challenged the charges that his movement was not really Islamic, he 
thought the differences between his Muslims and other Muslims were 
merely a product of the differing contexts:
My brothers in the East were never subjected to conditions of slavery and 
systematic brainwashing by the slavemasters for as long a period of time 
as my people here were subjected. I cannot, therefore, blame them if they 
differ with me in certain interpretations of the Message of Islam. In fact, I 
do not even expect  them to understand some of the things I say unto my 
people here.
33
At least with regard to the accusation that prayer in the Nation of Islam 
did not conform to orthodox standards, especially with regard to the use 
of English instead of Arabic, Elijah Muhammad attempted to explain 
again the effects of the different context to his Muslim critics:


--- PAGE 124 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 113
My followers here in the wilderness of North America do not speak a 
language of their own. They lost their original tongue when the devil (Eu-
ropean) slave-master had made their foreparents his slaves and brought 
them here from their native homeland (Africa) against their will and 
consent.
Today we are forced to worship our own God, Allah in an alien lan-
g u a g e ....  B u t  t h e  A l l - W i s e  a n d  M o s t  M e r c i f u l  A l l a h ,  t o  W h o m  a l l  p r a i s e s  
are due forever, does not demand of us that we pray to Him in a language 
we no longer can use or have mastery of. He promises to hear and grant 
our prayers no matter how we beseech His help and guidance.
Moreover, many of your followers are not yet qualified to learn and re-
cite the daily prayers in their own language. . . . Before they go after that, 
they have to prepare and prove themselves to be deserving and worthy of 
i t ....
34
With his ‘umra (the “lesser pilgrimage, ” which can be performed at 
any time but is normally performed with the hajj) and tour of Muslim 
countries in late 1959 and early 1960, he answered the domestic charges 
that he was not a Muslim: after all, Dawud had claimed that Elijah Mu-
hammad would not be permitted to enter Mecca. Having completed 
the hajj, he had all the evidence he needed to claim that the rest of 
the Muslim world recognized him as a Muslim.
35 However, it was dur-
ing this trip that for the first time he saw his “brothers in the East” in 
person.
On the one hand the pilgrimage nudged Elijah Muhammad closer to 
Sunni Islam. For instance, apparently Elijah Muhammad planned to re-
name his temples “mosques. ” On the other hand, he was forced to con-
front some harsh realities about his coreligionists in the East: instead of 
opulent wealth, he found poverty; instead of a society of brilliant scien-
tists, he found premodern societies.
Muhammad’s disappointment with the Middle East caused him to de-
emphasize the importance of making overtures to Arab and African 
Muslims and to stress traditional elements of the Nation’s doctrines. To 
a large degree, he lost respect for those he had esteemed as the Tribe of 
S h a b b a z  i n  E a s t  A s i a ....  I n t e r e s t i n g l y ,  t h e  A f r o - A s i a n  t o u r  h a d  a ff o r d e d  
him credibility and validation, but it also instilled in him a measure of 
disillusionment that reinforced the very beliefs and practices for which 
orthodox Muslims had scorned him.
36


--- PAGE 125 ---
114 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
Fortunately for Elijah Muhammad, acceptance from Muslims of the East 
was far from the most pressing concern for his followers in the inner cit-
ies of the United States.
Nevertheless, Elijah Muhammad continued to confront Muslims who 
questioned his orthodoxy. In 1963, he still sought to minimize differences, 
writing, “we are not enemies” and “They, too, are gradually coming over 
with me in the understanding for the first time in their history; the re-
alization of the devils. It is in the Holy Qur-an that these people are the 
devils, and the scholars of Islam know it. ” But he also felt increasingly 
comfortable emphasizing his independence: “I am sent from Allah and 
not from the Secretary General of the Muslim League. There is no Muslim 
in Arabia that has authority to stop me from delivering this message that 
I have been assigned to by Allah. . . . I am not taking orders from them, 
I am taking orders from Allah (God) himself. ”
37 Later, however, he be-
came even less concerned with currying favor with “orthodox” Muslims. 
Knowing the political, social, and racial problems of eastern Muslims may 
have made the break with them easier; but having met and spoken with 
so many learned Muslims during his travels, he was undoubtedly aware of 
how much more they knew about the Qur’an than he did, and this real-
ization may even have made the break with them necessary.
On doctrinal issues, he began challenging these Muslims in 1965 by 
claiming that his Islam was supplanting theirs:
The Orthodox Muslims will have to bow to the choice of Allah. Allah will 
bring about a new Islam. As for the Principles of Belief, they remain the 
same. . . . We are seeing this change now and entering into it. The devils 
oppose this change, and the Orthodox join them in opposing us because 
of their desire to carry on the old way of Islam.
38
And, when he was challenged on this reading of the Qur’an, he retorted,
Many Orthodox Muslims do not want to believe that Allah has appeared 
in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad or that He has made manifest 
the truth that has been hidden from their religious scientists—the truth 
of God and of the devil as revealed to me. Though they do have the Holy 
Qur-an, many of them do not understand the meaning of it, and some of 
them believe everything that is prophesied in the Bible and Holy Qur-an 
about a last Messenger or Prophet being or referring to Muhammad of 
1,400 years ago.
39


--- PAGE 126 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 115
Other Muslims whose sensibilities were troubled by Elijah Muhammad’s 
claim to be a Messenger of Allah sent to his people in America were told 
they had misunderstood the Qur’an, for it teaches that each community 
must have its own messenger who speaks its language.
40 They were like-
wise mistaken about the nature of God:
Some Orthodox Muslims mock us for the sake of being accepted as a 
friend of their and our enemy. They are spooky minded and believe that 
Allah (God) is some immaterial something. . . . The ignorant belief of 
the Orthodox Muslims, that Allah (God) is Some Formless Something 
and yet He Has An Interest in our affairs, can be condemned in no limit 
of time. I would not give two cents for that kind of God, in which they 
believe.
41
Thus, in the mid-1960s Elijah Muhammad saw his Muslim detractors as 
simply conservative and confused, or, more ominously, as attempting to 
curry the favor of Whites.
By 1972, however, Elijah Muhammad’s rhetoric had evolved yet again. 
He charged other Muslims not simply with being allied to the “white dev-
ils” and confused but with being “white” and deceived: “We have a New 
Islam coming up. The Old Islam was led by white people, white Mus-
lims, but this one will not be. This Islam will be established and led by 
Black Muslims only. ”
42 The earlier “copper-colored” Muslims were now 
“white” Muslims, and their forms of Islam were equated with Christian-
ity: “The Christians and most old world Muslims are alike: not having a 
true knowledge of the Supreme One, referred to as Allah, and God makes 
most people believe that God is something other than a man. ”
43
Elijah Muhammad’s claim to be Muslim and his authority to lead his 
Muslim followers was never predicated on acceptance by “orthodox” Mus-
lims. That authority came directly from Allah himself. Elijah Muhammad 
claimed, “God, Almighty appointed me” and “The Apostle is considered 
one in Allah and Allah is one in the Apostle. So, when you look at one, 
you see both; when you hear one speak, you hear both. ”
44 To those who 
claimed to believe in Allah but not his Messenger (a defining character-
istic of hypocrites, according to Elijah Muhammad), he said, “they err, 
because it is impossible for one to believe in either One—God or the 
Messenger—and not believe in Both, for the Messenger is the only source 
of communication and guidance for the people. So, rejecting the Messen-
ger is rejecting God, The Sender of the Messenger. ”
45 In his early writings,


--- PAGE 127 ---
116 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
he had appealed to his coreligionists to the East, but when push came to 
shove, his authority overruled that of all other Muslims, and he was will-
ing first to abandon them and then to reject them.
Elijah Muhammad’s Islams
Obviously, there is no monolithic Islam, except perhaps in the minds of 
Muslims with salafiyyah inclinations (i.e., so-called fundamentalist Mus-
lims) and in the minds of scholars with orientalist inclinations. Some 
scholars have a litmus test for Islam, which Elijah Muhammad fails. For 
instance, Sylviane A. Diouf suggests that
[a]ccording to Islam, nothing is more unforgivable and heinous than 
shirk, the association of others—such as Waly Fard—with the worship of 
God. Likewise, to believe that other prophets—such as Noble Drew Ali 
and Elijah Muhammad—follow Muhammad cannot be reconciled with 
orthodox Islam. These affirmations are not differences of interpretations; 
they are contrary to the most fundamental teachings of the religion.
46
However, there has been no shortage of Muslims who have had beliefs and 
practices that were considered heretical by their coreligionists and who 
brought their own background, culture, or agenda to their understand-
ing of Islam in the same way that Elijah Muhammad had done. Many, 
including Sufis and Shi‘is, have been accused of shirk by a few. A more 
fruitful approach is to ask why Islam should be employed at all by Elijah 
Muhammad, given the sometimes hostile but always ambivalent relation-
ship between him and other Muslims, be they Sunnis, Shi‘is, Ahmadiyyas, 
or Sufis. Because of this ambivalence, some scholars argue that Islam was 
merely a façade for Elijah Muhammad. Others see Elijah Muhammad as 
the leader of a Muslim millenarian movement. Still others put Elijah Mu-
hammad much more firmly inside the Islamic tradition, as a mufassir, ji-
hadist, or proto-Muslim. Each of these views has some merit, but neither 
individually nor collectively do they fully explain the critical role Islam 
played for Elijah Muhammad personally.
47
The Aegis of Islam
For several scholars Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam was not 
primarily a religious movement. The most significant advocate of this


--- PAGE 128 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 117
position was C. Eric Lincoln, who argued that the Nation of Islam only 
required the façade of Islam:
[T]he aegis of orthodox Islam means little in America’s black ghettos. 
So long as the movement keeps its color identity with the rising black 
peoples of Africa, it could discard all its Islamic attributes—its name, its 
prayers to Allah, its citations from the Quran, everything “Muslim, ” with-
out substantial risk to its appeal to the black masses.
48
In other words, the appeal to Islamic figures, language, scripture, and so 
forth by Elijah Muhammad was at best superficial—perhaps merely a ves-
tige of the impetus of Fard Muhammad. Lincoln does not deny the social 
benefits arising from invoking Islam, but he does deny Islam’s centrality: 
“although the Black Muslims call their movement a religion, religious val-
ues have a secondary importance. They are not part of the movement’s 
basic appeal, except to the extent that they foster and strengthen the sense 
of group solidarity. ”
49
A variation of this view comes from sociologist Clifton E. Marsh. For 
him, the Nation of Islam was primarily a “black separatist movement. ” 
Through it, Elijah Muhammad sought to solve the problem of racism and 
inequality in the United States with an emphasis on black pride and prac-
tical economic programs.
The fact that the organization was not purely Islamic does not tarnish the 
reality of the Nation of Islam having been an important vehicle for social 
change. Many black people did not adhere to the organization’s beliefs, 
but the Nation of Islam did raise their consciousness of African heredity 
and provided jobs for many inner-city residents.
50
For both Lincoln and Marsh, therefore, Elijah Muhammad constructed a 
racialist movement, not necessarily (or at least not primarily) a religious 
one.
51
Evidence in support of this position could come from within the Na-
tion of Islam as well. Far more important than the Islamic links, or even 
the original Asiatic links, were the African links. Elijah Muhammad him-
self said as much: “The Black African, the Aboriginal Black People of the 
earth, are our real brothers. We are part of, and belong to each other. ”
52
Support could also be drawn from Warith Deen Muhammad, the son of 
Elijah Muhammad and one of his successors. In an interview in 1979 he


--- PAGE 129 ---
118 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
was asked if the Nation of Islam was a social movement or a religion. He 
replied, “It was a religion and a social movement organization. In fact, 
the religion as it was introduced to the Nation of Islam was more a social 
reform philosophy than Orthodox Islam. ”
53
There are, however, at least two problems with this view. The first is 
a serious theoretical failing. As Curtis points out, Lincoln distinguishes 
between “politics” and “religion” in a way that simply does not reflect the 
way the Nation of Islam functioned:
His use of religion and politics as analytical categories ultimately obscured 
more than they revealed since he underemphasized the legitimately reli-
gious aspects of the movement’s nationalistic activity. In reality, of course, 
the line between religion and politics was and is often more blurry than 
he indicated. Indeed, politics and religion were wedded in fascinating and 
problematical ways within the movement.
54
Curtis adds that viewing “Islam” as a religion in this way essentializes it 
and puts the scholar in the position of judging what constitutes true Is-
lam. Similarly, the line between Elijah Muhammad’s economic program 
and his religion is blurry. Having been called a “black capitalist, ” he re-
sponded by arguing, “whatever I’m doing has nothing whatsoever to do 
with this ‘ism’ or that ‘ism’ or any kind of ‘ism. ’ . . . My work is all in the 
line of what Allah, the Almighty God, Who Came in the person of Master 
W . Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever, specifically as-
signed me to do. . . . ”
55
A second problem exists, even if one were to permit this artificial and 
problematic separation of religion and politics: the important role religion 
played for Elijah Muhammad is oversimplified. Clearly Elijah Muhammad 
did not feel the need to seek the approval of Muslims outside his move-
ment. And yet, when he came under attack from other Muslims, he did 
not reject Islam; he rejected them (as “white Muslims”), suggesting that 
Islam—as he understood it—was integral to him. In fact, Elijah Muham-
mad merely focused most intensely on those features of Islam that were 
most relevant to African Americans—that is, those that dealt with “color 
identity. ” The perceived connections of Islam with Africa, the centuries 
of confrontation of the “Muslim world” with Christendom, the glory of 
earlier Islamic civilizations, the assumed lack of “slave teachings” in Islam, 
and the antipathy of white Americans towards Islam were critical to the 
identity that Elijah Muhammad was trying to forge in the members of his


--- PAGE 130 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 119
movement. Some “religious” aspects of Islam were important too: rituals 
such as prayer, for instance, fostered the critically important social cohe-
sion and gave tangible expressions to new identities that Elijah Muham-
mad sought to forge. Thus, even if Elijah Muhammad boldly declared that 
it is “far more important to teach the separation of Blacks and Whites in 
America than prayer, ”
56 prayer services (along with the rallies) were the 
most visible expression of that separation. But the aforementioned ideo-
logical aspects of Islam were the most crucial. The “color identity” that 
Lincoln and Marsh take to be the essence of the Nation of Islam is inex-
tricably intertwined with Elijah Muhammad’s unique formulation of Is-
lam. Most importantly, for Elijah Muhammad himself, his own authority 
and everything from his race myth to the new Islamic identities and his 
economic programs were founded entirely upon his unique prophetic ac-
cess to “the eternal and transcendent authority” of Fard Muhammad (i.e., 
Allah incarnate). Therefore, this key feature of his mythmaking required 
the religious credibility that the aegis of Islam provided for that claim. 
Islam as a “religion, ” if not all of its “orthodox” practices and beliefs, was 
indispensable. As Curtis points out, the intellectuals of the Nation of Is-
lam expended considerable energy and displayed considerable ingenuity 
defending their leader’s Islamic legitimacy. Even though they occasionally 
doubted some of his more problematic claims, they maintained that Eli-
jah Muhammad was crucial to being a Muslim and practicing Islam.
57 Al-
though it is not for the scholar of Islam to decide whether Elijah Muham-
mad was a “real Muslim, ” it is impossible to understand him, his move-
ment, and his teachings apart from Islam.
Sherman A. Jackson suggests a far more nuanced and intriguing 
variation of the façade-of-Islam argument—one that, unlike Lincoln’s 
and Marsh’s, does describe the Nation of Islam as essentially a religious 
movement. Jackson explains, “Black Religion functioned as the core, with 
the trappings (namely vocabulary) of  Islam serving as the outer shell. ”
58
“Black Religion” for Jackson is a subset of African American religion that 
is characterized by a pragmatic, fol k-oriented “holy protest” against, and 
opposition to, white supremacy and anti-Black racism.
59 As such, Black 
Religion is a uniquely American religion born out of a uniquely American 
reality. Furthermore, Black Religion can appropriate either Christianity or 
Islam; that is, it can “[enlist] the aid of a set of nonindigenous ideas or 
doctrines in [its] own existential or ideological struggle” without defer-
ring to the traditional authorities over those ideas and doctrines. “ A black 
adopts Islam or Christianity, in other words, not in order to become an


--- PAGE 131 ---
120 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
honorary Arab or white but in order to become a truer, more authentic 
‘black man!’”60
While Jackson’s variation does not suffer from the weakness of an 
artificial distinction between polit ics and religion, it does still seem to 
minimize the importance of Islam for Elijah Muhammad. According to 
Curtis’s analysis of the Nation of Islam from 1960 to 1975, the same cen-
trality of Islam for ordinary members of the Nation of Islam is also evi-
dent.
61 And, as we saw earlier, Jackson sees numerous characteristics of 
Islam that made its marriage to Black Religion “felicitous. ” Some of these 
characteristics included the perceived connection of Islam with Africa; 
the independence from white Europeans and their descendants; a reputa-
tion for resistance; a non-European-centered civilization; a simple theol-
ogy, at least compared with trinitarianism; a conservative social ethic; the 
retributive justice of the Qur’an; the lack of an ecclesiastical hierarchy in 
Sunni Islam; and the hatred and fear of Islam by Whites.
62 However, the 
importance of Islam to the ideological claims made by Elijah Muhammad 
and the tenacity with which he clung to Islam in the face of opposition 
suggest that one should view these characteristics as necessary instead of 
simply fortuitous. Doing so, to use Jackson’s terminology, would move Is-
lam from the “outer shell” to the core.
63
Elijah Muhammad’s Roles in Islam
Many other scholars see Elijah Muhammad and his Nation of Islam as 
fully inside the Islamic fold. Some of them, therefore, focus on describing 
Elijah Muhammad’s role within Islam using terminology drawn from Is-
lam itself or from the study of religion. Thus Elijah Muhammad has been 
reimagined as the leader of a millenarian movement, a mufassir, a jihad-
ist, and even a “crypto-orthodox” Muslim or “proto-Muslim. ”
Political scientist Martha F . Lee, emphasizing Elijah Muhammad’s 
teachings on the doctrine of the Fall of America, argues that his Nation 
of Islam was a millenarian movement. She defines millenarianism as “the 
belief in an imminent, ultimate, collective, this-worldly, and total salva-
tion. ”
64 Elijah Muhammad’s conception of the apocalypse included the 
imminent demise of the six thousand years of devilish white rule. These 
devils would be completely destroyed and only the faithful—those Blacks 
who had separated themselves mentally and physically from Whites—
would survive. Only then could they assume their rightful place: with 
the evil of this world removed, a renewed and perfect (black) world of


--- PAGE 132 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 121
eternal peace and justice would arise.  All the elements of millenarian 
movements, therefore, are present in Elijah Muhammad’s prophecy of the 
Fall of America: the past and present suffering is explained, the means by 
which the end will come is provided, the steps that must be taken to avoid 
the cataclysm are elaborated, the unity against a common foe is engen-
dered, and the punishment of the wicked and the consequent role reversal 
was envisioned. For Lee, the various moral, social, political, and economic 
programs of Elijah Muhammad were all preparations for the coming Fall 
of America.
Not all millenarianism is religious (e.g., Marxism). However, most it-
erations are, and in examining the Nation of Islam from this perspective, 
Lee produces excellent insights that might also explain the role of Islam 
in Elijah Muhammad’s thought. There is no doubt that Elijah Muhammad 
was a millenarian. However, many of his teachings are directed towards 
improving life for African Americans in the here and now. His economic 
program was designed to free them from white domination. This pro-
gram, like his various moral, social, and dietary requirements, could be 
seen as merely necessary preparations for the Fall of America. However, 
all these aspects of Elijah Muhammad’s teachings were not dependent 
on millenarianism, for they continued long after the predicted end times 
had to be postponed indefinitely. Millenarianism is certainly an impor-
tant characteristic of Elijah Muhammad’s Islam, but hardly its defining 
characteristic.
We have explored how Elijah Muhammad interpreted the Qur’an. He 
used many techniques that traditionally trained mufassirs would have 
used. Not surprisingly, he ignored—or more likely was unaware of—most 
of the classical tradition of quranic exegesis. His was an exegesis rooted 
in the methods by which popular preachers used the Bible. If he became 
aware of differences, Elijah Muhammad felt that his understanding of the 
Qur’an was both superior and sufficient, whereas classical exegesis of the 
Qur’an was either incorrect or unnecessary. In this regard, he displayed 
a confidence in his formulation of Islam characteristic of many Muslim 
mufassirs.
Since he introduced the Qur’an to tens of thousands of African Ameri-
cans, both by having them read it and by showing them how to read it, 
he could certainly be classified as the first African American Muslim mu-
fassir. However, his intent was not primarily to try to explain the Qur’an 
to African Americans. Nor did he define himself as a mufassir. He de-
fined himself as a prophet. Thus, while he acted as a commentator on the


--- PAGE 133 ---
122 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
Qur’an to his African American followers, this activity likewise does not 
fully explain his role in Islam.
Richard Brent Turner places Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad 
in a long series of African American Muslims who sought to combat the 
injustice, inequality, and racism of the United States with jihad—not a 
jihad of violence against unbelievers, but a jihad of words that attempts 
to defend and propagate Islam through preaching, education, and self-
transformation.
65 Elijah Muhammad certainly fits this description, as long 
as one defines the word “jihadist” very narrowly. Although the Fruit of 
Islam were trained for combat, Elijah Muhammad never advocated such 
measures. Elijah Muhammad did, however, refer to the “Great War of Ar-
mageddon” as the “Holy War. ” The carrying of weapons had always been 
forbidden by Elijah Muhammad.
66 Only rarely did he even seem to advo-
cate any kind of violence:
Surah 2:100
Fight with those who fight with you, and know that Allah is with the 
believers.
Surah 9:20
Fighting is prescribed for you, and you dislike it, but it is possible that 
you dislike a thing which is good for [sic] and that you love a thing which 
is bad for you.
Surah 2:216
Surely Allah will defend those who believe: Surely Allah loveth not a 
traitor.
Surah 22:38
Muslims must not trust hypocrites and disbelievers of Islam, even though 
they be your near of kin.
We Muslims may have to learn it the hard way. Y ou like to be soft and 
kind to the hypocrites thinking that they are likewise, but you could be 
deceived.
Fight anyone who fights you. This is the Law of Nature. BE NOT A 
COW ARD.
67
Naeem, Elijah Muhammad’s Pakistani sycophant, however, argued 
that members of the Nation of Islam, because they are a minority and


--- PAGE 134 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 123
surrounded by “openly hostile elements, ” must be considered to be living 
in a perpetual stated of jihad and be classified as mujahids.68 Presumably, 
Elijah Muhammad permitted Naeem to make this argument.
Even so, as with the label “mufassir, ” Elijah Muhammad never described 
himself as a jihadist. The very absence from his rhetoric of a term that 
would have lent itself so well to his teachings is odd. Nevertheless, preach-
ing, education, and psychological, sociological, and economic self-transfor-
mation are all hallmarks of Elijah Muhammad and his message. He dedi-
cated his life to equating power with blackness.
69 However, this ideology 
was thoroughly conservative: it did little to physically challenge the status 
quo in the United States—much to the chagrin of some of his followers, 
including Malcolm X. In this broader sense, there was no jihad, and Elijah 
Muhammad was no jihadist—at least not in any normal usage of the term.
The Crypto-/Proto-Orthodox Muslim
Wallace Muhammad (later known as Warith Deen Mohammed) suc-
ceeded his father, Elijah Muhammad, when he died in 1975. It was through 
his efforts that the Nation of Islam was renamed and transformed into 
a Sunni Muslim organization. All the “heretical” teachings of the Nation 
of Islam, such as Fard Muhammad being Allah, Elijah Muhammad be-
ing his Messenger, the race myth, and the political demands, were aban-
doned. Fard Muhammad was reduced to being a “very wise man” and 
Elijah Muhammad to being a “wise leader, ” not Allah and his prophet, 
respectively.
70
More recently, Warith Deen Mohammed portrayed Fard Muhammad 
as someone whose true but secret purpose was to bring African Ameri-
cans to “orthodox Islam” (that is, orthodox as understood by Warith Deen
Mohammed). “He wanted that we study the Qur’an” but told his follower 
Elijah Muhammad not to teach the Qur’an. Instead, he told him, “When 
the time comes, your children will learn the Qur’an, and they will teach 
you. ” Thus, Fard Muhammad had “created this thing as a strategy, a tem-
porary strategy, a temporary language environment, to hold uneducated 
B l a c k s...  l o n g  e n o u g h  t o  c o m e  i n t o  a n  i n d e p e n d e n t  m i n d...  a n d  t h e n  
later study the Qur’an. ” In fact, according to Warith Deen Mohammed, 
Fard Muhammad knew things would get better in America for African 
Americans. Eventually, as they became more educated, they would ques-
tion the very racial myth that Fard Muhammad had created. They would 
discover that even Fard Muhammad himself had ridiculed it.
71


--- PAGE 135 ---
124 Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam
Moreover, Warith Deen Mohammed reinterprets the meaning of the 
predicted future book. According to him, Fard Muhammad had told Eli-
jah Muhammad that “there is coming another Islam. Y ou will get another 
holy Qur’an. ”
72 When Fard Muhammad gave Elijah Muhammad an Arabic 
book, it appears that the latter took it to be that new Qur’an. For years 
he kept it wrapped in its green cover, mounted in a place of honor. Later, 
when his sons Akbar and Wallace Muhammad had studied Arabic, he had 
them read it: to everyone’s surprise it was the Qur’an. They discovered 
that it was the same Qur’an used by other Muslims. For Warith Deen Mo-
hammed, this is a clear indication that Fard Muhammad had always in-
tended African Americans to move to Islamic orthodoxy. It had been his 
secret plan: his followers would “choose the Islam that is in the Qur’an. ” 
His purpose was to establish true Isla m, but he had to establish indepen-
dent thinking first. Likewise, the fact that Elijah Muhammad appointed 
his son Wallace Muhammad, whom he had expelled several times for his 
orthodox Sunni proclivities, as his successor demonstrated that just prior 
to his death Elijah Muhammad was in complete agreement with Fard Mu-
hammad’s hidden agenda.
This mythic revision by Warith Deen Mohammed is hard to reconcile 
with history. First, Elijah Muhammad was aware that the books that he 
had been given by Fard Muhammad were Qur’ans: two in English and 
one in Arabic.
73 Second, Elijah Muhammad stated that the future book 
had been written, but he had not yet received it. In 1969, long after Wal-
lace Muhammad and Akbar Muhammad would have read this special 
Qur’an, Elijah Muhammad still expected his future book to appear: he 
wrote, “This last Messenger is bringing it out in a book that was writ-
ten by Allah (God) himself—a book that was Sealed and Kept by Allah 
(God). This book has not, as yet, been released. But, it is promised to a 
last Messenger who lives among the beasts (human beasts), (Bible Rev. 
6:3). ”
74 Third, Warith Deen Mohammed later admitted that he had not 
been explicitly appointed by his father. In fact, it was so obvious to mem-
bers of the Nation of Islam that Wallace D. Muhammad had not been ap-
pointed the successor that immediately after he assumed the leadership 
of the Nation of Islam in 1975, he was asked in an interview (by his own 
brother, Herbert Muhammad), “Why did your Father never teach the 
Muslims concerning His passing, nor openly tell them that they are to 
look to His family for spiritual direction, and to you especially?”
75 Never-
theless, Warith Deen Mohammed is not the only one to make the claim 
about his father. Some Muslims, such as Muhammad Abdullah (the leader


--- PAGE 136 ---
Elijah Muhammad, Other Muslims, and Islam 125
of the Lahori Ahmadiyyas in California) in 1989 claimed, “Elijah followed 
the real Islam, but he thought that if he taught the real Islam, black people 
would not follow him. Elijah thought that he should push certain things 
to arouse curiosity so he and Fard Muhammad invented this story. ”
76
This later reimagining of Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad into 
“crypto-orthodox” Muslims whose followers were in fact “proto-Muslims” 
is also not congruent with the vehemence with which Elijah Muhammad 
taught his race myth, his hostility to Muslims who disagreed with him, 
and the expulsion of his own sons in the late 1960s and early 1970s for 
their “orthodox” beliefs. To see all of this as a ruse or even a pedagogical 
ploy does not, therefore, explain the role of Islam within Elijah Muham-
mad’s myths and movement.
If one feels the need to engage in such a revisionist strategy, a more 
plausible tactic would be to argue that Elijah Muhammad was a “proto-
Muslim” himself.
77 Curtis suggests that Elijah Muhammad’s use of the 
Qur’an to justify his own teachings “elevated the status of traditional Sunni 
Islamic discourse, especially its sacred texts, within African-American 
Islamic thought. . . . ”
78 The consequences of this elevation not only gave 
the upper hand to Elijah Muhammad’s Sunni opponents but also even-
tually affected key players within the Nation of Islam, most notably his 
own sons Akbar and Wallace Muhammad and his first protégé, Malcolm 
X. Thus, Elijah Muhammad’s exegetical techniques made the eventual 
move to some form of orthodoxy, while unpremeditated, inevitable. If he 
is to be considered a proto-Muslim, it cannot be by the ends he hoped to 
achieve, as Warith Deen Mohammed suggests, but by the means he used 
to achieve his other ends.


--- PAGE 137 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 138 ---
127
6
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
Drew Ali, Fard Muhammad, and especially Elijah Muham-
mad, because they were located so far away from the traditional centers of 
Islam, had the unique opportunity to define and redefine Islam for many 
years without significant interference from Muslims with more traditional 
understandings of Islam. They seized this freedom to experiment with 
novel conceptions and formulations of Islam. However, as the historian of 
Islam Yvonne Haddad points out, “this freedom is fraught with the dan-
ger of innovation and deviance: the great range of options available in the 
American context carries the threat of sectarian division and fragmenta-
tion. ”
1 Nowhere is this experimentation and deviation more apparent than 
in Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam. But what kind of impact did Eli-
jah Muhammad’s redefinition have on American Islam and Muslims? In 
other words, what was his legacy?
There are many ways to evaluate the legacy of Elijah Muhammad’s par-
ticular formulation of Islam. Certainly he achieved great economic suc-
cess and served as a model for how African Americans could improve 
their socioeconomic status. He was also successful in profoundly altering 
the lives of many recidivists and criminals. He forcefully equated black-
ness with power:
No other historical personality has had the kind of prolonged impact on 
black consciousness that he has had, and no recent group in the African-
American community has promoted—largely by example—economic 
self-help, cultural regeneration (or redefinition), and moral living more 
vigorously than his Nation of Islam. The Muslims were “black” long be-
fore it became fashionable to be labeled as such, and the Black Power 
Movement and all subsequent African-American protest styles, from the 
rhymes of the nationalistic rap group Public Enemy to the raison d’ être of 
the Million Man March, are undeniably offshoots of the legacy of Elijah 
Muhammad.
2


--- PAGE 139 ---
128 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
But to this legacy must be added some caveats. He was extremely con-
servative economically, morally, socially, and politically.3 Economically, he 
never deviated from the notion of Western capitalism. He simply sought 
to create an independent, black capitalist society—one whose measures 
of success were wealth and property . Morally, he enforced modest dress 
and harsh penalties for sexual infractions. Socially, he created a patriar-
chal organization in which women often fared poorly. Elijah Muhammad, 
not unlike some Muslim leaders in some countries, argued that women 
needed to be protected and controlled by their fathers and husbands and 
had to dress extremely conservatively.
4 Politically, he was a racial separat-
ist, arguing for segregation 5 and demanding that African Americans be 
given several states within the continental United States for their own in-
dependent and separate territory. Furthermore, though his rhetoric ad-
vocated activism, his restrictions enforced quietism. But even on some 
racial issues, his views were surprisingly stereotypical. For instance, he 
saw Africa as a mere extension of Asia; Blacks were Asiatics, not Africans. 
Moreover, he considered Africa uncivilized and, except for the Christians 
and Muslims, full of naked jungle dwellers.
6 These positive and negative 
aspects of his legacy, however remarkable, are not central in defining his 
Muslim legacy.
The Muslim Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
Elijah Muhammad was arguably the most influential American Muslim in 
the twentieth century because he brought so many (African) Americans 
to Islam and was instrumental in establishing Islam in America.
Because of him, there was a temple or mosque in a hundred cities where 
no mosques had existed before. There was a visible presence in the form 
of a hundred thousand Black Muslims—conspicuous in their frequent 
rallies and turnouts, and their little groceries and restaurants and baker-
ies and other small businesses. The clean shaven young Muslims hawking 
their newspapers on the streets, celebrating their rituals in prisons, debat-
ing their beliefs in the media gave to the religion of Islam a projection 
and a prominence undreamed of in North America.
7
Most of the other significant African American advocates of Islam who 
might rival his stature and accomplishments, including Malcolm X, 
Louis Farrakhan, and his own son Warith Deen Mohammed, were first


--- PAGE 140 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 129
introduced to Islam through Elijah Muhammad; they are part of his Mus-
lim legacy.
By placing Malcolm X within Elijah Muhammad’s legacy, I am not 
minimizing Malcolm X’s influence on African Americans. Especially in 
the decades after his death, his influence rivals and all but eclipses that of 
Elijah Muhammad in cultural and political black nationalist philosophy. 
In that regard, he even easily overshadows Warith Deen Mohammed and 
Louis Farrakhan. However, in terms of Islam as a religion, Malcolm X did 
not live long enough to challenge Elijah Muhammad or his two successors. 
Other members of the Nation of Islam had rejected Elijah Muhammad’s 
formulation of Islam for a more Sunni formulation prior to Malcolm X, 
but with limited success. How exactly Malcolm X, with his energy, cha-
risma, intellect, and influence, would have formulated his Islam and how 
successful he would have been cannot be known. It is equally tantalizing to 
speculate about the relative effectiveness of the transformation of African 
American Islam by Warith Deen Mohammed and Malcolm X. Although 
both came to reject Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of Islam, they did so 
in radically different ways. As will be discussed below, the son of Elijah 
Muhammad chose gradual reform from within. And despite the resistance 
from Louis Farrakhan and his follow ers, he was largely successful. Mal-
colm X, in contrast, opted for immediate revolution from without. Once 
again, unfortunately, a comparison and analysis of Warith Deen Moham-
med’s and Malcolm X’s methods are just not possible because of the latter’s 
death less than a year after his revolution (in terms of Islam) began.
Both of these men, along with all of Elijah Muhammad’s thousands of 
followers, had to struggle with the dual, ironic aspects of the Islamic leg-
acy: they were brought into the tradition of Islam by a man who was, and 
still is, largely rejected by that tradition. The latter two men, Warith Deen 
Muhammad and Louis Farrakhan,
8 who came to vie for the authority of 
Elijah Muhammad, epitomize the ways in which Elijah Muhammad’s fol-
lowers dealt with his dichotomous Muslim legacy.
Warith Deen Mohammed
Warith Deen Mohammed was Elijah Muhammad’s seventh son, born 
in 1933 in Detroit—the last child to be born before Fard Muhammad dis-
appeared. His father named him Wallace Delaney Muhammad after Fard 
Muhammad. He had little contact with his father during the first thirteen 
years of his life since Elijah Muhammad was away preaching or, later, in


--- PAGE 141 ---
130 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
prison until 1946. Nevertheless, Wallace Muhammad received his entire 
formal education within the Nation of Islam’s University of Islam. He also 
studied Islam and Arabic for several additional years under orthodox 
Muslims, including Jamil Diab. Already in the late 1950s and early 1960s, 
Wallace Muhammad was seen by many of Elijah Muhammad’s followers 
as the logical successor to his father.
9 In many ways he followed his fa-
ther. In 1959, he accompanied Elijah Muhammad on his ‘umra  and tour 
of the Middle East and Pakistan. In 1961, Wallace Muhammad was also 
convicted of draft evasion. On his twenty-eighth birthday he started serv-
ing his three-year sentence in a federal penitentiary, opting for the prison 
sentence over community service because he felt the latter would still aid 
the war effort in Vietnam.
In prison, with time on his hands to study the Qur’an, Wallace Muham-
mad began to see that his father’s teachings differed significantly from those 
of orthodox Islam. Even as a young man, he had doubts about the teach-
ings of his father. Wallace Muhammad had noticed that, in the famous oil 
painting of Fard Muhammad that Elijah Muhammad kept in his house, 
the founder of this black Islamic movement looked very much like a white 
man. Just prior to his incarceration he had even approached his father with 
concerns. Upon his release, Wallace Muhammad did not confront his father 
again, but resumed his position as minister within the Nation of Islam.
Wallace Muhammad’s first break with Elijah Muhammad was not 
based solely on religious matters. He was one of the people who con-
firmed to Malcolm X that Elijah Muhammad had fathered illegitimate 
children. They conferred to try to find biblical and quranic justifications 
for these extramarital activities
10—the very same justifications that Mal-
colm X later broached with Elijah Muhammad. Malcolm X wrote, “I felt 
that Wallace was Mr. [Elijah] Muhammad’s most strongly spiritual son, 
the son with the most objective outlook. Always, Wallace and I shared 
an exceptional closeness and trust. ”
11 Wallace Muhammad had also tried 
to convince Malcolm X that “the only possible solution for the Nation 
of Islam would be its accepting and projecting a better understanding of 
Orthodox Islam. ”
12 He remained loyal to Malcolm X after the latter was 
expelled from the Nation of Islam. For his role in this scandal, he was 
briefly suspended from the movement in 1964, and then a few months 
later left the Nation of Islam. As we have seen, after Malcolm X was assas-
sinated, Wallace Muhammad hastily returned to the fold, perhaps out of 
fear.
13 However, he was later suspended at least two more times—though 
now solely for matters of belief. He could not accept the belief that Allah


--- PAGE 142 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 131
had existed in human form in his namesake. He was reinstated in 1969 
and again in 1971, but only in 1974 did he regain his position as a minister 
in the Nation of Islam. Wallace Muhammad claimed that when he was ac-
cepted back by his father, Elijah Muhammad gave his consent to move the 
Nation of Islam to Sunni orthodoxy and abandon its racialist teachings, 
saying, “My son’s got it, my son can go anywhere on earth and preach. ”
14
Prior to Elijah Muhammad’s death in 1975, Wallace Muhammad se-
cured the support (or at least obedience) of key members of the Nation 
of Islam, including Louis Farrakhan, Raymond Sharrieff, and two of his 
brothers. One day after his father’s death, at the annual Saviour’s Day 
rally, Wallace Muhammad was acclaimed his father’s successor in front of 
the thousands of Muslims in attendance. The event included having the 
key members publicly pledge allegiance to him. This seems to have been 
part of the initial propaganda campaign. Within Muhammad Speaks this 
campaign included showing two pictures of Wallace Muhammad within 
a picture of Elijah Muhammad on the first page of the issue announc-
ing the latter’s death; including the famous picture of a seated Elijah Mu-
hammad with Wallace Muhammad standing beside him with his hand on 
his father’s shoulder (with the oil painting of Fard Muhammad behind 
them and the Qur’an in front of them); having pictures of the top officials 
of the Nation of Islam and family members (e.g., Yusuf Shah, Nathaniel 
Muhammad, Abass Rassoull, Raymond Sharrieff, Muhammad Ali, Abdul 
Karriem, Abdul Rahman, Jeremiah Shabbaz, and Louis Farrakhan) over 
the heading “Muslim Ministers Declare Support for New Leadership”; 
printing Wallace Muhammad’s rambling Saviour’s Day speech where Eli-
jah Muhammad’s column would usually have been; and having the editor 
and the Middle East columnist both devote their columns to proclaiming 
the succession of Wallace Muhammad.
15
As its new Supreme Minister, Wallace Muhammad rapidly reformed 
the Nation of Islam. Financially, he separated the businesses from the 
Nation of Islam. Despite being worth $46 million ($30 million less than 
had been thought), the Nation of Islam had millions of dollars of debt. 
Financial necessity forced the sellin g off of businesses to pay creditors, 
including the Internal Revenue Service. Far more significantly, the racial 
superiority doctrine, the demonizing of Whites, the demand for a sepa-
rate state for African Americans, an d anti-American and anti-Christian 
slogans were dropped or reinterpreted. For example, Whites were no lon-
ger devils, but the mindset that had dominated them was devilish. This 
kind of relabeling was a key feature of his reforms. The nationality of his


--- PAGE 143 ---
132 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
followers was changed from the tribe of Shabazz to Bilalians. (Bilal was 
an African slave in Mecca who converted to Islam in the time of Muham-
mad the Prophet. Although Muhammad’s opponents could not directly 
physically persecute him, Bilal, as a slave, was attacked. Later, he became 
the first muezzin, the one who called people to prayer.) This identifica-
tion with Bilal would also prove problematic and was later dropped. Most 
significantly, as we have seen, Fard Muhammad became a “wise man” in-
stead of Allah in person and his father became “Master” as opposed to 
Allah’s Messenger. Finally, even Wallace’s own role, title, and name, as well 
as the name of the Nation of Islam, were changed; he was not a messenger 
but a “mujeddid” (a reviver of Islam);
16 he was not the Supreme Minister 
of the Nation of Islam, the Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad but Imam 
Warith Deen Mohammed—with the change in spelling of “Muhammad” 
indicating an intentional break with any claim to be a messenger; and the 
Nation of Islam was first renamed the World Community of al-Islam in 
the West and later changed to the American Muslim Mission. Thus, a year 
and a half after Elijah Muhammad died, his movement also died.
As Warith Deen Mohammed, Wallace D. Muhammad also found a way 
incorporate his father’s mythology, though at the same time rejecting it. 
That is, as we have seen, Warith Deen Mohammed claimed that the move 
to “orthodoxy” was not only acceptable but also always intended and 
prophesied by Fard Muhammad himself. Fard had consciously, though 
secretly, sowed the seeds for the Nation of Islam’s own demise in favor of 
the move to Sunni Islam. What Warith Deen Mohammed’s motivation was 
for reimagining Fard Muhammad is not certain. However, several possi-
bilities exist. First, denigrating Fard  Muhammad might have undermined 
Warith Deen Mohammed’s own mystique. He was Elijah Muhammad’s 
seventh son, the only one born during the time of Fard Muhammad, pre-
dicted by Fard Muhammad, and named after Fard Muhammad. This mys-
tique was at least partially responsible for his acclamation as leader after 
his father’s death, despite his having been excommunicated several times 
by his father.
17 In fact, initially Warith Deen Mohammed had even capital-
ized on and played up this mystique; just a month after his ascension in 
1975, in answer to the question “Why were you chosen to succeed your 
Father, rather than one of the elder brothers?” he answered,
My personal answer would be it was God’s intention. It was God’s plan. 
But I have also heard my Father, Himself, say that when I was born or 
I was conceived in my mother, He had been born as the Servant, the


--- PAGE 144 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 133
Messenger of God, who manifested Himself with W . F . Muhammad; and 
by me being born at the time when He was in contact with His Savior, 
the God in Person, helped to form me, not only as a child of His loins, 
but a child for the Mission. . . . [T]here was never any doubt in His mind 
that I would be the one who would come to this office.
18
A second reason for his reimagining Fard Muhammad relates to Louis 
Farrakhan. Warith Deen Mohammed also extended the olive branch to 
Farrakhan, who so disagreed with Warith Deen Mohammed’s reforms 
that he “resurrected” the Nation of Islam with its original teachings and 
has led it for over three decades. Warith Deen Mohammed may have 
simply been showing greater respect for their shared heritage in order to 
bring the two groups closer, particularly as both leaders approach the end 
of their lives.
And third, many members of Warith Deen Mohammed’s organization 
came to Islam via the Nation of Islam. For many years Fard Muhammad 
was their Allah and Elijah Muhammad was his Messenger. The myth of 
Fard Muhammad’s secret plan to bring African Americans to Sunni Islam 
as constructed by Warith Deen Mohammed made it possible to under-
stand their earlier “unislamic” beliefs as a prerequisite stage. It reflected 
their own journey, validating who they were and who they are.
In a final irony, Warith Deen Mohammed managed even to separate 
his own father, Elijah Muhammad, from the Nation of Islam: he believed 
that Elijah Muhammad wrestled with Fard Muhammad’s words and was 
convinced that his father lived to reject privately the heretical notions of 
Fard Muhammad as God and himself and as his prophet.
19 In other words, 
Elijah Muhammad died an “orthodox” Sunni Muslim.
Louis Farrakhan
Scholar of African American religion Lawrence Mamiya has argued 
that the changes in ideology and practice wrought by Warith Deen Mo-
hammed were largely successful because Elijah Muhammad’s “do for 
self ” economic program had been remarkably effective. By the mid-1970s 
the socioeconomic status of many members of the Nation of Islam had 
changed as a result of that progress. The “black particularism” ideology 
that had drawn lower-class members to the movement was not appropri-
ate for their new middle-class lives. For them, Warith Deen Mohammed’s 
transformation to “universalist” Islam came at the right time for many


--- PAGE 145 ---
134 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
members of the Nation of Islam: middle-class African Americans did not 
need or want the strict discipline, the racial barriers, and the alienation 
from mainstream American political, social, and economic life.
20
However, many African Americans had not yet made that transforma-
tion and were still relegated to the lower classes, with all the moral, so-
cial, and economic ills that had made Elijah Muhammad’s original mes-
sage so potent and so attractive. Warith Deen Mohammed’s reinterpreta-
tion would not have been particularly appealing for them. Moreover, with 
such drastic reinterpretations of the key tenets of the Nation of Islam, it is 
not surprising that more conservative adherents, many of whom had in-
tense admiration for, loyalty to, and fervent belief in, Elijah Muhammad, 
would strongly object. The man who led that movement of objectors was 
Louis Farrakhan. In 1977 he reestablished the Nation of Islam with Elijah 
Muhammad’s original teachings.
Louis Farrakhan was born Louis Eugene Walcott in the Bronx in 1933, 
though he was raised in Boston. He became one of the more educated 
leaders within the Nation of Islam, having earned a high school diploma 
and studied for two years at a teachers’ college. Prior to joining the Na-
tion of Islam, he worked as a professional musician, as a violinist, and as 
a calypso singer. When Elijah Muhammad ordered all musicians in the 
Nation of Islam to give up music or leave, Louis X gave up music even 
though he had been a member for only a few weeks. Later, his musical 
talent would be used on behalf of the Nation of Islam when he wrote 
their theme song, “ A White Man’s Heaven Is a Black Man’s Hell. ” As we 
have seen, although Malcolm X helped to convert him and to train this 
equally charismatic speaker as a minister, Minister Louis X was among 
those who reported to Elijah Muhammad that Malcolm X was spreading 
rumors about the leader’s adulterous activities. And after Malcolm X and 
the Nation of Islam parted ways, Louis X publicly and viciously attacked 
his former mentor.
With Malcolm X’s removal, Louis X stepped into his shoes. He became 
the minister of the prestigious Temple No. 7 in New Y ork City and was 
soon appointed the National Spokesman, whose duties included introduc-
ing Elijah Muhammad at the annual Saviour’s Day rallies—both formerly 
Malcolm X’s portfolios. Elijah Muhammad replaced his “X” with “Farra-
khan” in the late 1960s as a sign of his new protégé’s ascension to the in-
ner circle. After Elijah Muhammad’s death, Farrakhan initially supported 
Warith Deen Mohammed (then still called Wallace D. Muhammad) as 
the new Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam. In 1975 he is quoted as


--- PAGE 146 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 135
saying, “There is no one wise enough to approach the shoelaces of Wal-
lace D. Muhammad” and “The teachings of Wallace D. Muhammad are so 
right, so exact, so on time. . . . ”
21 Furthermore, in the issue of Muhammad 
Speaks that announced the death of Elijah Muhammad and the acclama-
tion of Wallace Muhammad as his successor, Louis Farrakhan is quoted as 
saying, “The Hon. Elijah Muhammad’s life was the will of God: His son is 
the will of God. . . . Allah did not leave us comfortless. He knew we would 
need a comforter. ”
22 However, it is clear that he was seen as a threat within 
the Nation of Islam. In his first interview as the new leader of the Nation 
of Islam, Wallace Muhammad was asked about Louis Farrakhan specifi-
cally: “We understand he had pledged his allegiance to you just as he did 
to your Father before you, along with the other ministers of the Nation. 
Do you feel that you can depend on their loyalty if outside influences and 
inside influences try to bring about a split in the Nation of Islam?” Wal-
lace Muhammad replied, “Their pledges of allegiance were received in 
all sincerity. I have nothing to say that would reflect anything else. One 
correction here: The title of Minister Louis Farrakhan is National Repre-
sentative of the Supreme Minister. ”
23 He served as Wallace Muhammad’s 
international spokesman until December 1977, when he announced his 
departure from the newly Sunni movement.
Louis Farrakhan formed another organization, the Nation of Islam, 
based on all the original doctrines of Elijah Muhammad, including the 
doctrines of Fard Muhammad’s divinity, the story of Y akub, the Fall of 
America, a demand for a separate territory, and the claim that Whites are 
devils. He also reinitiated the defunct Fruit of Islam and the Muslim Girl’s 
Training and General Civilization Class.
Louis Farrakhan had done much to bolster his position, from marrying 
his family into that of Elijah Muhammad’s to attempting to parallel the lat-
ter’s life.
24 It is clear that his followers came to see him as the rightful suc-
cessor to Elijah Muhammad. They claim that Elijah Muhammad said to 
Louis Farrakhan, “ As Allah made me to take His place among the people, 
I  a m  m a k i n g  y o u  t o...  t a k e  m y  p l a c e . ”  A n d  t h e y  c l a i m  t h a t  t o w a r d s  t h e  
end of his life Elijah Muhammad said that Farrakhan was the best minis-
ter he ever had.
25 Y et, even Farrakhan drifted in later years from some of 
the teachings of Elijah Muhammad. He too has introduced more Sunni 
practices into his second resurrection of the Nation of Islam,
26 and in the 
last decade made a rapprochement with Warith Deen Mohammed—for 
which he too has been criticized by even more conservative followers of 
Elijah Muhammad.
27


--- PAGE 147 ---
136 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
Islamic Mythmaking in America28
The most prominent feature of Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of Islam 
is his synthesis of much of traditional Islam with the racial teachings that 
he inherited from Fard Muhammad. Louis Farrakhan and Warith Deen 
Mohammed represent two different responses to Elijah Muhammad’s 
forty years of mythmaking. Each of his successors tried to separate his 
race myth from his Islam myth by emphasizing one over the other. In so 
doing, they each introduced a false dichotomy into Elijah Muhammad’s 
myth. He would not have seen Islam and his race teachings as in any way 
separate or even separable. The centrality of Islam (as a symbol) to his 
movement, his relation to other Muslims, his role within Islam, his use 
and interpretation of the Qur’an, and all the connections among these ele-
ments situate him firmly within the Islamic tradition and can be under-
stood as the intertwined activities of social formation and mythmaking.
Myths and Mythmaking
Although anthropologists, psycho logists, sociologists, mythologists, 
and scholars of religions have produced many definitions for the word 
“myth, ” most of them can be categorized in one of two ways. Those in the 
first category are similar to the popular definition of the word “myth”: a 
false or implausible (and usually someone else’s) belief or tale. Within this 
category fall those definitions that view myths as a product of euhemer-
ism (which suggests that myths are based on exaggerated accounts of real 
people) or ancient savage philosophers trying to explain mysterious phe-
nomena. In either case, the myths are false, though still interesting objects 
of study for the insights they provide into the minds of our ancestors. 
Certainly, there are euhemeristic qualities to the status accorded to Fard 
Muhammad, and perhaps even Elijah Muhammad. However, such an ap-
proach to the Nation of Islam’s myths would prove pointless. Although 
people outside the Nation of Islam are unlikely to view their myths as 
anything but false, such an approach would bring us no closer to deter-
mining the reasons for the creation, appeal, and endurance of these myths 
among the members of these movements.
The second category of definitions for myth is that which tends to view 
myths as “true” in some sense. Of course, there are many ways for some-
thing to be true. A myth might be true in that it expresses something that 
is psychically real. For Sigmund Freud, myths are the social equivalent


--- PAGE 148 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 137
of dreams—both a product of repression. And, as the product of drives 
repressed for the sake of a harmonious civilization, myths could be seen 
as both true and false: they express a truth, but a truth that is not what 
it seems. (A similar claim might be made about Emile Durkheim, who 
would see myth as a true expression of group cohesiveness, but again a 
truth that is not what it seems.) For Carl Jung, myths also symbolically 
express a deep psychic reality. They are culturally determined manifesta-
tions of the universal archetypes that abide within the collective uncon-
scious. Therefore, myths are true in the most crucial sense, albeit not 
ever literally true. Y et for some others, myths are products of a different 
mentality, one that is nonrational or beyond the rational (that is, mystical 
or emotional in nature). Once again, we have a different kind of “true. ” 
Closely related to Jung’s and to mythopoeic definitions are those that sug-
gest that myths are symbolically imbued with something that ultimately 
cannot be reduced or rationalized away. That is to say, myths express 
primordial truths, or the “sacred. ” Hence, they are true by definition. Al-
though disguised in various forms, this kind of definition is espoused by 
such scholars as Mircea Eliade, Wendy Doniger-O’Flaherty, and Kees W . 
Bolle, to name only a few.
Accepting the myths of Elijah Muhammad as true, in whatever sense, 
seems even more problematic than dismissing them as false. That these 
myths were produced by individuals as opposed to groups is difficult to 
reconcile with some of the truth-definitions of myth, especially when the 
eclectic themes of Fard Muhammad’s and Elijah Muhammad’s myths seem 
to be borrowed from various sources.
29 Elijah Muhammad’s myths also 
suffer from having been born less than a century ago. We know how and 
when the myths came to be. Furthermore, given the racial claims made by 
him, even the most open-minded and sanguine scholar might balk at see-
ing primordial truths or the sacred encapsulated within these myths. New 
myths are not as easily romanticized as their ancient cousins.
A third and more fruitful approach would be to examine these myths 
from a perspective that dismisses myths neither as impotent and largely 
irrelevant falsehoods nor as powerful and profound truths, but rather as 
the product of a surprisingly ordinary human activity. Russell McCutch-
eon redescribes the category of “myth” by suggesting 
(1) that myths are not special (or “sacred”) but ordinary human means 
of fashioning and authorizing their lived-in and believed-in “worlds, ” 
(2) that myth as an ordinary rhetorical device in social construction


--- PAGE 149 ---
138 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
and maintenance makes this rather than that  social identity possible in 
the first place, and (3) that a people’s use of the label “myth” reflects, ex-
presses, explores and legitimizes their own self-image. 30
The key words within his redescription are “ordinary, ” “identity, ” and 
“authorizing” (or “construction, ” “maintenance, ” and “legitimizing”). The 
term “ordinary” suggests that we are not dealing with some human activ-
ity that is beyond our ken. It is not extraordinary, unique, unknowable, or, 
in a word, “sacred. ” That is not to suggest that myths are therefore irrel-
evant; they deal with the critical human issue of self-identity. These rhe-
torical acts that construct and maintain identity are called mythmaking. 
Simply put, mythmaking is a social activity in which the group authorizes 
its identity and the role it sees for itself in the larger scheme of things.
31
It is one of the key ways in which a group forms and perpetuates itself. 
Consequently, myths have no inherent power or truth other than that be-
stowed upon them by the group that identifies itself through them.
One might well ask at this point what distinguishes mythmaking from 
other rhetorical acts of constructing and maintaining group identities. In 
a word, nothing. More elaborately stated, mythmaking can describe any 
rhetorical act whose goal is to create, renew, sustain, or radically reenvi-
sion a group identity—whether within a street gang, a nation, a religious 
community, or in this case a people identified by the color of their skin. 
What distinguishes “religious” mythma king from “other” rhetorical acts 
(that some scholars might hesitate to call “mythmaking”) is the tendency 
of the former type of acts “to speak of things eternal and transcendent 
with an authority equally transcendent and eternal. ”
32 The real question 
becomes whether this particular feature is sufficiently unique to demand 
that a distinction in terminology be made between rhetorical acts that 
have this feature and those that do not (but otherwise are similar in meth-
ods and outcomes). The answer to this question is, probably not. Never-
theless, mythmaking as practiced by Elijah Muhammad had this feature, 
and its presence explains the key, though seemingly odd, role that Islam 
plays within his mythmaking.
Elijah Muhammad’s Mythmaking
The new and relatively recently created myths of Elijah Muhammad 
may seem strange and incredible at times, but these mythic ideas need to 
be viewed as plausible and appropriate to the self-understanding of a group


--- PAGE 150 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 139
of people, 33 in this case, Elijah Muhammad’s followers. In other words, he 
was revising the past, “in light of present circumstances from a particular 
point of view to support a critical judgment about the present state of af-
fairs. ”
34 The race myth provided a history that reversed the traditional ac-
count of the European and African contributions to civilization and so was 
a source of pride, inspiration, and revolutionary ideas to African Ameri-
cans.
35 It would certainly appeal to people who saw the racist behavior of 
Whites as uncivilized. Moreover, the myth in positing an ancient golden 
age of black civilization not only appeals to the pride of African Americans 
but also dismisses all of the intervening and recent history as a departure 
from that ideal. The message is clear: to return to the greatness of old, one 
must return to (the Nation of) Islam. This is a common strategy in myth-
making: to seek or create a pristine moment in the past and bracket out 
the intervening and recent history as a failure to maintain that purity.
36
At first glance it seems that Elijah Muhammad simply aligned the Na-
tion of Islam with a slightly revised, more ancient, “black” Islam. Like-
wise, Jewish and Christian mythologies may seem as though they were 
reinterpreted in light of the antebellum and postbellum circumstances of 
African Americans. Most of his writings, after all, are laced with passages 
from the Bible—more than double the number from the Qur’an. But on 
closer inspection, it is clear that Elijah Muhammad built upon Fard Mu-
hammad’s race myth, which owed little to Judaism, Christianity, or Islam. 
The story of the tribe of Shabazz, of Y akub and his white race, of the en-
slavement of Blacks in America, and of the Fall of America could have 
been told without reference to the Bible or the Qur’an— but they were not.
What Elijah Muhammad did was to reinterpret individual biblical and 
quranic passages (and sometimes their myths) to fit, substantiate, and 
elaborate his myth. This is particularly evident in the depictions of Moses, 
Jesus, and Muhammad, whose traditional biographies are ignored and for 
whom new roles are created within Elijah Muhammad’s Islam.
In this way, he was able to dismiss Christianity, the religion from which 
his converts came, not as unnatural for African Americans (as Drew Ali 
had done) but as evil. Y et, at the same time, he could continue to appeal 
to the one scripture with which African Americans were familiar—the 
Bible—and in a way that left them utterly dependent on him for its in-
terpretation. By employing Islam and its scripture, the Qur’an, within his 
mythmaking, Elijah Muhammad was able to develop new Islamic identi-
ties for his followers and a new Islamic authority for himself that could 
replace the ones he had just dismissed as evil.


--- PAGE 151 ---
140 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
The New Islamic Identities
At first sight the Islam of Elijah Muhammad and his myths may seem 
to be mere products of his overactive imagination. However, mythmaking 
is most frequently an organic activity that explains how a group sees itself 
and its place within the world; by its very nature mythmaking is not sys-
tematic but experimental. The key element in the myths created by Elijah 
Muhammad was their ability to present an identity that was appropriate 
for the circumstances of the group and so made sense and appealed to 
the members of that group. Otherwise, these myths would not have been 
understood, believed, and propagated.
A brief look at some of the more salient aspects of Elijah Muhammad’s 
myths illustrates some of the myths’ appropriateness for African Ameri-
cans. Elijah Muhammad drew on Marcus Garvey and Drew Ali. The ac-
ceptability of a demand to return to Africa, spiritually and mentally in the 
case of Drew Ali, is deeply indebted to Garvey. Drew Ali simply found 
an eminently more feasible way to return to the homeland. The use of 
Islamic terminology and imagery was also made possible by vestiges of Is-
lam among African Americans and the association of Islam as the enemy 
of Christianity. Elijah Muhammad also capitalized on these factors, but 
took the race consciousness of Drew Ali to the next level, race supremacy, 
and transformed the return to the homeland to a demand for the separa-
tion of Blacks and Whites, and for a separate nation within the continen-
tal United States. Islam was the evidence for supremacy, the means for 
transformation, and the motivation for separation.
The appeal of this greater militancy was no doubt heightened by the 
continued disparities between Whites and Blacks despite the economic 
growth after World War II. The practices and scripture of the Nation of 
Islam were far more Islamic than those of the Moorish Science Temple. 
Y et the role of traditional formulations of Islam in this new identity was 
somewhat limited. That was by design, or more accurately, by necessity. 
This new Islamic identity spoke directly to the racial problems faced by 
African Americans. It provided a past that reversed white supremacist 
myths, thereby declaring that the appalling situation was not how it was 
in the distant past, should be in the present, or would be in the future. 
It was a theodicy that said that such things were prophesied to end, 
thereby declaring that change was not only possible but inevitable—
if only African Americans would adopt the right identity: the Islamic 
one.
37


--- PAGE 152 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 141
Elijah Muhammad’s mythmaking was not simply a matter of arranging 
or rearranging ideas to produce a particular image, story, or set of sym-
bols. Despite the apparently conscious production of these myths by an 
individual, it is clear that social circumstances and the appeal of new and 
noble identities motivated the production and adoption of these myths. 
Islam—as formulated by Elijah Muhammad—was absolutely essential to 
these new identities.
The New Islamic Authorities
The new Islamic identities included seeing Elijah Muhammad as the 
supreme authority within Islam. But what does it mean for a text or per-
son to have authority? Authority can be contrasted usefully with coercion 
and persuasion, two additional but not unrelated ways in which a person 
may make other people do his or her will. However, the acts or threats of 
violence and the use of arguments or impassioned appeals are not same as 
authority. Authority is something people confer willingly:
If authority involves the willingness of an audience to treat a given act of 
speech as credible because of its trust in the speaker, then under the sway 
of authority an audience acts as if it had been persuaded, when in fact it 
has not, while accepting the fact that its regard for the speaker obviates 
the need for persuasion. In contrast, when authority is asked to explain 
itself and responds to that request by arguing in earnest rather than sim-
ply reasserting itself, it ceases to be authority for the moment and be-
comes (an attempt at) persuasion.
38
It is in this gray area between authority and persuasion that we find the 
roles assigned to Islam and the Qur’an by Elijah Muhammad. Islam and its 
Qur’an were used as insignia of authority. Insignia “announce the author-
ity of the bearer for a given audience and within a circumscribed context 
or sphere of activity. ”
39 And they play an active role in the construction 
of that authority. Those who bear insignia will be granted authority: their 
words will be given respect.
The construction of an Islamic authority structure by Elijah Muham-
mad is most apparent in his use of the most tangible emblem of Islam, the 
Qur’an. For Noble Drew Ali, the actual Qur’an was of almost no impor-
tance. Even the Circle Seven Koran was not authoritative in and of itself; it 
was an insigne of authority. It need not, therefore, bear any resemblance


--- PAGE 153 ---
142 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
to the actual Qur’an. It just needed to be a Koran—a scripture, the iconic 
emblem of prophethood—and in this case one associated with Islam, a 
non-Christian religion reflective of Drew Ali’s conception of the Moors. 40
Not so for Elijah Muhammad. For him the Qur’an served several different 
roles. At first the Qur’an was unfamiliar, especially to his followers. The 
first time Elijah Muhammad wrote about the Qur’an, he had to describe its 
history, extol its virtues, and assert the need to respect it (in part by deni-
grating the Bible).
41 In short, he attempted to persuade his audience that 
the Qur’an was the proper and ancestral scripture for African Americans. 
Elijah Muhammad then employed the Qur’an as scripture, which meant for 
him that it was a text containing prayers, history, and, above all, prophecies.
Its history was the history of the races and its prophecies were about the 
conflict between Blacks and Whites in America. For example, the theodicy 
most often employed by Elijah Muhammad to explain why the devils were 
permitted to make slaves of African Americans’ “innocent, Righteous fore-
fathers in Africa” is “ Allah, our God, has revealed to us that it was all for 
a Divine Purpose—to fulfill the prophecies of the Scriptures. ”
42 From Eli-
jah Muhammad’s perspective, scripture’s power, its authority, came largely 
from the historical and prophetic truths it contained. Once scriptural pas-
sages were understood properly, these truths would become manifest. His 
role as Messenger was to discover and propagate these truths. And in this 
way prophetic scripture, specifically the passages of the Bible or the Qur’an 
that he felt addressed his race myth and eschatology, served as the insignia 
of his prophethood. Because of the direction given to the movement by 
Fard Muhammad and the connections Elijah Muhammad thought Islam 
had with Africa, these insignia needed to be the actual Qur’an (not just 
“a Qur’an”)—but in this case one subservient to Elijah Muhammad’s racial 
message about the separation between Blacks and Whites.
The mere fact that Islam and the Qur’an served as insignia of authority 
for Elijah Muhammad does not mean that they were merely parapherna-
lia (as the Qur’an was for Drew Ali). Instead, they had a central and criti-
cal role for Elijah Muhammad. The Qur’an, as he understood it, was part 
of the politicization of Islam with himself as its Messenger—as the origi-
nal and only appropriate religion for African Americans. The Qu’ran was 
central and critical, yes, but it was never meant to be ultimate authority: 
Elijah Muhammad gave primacy to the racial teachings that he had re-
ceived directly from Allah, in the person of Fard Muhammad. Moreover, 
he maintained that the Qur’an would one day be superseded. In a strange 
twist of fate, he was wrong.


--- PAGE 154 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 143
Elijah Muhammad was so successf ul at establishing himself as the Is-
lamic authority that his insignia, Islam and the Qur’an, were also imbued 
with that authority. When he died in 1975, the authority he had created 
for himself died with him for the most part. (Vestiges remained, many 
of which transferred to his son Wallace Muhammad, and some of which 
would later be reclaimed by Louis Farrakhan.)
43 Islam and the Qur’an, 
not surprisingly, outlived Elijah Muhammad. As a result, Warith Deen 
Mohammed could move Elijah Muhammad’s followers towards a fairly 
traditional Sunni understanding of Islam and the Qur’an with relative 
ease by simply invoking the remaining authorities within the Nation of 
Islam. Ironically, then, the very insignia Elijah Muhammad had first em-
ployed to bolster his own authority and to fashion the new identities for 
his followers—the Qur’an and Islam—came to supplant that authority and 
redefine those identities. “Islam” is, therefore, not only critical to under-
standing Elijah Muhammad and his Nation of Islam but also essential to 
understanding why both he—in the mind of Warith Deen Mohammed at 
least—and it could so easily be transformed.
Conclusion
Elijah Muhammad’s formulation of Islam did not emerge in a vacuum. 
Vestiges of Islam from Muslim African forebears probably did not survive 
within Elijah Muhammad’s African American contemporaries. The asso-
ciation of Islam with Africa and the depiction of Islam as the opponent 
of white Christianity—both of which may have made African Americans 
more receptive to Islam—were more likely derived from American islami-
cism. These factors assisted Drew Ali and Ahmadiyya Muslim missionar-
ies as they sought to convert African Americans to their unique formula-
tions of Islam. These new Islams in turn set the stage for the missionary 
activities of Elijah Muhammad. In other words, in many ways Elijah Mu-
hammad and his followers had been prepared for this reintroduction of 
Islam into the African American community by their own ancestry, by 
islamicism, and by earlier Muslim missionaries.
The success of the Nation of Islam is, however, predicated primarily 
on the genius of Fard Muhammad and the devotion and dedication it 
inspired in Elijah Muhammad. His biography attests to the transforma-
tive and enduring power of this new formulation of Islam initiated by 
Fard Muhammad. The Nation of Islam founded by Fard Muhammad and 
developed by Elijah Muhammad taught that Islam was the original and


--- PAGE 155 ---
144 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
inherent religion of African Americans. Part of their Islam included the 
myth that African Americans were the descendants of the original black 
humanity, who later produced the “wicked white race. ” Their unique 
formulation of Islam is a product of mythmaking and social formation, 
mutually reinforcing activities that are sped up in times of social disin-
tegration and cultural change.
44 It is perhaps no surprise then that Elijah 
Muhammad was from the South and that many of the Nation of Islam’s 
adherents, like himself, had recently moved to the North. Because of their 
experiences in the South, the willingness to move in search of a better 
life, and their disappointment in the North, these people were undoubt-
edly the most race conscious, the most courageous, and the most disil-
lusioned.
45 To belong to a group whose myths, identities, and authority 
structures challenged the status quo and the traditional white charac-
terizations of African Americans and proposed a radical alternative that 
promised to end and reverse current injustices would have been very at-
tractive indeed.
46 Elijah Muhammad as the chief architect of these myths, 
authority structures, and identities may have produced his own formula-
tion of Islam. But a formulation of Islam it was.
Elijah Muhammad’s message—as he understood it—was not merely 
based on, or inextricably intertwined with, Islam. It was Islam. His under-
standing and exegesis of the Qur’an highlight that Islam and its scripture 
were essential features of his mission and movement. For almost every 
aspect of his message he found quranic support. His heavy reliance on 
the Bible, given that he saw it as a “poison book, ” did not diminish the 
centrality of the Qur’an. Moreover, Elijah Muhammad’s need to find in 
the Qur’an the basis for most of his teachings not only was Islamic but 
also forced his followers, including his son Warith Deen Mohammed, to 
become intimately familiar with the Qur’an. This relationship led the son 
to Sunni Islam, and smoothed the way for most of Elijah Muhammad’s 
Nation of Islam to follow him there.
Elijah Muhammad can thus only be understood within the context of 
Islam.
47 Even his willingness, perhaps ev en need, to engage Muslim op-
ponents does not indicate that he stood outside of Islam; in fact, quite the 
opposite. It clearly demonstrates that his Muslim-ness was no mere façade 
for him. He was an active participant in that most traditional of Muslim 
debates, that is, the debate over who is a Muslim.
If the life, teachings, and legacy of Elijah Muhammad can only be 
understood properly within the context of Islam, then a troubling and


--- PAGE 156 ---
The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad 145
interesting question presents itself: Why has Elijah Muhammad’s Mus-
lim-ness been so underemphasized by scholars? For those with a reli-
gious commitment to another formulation of Islam with a narrow set 
of acceptable beliefs and practices, it may be that Elijah Muhammad’s 
formulation and theirs simply cannot be reconciled. But there may be 
another factor, especially for scholars who do not see themselves as apol-
ogists for more traditional forms of Islam. Despite the enormous legacy 
of Elijah Muhammad in terms of Islam in the United States, it is not his 
only legacy. Long before the Black Power movement of the 1960s, Eli-
jah Muhammad had advocated that movement’s key tenets: racial sepa-
ration, black nationalism, economic independence, “black is beautiful, ” 
and even, at least in his rhetoric, the use of violence. Minimizing the role 
of Islam in these tenets allows Elijah Muhammad’s less appealing ideas, 
such as the Mother Plane and his strange dietary regulations, to be over-
looked and redirects focus on how for a quarter of a century embodied 
the ideals of black autonomy and black values better than anyone else. A 
similar revisioning took place with Malcolm X. His twelve-year adher-
ence to and promulgation of Elijah Muhammad’s teachings have been 
largely supplanted by his less than twelve months outside the Nation of 
Islam. Thus, he can be embraced by Sunni Muslim scholars as the para-
gon of acceptable African American Islam. For other scholars, and cer-
tainly within popular culture, this Muslim-ness (orthodox or otherwise) 
can be shorn from him completely. Thus, as historian Robin Kelley has 
pointed out,
Malcolm X has been called many things: Pan-Africanist, father of Black 
Power, religious fanatic, closet conservative, incipient socialist, and a 
menace to society. . . . Malcolm has become a sort of tabula rasa, or blank 
slate, on which people of different positions can write their own interpre-
tations of his politics and legacy. Chuck D of the rap group Public Enemy 
and Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas can both declare Malcolm 
X their hero.
48
Interestingly, “Muslim” is not in the list. Similar forces seem to be 
at work on Elijah Muhammad’s image. His great influence and nu-
merous achievements are to be celebrated; his Islam and especially his 
novel formulation of it are to be quietly omitted. Given what this book 
has argued, such an enterprise is very problematic, if not impossible.


--- PAGE 157 ---
146 The Legacy of Elijah Muhammad
Moreover, it would be extremely ironic. Elijah Muhammad never got 
his autonomous black state and the racial separation that he desired. 
Even his enormous business empire was quickly dismantled. He did, 
however, despite being considered a heretic by so many other Muslims, 
do what these gainsayers could not: directly and indirectly Elijah Mu-
hammad brought millions of African Americans into the Muslim world 
and Islam into the American world. This is his legacy—and it is an Is-
lamic one.


--- PAGE 158 ---
147
Notes
Introduction
1. Muhammed’s interview was published in three separate articles, and the 
preceding quotation was pieced together from these three articles: “Sixteen 
Journalists Obtain . . . Rare Interview, ” 3–4; “Muhammad Meets the Press!” 
(February 4, 1972): 3–4; and “Muhammad Meets the Press!” (February 11, 1972): 
3–4.
2. Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order.
3. Smith, “Patterns of Muslim Immigration. ”
4. For more on this prejudice, see C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in 
America, 26 and chapter 6. Even Warith Deen Mohammed, Elijah Muhammad’s 
son, shares this view. See chapter 5. For a discussion of a similar neglect by 
American historians, see Clegg, An Original Man, xi–xiii.
5. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 204.
6. See chapter 6.
7. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 513.
8. The term “orthodox” is extremely problematic since all Muslims believe 
they have “correct belief ” regardless of the atypicality of their beliefs. It is a dan-
gerous term for scholars of religion to employ, for it assumes a single articula-
tion of Islam and implies a value judgment, perhaps even a theologically based 
judgment on what constitutes proper religious belief or practice and what does 
not. It is used, nevertheless, in this book because Elijah Muhammad himself em-
ploys the expression “orthodox Muslims” to describe his (usually Sunni) Muslim 
opponents.
Chapter 1
1. Wright, “Negro Companions of the Spanish Explorers, ” 226–28. See also 
Arrington, Black Explorer in Spanish Texas.
2. Wright, “Negro Companions of the Spanish Explorers, ” 228.
3. Hugh Thomas gives the figure of five hundred thousand in his Slave Trade,
804. Philip D. Curtin suggests 427,000 in his  Atlantic Slave Trade, 71. Obviously, 
many more were brought to other countries in American ships.


--- PAGE 159 ---
148 Notes to Chapter 1
4. Turner, “Mainstream Islam in the African-American Experience. ” Else-
where, he cites Allan D. Austin’s estimate of 7 to 8 percent. Turner, Islam in 
the African-American Experience, 12. Michael A. Gomez suggests that between 
400,000 and 523,000 Africans were brought to British North America and “at 
least 200,000 came from areas influenced by Islam to varying degrees. Muslims 
may have come to America by the thousands, if not tens of thousands. ” Gomez, 
“Muslims in Early America, ” 682. See also Diouf, Servants of Allah, 45–48.
5. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 2.
6. Gomez, “Muslims in Early America, ” 672. The extent to which African 
American slaves were able to sustain their religions and cultures is a matter of 
some debate among scholars. Even when slaves seemingly adopted Christian-
ity in lieu of their ancestral religions, it may not have been simply a matter of 
identity being erased. For instance, the adoption of Christianity and its mes-
sage of spiritual equality may have resisted the dehumanization and self-de-
structive hatred engendered by slavery. R. L. Watson, “ American Scholars and 
the Continuity of African Culture in the United States, ” 375–86, but especially 
380.
7. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 6–8 and 107–44.
8. See Austin, African Muslims in Antebellum America: Transatlantic Stories 
and Spiritual Struggles, 32–156.
9. Gomez, “Muslims in Early America, ” 699.
10. Austin, African Muslims in Antebellum America: A Sourcebook, 29.
11. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 184–94.
12. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 185–90 and 205. In fact, Diouf suggests that the 
heretical beliefs of Elijah Muhammad (and Drew Ali) are such that “it is highly 
improbable that the last African Muslims in the Americas would have been in-
volved in them. ” Diouf, Servants of Allah, 207. A similar conclusion is drawn by 
Sherman A. Jackson: it was “virtually impossible for African Muslim slaves to 
perpetuate their faith in America, ” and “[n]one of the distinct and palpable fea-
tures of African Islam show up in the formative period of Blackamerican Islam. ” 
Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 39.
13. Marr, The Cultural Roots of American Islamicism.
14. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 38.
15. Parts of this section have appeared in Berg, “Mythmaking in the Ameri-
can Muslim Context, ” 685–703.
16. Wilson, Sacred Drift, 15–16.
17. Robert Dannin points out that these activities were “reminiscent of early-
nineteenth century attempts to commemorate the African-Islamic heritage of 
some slaves. ” Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam, 27.
18. McCloud, African American Islam, 11; and Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to 
Islam, 28.


--- PAGE 160 ---
Notes to Chapter 1 149
19. Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis, 72.
20. George Washington, who was a slave owner and aware of this Negro/
Moor distinction, cut down the red banner of the Moors so as to hide this fact. 
This alleged event, incidentally, was said to have given rise to the “cherry-tree” 
legend. Wilson, Sacred Drift, 16–19.
21. For an analysis of this text, see chapter 3.
22. Ali, The Holy Koran, 57.
23. Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis, 47.
24. Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam, 28. Emphasis added.
25. Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis, 47.
26. McCloud, African American Islam, 11.
27. See chapter 3.
28. In 1959, the Chicago Defender , an African American newspaper, explicitly 
linked the methods and teachings of Drew Ali with Elijah Muhammad. Both 
were accused of employing a strange religion and symbols to replace Christianity. 
Since the point was to criticize both Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad, it is some-
what odd that the article also compared their respective efforts to create black 
businesses and enjoin a strict moral code that included no drinking, smoking, or 
foul language. Burley, “Pomp, Mysticism Key to Power, ” 1–2.
29. Abu Shouk, Hunwick, and O’Fahey, “ A Sudanese Missionary to the United 
States, ” 137–91.
30. See McCloud, African American Islam, 21–24.
31. This list adapts and expands on the one found in Jackson, Islam and the 
Blackamerican, 44.
32. Ali, The Holy Koran, 59.
33. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 84.
34. Others say he was a black Jamaican, with a Syrian Muslim father. Y et oth-
ers say he was a Palestinian Arab. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America,
12. In short, his origins remain a mystery, and so there is no clear indication of 
where Fard Muhammad acquired his understanding of Islam.
35. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 11.
36. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 65.
37. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 3; Muhammad, “Nation of 
Islam Offers Hearst $100,000, ” 1–3; Shah, “Woe to Every Slanderer!” 2; and Sahib, 
The Nation of Islam, 69 and 94. Later writers said Fard Muhammad could even 
communicate with the animals and Martians! Toure Muhammad, Chronology of 
Nation of Islam History, 3–4; and Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-
an” (July 4, 1969): 19.
38. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (July 23, 1956): 2. A slightly edited 
version appears also in Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 15.
39. See chapter 4 for more on this theology.


--- PAGE 161 ---
150 Notes to Chapter 1
40. For the development of this belief, see chapter 2.
41. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 17.
42. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 48. See also Muhammad, 
“Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (September 22, 1956): 2.
43. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 294.
44. According to an article entitled “History” in “Muhammad University of 
Islam = No. 2 – 1973: Y ear Book, ” 24, Fard Muhammad also “left 104 books for 
Messenger Muhammad to find. ” “Elijah Muhammad, ” 26 November, 1973, FBI 
file 105-24822, 6. These books or the reading list are also mentioned by Elijah 
Muhammad elsewhere: “ Allah taught Me for 3 years and 4 months then He 
gave to Me 100 and 4 books to study. He gave Me the names of them and the 
places where I could find them, so I studied. ” Muhammad, Theology of Time,
379.
45. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 5.
46. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 5.
47. Elijah Muhammad claimed in 1963 that Fard Muhammad communi-
cated with him. He did not appear in person but Elijah Muhammad said, “I 
hear him in my ears” when awake. “Muslim Cult of Islam, ” 30 July 1963, FBI file 
105-63642-36. See also chapter 2.
48. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 142.
49. “Wallace D. Fard, ” FBI files 100-43165-15–17. The debate regarding the 
identity of Fard Muhammad continued into the 1980s, when he was rumored to 
be a Qadiyani Ahmadiyya from India living in California named Abdullah. He 
was also said to be a Turko-Persian. Turner, Islam in the African-American Expe-
rience, 164–65.
50. Clegg, An Original Man, 21. It has been claimed that he was known as 
David Ford-El. Moreover, according to some scholars, Fard Muhammad not only 
had contact with the Moorish Science Temple but also claimed to be Drew Ali 
reincarnated. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 48; and Marsh, From Black Mus-
lims to Muslims, 51. In an interview in 1965, however, Elijah Muhammad denied 
that Fard Muhammad was in any way associated with Drew Ali. Muhammad, 
The True History of Master Fard Muhammad, xvii.
51. “Wallace D. Fard, ” FBI file 100-43165-15.
52. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult, ” 895–97; “Wallace D. Fard, ” FBI file 
100-43165-1A(1); and Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 66–67.
53. Beynon reconstructed these teachings from three texts issued by Fard 
Muhammad: Teaching for the Lost Found Nation of Islam in a Mathematical Way
and the Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam, parts 1 and 2. Beynon, “The Voodoo 
Cult, ” 899–901.
54. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult, ” 903.
55. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 72.


--- PAGE 162 ---
Notes to Chapter 1 151
56. In the Secret Ritual, part 1, Fard Muhammad stated that Muslims must 
sacrifice four “Caucasian devils” in order to return to Mecca. Beynon, “The Voo-
doo Cult, ” 903. For a discussion of this charge, see Essien-Udom, Black National-
ism, 248–52. See also chapter 1 and Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 95.
57. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 70.
58. “Wallace D. Fard, ” FBI file 100-43165-15.
59. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 71.
60. The reporter was Ed Montgomery, who wrote the article entitled “Black 
Muslim Fake” for the San Francisco Examiner (July 28, 1963) in “Wallace D. 
Fard, ” FBI file 100-43165-15.
61. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 71.
62. “Wallace D. Fard, ” FBI file 100-43165-15.
63. Muhammad, “Nation of Islam Offers Hearst $100,000, ” 1. Similar charges 
and a claim that Fard Muhammad was Polynesian were made in 1972. The Na-
tion of Islam again made the same offer. See Shah, “Minister Offers A.P . Writer 
Merv Block $100,000 Plus Two Lives to Prove His Charges!” 2; Shah, “Woe to 
Every Slanderer!” 2; and 3X and Majied, “Through Lies, Distortions, Misquotes: 
Seek to Turn Black Man against Muhammad, ” 15.
64. Beynon called the latter two pamphlets the Secret Ritual of the Nation of 
Islam, parts 1 and 2. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult, ” 903.
65. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 147–49.
66. “Muslim Cult of Islam, ” 21 February 1957, FBI file 105-63642, 50.
67. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 11.
68. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 121.
69. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 112–21. See also Sahib, 
The Nation of Islam, 152–53. For Y akub’s motivation and methods for selective 
breeding, see chapter 4.
70. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 15.
71. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 230.
72. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 17.
73. Compare with his statement in chapter 5, in which some Whites are said 
to survive.
74. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 94–95; and Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad 
Speaks” (December 21, 1957): 10. See also chapter 4 for a discussion of the chang-
ing date for the fulfillment of this prophecy.
75. Elijah Muhammad stated that Fard Muhammad taught the lives of Jesus 
and Moses, but especially that of the Prophet Muhammad. Sahib, The Nation of 
Islam, 97. For a sketch of the life of Jesus as interpreted by Elijah Muhammad, 
see chapter 4.
76. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 68 and 80.
77. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 70.


--- PAGE 163 ---
78. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 3. Elijah Muhammad is 
recorded in the early 1960s as predicting that the end must come before the year 
2000, and that the year 1970 was likely. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 155.
Chapter 2
1. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 257. Barboza says Elijah 
Muhammad’s original name was Robert Poole. Barboza, American Jihad, 77. 
Marsh gives his date of birth as October 7, 1898. Marsh, From Black Muslims to 
Muslims, 53.
2. Diouf dismisses Gomez’s assertion that Elijah Muhammad’s father was 
named Wali and so the implication that he had Muslim ancestors. Diouf, Ser-
vants of Allah, 199–200.
3. Essien-Udom states that he was the seventh child of twelve. Essien-Udom, 
Black Nationalism, 8.
4. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 204–5.
5. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 88–89.
6. Toure Muhammad, Chronology of Nation of Islam History, 5.
7. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 52.
8. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 2. Compare with the alternate 
versions of this encounter described below. This version may reflect an earlier 
recension of the story. Fard Muhammad is the Son of Man, not God, and Fard 
Muhammad’s response does not (yet?) resemble Jesus’ statement in Matthew 
16:16–20. See also John 7:6. However, Sahib’s version does contain a reference to 
Jesus. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 91–92.
9. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 93.
10. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 2; and Sahib, The Nation of 
Islam, 92.
11. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 2–3.
12. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 17. Y et another varia-
tion is provided by Malcolm X: “Mr. Muhammad told me that one evening he 
had a revelation that Master W . D. Fard represented the fulfillment of the proph-
ecy. ‘I asked Him, ’ said Mr. Muhammad, ‘Who are you, and what is your real 
name?’ And then He said, ‘My name is Mahdi. I came to guide you into the right 
path. ’” Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 208.
13. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 71.
14. Toure Muhammad, Chronology of Nation of Islam History, 5–6. Elsewhere, 
Fard Muhammad is described as sitting Elijah Muhammad beside him and say-
ing, “This is the man that I want. That is just what we need; we need someone 
who teaches what I tell him. ” Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 96.
15. At this point, both men spelled their last name “Mohammed. ” Muham-
mad, “ A Warning to the Black Man of America, ” 1.
152 Notes to Chapter 1


--- PAGE 164 ---
Notes to Chapter 2 153
16. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 206.
17. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 93–94. Clegg also states that Elijah Muham-
mad and Fard Muhammad gradually “invented” this claim over the period of 
three years. Clegg, An Original Man, 36.
18. Muhammad, “ A Warning to the Black Man of America, ” 1.
19. Clegg, An Original Man, 36.
20. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 80.
21. Muhammad, “The Hypocrites, ” 12.
22. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 77 and 81.
23. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 196–97.
24. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 82.
25. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 185.
26. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 82. The actual number of members was 
a closely guarded secret, and so estimates vary greatly.
27. Even some African American newspapers portrayed this event as an act 
of lawlessness: “ . . . Muhammad . . . stirred thousands to descend upon a Harlem 
police precinct station where they threatened to break in to liberate two of their 
brothers under arrest. ” Burley, “Portrait of a Shrewd Cult Leader, ” 1.
28. For example, Time used the phrase “Muhammad’s doctrine of total hate” 
and U.S. News & World Report used “hatred of the white man. ” Time, “The Black 
Supremacists, ” 25; and U.S. News & World Report, “Is New Y ork Sitting on a 
‘Powderkeg’?” 50.
29. The executive secretary of the NAACP , Roy Wilkins, charged, “The so-
called Moslems . . . preach black supremacy and hatred of all white people. ” 
“NAACP Attacks ‘Moslem’ Cult, ” 1. Burley, “Portrait of a Shrewd Cult Leader, ” 
1–2. In the latter article, Elijah Muhammad is described as a “shrewd master of 
mob psychology, ” being “anti-white and anti-Christ” and living “like a Mid-East 
potentate in a pretentious mansion. ” See also, Burley, “Pomp, Mysticism Key to 
Power, ” 1–2.
30. See chapter 5 for an analysis of the criticism by Talib Ahmad Dawud and 
Jamil Diab of Elijah Muhammad.
31. The evolution in Elijah Muhammad’s attitude toward “orthodox” Islam is 
examined in chapter 5. In his eulogy for Gamal Abdul Nasser, who died in 1970, 
Elijah Muhammad claimed that the Egyptian president had asked him to stay 
in Africa to teach black people there. He even offered him a 75-room palace in 
Cairo, or to build him one if it was not to his liking. Muhammad, “The Sudden 
Death of President Nasser of Egypt, ” 17.
32. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Answers White Filth Crusader, ” 6.
33. Stoner, “Letter to Elijah Muhammad, ” 1.
34. The claim was even made that Stoner’s letter was a “phony” because “Mr. 
Stoner is working hand in hand with Mr. Muhammad. ” “Muslim Leader Calls 
Moslem Leader ‘Phony, ’” 11. See also Clegg, An Original Man, 152–55.


--- PAGE 165 ---
154 Notes to Chapter 2
35. See chapter 6 for a discussion of Elijah Muhammad’s conservatism.
36. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 265.
37. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 289–93.
38. Muhammad, “Nation Still Mourns Death, ” 1.
39. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad’s Statement on the President’s Death, ” 3. 
Emphasis added to show how much Elijah Muhammad was concerned about any 
backlash Malcolm X’s statement might provoke.
40. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 294–309.
41. Despite his orthodoxy, Malcolm X still blamed “Muslims from the East” 
for not having “done enough to make real Islam known in the West. ” Malcolm X, 
The Autobiography, 168.
42. See Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 434–39; and Clegg, An Original Man,
228–30, for a discussion of the cont roversy surrounding the assassins.
43. Muhammad, “Victory of the Apostle, ” 3. Also, Elijah Muhammad had 
always insisted that his followers be unarmed, stating, “We are forbidden by Al-
lah to carry weapons. ” Muhammad, “Right to Peaceful Assembly Denied Black 
Americans, ” 1. See also “Sixteen Journalists Obtain . . . Rare Interview with Mes-
senger Muhammad!” 3. Nevertheless, Elijah Muhammad felt the need to have 
his innocence proclaimed within Muhammad Speaks by his “orthodox” Muslim 
mouthpiece, Abdul Basit Naeem. Naeem wrote that “I shudder at the thought 
that the ‘extreme punishment’ decreed for him [Malcolm X] (not by the Honor-
able Elijah Muhammad as presumed and pr eposterously alluded by the Muslim’s 
enemies but) by Allah (God) when the insubordinate and increasingly defiant 
‘Mr. X’ further attempted to deride and defame his own former mentor and 
leader. ” Naeem, “Malcolm’s Doom Decreed by God, Not the Messenger, ” 10.
44. For the reaction within the Nation of Islam to these threats, see Louis X 
(Farrakhan), “Minister Condemns Press Threats, ” 3.
45. Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an on Obedience, ” 3, which 
is an article that was reprinted nine months later. Elijah Muhammad even wrote 
to the Muslims in Harlem, many of whom supported Malcolm X, “Obedience 
to Allah’s Messenger is Obedience to Allah. ” Muhammad, “Muhammad Thanks 
Harlem, ” 4. See also Naeem, “Obey Divine Leader, ” 1, 3, and 6. Even the column 
in Muhammad Speaks devoted to quotations from the Qur’an was employed in 
driving home the message of obedience. See “Holy Qur-an: Chapter 4, Section 
9: The Prophet Must Be Obeyed, ” 8. On hypocrites, see Muhammad, “Beware 
of False Prophets, ” 1 and 3; Muhammad, “Victory of the Apostle, ” 1 and 3–4; 
and Muhammad, “Hypocrites Condemned, ” 8. The same column on the Qur’an 
is also enlisted several times in this campaign. One column simply listed over 
thirty characteristics and activities of hypocrites—all drawn directly from Mu-
hammad Ali’s index to his translation of the Qur’an with little editing. “The Holy 
Qur-an: The Hypocrites and Disbelievers, ” 8.


--- PAGE 166 ---
Notes to Chapter 2 155
46. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 254.
47. Muhammad, “Victory of the Apostle, ” 3–4.
48. Shabbaz, “Open Letter: Muslim Minister Writes to Malcolm, ” 9. See also X 
and X, “Biography of a Hypocrite, ” 16; and X and X, “Minister Exposed by Those 
Who Knew Him through Life, ” 5.
49. Louis X, “Boston Minister Tells of Malcolm—Muhammad’s Biggest Hypo-
crite, ” 14. See also chapter 5 for Abdul Basit Naeem’s strident defense of Elijah 
Muhammad and persistent attacks on Malcolm X.
50. Muhammad, “Victory of the Apostle, ” 3–4.
51. John Ali, “Whiteman and the Hypocrites Love Malcolm, ” 20–21.
52. Muhammad, “The Hypocrites, ” 12.
53. “Muhammad Meets the Press!” (February 11, 1972), 4.
54. “Decree Akbar Muhammad, ” 9.
55. Muhammad, “TO: The Family of Dr. Martin Luther King, ” 3.
56. Elijah Muhammad was extremely grateful to Mr. DeMets and the mem-
bers of the church for waiting for so many years for the money to be raised 
and for accepting a $2 million mortgage. Muhammad, “Messenger Thanks 
Greeks, ” 2.
57. See chapter 4 for a discussion of the December fast.
58. Barboza, American Jihad, 78; and Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims,
90–91.
59. Muhammad, “Clarification of Actions Taken by Messenger Muhammad 
against Muhammad Ali’s Action, ” 2–3.
60. Muhammad, “Truth Has Always Triumphed: Sport and Play Is Con-
demned, ” 16. See also Muhammad, “Revelation Guides Aright, ” 18.
61. “ Allah’s Last Messenger Answers Questions Y ou Have Always Wanted to 
Ask!” 4.
62. Clegg, An Original Man, 260–61.
63. Farrakhan, “Muslim ‘Feud’ a Hoax, Farrakhan Explains, ” 3.
64. Muhammad, “Hypocrites: Do Not Befriend Hypocrites, ” 15.
65. See chapter 4 for a more detailed discussion of the quranic term 
“hypocrite. ”
66. Rassoull, “Warning, ” 15; and Rassoull, “Holy Names, ” 3.
67. “ Allah’s Last Messenger Answers Questions Y ou Have Always Wanted to 
Ask!” 4.
68. Clegg, An Original Man, 275.
69. 14X, “Fundraising Dinner a ‘Quiet Success, ’” 4.
70. “Chicago Mayor Proclaims Muslim Saviour’s Day, ” 1; and Mary Eloise X, 
“Two Great Families Unite!” S1–S7.
71. “News of Messenger Muhammad’s Illness Evokes Growing Expressions of 
Concern, ” 5; and “‘Get Well’ Sentiments Arrive in ‘ Avalanche, ’” 5.


--- PAGE 167 ---
156 Notes to Chapter 3
Chapter 3
1. Parts of this chapter have appeared in Berg, “Early African American Mus-
lim Movements and the Qur’an, ” 22–37; and Berg, “Elijah Muhammad and the 
Qur’an, ” 42–55.
2. Wilson, Sacred Drift, 16.
3. This fact was, as far as I can tell, first noted in an FBI report from 1943. 
“Moorish Science Temple of America (Noble Drew Ali), ” 2 April 1943, FBI file 
62-25899-90. Editing included changing words such as “God” to “ Allah. ”
4. Wilson, Sacred Drift, 21.
5. Noble Drew Ali, The Holy Koran, 57.
6. Drew Ali wrote, “ . . . the Islamic Creed from the East was brought to the 
Asiatics of America by the Prophet, NOBLE DREW ALI. . . . [H]e has brought 
the only remedy for the nations. The remedy brought by Jesus, Mohammed, 
Confucius, and all the other prophets, which remedy is truth. ” Noble Drew Ali, 
Moorish Literature, 8–9.
7. Noble Drew Ali, The Holy Koran, 56.
8. McCloud, African American Islam, 11–12.
9. McCloud, African American Islam, 13.
10. Wilson, The Sacred Drift, 30.
11. Noble Drew Ali, Moorish Literature, 11.
12. Noble Drew Ali, Moorish Literature, 12. This exact phrase in his “Prophet 
Has Spoken” is repeated in “General Laws as Said by the Prophet. ” Noble Drew 
Ali, Moorish Literature, 15. His pamphlet entitled “Humanity” also contains these 
two statements. Both documents are dated “Friday, November 9, 1928. ” Noble 
Drew Ali, Humanity, 1 and 3–4. If these dates are accurate, they seem to support 
the later publication date for the Circle Seven Koran.
13. Noble Drew Ali, Koran Questions, 1, 3, and 5.
14. Noble Drew Ali, Moorish Literature, 16.
15. Noble Drew Ali, Moorish Literature, 10.
16. English translations of the Qur’an of that time translated “ dar al-salam”
differently: Alexander Ross (1649) used “Paradise”; George Sale (1734) used 
“dwelling of peace”; and J. M. Rodwell (1861), E. H. Palmer (1880), Mirza Abu’l 
Fadl (1912), and Maulana Muhammad Ali (1917) opted for “abode of peace. ” 
Mohammad Abdul Hakim Khan (1905) translated it as “home of peace. ” Only 
Ghulam Sarwar (1920) used “House of Peace, ” but his translation of 78:95 is quite 
different from Drew Ali’s. I have only been able to find volume 1 of Mirza Hairat 
Dihlavi’s three-volume The Koran: Prepared by Various Oriental Learned Scholars
(Delhi: 1912) in the British Library. Volume 1 ends with Qur’an 9. Even so, I as-
sume his translation was used by Drew Ali because (1) none of the other trans-
lations uses the same wording, and (2) the spelling of the Qur’an as “Koran” is 
the same. However, it is possible that Drew Ali received this translation directly


--- PAGE 168 ---
Notes to Chapter 3 157
from an Arabic-speaking Muslim. Ahmadiyya Muslim missionaries were active 
in several of the cities that had Moorish Science Temples and the Sudanese Sunni 
missionary, Sāttī Mājid, made contact with Drew Ali (see chapter 1).
17. “Moorish Science Temple, ” 31 January 1944, FBI file 62-25899-260.
18. “Moorish Science Temple, ” 22 April 1944, FBI file 62-25899-265.
19. Members of the Moorish Science Temple described their Koran as “their 
Bible. ” However, the word “Bible” was being used as a synonym for “scripture. ” 
Elsewhere the Bible is described as having been “written to enslave the Negro. ” 
“Moorish Science Temple, ” 9 February 1943, FBI file 62-25899-66.
20. Noble Drew Ali, Moorish Literature, 20.
21. However, he did speak of a future book (for which, see below).
22. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 70.
23. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 12, and Message to the Black-
man in America, 94.
24. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 13.
25. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 13. Elsewhere, he described 
the Bible as a “beautiful book but you have to understand it’s [sic] meaning. ” “W . 
D. Muhammad, ” 7 March 1958, FBI file 100-33683-55.
26. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 88.
27. John Ali, “Introduction, ” in Elijah Muhammad, The Fall of America, vi.
28. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 141.
29. Elijah Muhammad added, “There are many Muslims who do not care 
to read anything in the Bible. But those Muslims have not been given my job. 
Therefore, I ignore what they say and write!” Muhammad, Message to the Black-
man in America, 82.
30. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult, ” 900.
31. “Elijah Muhammad, ” 26 November, 1973, FBI file 105-24822.
32. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 51. In pictures of Elijah Mu-
hammad holding a copy of the Qur’an, the cover appears to be that of the 1917 
edition.
33. For an example of his use of footnotes, see Muhammad, Message to the 
Blackman in America, 23, in which he urges readers to examine note 2,276, which 
explains the expression “the days of Allah. ” See also Muhammad, Message to the 
Blackman in America, 254, where he refers the reader to note 2,794. For an ex-
ample of his use of headings, compare Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in 
America, 255–56 and The Holy Qur-an, 231–32.
34. Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an” (July 4, 1969), 19.
35. “Walking the Earth like Brothers, ” 67.
36. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 50–51; and Muhammad, 
Message to the Blackman in America, 92.
37. Muhammad, The Theology of Time, 379.
38. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 92.


--- PAGE 169 ---
158 Notes to Chapter 3
39. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 20.
40. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 20.
41. See discussion of The Supreme Wisdom: Solution below.
42. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 98.
43. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 52. My emphasis indi-
cates the words drawn from Qur’an 1:2.
44. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 15.
45. Muhammad, Theology of Time, 379. An earlier version of this story has 
Fard Muhammad giving his minister two copies of the Qur’an but adding, 
“These are not the only books I have but I have another book that I made my-
self. ” Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 71.
46. Muhammad, History of the Nation of Islam, 38–39. All of this seems at 
odds with his statement that “[t]he Holy Qur’an will live forever. ”
47. Muhammad, The Theology of Time, 379.
48. Muhammad, “ A Warning to the Black Man of America, ” 1.
49. See chapter 6 for a discussion of the critical role Islam played for Elijah 
Muhammad.
50. “W . D. Muhammad, ” 7 March 1958, FBI file 100-33683-55.
51. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 127. As Lincoln mentions, 
The Supreme Wisdom: Solution has been published in several editions. In fact, 
The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two contains virtually all the material of the first 
volume, which appears verbatim in the second, and hence, the latter is more of a 
revised edition. This recycling of material also occurs between The Supreme Wis-
dom: Volume Two and Message to the Blackman in America.
52. The “simplicity of his speaking style and his improvised syntax” (Clegg, 
An Original Man, 117) are very much present in all three of the aforementioned 
books. Elijah Muhammad was primarily a preacher, as his father and grandfa-
ther before him had been. Being poorly educated, he dictated his writings and 
speeches to his secretaries. Even Message to the Blackman in America was less a 
monograph than a compilation of earlier columns and speeches. Clegg, An Origi-
nal Man, 177–79.
53. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 21 and 50.
54. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 26.
55. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 31.
56. Elsewhere he wrote, “It (Islam) teaches an eternal heaven for the right-
eous. (Hell, according to Islam, is not eternal.)” Elijah Muhammad, The Supreme 
Wisdom: Solution, 44. Elijah Muhammad meant that hell is the period of the 
white race’s rule and it will end, whereas heaven will endure forever thereafter.
57. See also his treatment of the Sūrat al-fatiha in the context of prayer. Mu-
hammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 45–47.
58. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 43.
59. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 46.


--- PAGE 170 ---
Notes to Chapter 3 159
60. For his discussion of the Judgment, see Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: 
Solution, 17. When Elijah Muhammad cited Qur’an 2:168, which commands people 
not to follow Satan, he explained, “The devils referred to are not other than the 
white people. ” Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 23. For an additional 
and longer example of this exegetical technique, see Elijah Muhammad’s discussion 
of Qur’an 30:41. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 28–29.
61. Those that are absent that have some relevance to the Qur’an include the 
passages entitled “The Future Holy Book” and “Be Y ourself, ” the latter being 
called “ Allah’s greatest teaching and warning to . . . the so-called Negroes. ” Mu-
hammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 12. Perhaps they were removed to bring 
the Nation of Islam more in line with orthodox Muslim views.
62. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 2.
63. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 65.
64. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 46. See also Muham-
mad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 9, 20, 29, 35, 46, 69, 80, and 82–83.
65. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 67. For a longer exegesis 
of Qur’an 112, see the discussion of Allah. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: 
Volume Two, 9. Even less explicit is the passage entitled “Firewood of Hell, ” which 
states, “The true One God is Allah, the author of Islam. The Holy Quran states 
that what you worship besides Allah is the Firewood of Hell. ” Muhammad, The 
Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 42. This seems to be a reference to Qur’an 111.
66. This technique is even more noticeable in Elijah Muhammad’s next book. 
See, for example, Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 155–56 and 294.
67. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 76.
68. For another example, see the discussion entitled “Islam, only true religion 
of God, ” which consists of the earlier pericopes “ Allah, Our God, is one and self-
independent God, ” “The Bible on Allah (One God), ” “Jews and Christians set up 
rivals to Allah, ” “Insult to Allah, ” and “The 112th Chapter of the Holy Quran. ” 
Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 73–75, and The Supreme Wis-
dom: Volume Two, 9, 13, 13, 11–12, and 67, respectively.
69. Clegg, An Original Man, 177–79.
70. Watson, “The Rise of the Moslems: Messenger Muhammad Leads Thou-
sands to Clean Living through the Islamic Faith, ” 2.
71. See, for example, Muhammad, “Future of American So-Called Negroes, ” 
3, 6, 8, and 16–17; and Muhammad, “12,000 Cheer Muhammad’s History of Black 
Man’s Role in Islam, ” 3–4.
72. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 187.
73. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 189. In a similar argu-
ment, Elijah Muhammad claimed that the Qur’an, when it states that Allah sends 
a messenger to each community He intends to warn, supports Elijah Muham-
mad’s claim to be a “messenger. ” Muhammad, “Memo: From the Desk of Mu-
hammad, ” 5 and 14.


--- PAGE 171 ---
74. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 189. Elijah Muham-
mad added later in the passage, “There are religious scientists in Islam who know 
these things to be true as I am saying, and there are those who do not under-
stand their Holy Qur-an and the prophecy of Muhammad being the last among 
the dead, for the Bible teaches that God will use him to make Him himself 
known in the last days. ” Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 189.
75. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 21.
76. See chapter 5 for a discussion of his break with “orthodox” Muslims.
Chapter 4
1. Parts of this chapter have appeared in Berg, “Elijah Muhammad: An Afri-
can American Muslim mufassir?” 1–27.
2. Elijah Muhammad had many prominent themes, such as the need to pro-
tect African American women from Whites, economic self-sufficiency, the sepa-
ration of the races, the “true” history of Jesus, and the vices of Christians and 
Christianity. The ones discussed here represent those that highlight his exegetical 
techniques and that bear some relation to his formulation of Islam. Other promi-
nent “Islamic” themes such as the virtues of Islam and the Qur’an have been 
discussed in chapter 3 and the physical incarnation of Allah in Fard Muhammad 
has been discussed in chapter 2.
Elijah Muhammad, however, was not limited to these themes. He wrote mis-
sives about the dangers of jaywalking, the improved service at his Salaam Restau-
rant, the problem of air pollution (which he believed would be solved by using 
steam), the requirement for Muslims to pay their debts, the need to shun astrol-
ogy, the danger of people going door-to-door pretending to collect donations 
on behalf of Elijah Muhammad, the need for donations, the gratitude he felt to 
the governor of Illinois and the mayor of Chicago for naming a day after him in 
1974, and (somewhat ironically) the “crazy and nasty minded people” foolishly 
requesting permission to “take over other women and other men” whom he ac-
cuses of committing fornication and adultery. Muhammad, “‘Daring Pedestrian’ 
Who Challenges Motorist, ” 12–13; Muhammad, “The Daring Pedestrian: Part II, ” 
12–13; Muhammad, “TO: The Patrons of Y our Supermarket and Salaam Restau-
rant, ” 6; Muhammad, “ Air Pollution Can Be Controlled, ” 2; Muhammad, “Pay 
Y our Debts, ” 16; Muhammad, “Pay Y our Debts!” 1; Muhammad, “Shun Astrol-
ogy, ” 17; Muhammad, “Warning to Donors, ” 2; Muhammad, “Money Necessary, ” 
6; Muhammad, “Thank Y ou!” 1; and Muhammad, “Special: Read, ” 13.
3. Muhammad, “Old World Going Out with a Great Noise!” 16–17. Others 
eventually expanded on this theology. Near the end of his life, Elijah Muhammad 
was forced to deny the claim by some followers that he was Fard Muhammad. 
He also rejected teachings that gave Fard Muhammad an esoteric cosmological 
status (e.g., “Master Fard Muhammad represents substance, physical matter, the 
160 Notes to Chapter 3


--- PAGE 172 ---
Notes to Chapter 4 161
reflector, that which is incomplete, invisible, transparent, white crystal. ”) and that 
spoke of his miraculous birth and meetings taking place on Mars. Nathaniel Mu-
hammad, “October 15 Address: Muhammad Clarifies Truth! Condemns Liars, ” 
S8–S9.
4. “Muslim Cult of Islam, ” 21 February 1957, FBI file 105-63642. As noted 
above, the twenty-three scientists produce a scripture every twenty-five thou-
sand years but then wait an additional ten thousand years before giving it to a 
prophet. Such was the case with the Torah, Bible, and Qur’an. Sahib, The Nation 
of Islam, 70.
5. This date is given in Lost-Found Lesson 2, question 26, which reads,
26. What year was that [that is, the grafting of the devil]?
Ans.—It was in the year eight thousand four hundred, which 
means from the date of our present history or Koran, or about two 
thousand and six hundred years before the birth of the Prophet 
Mossa. “Muslim Cult of Islam, ” 21 February 1957, FBI file 105-63642.
Eighty-four hundred years, plus six hundred years of grafting, plus six thou-
sand years of the white rule equals fifteen thousand years.
6. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 12.
7. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 237.
8. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 294.
9. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 31–32.
10. Muhammad, “What Was the Idea of God Making the Moon?” 21–22.
11. Muhammad, “Significance of the Moon, ” Muhammad Speaks (January 17 , 
1969): 21–22; and Muhammad, “Significance of the Moon. ” Muhammad Speaks
(January 24, 1969): 3.
12. Muhammad, “Old World Going Out with a Great Noise!” 16–17.
13. Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an” (July 4, 1969): 19.
14. Muhammad, “Old World Going Out with a Great Noise!” 17; and Muham-
mad, “Fasting” (December 10, 1971): 17.
15. Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an” (July 4, 1969): 19. This 
interest in astronomy, however, did not translate into an interest in astrology. 
Elijah Muhammad condemned it: “Islam is not an Astrology believing Religion. 
Astrology often proves to be untrue! So, the Holy Qur-an Teaches against Astrol-
ogy. It is a work of the Devil. ” Muhammad, “Shun Astrology, ” 17.
16. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (August 10, 1957): 10; (August 17, 
1957): 10; (August 24, 1957): 10; (August 31, 1957): 10; (September 7, 1957): 10; and 
(October 19, 1957): 10. See also, Muhammad, “Christmas!” 15.
17. Muhammad, “Christmas!” 15.
18. “Muhammad Meets the Press!” (February 11, 1972): 3–4.
19. Muhammad, “Fasting” (December 10, 1971): 17.
20. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 53.
21. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 44.


--- PAGE 173 ---
162 Notes to Chapter 4
22. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 58–61.
23. Muhammad, “Warning to M.G.T. and G.C. Class, ” 4.
24. See for example, Muhammad, “The Filth That Produces the Filth, ” 16–17.
25. Muhammad, “To the Black Woman in America, ” 16–17. See also Muham-
mad, “To My Beloved People: Warning, ” 14–15, in which he criticized both skirts 
and shorts that were above the knee.
26. Muhammad, “Why and How We Fast in December, ” 11.
27. Muhammad, “Fasting” (December 18, 1970): 15.
28. Muhammad, “Fasting” (December 10, 1971): 16–17.
29. “Tricknology” is the set of “superior tricks” that Y akub taught his newly 
created race to ensnare the original black race. For example, he had learned that 
unlike attracts and alike repels. “When Y akub, the Father (God) of this race of 
people (white Man) was six (6) years old, he was playing. Playing with two pieces 
of steel. He found in them an attraction. Y akub looked up at his uncle and said, 
‘Uncle, when I get to be an old man, I am going to make a man and he will rule 
you. ’” Therefore, he had to make his new people unalike: pale-skinned and blue-
eyed. He did so by separating the “black germ and brown germ” within the black 
man’s sperm and only allowing the brown babies to live. He continued in this 
manner, making progressively lighter people until he was able to achieve the un-
alike features he required. With these features they were attractive to the original 
black, brown, and yellow peoples and were thus able to “deceive the Black man, 
destroy him . . . and take over the earth. ” Not surprisingly, Elijah Muhammad 
commands, “Let alike unite and repel unalike. Accept your own!” Muhammad, 
“Unalike Attracts and Alike Repels, ” 3; and Muhammad, “Playing with Steel, ” 
16–17.
30. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 128. Elijah Muham-
mad argued, “We created man (white race) from a small life germ. [T] the soft 
pronoun ‘we’ used nearly throughout the Holy Qur-an makes the knowledge of 
the Original Man much clearer and of a more intelligent knowledge of how the 
white race’s creation took place. ” Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (July 28, 
1956), 2.
31. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 118.
32. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (June 29, 1957): 10.
33. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 133. Elijah Muhammad 
is not always consistent in his assigning of the symbols. Sometimes the white 
race is the serpent, the devil, and the tree of knowledge, while Adam and Eve are 
merely victims. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 126–27. Thus 
the devil can be Adam and Eve, the serpent, the tree, Y akub, and/or the white 
race as a whole.
34. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 104 and 119.
35. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America , 133. See also his 
Supreme Wisdom: Solution , 18, in which II Thessalonians 2:9 is adduced to


--- PAGE 174 ---
Notes to Chapter 4 163
explain why the white race has been given free rein of the world for a period 
of time. Qur’an 2:36; 3:174; 7:12, 20, and 27; 8:48; 15:16–18 and 42; 16:99; 20:120; 
22:3 and 26; 23:97; and 38:37 are all cited as describing the characteristics of the 
“devil white race. ” Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (October 26, 1957): 
10.
36. Muhammad, “The Holy Qur-An, ” 10. Only once is the devil white race 
identified with the jinn. In regard to Qur’an 72:5–6—“ And we thought that men 
and jinn did not utter a lie against Allah; And persons from among men used 
to seek refuge with persons from among the jinn, so they increased them in evil 
doing”—Elijah Muhammad declared, “Jinn is the devil and men is the Black 
People. ” Muhammad, “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an” (July 4, 1969): 19.
37. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 128.
38. On the basis of Revelation 14:1, Elijah Muhammad believed that only 
144,000 Muslims would be saved: the other “16,856,000 would go down with 
the enemies of Allah (God). ” Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (August 11, 
1956): 2. See also Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (October 20, 1956): 2.
39. Muhammad, “The Mother Plane, ” 20–21; and Muhammad, “Continued: 
The Mother Plane, ” 20–21.
40. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 270. In the same book, 
which was published in 1965, he expects the end within twenty-four months. 
Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 297. Elsewhere, he is even 
more urgent: “Do not expect ten more years, the fall will be within a few days. ” 
Muhammad, The Fall of America, 19. However, later (perhaps out of necessity), 
the date was moved to 1970.
41. Muhammad, Our Saviour Has Arrived, 60.
42. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 38.
43. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 155.
44. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 97.
45. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 18.
46. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 134.
47. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 125–26; and The Su-
preme Wisdom: Solution, 18.
48. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 276. The italics of the 
original have been removed, except in the case of Elijah Muhammad’s com-
ments and glosses, which have been retained for the sake of clarity. Likewise, his 
brackets have been replaced with parentheses so that my emendations will not be 
confused with his comments.
49. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 293–95.
50. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 293.
51. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 43.
52. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 273, 290–91, and 303.
53. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 303–5.


--- PAGE 175 ---
164 Notes to Chapter 4
54. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 267–68. Italics were 
added to facilitate the distinction betw een the scriptural texts and Elijah Mu-
hammad’s comments within the scriptural quotations. Also, his brackets have 
been changed to parentheses for the sake of clarity and consistency.
55. “Muhammad Meets the Press!” (February 11, 1972): 4.
56. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 17.
57. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 24, 67, and 110. However, in his Supreme 
Wisdom: Solution, 23, Elijah Muhammad mentioned Qur’an 2:173, but did not 
reproduce it.
58. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 69–72 and 95–99. In his Supreme Wis-
dom: Solution, 23, the biblical passages Deuteronomy 14:8, Isaiah 66:2, 3, 5, and 
18, and Mark 5:11–16 were mentioned.
59. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 61–62.
60. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 60.
61. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 70.
62. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 4–12.
63. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 36.
64. Muhammad, How to Eat to Live, 99–101. Italics added to facilitate the dis-
tinction between the biblical text and Elijah Muhammad’s comments.
65. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 22.
66. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (May 23, 1959): 14. For the reasons 
for the reappearance of the term “hypocrite, ” see chapter 5.
67. Clegg, An Original Man, 209. In an interview in 1972, Elijah Muhammad 
spoke of assassination attempts “going on for forty years, ever since I was Missioned. ” 
However, he also felt that such attempts had to fail, for he was protected by Allah. 
“Sixteen Journalists Obtain . . . Rare Interview with Messenger Muhammad!” 3.
68. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America , 199.
69. Message to the Blackman in America was, of course, written after Malcolm 
X left the Nation of Islam. Later, in the early 1970s, the term would begin to ap-
pear again in his columns as he fought to control the various factions within the 
Nation of Islam. See also Muhammad, “Victory of the Apostle, ” 3–4.
70. Muhammad, “Beware of False Prophets, ” 3.
71. See, for example, Muhammad, “Hypocrites!” 18. In this full-page article, 
Elijah Muhammad wrote, “One Hypocrite among the Muslims, is worse than one 
hundred disbelievers who have never sought to come among the Muslims. ” He 
describes the hypocrite as “evil, ” “poisonous, ” and “not only hated by Allah (God) 
b u t...  h a t e d  b y  a l l  b e l i e v e r s . ”
72. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 248–51.
73. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 252–59.
74. Elijah Muhammad followed this with similar analyses in this passage of 
Qur’an 5:53, 4:144 and 145, 47:23 and 25–27, 66:9 and 10, and Qur’an 104 without 
quoting the verses. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America , 252–53.


--- PAGE 176 ---
Notes to Chapter 4 165
75. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 259–60.
76. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 269.
77. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 262–63.
78. See, for example, Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America,
261–62.
79. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 263. See above where 
the cited passage from The Fall of America links the appearance of hypocrites 
and the end of the present world.
80. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 138 and 141.
81. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 45–47.
82. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 64–65.
83. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 135–37. Elijah Muham-
mad’s italics have been removed and his brackets changed to parentheses for the 
sake of clarity.
84. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 135–37.
85. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 146–47.
86. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 135–60. For example, 
Elijah Muhammad includes the following translation of the “ du‘ā’ al-qunūt”:
O Allah, we beseech Thy help and ask Thy protection. We believe 
in Thee and trust in Thee. We worship Thee in the best manner and 
we thank Thee. We are not ungrateful to Thee and we cast off and 
forsake him who disobeys Thee. O Allah, Thee do we serve and to 
Thee do we pray and make obeisa nce. To Thee do we flee and we 
are quick. We hope for Thy mercy and we fear Thy chastisement, 
for surely Thy chastisement overtakes the unbelievers. Muhammad, 
Message to the Blackman in America, 155.
This exact translation was readily available in many prayer manuals. See, for 
example, Siddiqui, Elementary Teachings of Islam, 61. In this case, Elijah Mu-
hammad seems to have slightly emended the version available in his Qur’an. 
Muhammad Ali, preface to The Holy Qur-án, xxv. Also, as early as 1957 Elijah 
Muhammad gave a detailed description of how to perform a standard prayer. 
Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (February 15, 1957): 14; and Muhammad, 
“Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (February 22, 1957): 14.
87. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 143–44. In a 1965 col-
umn on prayer in Muhammad Speaks, Elijah Muhammad directly quoted the 
preface of Muhammad Ali’s translation to describe the five daily prayers. He even 
quoted the notes appended by Ali. Muhammad, “Muslim Prayer Service, ” 10.
88. For a discussion of some Muslims’ reaction to the Nation of Islam’s less-
than-orthodox prayers, see chapter 5.
89. See for example, Muhammad, “Revelation Guides Aright, ” 18.
90. See for example, Muhammad, “The Bursting Asunder, ” 20–21; and Mu-
hammad, “Opposition to Truth Is Punished, ” 2.


--- PAGE 177 ---
91. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 161–205 and 220–47.
92. Muhammad, Our Savior Has Arrived, 6.
93. Wansbrough, Quranic Studies, 121.
94. Wansbrough, The Sectarian Milieu, 2.
95. Wansbrough, The Sectarian Milieu, 3.
96. The passage from Joel 3:2–3, 7, and 14 and Isaiah 65:1–5 was exegetical 
whereas the passage on the creation of the devils seems largely parabolic. Para-
phrastic exegesis was evident in the ubiquitous allusions to biblical motifs and 
the adoption of quranic idioms, such as “Lord of the Worlds. ”
97. Wansbrough, Quranic Studies, 127.
98. Wansbrough, Quranic Studies, 142 and 148.
Chapter 5
1. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 43.
2. McCloud, African American Islam, 4, 37–38, and 169–70.
3. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 220–23.
4. Barboza, American Jihad, 4–6; and McCloud, African American Islam, 32.
5. Clegg, An Original Man, 69.
6. Even using a more complex definition, one that sees religion as discourse, 
such as that of Bruce Lincoln—“Religion, I submit, is that discourse whose defin-
ing characteristic is its desire to speak of things eternal and transcendent with 
an authority equally transcendent and eternal”—obviously makes the Nation of 
Islam a religion. Lincoln, Theses on Method, 225.
7. Curtis, Black Muslim Religion, 6.
8. The term “religion” and the determination of what makes something “reli-
gious” are themselves extremely problematic. See Arnal, “Definition, ” 21–34; and 
Braun, “Religion, ” 3–20.
9. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 6.
10. Baghdadi, “Who’s behind the Splinter Group? Messenger’s Attackers Ex-
posed, ” 2.
11. See also al-Ghareeb (“Lauds Leader: Eastern Muslim Calls Nation of Is-
lam ‘Great, ’” 15 and 18), who wished he could join the Nation of Islam and even 
accepted Allah in the person of Fard Muhammad. What also makes al-Ghareeb 
unusual is the relatively late date of his support for Elijah Muhammad: 1971.
12. For example he wrote “Inexcusable indeed . . . is the uncalled for criticism 
of the teachings of Mr. Elijah Muhammad by the (so-called) ‘orthodox. ’ I am also 
convinced that Mr. Elijah Muhammad’s mission is God-inspired. ” Naeem, “Paki-
stan Muslim Tells the Truth about the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, ” 3. See also 
Naeem’s apologetics on behalf of the Nation of Islam: Naeem, “Pakistan Muslim 
Blasts Press Slander of Islam, ” 3; Naeem, “Rips Role of Lomax, ” 4; and Naeem, 
“Pakistan Muslim: Muhammad’s Work, Not Words, True Test of Greatness, ” 
166 Notes to Chapter 4


--- PAGE 178 ---
Notes to Chapter 5 167
18–19. Naeem also leapt to the defense of Elijah Muhammad, attacking Malcolm 
X and warning people not to listen to rumors or spread gossip. Naeem, “Obey 
Divine Leader, ” 1, 3, and 6. He also wrote a four-part series for Muhammad 
Speaks harshly criticizing Malcolm X: Naeem, “How the Late Malcolm X Misrep-
resented Himself and the Divine Messenger, ” 9; Naeem, “Self-Publicity Motivated 
Malcolm, Not Devotion, ” 10; Naeem, “Pakistani Muslim Tells: Why, at Times, I 
Refused to Cooperate with Malcolm, ” 10 and 12; and Naeem, “Malcolm’s Doom 
Decreed by God, Not the Messenger, ” 10. Even well after Malcolm X’s death, 
Naeem maintained his assault on his character: “Malcolm . . . never did compre-
hend True Islam . . . [and was] devoid of Islamic characteristics. ” Naeem, “Paki-
stan Muslim: Rips Malcolm Statements Printed in Foreign Press, ” 10.
13. Naeem, “Introduction” to Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 4.
14. Naeem, “Introduction” to Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution,
4. In his introduction to The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, Naeem continued 
his support. He ironically critiqued the Christian belief that Jesus is God. (It 
seems unlikely that he was surreptitiously critiquing the most controversial of 
Elijah Muhammad’s doctrines.) He then pointed to the many successes of Elijah 
Muhammad as proof “that most surely Allah, our Almighty God, is with him. ” 
Naeem, “Introduction, ” 3.
15. Naeem, “Says the Messenger and His Followers May Hold Key to Future 
of World Islam, ” 10.
16. Naeem, “Says the Messenger and His Followers May Hold Key to Future 
of World Islam, ” 10. See also Naeem, “Declares Messenger of Allah Deserves Sup-
port of Entire Muslim World, ” 10.
17. “Muslim Leader Calls Moslem Leader ‘Phony, ’” 11. The different spelling of 
“Muslim” for each group in the newspaper’s heading may indicate the editor’s bias.
18. DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 147–48; “Moslems Fill Rockland, ” 21; 
“White Man Is God for Cult of Islam, ” 1; and “Muslim Leader Calls Moslem 
Leader ‘Phony, ’” 11. When the “White Man” article in The New Crusader came 
out, members of the Nation of Islam in Chicago and New Y ork attempted to buy 
every copy and publicly burn them all. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 316.
19. “Dakota Says There’s No Connection ’Tween Her Faith, Muhammed, ” 3; 
and “Muslim Leader Calls Moslem Leader ‘Phony, ’” 11.
20. “Fire New Blasts at Moslems, ” 1–2.
21. Clegg, An Original Man, 134.
22. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 90. This period also saw an increase in the 
Islamic literature available to African Americans. McCloud, African American 
Islam, 7. This increase may also have contributed to the need for Elijah Muham-
mad and Malcolm X to engage the claims of other Muslims.
23. Mughal, Frequently Asked Questions.
24. This sentiment is hardly unique. For a similar, but somewhat less polemic 
comparison, see also El-Amin, The Religion of Islam and the Nation of Islam.


--- PAGE 179 ---
168 Notes to Chapter 5
25. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Answers White Filth Crusader, ” 6. Elijah 
Muhammad was also concerned that scholars of the Qur’an overemphasized Al-
lah as “spirit” in the same way Christians did. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad 
Speaks” (October 19, 1957): 10.
26. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (June 8, 1957): 10. Emphasis 
added.
27. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 29–30, 31, 33, and 35.
28. Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 37.
29. Malcolm X, “ Arabs Send Warm Greetings, ” 1.
30. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (August 15, 1959): 14.
31. Clegg, An Original Man, 133.
32. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 203–4.
33. Elijah Muhammad cited in Abdul Basit Naeem, “Introduction” to Mu-
hammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 4. See also C. Eric Lincoln, The Black 
Muslims in America, 220–21.
34. Naeem, “Explains Why U.S. Muslims Don’t Pray in Orthodox Way, ” 10. 
Naeem also defended Elijah Muhammad’s priorities in a series of articles about 
the five pillars of Islam within the Nation of Islam in his weekly column in Mu-
hammad Speaks. Naeem argued that the Nation of Islam was in its infancy and 
not yet ready for the deeper, more spiritual meanings of prayer, but that their 
efforts to clothe, feed, and shelter others  were a form of prayer; theirs was a 
prayer of action and service to others. Moreover, they did not have the linguistic 
skills to pray in Arabic, nor were they all morally prepared. Naeem, “Examines 
‘5 Pillars of Islam’ and Black Nation, ” 10; Naeem, “Explains Why U.S. Muslims 
Don’t Pray in Orthodox Way, ” 10; and Naeem, “U.S. Muslims’ Good Deeds Are 
Prayers in Action, ” 10 and 27. Similarly, Naeem argued that the time and energy 
of the Muslims of the Nation of Islam would be better spent spreading Islam 
in the United States than going on hajj. Not only would they there encounter 
peculiarities of “old world” Muslims that might perplex them, but technically 
these new world Muslims were also surrounded by a hostile (white) enemy; they 
were, therefore, in a state of jihad and exempt from performing the hajj based 
on Islamic law. Naeem, “Thinks U.S. Muslims Should Aid Islam at Home before 
Pilgrimage to Mecca, ” 10–11.
35. For an example of how Elijah Muhammad used his “ hajj” experience, see 
Muhammad, Theology of Time, 22–23. His focus was on the health effects of the 
water from the Zamzam well. There was no mention of its connection to the 
traditional stories of Hagar and Ishmael or of its rediscovery by Muhammad’s 
grandfather.
36. Clegg, An Original Man, 144.
37. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Answers Critics, ” 3–4.
38. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 49–50.
39. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 187.


--- PAGE 180 ---
Notes to Chapter 5 169
40. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 188–90.
41. Muhammad, “Black Man of U.S.A. and Africa, ” 20.
42. “ Allah’s Last Messenger Answers Questions Y ou Have Always Wanted to 
Ask!” 4.
43. Muhammad, Our Saviour Has Arrived, 61.
44. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 289 and 264. Science 
too must take a back seat to this divine authority: “I do not make mistakes in 
what I write pertaining to these two races—black and white—and I do not need 
to study the theory of evolution to learn about them. Theories do not always 
prove to be the truth. I have the truth from the All-wise One (Allah), to Whom 
praise is due. ” Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 21. Similarly, scien-
tific discoveries about the moon (such as its age) and Mars (such as the presence 
of Martian life) were wrong or lies, for Elijah Muhammad got his information 
about such things from Allah. Muhammad, “Old World Going Out with a Great 
Noise!” 16–17. However, Elijah Muhammad did not oppose science. In fact, he 
strongly encouraged his followers to pursue higher education, particularly in 
technology, mathematics, and “higher science. ” For him, the advancement and 
independence of African Americans depended on obtaining this knowledge. Mu-
hammad, “Qualification Is a Must: Advance Education, ” 16–17.
45. Muhammad, “The Hypocrites, ” 12.
46. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 207.
47. See Curtis, Black Muslim Religion, for a detailed examination of the criti-
cal and personal role Islam played for members of the Nation of Islam from 1960 
to 1975.
48. C. Eric Lincoln, Black Muslims, 210.
49. C. Eric Lincoln, Black Muslims, 26.
50. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 103–4.
51. A similar position is taken by Essien-Udom, who states,
The Nation of Islam represents an esoteric, in-group struggle to 
provide standards by which the social, cultural and moral life of the 
Negro masses can be raised to a meaningful community fabric. It 
seeks an outlet for Negro striving and performance. The movement 
combines the attractions of religion, nationalism, and political “pies 
in the sky” with a peculiar sense of belonging and achievement, and 
proposes the possibility of “greater” achievement for its members. 
The Nation assists its members to strive for traditional American 
middle-class values while maintaining their identity with the Negro 
community. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 362.
52. Muhammad, “Black Man of U.S.A. and Africa, ” 20.
53. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 105.
54. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 2.
55. Ghareeb, “Lauds Leader: Eastern Muslim Calls Nation of Islam ‘Great, ’” 15.


--- PAGE 181 ---
170 Notes to Chapter 5
56. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America, 204.
57. Curtis, Black Muslim Religion, 37.
58. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 44.
59. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 4, 29, and 31.
60. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 28.
61. Curtis, Black Muslim Religion.
62. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 44.
63. Jackson’s concept of “Black Religion” is also problematic. There is no ex-
istence of Black Religion independent of th e existence of religions such as Islam 
and Christianity. It seems possible, therefore, that Jackson has selected some 
salient characteristics of particularly politically active expressions of these re-
ligions among African Americans and reified them into a discernible religious 
movement. Jackson’s Black Religion is brilliant as a descriptive category, but 
whether this abstraction can then be pressed into service as the active agent that, 
for instance, appropriates the vocabulary of Islam and so gives rise to the Nation 
of Islam is a somewhat more dubious claim. Furthermore, except for Jackson’s 
use of the phrase “holy protest, ” it is not exactly clear what makes Black Religion 
religious. In other words, it seems just as plausible to suggest that there is black 
protest against white supremacy in the United States that appropriates religious 
language from Islam in the case of the Nation of Islam and political language 
from nationalism in the case of the Universal Negro Improvement Association.
64. Lee, The Nation of Islam, 2.
65. Turner, Islam, 4–5.
66. Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (October 12, 1956): 2; and “Sixteen 
Journalists Obtain . . . Rare Interview with Messenger Muhammad!” 3.
67. (The use of “Surah” is also very unusual.) Muhammad, “Fight in the Cause 
of Allah with Those Who Fight Y ou, ” 1.
68. Naeem did so to explain why hajj was not incumbent on members of the 
Nation of Islam. Naeem, “Thinks U.S. Muslims Should Aid Islam at Home before 
Pilgrimage to Mecca, ” 10.
69. Clegg, An Original Man, 282.
70. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 107 and 110.
71. For instance, Fard Muhammad taught that whites were evil, but it was a 
black man, Y akub, who had created them. Also, God himself (i.e., Fard Muham-
mad) was the son of a black man and a white woman.
72. Mohammed, “ Address to the University of North Carolina at Wilmington. ”
73. Sahib, The Nation of Islam, 71.
74. Muhammad, “Teachings of the Holy Quran, ” 18.
75. “First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam, 
The Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad, ” 3.
76. Turner, Islam, 158.
77. Sherman A. Jackson also uses the term “proto-Islamic movement” for


--- PAGE 182 ---
Notes to Chapter 6 171
both the Moorish Science Temple of America of Drew Ali and the Nation of Is-
lam of Elijah Muhammad. However, in so doing he is not suggesting, as Warith 
Deen Mohammed does with regard to Fard Muhammad and as Muhammad Ab-
dullah does with regard to Elijah Muhammad, that these men were consciously 
engaged in a secret effort to bring African Americans to Sunni Islam. His goal 
is to emphasize that these forms of Islam were not “interpretations” of Islam but 
“appropriations” of Islam. In other words, Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad had 
little interest in the way other Muslims practiced Islam. Instead, they sought to 
use Islam to reject white supremacy and anti-Black racism. Jackson, Islam and 
the Blackamerican, 5 and 43–44.
78. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 18–19.
Chapter 6
1. Haddad, “Introduction: The Muslims of America, ” 4.
2. Clegg, An Original Man, 282.
3. Elijah Muhammad was certainly not theologically conservative in the con-
text of Islam, but he “clung rather slavishly to Christian categories and anteced-
ents. ” Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 37. See also Ansari, “ Aspects of Black 
Muslim Theology, ” 137–76.
4. See chapter 4 above for a discussion of women.
5. Having argued that the separation of the races is inevitable and mandated 
by God, Elijah Muhammad stated, “If you were forced to choose between segre-
gation and integration you would be better off to ask the southern white people 
to give segregation back to you. ” Muhammad, “The Fatal Mistake, ” 17.
6. Elijah Muhammad warned his female followers that he opposed “adopting the 
African dress and hair styles . . . accepting traditional African tribal styles and gar-
ments with gay colors. ” Muhammad, “Warning to M.G.T. and G.C. Class, ” 4. With 
regard to men, beards, Afros, and traditional African “garb, ” these were dismissed 
as “jungle styles. ” He said, “I am against wearing beards. I am against men wearing 
long hair like women. ” His main issue with beards and long hair, besides their be-
ing “non-modern, ” was a matter of hygiene. He believed them to be “germ-carriers” 
and unsanitary. Even the “white man, ” who “came out of the cave . . . full of hair . . . 
[that] covered his whole body and face, ” shaves. Muhammad, “Beards, ” 5.
His issue with hygiene highlights hi s negative and condescending attitude 
towards Africa as well. Of beards or “hair worn down their backs like a woman, ” 
Elijah Muhammad noted, “This is the way the uncivilized white man went in the 
days when they lived in caves. It is the style of Black people of uncultured parts 
of Africa and the Islands of the Pacific, which was caused by the absence of the 
right guide, but they too will turn to the civilized way when they have the right 
guide. ” Muhammad, “To the Black Woman in America, ” 16–17.
After encouraging the “Black Man” to “wash and be clean, ” to refrain from


--- PAGE 183 ---
172 Notes to Chapter 6
using “filthy language” and from being loud, and to give up smoking, drinking, 
and drugs, Elijah Muhammad stated, “We must even teach Africa, and all other 
Black peoples, wherever they are on the earth, to have higher morals and more 
self-respect. We must get to them. ” After all, “The devil practices good manners. 
Why do not you and I do the same thing?” Muhammad, “Wash and Be Clean, ” 
21.
Elijah Muhammad’s conservative, perhaps even prejudiced attitude towards 
Africans is extended to Native Americans as well, even though he considered 
them descendants of “an old Ancient People, the Black Man of Asia. ” He taught 
that they originated in India and are therefore “so-called American Indians. ” 
They came to America because they had been exiled from India for their unbe-
lief in Allah and refusal to worship in His religion, Islam. After reaching Amer-
ica on foot (as part of their punishment) via the Bering Strait, they worshiped 
gods that they had fashioned themselves (as they had done in India). Their near 
annihilation by the white man was therefore a punishment for rejecting Allah. 
Elijah Muhammad then made Native Americans an offer: “So if you desire to 
live, my once-brothers, the Indians of America, seek me and I will Seek God for 
you, that you may live, yet again. Allah taught me that we can get along with the 
Indians of America, for they yet have some blood of the aboriginal Black people. ” 
Muhammad, “Indians in America, ” 20.
7. C. Eric Lincoln, “The Muslim Mission, ” 286.
8. These two men head the two most influential movements that emerged 
from the Nation of Islam after Elijah Muhammad’s death. There were about a 
dozen offshoots, with the third most influential being that of John Muhammad, 
Elijah Muhammad’s brother.
9. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 93.
10. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 78.
11. Malcolm X, Autobiography, 297.
12. Malcolm X, Autobiography, 339.
13. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 111.
14. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 91.
15. “He Lives On!” 1; Kashif, “Muslim Ministers Declare Support for New 
Leadership, ” 3 and 19; Wallace Muhammad, “Saviour’s Day Address: Hon. Wal-
lace Muhammad, ” 12–13; 67X, “He Lives On!” 2; and Baghdadi, “Middle East 
Report, ” 2. In subsequent issues, Wallace Muhammad’s picture would become 
ubiquitous and he granted a long interview to make his case directly to his fa-
ther’s followers. “First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation 
of Islam, The Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad, ” 3 and 11–14.
16. “First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam, 
The Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad, ” 3.
17. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Muslims, 92.
18. “First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam,


--- PAGE 184 ---
Notes to Chapter 6 173
The Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad, ” 3. Wallace Muhammad also related that 
his mother and father had been told by Fard Muhammad that Wallace Muham-
mad would be a boy and would be “a helper to his father. ” Ibid., 13.
19. Mohammed, “ Address to the University of North Carolina at Wilmington. ”
20. Mamiya, “From Black Muslim to Bilalian, ” 138–52.
21. “White Muslims?” 52; and Sullivan and Moore, “Cleveland Hosts Mass 
Elder Citizen Affair, ” 3.
22. Kashif, “Muslim Ministers Declare Support for New Leadership, ” 19.
23. “First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam, 
The Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad, ” 12.
24. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 130. The double wedding of Louis Far-
rakhan’s daughters Donna and Maria to Elijah Muhammad’s nephew, Wali Mu-
hammad, and his grandson, Alif Muhammad, occurred on January 28, 1975, less 
than a month prior to Elijah Muhammad’s death. Mary Eloise X, “Two Great 
Families Unite!” S1–S7.
25. Toure Muhammad, Chronology of Nation of Islam History, 11–12.
26. Given Curtis’s argument that between the years 1960 and 1975 the Nation 
of Islam was gradually islamicized by Elijah Muhammad, one could see Louis 
Farrakhan as merely continuing that process. Curtis, Black Muslim Religion.
27. If Mamiya’s thesis is correct, perhaps part of Farrakhan’s recent shift is due 
to his followers also moving into the middle class. As with the generation before, 
the racial separatist ideology of Elijah Muhammad is not as appropriate as it 
once was.
28. Parts of this section have appeared in Berg, “Mythmaking in the Ameri-
can Muslim Context, ” 685–703.
29. Clegg, An Original Man, 69–73.
30. McCutcheon, “Myth, ” 200.
31. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament? 11.
32. Bruce Lincoln, “Theses on Method, ” 225.
33. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament? 71.
34. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament? 36.
35. A good example of this kind of reversal can be seen in Elijah Muham-
mad’s treatment of the white racist claim that it is “obvious” that Africans are 
more closely related to other primates from which humans evolved. Elijah Mu-
hammad reversed this claim by stating that Allah taught him that some Whites 
had tried to “graft themselves back into the black nation. ” They only got as far 
as turning themselves into gorillas. “In fact, all the monkey family are from this 
2,000 year history of the white race in Europe. ” Muhammad, Message to the 
Blackman in America, 119.
36. Mack Who Wrote the New Testament? 118.
37. The importance of identity is made explicit in Elijah Muhammad’s ubiq-
uitous command “Be yourself!” and his emphasis on “knowledge of self ” and


--- PAGE 185 ---
174 Notes to Chapter 6
“do for self. ” The former is said to be “ Allah’s greatest teaching and warning to us 
(the so-called Negroes). ” Muhammad, Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 12 and 18–19. 
“Be yourself ” meant being proud of being black, seeing black as beautiful, and 
becoming Muslim. “Do for self ” meant breaking one’s economic, social, and reli-
gious dependence on Whites.
38. Bruce Lincoln, Authority, 6.
39. Bruce Lincoln, Authority, 7.
40. Drew Ali made his views on Christianity clear at the end of his Circle 
Seven Koran:
We, as a clean and pure nation descended from the inhabitants 
of Africa, do not desire to amalgamate or marry into families of the 
pale skin nations of Europe. Neither serve the gods of their religion, 
because our forefathers are the true and divine founders of the first 
religious Creed, for the redemption and salvation of mankind on 
earth.
Therefore we are returning the Church and Christianity back to 
the European Nations, as it was prepared by their forefathers for 
their earthly salvation.
While we, the Moorish Americans are returning to Islam, which 
was founded by our forefathers for our earthly and divine salvation. 
Noble Drew Ali, Circle Seven Koran, 59.
Drew Ali saw a chronological priority and a spiritual superiority of Islam, but 
did not denigrate Christianity, “for every nation must worship under his own 
vine and fig tree. ” Noble Drew Ali, Circle Seven Koran, 59. However, it is wrong 
for people descended from Moors to follow anything else but Islam. Elijah Mu-
hammad, in contrast, stated, “Christianity is a religion organized and backed by 
the devils for the purpose of making slaves of black mankind. ” Muhammad, Su-
preme Wisdom: Solution, 13.
For Drew Ali, the Qur’an (or at least its name) was central to his self-exoticiz-
ing claims of prophethood. For an excellent discussion of this “self-exoticizing” 
and its connection with African Americans’ perception of Islam and the “East” in 
1920s Chicago, see Nance, “Respectability and Representation, ” 623–59.
41. See, for example, Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (June 30, 1956): 
2; Muhammad, “Mr. Muhammad Speaks” (July 7, 1956): 2; and Muhammad, The 
Supreme Wisdom: Solution, 12 and 20.
42. Muhammad, Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, back cover.
43. For those who refused to follow Warith Deen Mohammed, much of Elijah 
Muhammad’s authority passed to his writings. Several organizations, such as the 
Coalition for the Remembrance of Elijah (CROE), United Brothers Communica-
tions Systems, and Messenger Elijah Muhammad Propagation Society, continue 
to preserve and propagate Elijah Muhammad’s teachings.
44. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament? 11.


--- PAGE 186 ---
Notes to Chapter 6 175
45. Sherman A. Jackson lists a similar set of “four key facts. ” The spread of the 
Islams of Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad was a twentieth-century, northern, 
urban, and underclass phenomenon. Prior to the twentieth century, the existen-
tial reality of African Americans precluded first preserving the Islam brought 
from Africa and then later resuscitating it. The migration of millions of African 
Americans to the cities of the post-Reconstruction North, where they remained 
poor, highlighted the “uneasy place” black Christianity occupied within an 
American Christianity dominated by Whites and the inability of black Christian-
ity to adapt to this new cultural milieu . The result was a significant number of 
African Americans who were alienated from black Christianity and susceptible 
to the new black Islams. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 38–42.
46. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament? 176.
47. As noted earlier, phenomenologically, if one brackets out theological prej-
udice, Elijah Muhammad must be treated as a Muslim on the basis of his own 
claims (see chapter 5). If one were to create a “minimal definition of Islam” (as 
discussed in chapter 5), the preeminence he accords to the Qur’an (see chapters 
3 and 4) and even to the figure of Muhammad (if not his Sunna) suggests that 
Elijah Muhammad would fit such a definition. Of course, it is not for the scholar 
of Islam to adjudicate whether anyone is a Muslim. Rather, my point is that these 
aforementioned facts, along with the vital and essential role of the religion of 
Islam within the authorities and identities he created (see above) and his tre-
mendous impact on “orthodox” Islam in America before and after his death (see 
above), highlight the need to study him within the larger Islamic tradition.
48. Kelley, “Malcolm X, ” 1,233.


--- PAGE 187 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 188 ---
177
Bibliography
3X, Allen and Eugene Majied. “Through Lies, Distortions, Misquotes: Seek to 
Turn Black Man against Muhammad. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 21, 1972): 15.
14X, Larry. “Fundraising Dinner a ‘Quiet Success’: Unity, Dominant Theme at 
Muhammad Hospital Fund Affair. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 31, 1975): 4.
67X, Charles. “He Lives On!” Muhammad Speaks (March 14, 1975): 2.
Abu Shouk, Ahmed I., J. O. Hunwick, and R. S. O’Fahey. “ A Sudanese Mission-
ary to the United States: Sāttī Mājid, ‘ Shaykh al-Islām in North America, ’ and 
His Encounter with Noble Drew Ali, Prophet of the Moorish Science Temple 
Movement. ” Sudanic Africa 8 (1997): 137–91.
Ali, John. “Whiteman and the Hypocrites Love Malcolm. ” Muhammad Speaks
(October 3, 1969): 20–21.
Ali, Noble Drew. The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science Temple of America. N.d.
— — —. Humanity. N.d.
— — —. Koran Questions for Moorish Americans. N.d.
— — —. Moorish Literature. N.d.
“ Allah’s Last Messenger Answers Questions Y ou Have Always Wanted to Ask! 
Muhammad Meets the Press!” Muhammad Speaks (February 4, 1972): 3–4.
Ansari, Z. I. “ Aspects of Black Muslim Theology. ” Studia Islamica 53 (1981): 137–76.
Arnal, William E. “Definition. ” In Guide to the Study of Religion, 21–34. Edited by 
Willi Braun and Russell McCutcheon. New Y ork: Cassell, 2000.
Arrington, Carolyn. Black Explorer in Spanish Texas: Estevanico. Austin, TX: 
Eakin Press, 1986.
Austin, Allan D. African Muslims in Antebellum America: A Sourcebook. New 
Y ork: Garland Publishing, 1984.
— — —. African Muslims in Antebellum America: Transatlantic Stories and Spiri-
tual Struggles. New Y ork: Routledge, 1997.
Baghdadi, Ali. “Middle East Report. ” Muhammad Speaks (March 14, 1975): 2.
— — —. “Who’s behind the Splinter Group? Messenger’s Attackers Exposed. ” Mu-
hammad Speaks (May 5, 1972): 2.
Barboza, Steven. American Jihad: Islam after Malcolm X. New Y ork: Doubleday, 
1994.


--- PAGE 189 ---
178 Bibliography
Berg, Herbert. “Early African American Muslim Movements and the Qur’an. ” 
Journal of Qur’ anic Studies 8.1 (2006): 22–37.
— — —. “Elijah Muhammad: An African American Muslim mufassir?” Arabica: 
Revue d’ études Arabes 44 (1997): 1–27.
— — —. “Elijah Muhammad and the Qur’an: The Evolution of His tafsır.”  The 
Muslim World 89.1 (January 1999): 40–55.
— — —. “Mythmaking in the American Muslim Context: The Moorish Science 
Temple, the Nation of Islam, and the American Society of Muslims. ” Journal 
of the American Academy of Religion 73.3 (September 2005): 685–703.
Beynon, Erdmann Doane. “The Voodoo Cult among Negro Migrants in Detroit. ” 
American Journal of Sociology 43 (July 1937–May 1938): 894–907.
“The Black Supremacists. ” Time (August 10, 1959): 24–25.
Braun, Willi. “Religion. ” In Guide to the Study of Religion, 3–20. Edited by Willi 
Braun and Russell McCutcheon. New Y ork: Cassell, 2000.
Burley, Dan. “Pomp, Mysticism Key to Power: Elijah Muhammad Part II. ” Chi-
cago Defender (August 22, 1959): 1–2.
— — —. “Portrait of a Shrewd Cult Leader. ” Chicago Defender (August 15, 1959): 
1–2.
“Chicago Mayor Proclaims Muslim Saviour’s Day: ‘Nation of Islam Day’ Feb. 26, 
1975. ” Muhammad Speaks (February 14, 1975): 1.
Clegg, Claude Andrew, III. An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Mu-
hammad. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
Curtin, Philip D. The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census. Madison: University of Wis-
consin Press, 1969.
Curtis, Edward E., IV . Black Muslim Religion in the Nation of Islam, 1960–1975.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
— — —. Islam in Black America: Identity, Liberation, and Difference in African-
American Islamic Thought. Albany: State University of New Y ork Press, 2002.
“Dakota Says There’s No Connection ’Tween Her Faith, Muhammed. ” The Pitts-
burgh Courier (August 1, 1959): 3.
Dannin, Robert. Black Pilgrimage to Islam. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
DeCaro, Louis A., Jr. On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X.
New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1996.
“Decree Akbar Muhammad. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 1, 1965): 9.
Diouf, Sylviane A. Servants of Allah: African Muslims Enslaved in the Americas.
New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1998.
Dowling, Levi H. The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ: The Philosophical and 
Practical Basis of the Religion of the Aquarian Age of the World and of the 
Church Universal, Transcribed from the Book of God’s Remembrances, Known 
as the Akashic Records. London: Fowler, 1930 [1908].
El-Amin, Mustafa. The Religion of Islam and the Nation of Islam: What Is the Dif-
ference? Newark, NJ: El-Amin Productions, 1991.


--- PAGE 190 ---
Bibliography 179
Essien-Udom, E. U. Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America. New 
Y ork: Dell, 1962.
Farrakhan, Louis. “Muslim ‘Feud’ a Hoax, Farrakhan Explains. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (February 22, 1974): 3.
Fauset, Arthur Huff. Black Gods of the Metropolis: Negro Religious Cults in the Ur-
ban North. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1944.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. “Elijah Muhammad. ” FBI file 105-24822.
— — —. “Fard, Wallace D. ” FBI files 100-33603; 100-43165; and 105-63642.
— — —. “Moorish Science Temple of America (Noble Drew Ali). ” FBI file 62-
25899.
 “Fire New Blasts at Moslems: Leader Explains Role of 2 Groups. ” Chicago De-
fender (December 5, 1959): 1–2.
“First Official Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam, The 
Honorable Wallace D. Muhammad. ” Muhammad Speaks (March 21, 1975): 3 
and 11–14.
“‘Get Well’ Sentiments Arrive in ‘ Avalanche. ’” Muhammad Speaks (February 28, 
1975): 5.
Ghareeb, Zahid Aziz al-. “Lauds Leader: Eastern Muslim Calls Nation of Islam 
‘Great.’” Muhammad Speaks (July 2, 1971): 15 and 18.
Gomez, Michael A. “Muslims in Early America. ” The Journal of Southern History 
60.4 (November 1994): 671–710.
Haddad, Yvonne Y azbek. “Introduction: The Muslims of America. ” In The Mus-
lims of America, 1–8. Edited by Yvonne Y azbek Haddad. New Y ork: Oxford 
University Press, 1991.
“He Lives On!” Muhammad Speaks (March 14, 1975): 1.
The Holy Qur-an. Ali, Maulvi Muhammad, trans. 4th rev. ed. Lahore: Ahmadiyya 
Anjuman Ishaat Islam, 1951.
 “The Holy Qur-an: Chapter 4, Section 9: The Prophet Must Be Obeyed. ” Mu-
hammad Speaks (April 4, 1965): 8.
“The Holy Qur-an: The Hypocrites and Disbelievers. ” Muhammad Speaks (Janu-
ary 1, 1965): 8.
Huntington, Samuel P . The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Or-
der. New Y ork: Simon and Schuster, 1996.
“Is New Y ork Sitting on a ‘Powderkeg’? Racial Unrest Forces Its Way to the Sur-
face. ” U.S. News & World Report (August 3, 1959): 48–51.
Jackson, Sherman A. Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking toward the Third Res-
urrection. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Kashif, Lonnie. “Muslim Ministers Declare Support for New Leadership. ” Mu-
hammad Speaks (March 14, 1975): 3 and 19.
Kelley, Robin D. G. “Malcolm X. ” In Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African 
and African American Experience, 1,233–36. Edited by Kwame Anthony Ap-
piah and Henry Louis Gates, Jr. New Y ork: Basic Civitas Books, 1999.


--- PAGE 191 ---
180 Bibliography
Lee, Martha F . The Nation of Islam: An American Millenarian Movement. Syra-
cuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1996.
Lincoln, Bruce. Authority: Construction and Corrosion. Chicago: Chicago Univer-
sity Press, 1994.
— — —. “Theses on Method. ” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 8.3 (1996): 
225–27.
Lincoln, C. Eric. The Black Muslims in America . 3rd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerd-
mans, 1994 [1961].
— — —. “The Muslim Mission in the Context of American Social History. ” In 
African-American Religion: Interpretive Essays in History and Culture, 279–94. 
Edited by Timothy E. Fulop and Albert J. Raboteau. New Y ork: Routledge, 
1997.
Mack, Burton L. “Social Formation. ” In Guide to the Study of Religion, 283–96. Ed-
ited by Willi Braun and Russell T. McCutcheon. London: Continuum, 2000.
— — —. Who Wrote the New Testament? The Making of the Christian Myth. New 
Y ork: HarperCollins, 1995.
Mamiya, Lawrence H. “From Black Muslim to Bilalian: The Evolution of a Move-
ment. ” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 21.2 (1982): 138–52.
Marr, Timothy. The Cultural Roots of American Islamicism. New Y ork: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006.
Marsh, Clifton E. From Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition from Separation 
to Islam, 1930-1980. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1984.
McCloud, Aminah Beverly. African American Islam. New Y ork: Routledge, 1995.
McConkie, Bruce R. Mormon Doctrine. Salt Lake City, UT: Bookcraft, 1958.
McCutcheon, Russell T. “Myth. ” In Guide to the Study of Religion, 199–207. Edited 
by Willi Braun and Russell T. McCutcheon. London: Continuum, 2000.
Mohammed, Warith Deen. “ Address to the University of North Carolina at 
Wilmington. ” Paper presented on February 2, 2002.
“Moslems Fill Rockland, Leader Fails to Show. ” The Amsterdam News (August 22, 
1959): 21.
Mughal, Asim. Frequently Asked Questions: Part 10. Islam: Farrakhism & Malcolm 
X. http://allanswers.org/religion/islam-faq/part10.htm, version 3.3, 1993.
Muhammad, Elijah. “ Air Pollution Can Be Controlled. ” Muhammad Speaks (Au-
gust 7, 1970): 2.
— — —. “Beards. ” Muhammad Speaks (July 4, 1969): 5.
— — —. “Beware of False Prophets. ” Muhammad Speaks (July 31, 1964): 1, 3, and 8.
— — —. “Black Man of U.S.A. and Africa. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 17, 1969): 
20–21.
— — —. “The Bursting Asunder. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 26, 1969): 20–21.
— — —. “Christmas!” Muhammad Speaks (December 25, 1970): 15.
— — —. “Clarification of Actions Taken by Messenger Muhammad against Mu-
hammad Ali’s Action. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 11, 1969): 2–3.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Bibliography 181
— — —. “Continued: The Mother Plane. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 5, 1969): 
20–21.
— — —. “‘Daring Pedestrian’ Who Challenges Motorist. ” Muhammad Speaks (Au-
gust 11, 1967): 12–13.
— — —. “The Daring Pedestrian: Part II. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 25, 1967): 
12–13.
— — —. The Fall of America. Chicago: Muhammad’s Temple of Islam No. 2, 1973.
— — —. “Fasting. ” Muhammad Speaks (December 18, 1970): 15.
— — —. “Fasting. ” Muhammad Speaks (December 10, 1971): 16–17.
— — —. “The Fatal Mistake. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 23, 1970): 16–17.
— — —. “Fight in the Cause of Allah with Those Who Fight Y ou. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (October 28, 1966): 1.
— — —. “The Filth That Produces the Filth. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 4, 
1970): 16–17.
— — —. “Future of American So-Called Negroes. . . . ” Muhammad Speaks (April 
1962): 3, 6, 8, and 16–17.
— — —. History of the Nation of Islam. Atlanta: Secretarius Memps Publication, 1993.
— — —. “The Holy Qur-An. ” Muhammad Speaks (February 4, 1966): 10.
— — —. How to Eat to Live. Newport News, V A: National Newport News and 
Commentator, 1967.
— — —. “The Hypocrites. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 26, 1968): 12.
— — —. “Hypocrites!” Muhammad Speaks (May 14, 1971): 12.
— — —. “Hypocrites Condemned. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 23, 1964): 8.
— — —. “Hypocrites: Do Not Befriend Hypocrites. ” Muhammad Speaks (Novem-
ber 26, 1971): 15.
— — —. “Indians in America. ” Muhammad Speaks (March 28, 1969): 20.
— — —. “Memo: From the Desk of Muhammad; To: The Original Black People!” 
Muhammad Speaks (September 11, 1964): 5, 14, and 20.
— — —. Message to the Blackman in America. Newport News, V A: United Brothers 
Communications Systems, 1992 [1965].
— — —. “Messenger Thanks Greeks. ” Muhammad Speaks (March 3, 1972): 2.
— — —. “Money Necessary. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 3, 1973): 6.
— — —. “The Mother Plane. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 29, 1969): 20–21.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Answers Critics: Authority from Allah, None Other. ” 
Muhammad Speaks (August 2, 1963): 3–4.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Answers White Filth Crusader: Says So-called Negroes 
Will Soon Lose Love for Their White Oppressors. ” The Pittsburgh Courier
(March 30, 1957): 6.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (June 30, 1956): 2 (Mag-
azine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (July 7, 1956): 2 (Maga-
zine Section).


--- PAGE 193 ---
182 Bibliography
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (July 23, 1956): 2 (Maga-
zine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (July 28, 1956): 2 (Mag-
azine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 11, 1956): 2 
(Magazine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (September 22, 1956): 2 
(Magazine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (October 12, 1956): 2 
(Magazine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (October 20, 1956): 2 
(Magazine Section).
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (February 15, 1957): 14.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (February 22, 1957): 14.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (June 8, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (June 29, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 10, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 17, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 24, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 31, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (September 7, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (October 19, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (October 26, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (December 21, 1957): 10.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (May 23, 1959): 14.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad Speaks. ” The Pittsburgh Courier (August 15, 1959): 14.
— — —. “Mr. Muhammad’s Statement on the President’s Death. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (December 20, 1963): 3.
— — —. “Muhammad Thanks Harlem: Wins Sweeping Support. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (July 17, 1964): 1 and 4.
— — —. “Muslim Prayer Service. ” Muhammad Speaks (June 4, 1965): 10.
— — —. “Nation of Islam Offers Hearst $100,000 to Prove Charge: Beware of 
Phony Claims. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 16, 1963): 1 and 3.
— — —. “Nation Still Mourns Death: When Abe Lincoln and J. F . Kennedy Spoke 
Out for Negroes. . . . ” Muhammad Speaks (December 20, 1963): 1 and 3.
— — —. “Old World Going Out with a Great Noise! Disagreement Mounting. ” 
Muhammad Speaks (November 26, 1971): 16–17.
— — —. “Opposition to Truth Is Punished. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 2, 1970): 
2.
— — —. Our Saviour Has Arrived. Chicago: Muhammad’s Temple of Islam No. 2, 
1974.
— — —. “Pay Y our Debts. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 5, 1973): 16.


--- PAGE 194 ---
Bibliography 183
— — —. “Pay Y our Debts!” Muhammad Speaks (September 20, 1974): 1.
— — —. “Playing with Steel. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 9, 1970): 16–17.
— — —. “Qualification Is a Must: Advance Education. ” Muhammad Speaks (No-
vember 21, 1969): 16–17.
— — —. “Revelation Guides Aright. ” Muhammad Speaks (December 25, 1970): 18.
— — —. “Right to Peaceful Assembly Denied Black Americans. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (November 22, 1963): 1, 3, and 9.
— — —. “Shun Astrology. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 5, 1973): 17.
— — —. “Significance of the Moon. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 17, 1969): 21–22.
— — —. “Significance of the Moon. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 24, 1969): 3.
— — —. “Special: Read. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 11, 1974): 13.
— — —. “The Sudden Death of President Nasser of Egypt. ” Muhammad Speaks
(October 9, 1970): 17.
— — —. The Supreme Wisdom: Solution to the So-Called Negroes’ Problem. New-
port News, V A: National Newport News and Commentator, 1957.
— — —. The Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two. Hampton: U.B. & U.S. Communica-
tions Systems, n.d.
— — —. “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an. ” Muhammad Speaks (July 4, 1969): 
19.
— — —. “Teachings of the Holy Quran. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 15, 1969): 18.
— — —. “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an on Obedience. ” Muhammad Speaks
(April 24, 1964): 3.
— — —. “The Teachings of the Holy Qur-an on Obedience. ” Muhammad Speaks
(January 15, 1965): 21.
— — —. “Thank Y ou!” Muhammad Speaks (April 12, 1974): 1.
— — —. The Theology of Time. Transcribed by Abass Rassoull. Hampton, V A: U.S. 
Communications Systems, 1992.
— — —. “To My Beloved People: Warning. ” Muhammad Speaks (February 16, 
1968): 14–15.
— — —. “To the Black Woman in America. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 4, 
1970): 16–17.
— — —. “TO: The Family of Dr. Martin Luther King. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 
12, 1968): 3.
— — —. “TO: The Patrons of Y our Supermarket and Salaam Restaurant. ” Muham-
mad Speaks (April 26, 1968): 6.
— — —. The True History of Master Fard Muhammad. Compiled and edited by 
Nasir Makr Hakim. Atlanta: Messenger Elijah Muhammad Propagation Soci-
ety, 1996.
— — —. “Truth Has Always Triumphed: Sport and Play Is Condemned. ” Muham-
mad Speaks (April 17, 1970): 16.
— — —. “12,000 Cheer Muhammad’s History of Black Man’s Role in Islam: Ap-
plies Prophesy to Today’s World. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 31, 1962): 3–4.


--- PAGE 195 ---
184 Bibliography
— — —. “Unalike Attracts and Alike Repels. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 15, 
1967): 3.
— — —. “Victory of the Apostle. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 15, 1965): 1 and 3–4.
— — —. “ A Warning to the Black Man of America. ” The Final Call to Islam (Au-
gust 18, 1934): 1–2.
— — —. “Warning to Donors. ” Muhammad Speaks (July 6, 1973): 2.
— — —. “Warning to M.G.T. and G.C. Class. ” Muhammad Speaks (June 28, 1968): 4.
— — —. “Wash and Be Clean. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 1, 1969): 21.
— — —. “What Was the Idea of God Making the Moon?” Muhammad Speaks
(January 17, 1969): 21–22.
— — —. “Why and How We Fast in December. ” Muhammad Speaks (December 3, 
1965): 11.
“Muhammad Meets the Press!” Muhammad Speaks (February 4, 1972): 3–4.
“Muhammad Meets the Press!” Muhammad Speaks (February 11, 1972): 3–4.
Muhammad, Nathaniel. “October 15 Address: Muhammad Clarifies Truth! Con-
demns Liars. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 27, 1972): S8–S9.
Muhammad, Toure. Chronology of Nation of Islam History. Chicago: Toure Mu-
hammad, 1996.
Muhammad, Wallace. “Saviour’s Day Address: Hon. Wallace Muhammad. ” Mu-
hammad Speaks (March 14, 1975): 12–13.
“Muslim Leader Calls Moslem Leader ‘Phony. ’” The Amsterdam News (October 3, 
1959): 11.
“NAACP Attacks ‘Moslem’ Cult: Roy Wilkins Hits Racists for Aid. ” Chicago De-
fender (August 8, 1959): 1–2.
Naeem, Abdul B. “Declares Messenger of Allah Deserves Support of Entire Mus-
lim World. ” Muhammad Speaks (May 6, 1966): 10.
— — —. “Examines ‘5 Pillars of Islam’ and Black Nation. ” Muhammad Speaks (June 
24, 1966): 10.
— — —. “Explains Why U.S. Muslims Don’t Pray in Orthodox Way. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (July 1, 1966): 10.
— — —. “How the Late Malcolm X Misrepresented Himself and the Divine Mes-
senger. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 6, 1965): 9.
 — — —. “Malcolm’s Doom Decreed by God, Not the Messenger. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (August 27, 1965): 10.
— — —. “Obey Divine Leader. ” Muhammad Speaks (July 17, 1964): 1, 3, and 6.
— — —. “Pakistan Muslim Blasts Press Slander of Islam: Declares U.S. Muslims 
True Brothers in Islam. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 30, 1962): 3.
— — —. “Pakistan Muslim: Muhammad’s Work, Not Words, True Test of Great-
ness. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 31, 1962): 18–19.
— — —. “Pakistan Muslim: Rips Malcolm Statements Printed in Foreign Press. ” 
Muhammad Speaks (December 24, 1965): 10.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Bibliography 185
— — —. “Pakistan Muslim Tells the Truth about the Honorable Elijah Muham-
mad. ” Muhammad Speaks (October 15, 1962): 3.
— — —. “Pakistani Muslim Tells: Why, at Times, I Refused to Cooperate with 
Malcolm. ” (August 20, 1965): 10 and 12.
— — —. “Rips Role of Lomax: Pakistani Muslim Blasts Handling of TV Interview 
with Messenger of Allah. ” Muhammad Speaks (January 1, 1965): 4.
— — —. “Says the Messenger and His Followers May Hold Key to Future of World 
Islam. ” Muhammad Speaks (April 22, 1965): 10.
— — —. “Self-Publicity Motivated Malcolm, Not Devotion. ” Muhammad Speaks
(August 13, 1965): 10.
— — —. “Thinks U.S. Muslims Should Aid Islam at Home before Pilgrimage to 
Mecca. ” Muhammad Speaks (August 14, 1967): 10–11.
— — —. “U.S. Muslims’ Good Deeds Are Prayers in Action. ” Muhammad Speaks
(July 8, 1966): 10 and 27.
Nance, Susan. “Respectability and Representation: The Moorish Science Temple, 
Morocco, and Black Public Culture in 1920s Chicago. ” American Quarterly
54.4 (2002): 623–59.
“News of Messenger Muhammad’s Illness Evokes Growing Expressions of Con-
cern. ” Muhammad Speaks (February 28, 1975): 5.
Rassoull, Abass. “Holy Names. ” Muhammad Speaks (December 8, 1972): 3.
— — —. “Warning. ” Muhammad Speaks (June 1, 1973): 15.
Sahib, Hatim A. The Nation of Islam. M.A. thesis, University of Chicago, 1951.
Shabbaz, John. “Open Letter: Muslim Minister Writes to Malcolm. ” Muhammad 
Speaks (July 3, 1964): 9.
Shah, Yusuf. “Minister Offers A.P . Writer Merv Block $100,000 Plus Two Lives to 
Prove His Charges!” Muhammad Speaks (April 14, 1972): 2.
— — —. “Woe to Every Slanderer!” Muhammad Speaks (April 14, 1972): 2.
Sharif, Sidney R. The African American (Bilalian) Image in Crisis . Jersey City, NJ: 
New Mind Productions, 1985.
Siddiqui, Muhammad Abdul Aleem. Elementary Teachings of Islam. Islamic Call 
Society, n.d.
“Sixteen Journalists Obtain . . . Rare Interview with Messenger Muhammad!” 
Muhammad Speaks (January 28, 1972): 3–4.
Smith, Jane I., “Patterns of Muslim Immigration. ” http://usinfo.state.gov/prod-
ucts/ pubs/muslimlife/ immigrat.htm.
Stoner, J. B. “Letter to Elijah Muhammad. ” The Amsterdam News (September 19, 
1959): 1 and 7.
Sullivan, Carl 2X and Constance 2X Moore, “Cleveland Hosts Mass Elder Citizen 
Affair. ” Muhammad Speaks (November 7, 1975): 3.
Thomas, Hugh. The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1440-1870. 
New Y ork: Simon and Schuster, 1997.


--- PAGE 197 ---
186 Bibliography
Turner, Richard Brent. Islam in the African-American Experience. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1997.
— — —. “Mainstream Islam in the African-American Experience. ” Muslim Ameri-
can Society (August 25, 2004): http://www.masnet.org/history.asp?id=1572.
“Walking the Earth like Brothers. ” The Economist (August 24, 1996): 67–68.
Wansbrough, John. Quranic Studies: Sources and Methods of Scriptural Interpreta-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.
— — —. The Sectarian Milieu: Content and Composition of Islamic Salvation His-
tory. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Watson, R. L. “ American Scholars and the Continuity of African Culture in the 
United States. ” Journal of Negro History 63.4 (October, 1978): 375–86.
Watson, Ted. “The Rise of the Moslems: Messenger Muhammad Leads Thou-
sands to Clean Living through the Islamic Faith. ” The Pittsburgh Courier
(April 21, 1956): 2 (Magazine Section).
“White Man Is God for Cult of Islam. ” The New Crusader (August 15, 1959): 1.
“White Muslims?” Time (June 30, 1975): 52.
Wilson, Peter Lamborn. Sacred Drift: Essays on the Margins of Islam . San Fran-
cisco: City Lights Books, 1993.
Wright, R. R. “Negro Companions of the Spanish Explorers. ” American Anthro-
pologist N.S. 4.2 (April 1902): 217–28.
X, Jeremiah and Joseph X. “Biography of a Hypocrite: By Two Muslim Brothers 
Who Knew Him Best. ” Muhammad Speaks (September 25, 1964): 16.
— — —. “Minister Exposed by Those Who Knew Him through Life: He Was No 
‘Empire Builder. ’” Muhammad Speaks (October 9, 1964): 5.
X, Louis. “Boston Minister Tells of Malcolm—Muhammad’s Biggest Hypocrite. ” 
Muhammad Speaks (November 6, 1964): 11–15.
— — —. “Minister Condemns Press Threats: Let the Messenger of Truth Teach the 
World.” Muhammad Speaks (April 16, 1965): 3.
X, Malcolm. “ Arabs Send Warm Greetings to ‘Our Brothers’ of Color in U.S.A. ” 
Pittsburgh Courier (August 15, 1959): 1 (Magazine Section).
X, Malcolm, with Alex Haley. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New Y ork: Bal-
lantine Books, 1973 [1964].
X, Mary Eloise. “Two Great Families Unite!” Muhammad Speaks (February 14, 
1975): S1–S7.


--- PAGE 198 ---
187
Abd ar-Rahman, Ibrahim, 11
Abdul Khaalis, Hamaas, 49
Abdullah, Muhammad, 124–125, 
171n77
Abraham, 82, 97
Adam, 83, 86–87, 94, 162n33
Africa, 9–11, 14, 16, 20, 21, 53, 78, 80, 
113, 117, 118, 128, 142, 143, 148n4, 
171–172n6
Ahmad, Mirza Ghulam, 18, 78
Ahmadiyya, 5, 13, 18–19, 20, 25, 60, 
61, 80, 101, 107, 109, 116, 125, 145, 
150n49, 157n16
Alcohol, 13, 25, 46, 53, 171n6
Ali, John, 45, 48, 59
Ali, Duse Mohammed, 19
Ali, (Maulana) Muhammad (translator 
of Qur’an), 19, 60–61, 64, 101, 102, 
154n45, 156n16, 157n32, 157n33, 
165n87
Ali, Muhammad (Cassius Clay), 48, 
131
Ali, Noble Drew, 2, 5, 6, 9, 14–18, 20, 
21, 53–58, 60, 63, 71, 73, 116, 127, 
139, 140, 141–142, 143, 148n12, 
149n28, 150n50, 156–157n16, 
170–171n77, 174n40, 174n45
Allah, 3, 21, 22, 24, 29–30, 54, 55, 57, 
58, 62, 63–64, 75, 76–78, 105, 107, 
110, 113,114, 115, 117, 118, 119, 
122, 130–131, 132–133, 135, 142, 
154n43, 156n3, 159n65, 159n68, 
159n73, 163n36, 164n67, 164n71, 
166n11, 167n14, 168n25, 169n44, 
173n37. See also Muhammad, Wali 
Fard
American Nazi Party, 41
Armageddon, 30, 34, 88–92, 98, 121, 
122, 135, 139, 163n40
Asiatics, 15, 54, 78, 128, 156n6
Barboza, Steven, 106
Ben Solomon, Job, 11
Beynon, Erdmann Doane, 25, 60, 
150n53, 151n64
Bible, 32, 34, 40, 56, 58–60, 62–63, 64, 
66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 75, 77, 85, 87, 
89, 90, 91–92, 93–95, 99, 102, 110, 
124, 137, 142, 144, 152n8, 157n19, 
157n25, 157n29, 159n68, 161n4, 
162n35, 164n58, 166n96
Bilal, 132
Bilali, Salih, 11
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 14, 21
Buddhism, 70, 82
Canaanite Temple, The, 14–16, 18, 54
Cassius Clay. See Ali, Muhammad
Christians and Christianity, 4–5, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 14, 15, 16–17, 18, 19, 20, 
29–30, 31, 34, 34, 53, 59, 60, 66, 
68, 69, 70, 71, 75, 77, 80, 81, 82, 84, 
95, 96, 100, 107, 115, 118, 119–120, 
128, 131, 139, 140, 143, 148n6, 
159n68, 160n2, 167n14, 168n25m 
171n3, 174n40, 175n45
Index


--- PAGE 199 ---
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day 
Saints (Mormons), 4–5, 56
Circle Seven Koran, 6, 16, 53–58, 
140–141, 156n3, 156n12, 157n19, 
174n40
Clegg, Claude Andrew, III, 36, 96, 106, 
147n4, 153n17
Curtis Edward E., IV , 106, 118, 119, 
173n26
Dawud, Talib Ahmad, 41, 108–109, 
111–112, 113
Devil, 2, 3, 24, 28–29, 61, 67, 70, 72, 
73, 81, 85–88, 90, 92, 104, 105, 108, 
115, 120, 131, 159n60, 161n15, 
162n33
Diab, Jamil, 41, 109, 111, 130
Diet, 84, 93–95, 104, 145. See also
Pork
Diouf, Sylviane A., 10–11, 116, 148n12, 
152n2
Drew, Timothy. See Ali, Noble Drew
Du Bois, W . E. B., 21
Estevan, 9–10
Faisal, Shaykh Daoud Ahmed, 18
Fall of America, The, 65, 88. See also
Armageddon
Farrakhan, Louis, 2, 7, 45, 48, 49, 
51–52, 128, 129, 131, 133–135, 136, 
143, 154n44, 173n24
Fasting, 47, 84–85, 110
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
21, 22, 24–25, 27, 31, 38, 58, 156n3
Ford, Wallace D. See Muhammad, 
Wali Fard
Fruit of Islam, 26, 41, 49, 135
Future Book, 6, 63–64, 72, 77, 124, 
159n61
Gambling, 48
Garvey, Marcus, 17, 19, 20–22, 25, 39, 
140
Girl’s Training and General Civiliza-
tion Class, 26, 135
Gomez, Michael A., 11, 148n12, 152n2
Haddad, Yvonne, 127
hadīth, 101, 107, 110, 175n47
hajj, 41, 44, 110, 113, 130, 168n34, 
168n35, 170n68
Heaven and Hell, 50, 53, 66, 88, 89, 91, 
105, 134, 158n56
Hinduism, 82
Holy Koran of the Moorish Science 
Temple of America, The. See Circle 
Seven Koran
How to Eat to Live, 65, 93
Hypocrites, 37, 44–46, 49–50, 70, 
76, 96–99, 104, 154n45, 164n69, 
164n71, 165n79
Ibn Said, Umar, 11
Jackson, Sherman A., 105, 119–120, 
148n12, 170n63, 170–171n77, 
174–175n45
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 89, 101
Jesus, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28, 29, 33, 45, 
54, 57, 75, 77, 82, 84, 139, 152n8, 
156n6, 160n2, 167n14; life of, 
80–81
Jews and Judaism, 59, 77, 80, 92, 93, 
139, 168n34
jihad, 6, 120, 122–123, 168n34
jinn, 61, 163n36
Kebe, Lamine, 11
Kennedy, John F ., 43
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 41, 45, 47
Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 41, 42
Lee, Martha F ., 120–121
188 Index


--- PAGE 200 ---
“Lesson 1” and “Lesson 2, ” 27, 150n53, 
151n56, 151n64, 161n5
Lincoln, Abraham, 43
Lincoln, C. Eric, 106, 117, 119
Little, Malcolm. See X, Malcolm
Mahdi, 18, 23–24, 34, 63, 68, 70, 
77–78, 88, 152n12
Mājid, Sāttī, 18, 157n16
Mamiya, Lawrence, 133, 173n27
Marr, Timothy, 12–13
Mars and Martians, 78, 81, 149n37, 
161n3, 161n15, 169n44
Marsh, Clifton E., 117, 119
Marshall, Thurgood, 41
McCloud, Aminah Beverly, 55, 105
Mecca, 25–26, 28, 29, 55, 70, 78, 88, 
113
Message to the Blackman in America,
50, 59, 65, 68–71, 96, 99, 102, 
158n51, 158n52
Mohammad, Bilali, 11
Mohammed, Abdul, 25, 33
Mohammed, Warith Deen (Wallace 
Muhammad), 2, 3, 7, 45–46, 50, 
51–52, 96, 117–118, 123–124, 128, 
129–133, 134–135, 136, 143, 147n4, 
171n77, 172n15, 172–173n18, 
174n43
Moon, 28, 78–79, 82
Moorish Science Temple, 5, 6, 13, 
15–18, 19, 20, 25, 33, 54–58, 140, 
150n50, 157n16, 157n19, 170n77
Moors, 10, 15–17, 54, 142, 174n40
Moses, 29, 36, 81, 97, 139, 151n75, 
161n5
Mother Plane, 29, 88–89, 145
Mughal, Asim, 110
Muhammad (ibn Abd Allah), 2, 20, 
28, 29, 54, 57, 58, 72, 81, 90, 110, 
114,132, 139, 156n6, 168n35, 
175n47
Muhammad, Abkar, 45–46, 96, 124, 
125
Muhammad, Clara, 32, 38, 60
Muhammad, Herbert, 42, 124
Muhammad, Kalot, 37, 45
Muhammad Speaks, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47, 
48, 50, 51–52, 83, 93, 96, 107, 131, 
135, 154n45
Muhammad, Wali Fard, 1–2, 3, 5, 9, 
14, 15, 19, 20, 22–30, 33–36, 37, 
38, 39, 46, 52, 60, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 
69, 71, 76–78, 81, 84, 88, 94, 96, 
100, 105, 109, 110, 113, 114, 115, 
117, 118, 119, 123–125, 127, 129, 
130–131, 132–133, 135, 137, 139, 
142, 143, 149n37, 150n44, 150n47, 
150n49, 150n50, 151n63, 151n75, 
152n8, 152n12, 152n14, 153n17, 
158n45, 160n3, 166n11, 169n44, 
170n71, 171n77, 173n18, 173n37
Muhammad, Wallace. See Mohammed, 
Warith Deen
Naeem, Abdul Basit, 107–108, 122–
123, 154n43, 154n45, 166–167n12, 
167n14, 168n33, 168n34, 170n68
National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP), 
41, 153n29
Native Indians, 14, 85, 172n6
Nurud-din, Adib, 109
Pork, 25, 26, 53, 66, 93–95. See also
Diet
Prayer, 3, 15, 34, 53, 66, 68, 70, 76, 84, 
99–102, 104, 108, 110, 119, 142, 
158n57, 165n86, 165n87, 168n34
Qaddafi, Muammar, 47
Qur’an, 4, 6, 19, 20, 24, 34, 38, 44, 48, 
53–104, 106, 108, 110, 114, 115, 
117, 120, 121, 122, 123–124, 130,
Index 189


--- PAGE 201 ---
Qur’an (Continued) 136, 139, 141–142, 
143, 144, 154n45, 156–157n16, 
157n32, 158n43, 158n45, 158n46, 
158n57, 159n60, 159n61, 159n65, 
159n68, 159n73, 160n74, 160n4, 
161n5, 161n15, 162n30, 162n33, 
163n35, 163n36, 164n57, 164n74, 
165n86, 166n96, 168n25, 174n40, 
175n47
Ramadan, 47, 84–85.  See also Fasting
Rassoull, Abass, 51, 131
Reincarnation, 57, 82, 150n50
Resurrection: life after death, 1, 91; of the 
Lost-Found Nation of Islam, 27, 91
Rozier, Theodore, 37
Russell, C.T., 89
Rutherford, Judge, 89, 101
Sadiq, Muhammad, 18–19
Satan, 40, 56, 67, 159n60. See also Devil
Saviour’s Day Rally, 46, 49, 50, 52, 131
Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam. See
“Lesson 1” and “Lesson 2”
Shabbaz, John, 44
Shabbaz, Tribe of, 23, 62, 67, 68, 78, 
113, 139
Sharrieff, Raymond, 49, 51, 131
Staton, Dakota, 11–112
Stoner, J. B., 42, 153n34
Sunna. See hadith
Supreme Wisdom, The, 59, 63, 65, 66–67, 
68, 70, 96, 99, 107, 108, 111, 158n51
Supreme Wisdom: Volume Two, 65, 
68–69, 96, 99, 158n51
Teachings for the Lost Found Nation of 
Islam in a Mathematical Way, 27, 
150n53
Temple No. 1 (Detroit), 25–26, 37, 39, 
40
Temple No. 2 (Chicago), 27, 37, 38, 39, 
43, 47, 49, 111, 155n56
Temple No. 3 (Milwaukee), 38, 39
Temple No. 4 (Washington), 38, 39
Temple No. 7 (New Y ork City), 40, 43, 
44, 137
Temple No. 11 (Boston), 40
Turner, Henry McNeal, 14
Turner, Richard Brent, 122
Universal Negro Improvement Asso-
ciation (UNIA), 21, 39, 170n63
University of Islam, 26, 37, 47, 109, 
130
Walcott, Louis Eugene. See Farrakhan, 
Louis
Wansbrough, John, 103–104
Washington, Booker T., 45
Washington, George, 149n20
Webb, Alexander Russell, 13–14
Wilson, Peter Lamborn, 54
Women, 76, 82–83, 128, 160n2, 
162n25, 171n6
X, Louis. See Farrakhan, Louis
X, Malcolm, 2, 5, 31, 39–46, 48–49, 
96, 98, 107, 110, 111, 123, 125, 128, 
129, 130, 134, 145, 152n12, 154n39, 
154n41, 154n43, 154n45, 164n69, 
166–167n12, 167n22
Y akub, 28, 76, 83, 85–88, 89, 104, 135, 
139, 162n29, 170n71
Yusuf Ali, Abd Allah, 60, 62, 64, 102
190 Index


--- PAGE 202 ---
About the Author
Herbert Berg i s  P r o f e s s o r  i n  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  o f  P h i l o s o -
phy and Religion at the University of North Carolina–Wilmington. He is 
the author of The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam: The Debate over 
the Authenticity of Muslim Literature from the Formative Period and editor 
of Methods and Theories in the Study of Islamic Origins.

