=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Elijah Muhammad~How to Eat to Live pt 1.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 71
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:02:13.396253
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
How to Eat to Live How to Eat to Live How to Eat to Live How to Eat to Live  
Book 1 Book 1 Book 1 Book 1  
 
"There is no way for us to learn the right way to eat in order to live a long life, 
except through the guidance and teachings of Allah, Who came in the person of 
Master Fard Muhammad."  
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad, How to Eat to Live...Book one  
Chapter 1  Right Way to Eat  
Chapter 2  Vegetables  
Chapter 3  Food God Suggests  
Chapter 4  Why They Urge You to Eat the Swine  
Chapter 5  The Pig...Swine  
Chapter 6  Fasting  
Chapter 7  One Meal A Day  
Chapter 8  Beware of Starchy Foods and Sweets  
Chapter 9  How Allah's Way Prolongs Life  
Chapter 10  How To Keep Food from Hurting Us  
Chapter 11  The Proper Food and the Proper Time to Eat it  
Chapter 12  The Right Food and the Proper Time to Eat it is 
becoming a "MUST"  
Chapter 13  Fruit is digested better when eaten Raw  
Chapter 14  Overindulgence, The Enemy  
Chapter 15  Our Biggest Problem is Eating too Much and too Often


--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 16  Why and How we Fast in December  
Chapter 17  The Food and It's Eater  
Chapter 18  Food Can be Life or Death  
Chapter 19  How to Live More than 100 Years  
Chapter 20  Proper Food for Body and Mind Equals Good Health  
Chapter 21  The Benefits of Eating Once a Day  
Chapter 22  A List of Foods We Must Not Eat  
Chapter 23  You Don't Need Numerous Diets; Just Eat Once Daily  
Chapter 24  Feeding Babies  
Chapter 25  Meat, Part 1  
Chapter 26  Know the Truth About the Flesh of The Swine  
Chapter 27  Live a Thousand Years  
Chapter 28  Train Yourself to Eat as Allah has Prescribed  
Chapter 29  "The Death Way"  
Chapter 30  Do Not Take Birth Control Pills  
Chapter 31  Food and Health  
Chapter 32  Foods to Avoid  
Chapter 33  The Safest Way to Eat


--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter 34  The Poisonous Animal Eater  
Chapter 35  Beautiful Appearance and Long Life  
Chapter 36  Divinely Prohibited Flesh  
Chapter 37  Poisonous Food and Water  
Chapter 38  Bad Food Causes Us to Look Old  
Chapter 39  Little Pure Food on Market  
Chapter 40  God of Right Prescribes Best Foods


--- PAGE 4 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 1 Chapter 1 Chapter 1 Chapter 1  
Right Way to Eat Right Way to Eat Right Way to Eat Right Way to Eat  
 
1    There is no way for us to learn 
the right way to eat in order to live 
a long life, except through the 
guidance and teachings of Allah. 
Who came in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad.  
2    The Bible says that He will give us more life abundancy, but He 
demands strict obedience to His Will. There is no way of prolonging 
the life of human beings or any other life unless it begins with 
restrictions of the foods which sustain life, the right kinds of food and 
the proper time when it should be taken into our bodies. 
3     Jehovah taught Israel how to live, but Israel rebelled against the 
law of Jehovah, handed down to them through Moses, the servant of 
Jehovah.  
4    There are many Jews today, called Orthodox Jews, who try to eat 
in order to live. They are careful of the type of food that goes into 
their stomachs. They will not slaughter an animal without trying to 
drain that animal's blood out of its body before taking it for food. 
They will not accept diseased animals, birds or fowls.  
5    We give credit to the Jews for still trying to obey that which they 
were ordered to do by Allah, through the prophets that Allah sent to 
them. The Jews paid the penalty for disobedience, and are still 
paying. However, they are the only people, the Holy Qur'an teaches, 
whose food we can eat. They, in turn, can eat our food. The Muslims 
who try to live according to the teachings of the Holy Qur'an will not 
eat the wrong food when they know what that food is.  
6    Of course, those who are becoming converts to Islam in America, 
my followers, are being tried. The Christians, white and black, try to


--- PAGE 5 ---
force or deceive my followers into eating foods they know we the 
Muslims do not approve.  
7    In prison, they almost starve my followers trying to force them to 
eat the filthy, poisonous swine flesh. This I know, because when I 
was in prison they did the same to me.  
8    Thanks to the coming of Allah in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, if we obey what He has given to us in the way of proper 
foods and the proper time to partake of these foods, we will never be 
sick or have to pay hundreds, thousands and millions of dollars for 
doctor bills and hospitalization.  
9    The Christian people have one of the most brutal ways of killing 
animals for their food. Many of their animals are killed under fright 
and excitement; they actually murder the animals they eat.  
10    We, the Muslims, who have not been able to go out to the 
slaughter houses as yet to choose our meat, as the Orthodox Jews are 
doing, slaughter our animals or cattle at a time when they least expect 
it. We take their lives in the name of Allah, with a prayer over this 
condemned life to be used to sustain our lives.  
11    Allah has taught me how to eat in order to live. I have been 
teaching it to my followers, but we often become negligent and fall 
victim to our own negligence. As a result, we are calling the doctor, 
or going to the hospital because we did not eat the right foods, and in 
the proper way.  
12    Hereafter. I shall enforce restriction on my followers to eat as 
Allah bids us. As I have said to my followers on many occasions, life 
cannot be prolonged unless we are careful of what we eat and when 
we eat.  
13    The foolish idea of eating three or four times a 
day and all between meals is like the poisonous 
swine who never has any regular eating habit. Even 
a dog will not eat when he is full most of the time. 
The hog, however, swallows as long as he can, and 
then regrets that he can't keep swallowing. He will 
crawl into his food and wait until he can swallow 
some more. He is so greedy he won't leave his food.


--- PAGE 6 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 2 Chapter 2 Chapter 2 Chapter 2  
Vegetables Vegetables Vegetables Vegetables  
 
1    Virtually all vegetables are good to eat except collard 
greens and turnip salad. The roots of turnips do very well, but not the salad. 
Cabbages are good, especially the white head, but not the green leaves. 
Cauliflower is a really fine vegetable, but take away the green leaves. There 
are a lot of other good vegetables that have been grafted from original 
vegetables, though some of the grafted vegetables are not good to eat. Do 
not eat the vegetable called kale.  
2    Eat some spinach, but do not become an habitual spinach eater. Eat 
rutabaga, a little every now and then. You may eat as much garlic and onion 
as you like, but no sweet potatoes and no white potatoes. Sweet potatoes 
were never good for any human to eat. They are good for hogs, but not for 
you. White (Irish) potatoes are a food for people who live in frigid zones, a 
staple food for such as Europe, Northern America and Canada; but potatoes 
and rice are too starchy for you and me. They laden us with too much starch 
and fat, which are friends to diabetes. Sweet potatoes are full of gas, do not 
eat them. There are many more vegetables you will find edible or forbidden 
to eat in this book. If you like, write me for information on other vegetables 
not mentioned here.  
  
PEAS 
 
3    Allah forbids us to eat peas. He considers most peas fit for cattle and 
herds of animals, but not for the delicate stomachs of human beings. No 
black-eyed peas. field peas, speckled peas, red peas or brown peas. Do not 
eat the split peas you find in the store.


--- PAGE 7 ---
4    Peas, collard greens, turnip greens, sweet potatoes and white potatoes 
are very cheaply raised foods. The Southern slave masters used them to 
feed the slaves, and still advise the consumption of them. Most white 
people of the middle and upper class do not eat this lot of cheap food, 
which is unfit for human consumption.  
  
BEANS (DRY)  
5    No beans did He advise, except the small navy, the small size and not 
the larger size, the little brown pink ones, and the white ones. This bean He 
valued to be very high in protein, fats and starches, and it is a safe food for 
prolonging life. As you will find, most of the Muslims like their bean soup. 
These beans are dry beans. 
He said that He could take one of our 
babies and start him off eating the dry small navy bean soup, and 
make that child live 240 years . He described no other bean. This dry 
bean, or pulse, is of ancient origin. It was this bean, according to certain 
historians, that Daniel preferred for himself and his followers in the prison 
of Nebuchadnezzar. Do not add rice and meats to these beans. because they 
contain proteins, fats and starches.  
  
FRUITS 
 
6    Virtually all fruits are good. We eat apples, oranges. bananas, pears, 
peaches, tangerines, mangos, plums, grapes (do not eat processed dried 
grapes, eat natural sun dried grapes), pomegranates. lemons and grapefruit.  
BREAD  
7    Eat whole wheat, but not the whole grain, it is too much for the 
digestive system. Eat wheat, never white flour, which has been robbed of all 
its natural vitamins and proteins sold separately as cereals. You know, as 
well as I that the white race is a commercializing people and they do not 
worry about the lives they jeopardize so long as the dollar is safe. You 
might find yourself eating death, if you follow them.  
8    He flatly forbids us to eat corn bread. The white race, and some African 
people used to live off corn bread because it is cheaply made. It is not good


--- PAGE 8 ---
for human consumption because of its potency which only animals 
stomachs are able to digest. Positively do not eat corn bread. If you must, or 
are forced to eat it, he said to cook it two or three times, put it up, sour it 
with a good yeast, dice onions into it, and let it ferment like wheat bread. 
After this, cook it two or three times.  
9    Never eat fresh, hot corn muffins. or hot cakes and syrup. When you eat 
half cooked bread it shortens your life, as all bread will rise again in our 
stomachs buckling our stomach and intestinal walls. The more it is cooked, 
the less this will happen.  
10    Rye bread if it is cooked enough is fine to eat. It is not good for office 
people, they are not active enough to digest such a bread.  It is good for a 
working man doing manual labor. Office workers should not even eat baked 
beans, nor beans with rice and meat in them because their jobs do not 
permit them enough activity to digest such heavy foods.  
  
Prepare Your Own Food  
11    Take time and prepare your own foods. Do not kill yourselves by 
running to the store buying processed foods to eat, and never buy those 
ready made biscuits.  
12    We plan to install health food departments in our bakeries, grocery 
store, and restaurant soon. Watch for them.  
13    Do not eat the highly rich soy bean, which is a new flour on the 
market. These beans are for cattle not human beings. The oil from soy 
beans is not good for our stomachs. Soy bean flour is being mixed with 
wheat flour by the flour mills. In fact, the Christians are experimenting with 
all foods. They do not care what they eat as long as it does not kill them 
instantly. Beware!  
14    For good health, we should raise and prepare our own food. As I said 
in this book, the white race is a commercializing race by nature. It is the 
almighty dollar they are after, not long life.  
15    Remember. cook your bread thoroughly. Make thin rolls, so that you 
can cook them well done. The rolls should be sliced, and those slices of 
bread should be toasted through and through before they are eaten. There is 
no such thing as being too stale. Actually, stale bread is better on your 
digestive system. Positively eat no nuts.  
16     The eating regulations in this book are a "must" with my followers.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Begin at once, eat only one meal a day regardless of the work you are 
doing. Do not put lard in your bread. Use vegetable oil, corn oil, pure 
butter, olive oil or whatever good vegetable oil you choose. Keep any hog 
or swine out of your foods. Do not eat fried or hard baked foods, if you can 
avoid them. When it comes to meats, no fried chicken or steaks, nothing 
fried. Fried foods are hard on your digestive system and will cut short your 
life.  
 
 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapter 3  
Food God Suggests Food God Suggests Food God Suggests Food God Suggests  
 
1    What food does Allah (God) suggest? He suggests the food that is 
good for us and does not make us ill. Food that is for human 
consumption and not for animals.  
2    Never before have we gone so far astray. The European white 
race, blessed with the privilege of eating the best food the earth 
provides, has taught us to eat the worst (divinely prohibited) food. We 
eat all the time, three and four times a day. This is enough to wear out 
the intestines of a brass monkey.  
3    Eat a single meal a day, no matter what anyone says. If your 
doctor says that you should eat more than one meal a day, ignore him 
with a smile, and eat only once a day. If he tells you he eats three 
meals a day, tell him that his length of life is about the same as his 
patients. Then, tell the doctor to try eating one meal a day.  
4    The more idle our stomachs are, the longer they will last. The 
more we tax our stomach, the sooner it wears out. We all try to live as 
long as we can because nature never teaches us that we should not try 
to live. We do not have a nature that teaches us to die, or teaches of 
life somewhere else.  
5    No matter how staunch a believer the Christian may be in a life 
after the grave, if he gets sick, he sends for the doctor. He prays to 
stay on here and not to go to the unknown.


--- PAGE 10 ---
6    To live a long time, Allah, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, has taught me life must begin with the type of food that 
will prolong life. We have been talking about bread. There are people 
so poor they have no choice, and there are some so rich who still have 
no choice.   
7    Whole wheat bread, cooked thoroughly, is the best bread. It should 
be ground very fine. It can be ground almost as fine as its white 
kernel. Never eat corn bread. As I said, rye bread is all right for the 
hardworking man. Even at that, it should be cooked twice.  
8    The Christian civilization has taught the so-called Negro slave to 
eat freshly baked bread, white biscuits or white rolls, just out of the 
oven, and it scorns old bread, which is better for the stomach than 
freshly baked bread or cakes.  
9    There are many foods we would like to teach you not to eat, but at 
present so many of you cannot avoid eating them.  
10    We must prepare and grow our own food, because this is a highly 
commercialized world. They graft a lot of food, and some of this food 
is not good for our stomachs.  
11    Soy bean flour is very rich, and not good for our stomachs. Our 
stomachs are too delicate for soy bean flour, therefore, leave those 
beans alone. The animals, especially cattle and hogs, love them. Grind 
them up and they will eat them. They are very high in protein. The 
lima bean is another large bean advertised by the devil for you to eat. 
which will almost burst the lining of the stomach and intestines of a 
Texas bull. They said "that one is good for the nigger." Do not eat the 
smaller ones, either, the ones they call "baby lima beans" (baby belly 
busters).  
12    Pastries and cakes -- the kind made with crusts of white flour and 
sweetened with white sugar, so sweet you can still taste them the next 
day, are not good for our stomachs. All this hastens you to the 
graveyard sooner than you would like to go. We should eat fruit and 
fruit pies. I love that little black blueberry pie; huckleberry, as we call 
it in the South. But do not make it with white sugar or crusts of white 
flour. Use brown sugar and whole wheat flour for your pie and 
cobbler crusts.  
13    Apples are better when eaten raw than when made into pies. This 
goes for pears, peaches and bananas. All fruit is better for you raw 
than cooked. When fruit is raw, we get the benefit of its natural


--- PAGE 11 ---
vitamins. If possible, never eat cooked fruit.  
14    If you must eat meat, always eat the cleanest, such as healthy and 
tuberculosis free beef. The lamb is the best. Most beef is too coarse 
for our stomachs. The lamb is a much finer grained meat.  
15    Eat small young pigeons (squabs) which have never flown from 
their nests. Do not eat any bird that has been free to fly around and 
look for its own food. This is the teaching of Allah to me. Chickens 
are not fit to eat. You have to nurse them so carefully to keep them 
away from filth.  
16    If you would like to find good food, such as lamb, beef or even 
chicken, if you are a Muslim, buy it from the strictly Orthodox Jew. 
Be certain it is an Orthodox kosher market, because some Jews eat the 
pig. Orthodox Jews are excellent in protecting their health, even 
spiritually trying to do and eat like their prophet Mossa (Moses) 
taught them through the Divine teachings of Allah. If you respect 
yourselves as Muslims, the spiritual Orthodox Jew will respect you. 
Of course, no one will respect you unless you respect yourself.  
17    Do not buy the Christians' ready prepared ground meats, or any 
ready ground meat. Buy the quality meats that you like, and have them 
ground by the kosher butchers, through their meat grinders, because 
they do not have the pig near their shops. They are like us, they hate 
the divinely Prohibited flesh. If you must eat rice please brown it 
thoroughly in your oven or on top of your stove with a little butter or 
Oil to keep it from Sticking. Keep stirring it vigorously. Remember, 
eat only one meal, once every 24 hours.


--- PAGE 12 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 4 Chapter 4 Chapter 4 Chapter 4  
Why They Urge You to Eat the Why They Urge You to Eat the Why They Urge You to Eat the Why They Urge You to Eat the 
Swine Swine Swine Swine  
 
1    The taking of the prohibited flesh of the swine as a food is beyond 
righteous imagination. It is difficult to understand why Christians eat such 
divinely prohibited flesh, while having a Bible and the law given to Moses 
against the swine flesh. Other prophets, down to Muhammad, preached 
against the eating of the swine.  
2    Christians are among the largest consumers of pork in America, and 
they deliver this rat throughout the world to other people. They are so fond 
of swine flesh that they sacrifice it in the church, and then ask divine 
blessing upon it. They barbecue and cook it, and hold a feast in their places 
of worship and eat this slow death poisonous animal which God has 
forbidden as though they had an option with God.  
3    No wonder Isaiah says that they stand behind one tree in the garden, 
eating swine flesh, the abomination, the mouse and the broth of the swine in 
their vessels. And yet, they will tell all the Muslims and Orthodox Jews that 
they are holier than we who don't dare even to touch the swine's carcass.  
4    Preachers and priests are working along with the enemy, or adversary of 
God, teaching the people that it is all right to eat swine, their bellies 
stretched with the hog in them and saturated with the whiskey and wine. 
This is the type of religion under which you have been brought, Christianity 
and its preachers and priests. None of them have tried to prevent you from 
breaking this divine law by teaching you the consequences of such an act. 
5    Allah taught me that this grafted animal was made for medical 
purposes, not for a food for the people.  That this animal destroys the 
beautiful appearance of its eaters. It takes away the shyness of those who 
eat this brazen flesh. Nature did not give the hog anything like shyness.  
6    Take a look at their immoral dress and actions; their worship of filthy 
songs and dances that an uncivilized animal or savage human being of the 
jungle cannot even imitate. Yet, average black people who want to be loved


--- PAGE 13 ---
by their enemies, regardless of what God thinks of them, have gone to the 
extreme in trying to imitate the children of their slave masters in all of their 
wickedness, filthiness and evil.  
7    The Arabic meaning of hog, or swine, according to one Arab Muslim, is 
Khanzier. Khan, he says, means "I see." Zier means "foul." This is the 
meaning of the English word swine. Khanzier, or "I see the animal foul".  
And very foul is the best explanation that I have heard to cover the very 
nature and characteristics of this animal.  
8    He is the foulest animal. He lives off nothing but filth. The only way 
you can get him to live and eat better food is to keep him from getting to 
filth. He is so poisonous (99.9 per cent) that you can hardly poison him with 
other poison. You can even give him lye. Something you'd think would cut 
up the intestines when eaten. 
9     Snakes can't poison hogs, they eat them and fatten. The bite of snakes 
doesn't harm them, because they eat the biter. He is so poisonous and filthy, 
that nature had to prepare him a sewer line and you may find the opening on 
his forelegs. It is a little hole out of which oozes pus. This is the filth of his 
body that cannot be passed fast enough.  
10    His poison is that of a live nature, in the form of a parasitic worm that 
is called trichina (commonly known as pork worm), which is found in the 
stomach and intestinal walls -- until it finally breeds and works itself into 
the muscles of the body of the eater. From there, the trichinae work 
themselves into the spinal cord and travel the spinal cord toward the brain, 
at which time there is no possible cure.  
11    They then cause the victim to suffer with rheumatism, backaches, 
stomach aches, headaches, fever -- and even change the color of the eyes of 
some eaters to a dull brown or dull red. They fill the eater with a 
drowsiness, laziness, slow thinking, slow moving and the tendency to be 
easily irritated. The swine eaters are always ready to rise up for a dispute 
and fight other people and among themselves.  
12    He is the greediest animal. He never knows or cares to stop eating, as 
long as he sees something to eat. He is the dumbest animal. He keeps his 
nose smelling and eyes looking for something in the earth. You could feed 
him all day long, and he will never look up to see his feeder.  
13    In the case of bad weather arising, he is never intelligent enough to go 
in before it actually starts raining or hailing on his back. He takes no 
warning. He will keep his head in the earth, rooting until the storm is 
lashing his back with rain and the lightning is blinding his eyes.


--- PAGE 14 ---
14    You eat this animal from his snout to his tail, and all of the poisonous 
wormy intestines. Yet you say you are holier than any religious people.  
15    Please learn to eat one meal a day and let it be without swine flesh. 
And many of the ailments that you are now suffering and getting medicine 
from the doctor for will disappear.  
16    To you diabetics... Eat one meal a day and lay off that starch and 
sugar.  They are only making you sick. Write and let me know that you 
have tried eating once a day, shunning sugar and starches, and before a 
week's time, your urine will be negative of sugar and acid negative.  
17    It is ignorant for you to suffer with this disease, when it can easily be 
cured.  Just stop eating that which is causing your trouble.  Eat one meal a 
day. You will not starve and die.  
 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book one How to Eat to Live, Book one How to Eat to Live, Book one How to Eat to Live, Book one  
Chapter 5 Chapter 5 Chapter 5 Chapter 5  
The Pig: Swine The Pig: Swine The Pig: Swine The Pig: Swine  
 
1    I think we have said enough about the poisonous animal called, in Arabic, Khanzier. 
Beyond a shadow of a doubt the swine is the filthiest and foulest animal human beings 
could have resorted to for food. The flesh of the swine, while cooking, has a very 
different smell from that of other animal's flesh while cooking. And even when it is not 
being cooked, it has a bad smell.  
2    Worms and insects take to its flesh while in the farmer's curing stage faster than to 
any other animal's flesh. And in a few days, it is full of worms.  
3    In many cases, the eater of the flesh becomes nauseated when the flesh is being 
cooked in the early morning. It is a divinely prohibited flesh, and God (Allah) has 
prohibited you and me, my brothers and sisters of the Black Nation, from eating it or 
even touching its dead carcass.  
4    
Please, for our health's sake, stop eating it, for our beauty's sake, stop 
eating it; for our obedience to God and His laws against this flesh, stop 
eating it; for a longer life, stop eating it and for t he sake of modesty, stop


--- PAGE 15 ---
eating it.  
5    Do you know that if we, the 22 million lost-found members of our nation here in 
America, would stop eating this pig (his poison swine flesh), it would mean a great 
economic saving to us? And I do not think the government would be so eager to eat it 
themselves if we would obey this Divine law against this divinely prohibited flesh. 
There is an old, foolish answer our people have given to such advice.  "The white folks 
eat it, and my grandparents ate it, and they lived to be 75 and 80 years old."  
6    If Noah and Methuselah had heard you boasting that your parents lived only 75 or 
80 years eating poison, they would have considered your parents as never having grown 
up to become adults, according to their good way of eating the best food, about twice a 
week, and living nearly 1,000 of our present calendar years which consists of 365 days.  
7    God does not punish us for the crime of disobedience to His laws when we are 
ignorant of His laws. But after knowledge of His laws, He is justified in punishing us 
by setting the full penalty according to the disobedience.  
8    As I have previously said in this book, most vegetables that are sold on the public 
market are good to eat with the exception of those Allah prohibits; such as collard 
greens and the rough turnip salads. You have plenty of other vegetables to eat. And you 
have good beans other than lima beans, field butter beans (called baby lima beans), and 
black-eyed peas (field peas we call them.)


--- PAGE 16 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 6  
FASTING FASTING FASTING FASTING  
 
1   Fasting is a greater cure of our ills,  both mental and physical, than 
all of the drugs of the earth combined into one bottle or a billion 
bottles.  Allah (God), in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, has 
taught me that fasting, with the right kind of food, is the cure for our 
ills. He has said to me that there is no cure in drugs and medicine. 
And this the world is now learning. We can take medicine all of our 
lives until it kills us (yet, we are still ailing with the same old 
diseases).  
2   The bad foods and drinks that we are putting into our bodies keep 
us a victim to illness. There are very few nice doctors who like to tell 
you that drugs are not good for you, because they paid for their 
learning and want to keep practicing. But "How to Eat to Live" is 
what we want to know and have wanted to know all of our lives.  
3   All men and women want to know how they can prolong their 
lives. Nature teaches us to stay here in this life as long as we can.  
4   Nature has never taught anyone that he should leave this life and 
find another one somewhere else, because we only have one life. 
And, if this life is destroyed, we would have a hard time trying to get 
more life, it is impossible. So try to keep this life that you have as 
long as possible. Go when you cannot stay here any longer.  
5   Allah taught me that one meal a day would keep us here for a long 
time; we would live over 100 years. Eating one meal every two days 
would lengthen our lives just that much longer. He said to me that 
you would never be sick, eating one meal every three days.  
6   The fact that fasting is the cure for 90 percent of our ills is known 
by the medical scientists. But, they do not teach you that. They know 
that tobacco, hard whiskey and alcohol are not good for you and will 
shorten your life and kill you.  
7   But, most of them are too weak themselves to stop drinking,


--- PAGE 17 ---
smoking or chewing tobacco. So they do not teach you that tobacco 
and alcoholic drinks made into what is known as whiskey, beer and 
wine are not good for you, although they know it to be true. They 
will say, "Yes, it is good for you if you are temperate." But they 
know that once you get started on that stuff it is such an enemy that it 
just takes you into its power and it is almost like trying to break an 
iron chain to get away from the habit. So, do not use tobacco in any 
form and you will live a few years longer.  
8   Fast once a month for three days, four days, or for whatever length 
of time you are able to go without food without harming yourself, 
and you will feel good. Did you know that if you would stop eating 
pig and the food that you should not eat, stop eating three and four 
times a day and stop drinking whiskey, beer, and wine, you would 
save much in the way of money?  
9   In prolonging your life by abstaining from the pig, alcoholic 
drinks and tobacco, you will also be adding money to your savings by 
hundreds and thousands of dollars. You will be depriving those pig 
raisers, tobacco growers and alcoholic distillers of millions of dollars 
of which they rob you as they hasten you to your grave.  
10  You could stop the tobacco growers from growing that stinking 
weed by turning away from the use of it. And you could stop the pig 
raising by not eating the stinking hog. These things are death to your 
children in their early ages. They even affect the reproductive organs 
of people in the early ages, as well as affect the heart, lungs and your 
sharpness in thinking. And, after all of this, you die a victim of 
poison and commercialization.  
LEARN TO EAT TO LIVE.


--- PAGE 18 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 7  
One Meal A Day One Meal A Day One Meal A Day One Meal A Day  
 
1   Eat one meal a day or one meal every other day, and it will prolong 
your life. Do not think that you will starve. On the contrary. you will be 
treating yourself to life, and a life filled with sickless days. You can 
hardly get sick eating this way. I know because I have this experience. If 
you eat the proper food -- which I have given to you from Allah (in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad to Whom be praise forever) in this 
book-- you will hardly ever have a headache.  
2   In eating once a day or once every other day, you must not eat between 
meals. And, you should try to eat at the same hour tomorrow as you eat 
today. Do not change your meal hours if you can help it. That causes your 
stomach to react to various hours of the day for a meal, and will set up gas 
on the stomach. Do not even drink juices, milk, or soft drinks between 
meals.  
3   And, do not eat candies or fruits between meals. You are welcome to 
drink water, but I know you will not want too much water between meals 
since your stomach will not call for it. You may drink coffee between 
meals, but do not fill your cup with half sugar and half cream and pour 
coffee on top of that. (smile) This (that I am trying to teach you) is the 
way that He (Almighty Allah) has taught me for you. I have given to you 
in this book the type of food that you should eat as Allah has given it to 
me.  
4   Again I say, many vegetables are good to eat; also many fruits. But the 
vegetables you have been warned against eating such as collard greens, 
turnip salads, black -eyed peas, field peas, lima beans, butter beans and 
soy beans - Should not be eaten. Be sure that you do not eat the large size 
navy bean, eat the small size navy bean.  
5   Surely Sugar diabetes can be controlled and driven out with your 
abstinence from eating sugar and Starchy foods. And, with your corrected 
way of eating once a day or once every other day (if started in time), you 
will become  negative of Sugar in your blood. If you are a victim of sugar


--- PAGE 19 ---
diabetes, you should not eat white or sweet potatoes. And even if you are 
not a victim of diabetes, you should not eat too much of any starchy food 
(such as potatoes), and positively no sweet potatoes. You Should be 
careful of eating this type of food. 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1 How to Eat to Live, Book 1  
Chapter 8 Chapter 8 Chapter 8 Chapter 8  
Beware of Starchy Foods and Sweets Beware of Starchy Foods and Sweets Beware of Starchy Foods and Sweets Beware of Starchy Foods and Sweets  
1    God Almighty has taught me -- and many others that we should never 
eat more than one meal a day. That will most certainly heal you of many 
complaints. Since the American citizens eat more meat, sugar and starchy 
foods than they should, there is almost an epidemic of too much sugar 
accumulating in out blood. Eating one meal a day, which does not include 
too much sugar, will keep you healthy, both physically and mentally, if you 
are a Muslim believer in Allah and the religion of peace (Islam). 
2     I warn all you sufferers of diabetes to stop eating starchy foods and 
sweets until this disease vanishes out of your blood or cannot do you any 
harm. If you eat once every other day, it is almost a guarantee that you will 
not be sick.  
3    The Orthodox Jews are a people who have lived among us in Asia, and 
they still try to follow Moses teachings on how to eat to live. The Holy 
Qur'an teaches us that we can eat their food and they can eat our (the 
Muslims) food, because the two people (Jew and Muslims) try to eat the 
right food to live. I have learned, and most likely you have too, that it is 
only weakness of ours to eat constantly. We are only digging our own 
graves with our appetites and teeth. There is no teaching from anyone -- 
God, you, or me, that will help us if we take our appetites for our guides.  
4    Within one week you can get used to eating once a day, and within one 
week you can get used to eating once every other day. Many of the Muslims 
are eating like this and you can eat this way too. Our stomachs are just the 
way we train them to be. Get away from those fattening Sweet pies two or 
three times a day, and do not eat those white potatoes at every meal, they 
are full of starch. Do not eat fresh bread, and you should never eat white 
bread because it is the worst bread you can eat and it will shorten your life. 
In fact you should not eat too much fattening food. You are not going to get 
weak.  
5    Eat plenty or vegetables and fruit. Eat meat? If so, eat clean, fresh meat 
whether it is beef, lamb or chicken.   Do not eat too much of it. Change


--- PAGE 20 ---
sometimes, and have fish for your meal. Many of out people like to eat 
young pigeons (squabs) but usually they are a little too expensive.  
6    Do not eat too much of anything - good or bad food - and do not eat but 
once a day. You will soon tell me how much better you feel. Do not smoke 
or use tobacco in any form or way and do not eat the pig even 
if YOU  have to starve to death.  
 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 9 Chapter 9 Chapter 9 Chapter 9  
How Allah’s Way Prolongs Life How Allah’s Way Prolongs Life How Allah’s Way Prolongs Life How Allah’s Way Prolongs Life  
  
1 Many are advertising what to eat, and what medicines to take to make you 
eat or stop you from eating. Many books are written and sold on good and 
bad foods, as well as on reducing the weight and on how to increase the 
weight, introducing the many chemicals used to bring about the desired 
result. But Allah, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
praises are due forever, has given us a better and safer way to do these 
things.  
2 His way will prolong our lives and do away with our sicknesses. And, that 
way is eating one meal a day-or if we are able and do not have too much 
physical work to do, eating one meal every two days. This alone will 
prolong your life.  
3 You will not be sick often if you eat one meal a day and eat the proper 
food. The proper food is that food which is not poisonous. The slave 
masters taught us to eat the rough foods, such as field peas, and today, 
being accustomed to eating them, we still eat them along with sweet 
potatoes (which are not good for anyone but hogs) and white potatoes 
(which, since they are so starchy and fattening, are not good for anyone 
unless they are in a zone where they cannot secure better food).  
4 We cannot live a long time if we laden our bodies with fats to burden our 
hearts in pumping blood through all this fat. It shortens the time our heart 
beat, and the fat person is-in many instances more likely to attract sickness 
and disease.  
5 Why are we healthier and our lives prolonged by eating as God has taught


--- PAGE 21 ---
as in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due 
forever? It is because of the one meal a day or fasting. Eating once a day 
and fasting gives the body time to rest from the previous meal and to absorb 
it properly and distribute it where the body is calling for it.  
6 Some of us eat so often and so much of the time that it actually has a 
tendency make us small and skinny because we never allow time for the 
previous meal to digest and distribute the vitamins and proteins into the 
proper places and throughout our blood stream. Rest, given to the digestive 
system of our bodies, is the thing that prolongs our lives. 
7 In this period of rest (24 hours), poisons that we ate in the previous meal 
are not capable of doing us any harm (when it is minor food poison), for the 
idleness of the stomach destroys this poison that would upset us or shorten 
our lives to a great extent. Therefore, we live a longer life if we eat 
correctly and do not eat three meals a day. Only one meal a day is sufficient 
for adults no matter what their occupation may be.  
8 Milk and bread (wheat bread) alone will keep us alive indefinitely, and it 
is the best and most easily digested food. We have plenty of supplements 
for milk and bread, so eat them, but eat them only once a day. This will 
reduce your doctor bill almost 90 percent, and if you eat once every two 
days, you will not have any doctor bills. So, do not tell the doctor that I told 
you this. (smile) 
9 As you know, I contracted bronchial-asthma, and I have learned that there 
are no drugs that the public has access to which actually serve as a cure. But 
I am doing fine now, and eating once a day and once every other day does 
not give the mucous time to accumulate and choke the bronchial tubes and 
tract.  
10 All praises are due to Master Fard Muhammad, as it is written of Him in 
the scriptures, that He comes to prolongs our lives and to do away with 
sickness and death. If we live right, He teaches us we will enjoy life for a 
long, long time .  
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10  
How To Keep Food From Hurting Us How To Keep Food From Hurting Us How To Keep Food From Hurting Us How To Keep Food From Hurting Us  
     
1 I thank Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to whom praises 
are due forever, for bringing us life and light so that we ma y be able to


--- PAGE 22 ---
enjoy life, and to enjoy that life longer than we have previously enjoyed it.  
2 Many years to be added to our lives if we only knew how to protect our 
lives from their enemies. As He (meaning Master Fard Muhammad) said 
to me, food keeps us here; it is essential that we eat food which gives and 
maintains life. That same food destroys life. Therefore, to keep this food 
from destroying our lives, we must protect our lives as well as we possibly 
can from the destruction of food. If we eat the proper food, and eat at the 
proper time, the food will keep us living a long, long time.  
3 Eating three or four times a day is to your stomach as dripping water is 
to a stone or iron. The dripping water will eventually wear a stone and iron 
away. But, just to look at the water, it does not appear powerful enough in 
its dripping to wear the stone and iron away. It is the same with food; we 
continuously put it into our stomachs to be digested and eventually it will 
destroy the stomach. If we let our stomachs rest a while and gain strength, 
they will last longer in doing a job of digesting food for us .  
4 Eat one meal a day and eat the food that will not harm you so quickly. 
You do not have to obtain a long, detailed knowledge of what foods you 
have to eat, because the wrong food has already been pointed out to you-
foods such as the pig , nuts, white flour, meats (of course, we eat some 
meats ), the wrong kind of peas, the wrong kinds of breads, too many 
starchy foods and to many sweets.  
5 All of these foods destroy us. Bread should be cooked thoroughly and 
slowly, and if you have plenty of time, cook the bread two or three times 
and then eat it. Meat should also be cooked two or three times.  
6 Eating great meals of highly seasoned and sugared pastries is definitely 
not good for us. They most surely take years of our lives away. You may 
eat some sweets, but do not make an entire meal of sweets or eat them 
every day. Fruit is good for us; we should eat plenty of fruit.  
  
7 To live a long time, eat once every 24 hours or once every 48 hours, if 
you’re able to do so. But, if you have heavy, manual work to do, do not try 
to eat once every two or three days. And, if you eat once a day, you should 
fast every month for two or three days. By doing that, there will be no 
poison left in the body at the end of a year to make you sick even one hour. 
 
  
8 I would like you, who try to live and eat just as this book teaches you, to 
please send me a letter telling me of the result that you have gained from


--- PAGE 23 ---
eating as I have instructed you in this book. I repeatedly teach that the way 
Allah, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, has taught us to eat will 
do away with many doctor bills and do away with much maiming of the 
limbs caused by certain diseases.  
  
9 Sugar diabetes can be controlled and cured if you only eat correctly. Stay 
off sugar and starchy foods and leave those old, white potatoes alone. Do 
not eat spaghetti and macaroni at every meal. If you are overweight, do not 
eat it at any meal, and if you want to live a long time, do not eat it at any 
meal. Foods such as spaghetti and macaroni are processed, and are hard to 
digest.  
  
10 There are some people who claim that they do not receive beneficial 
results as they should. This is due to wrong mental food that they are 
eating, which has an effect on their digestive system. To get good results 
from eating the proper foods, we must have good thoughts. 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 11 Chapter 11 Chapter 11 Chapter 11  
The Proper Food and The Proper Time to Eat It The Proper Food and The Proper Time to Eat It The Proper Food and The Proper Time to Eat It The Proper Food and The Proper Time to Eat It  
 
1 Eating the proper food that has been given to us and taught to us by our 
Lord and Saviour, Master Fard Muhammad ( to Whom praises are due 
forever), changes us in many ways. Not only does it give us good health, 
but it gives us a better way of thinking, as food and our mental power work 
in the same way. Whatever affects one, affects the other. Eating the proper 
food also brings about a better surface appearance. Our features are 
beautified by the health that the body now enjoys from the eating of proper 
food and also eating at the proper time.  
2 Bad food takes away even the beauty appearance of a person.. God 
taught me that the swine (hog) takes away three one-hundredths per cent of 
the beauty appearance of a person. This we can easily understand and see 
after we stop eating it. The medical scientists also will agree with us that 
the poisonous flesh of the hog will take away three one-hundredths per 
cent of your beauty appearance.


--- PAGE 24 ---
3 There are some people who have eaten so much of this ugly, poisonous 
animal-and he is the ugliest and silliest-acting animal you have ever looked 
upon and been around, as well as the filthiest animal that you have ever 
dealt with-that they actually look like that animal. It is a divinely- 
prohibited flesh. It is a sin for you to eat it.  
4 The enemy of God (the devil) teaches you to eat it, and he eats it himself 
to show you how little respect he has for God’s divine law against eating 
this prohibited flesh.  
5 He drinks all of the intoxicating drinks, offers them to us, and then 
preaches the same gospel in the church that "Thou shall not eat the pig. 
Thou shall not drink intoxicating liquor. Thou shall not rob, steal, murder, 
commit adultery, gamble, hate, and lie to one another". Yet, he is doing 
that hourly. Everything that God says "Thou shall not do" in the Ten 
Commandments given to Moses, they say thou shall do.  
6 It was only a waste of God’s time to have given this race of evil people 
good guidance, because it is just as Jesus said in a parable, "The wicked 
husband who was given overlord of the earth and its people, never did 
offer the true owner any of the heir (a convert of righteousness)."  
7 We have nothing to fear or worry about in the way of right guidance 
today, because we have God Himself in Person with us to lead and guide 
us in the way of truth and righteousness.  
8 There is a lot of difference in the beauty of true Muslims and that of 
Christians. I do not mean to say that there are no beautiful Christians or 
Black people who eat the hog. But, there is a difference in their appearance 
of beauty that can easily be discovered by one who obeys this divinely-
prohibited law against eating swine flesh. The poisonous hog flesh makes 
the color many people’s eyes muddy and reddish in appearance and makes 
the people who eat it brazen, careless, easy to anger, fight, and oppose 
each other.  
9 Eat the proper food as given in this book and eat at the proper time; one 
meal a day from 4 to 6 p.m. 
 
How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 12 Chapter 12 Chapter 12 Chapter 12  
The Right Food and The The Right Food and The The Right Food and The The Right Food and The


--- PAGE 25 ---
Proper Time To Eat It Is Becoming a "Must" Proper Time To Eat It Is Becoming a "Must" Proper Time To Eat It Is Becoming a "Must" Proper Time To Eat It Is Becoming a "Must"  
 
1 To live without sickness and without fear of a short span of life is now a 
must for the people who expect to see the Hereafter. The way that God, in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad (to Whom praises are due forever), is 
teaching us (the lost-found members of the aboriginal nation) is the best 
way; regardless of what it is. Whether it concerns food, mental stability, or 
what have you, He teaches us in the best way. 
2 I offer you His teachings, and it is up to you to accept or reject them. But, I 
repeat, His is the best way as He says in His Holy Qur-an, "I Allah am the 
Best Knower" (Chapter 2, Verse 1). Since He represents Himself as the Best 
Knower, then it is nothing but intelligence on our part to follow and obey 
that Best Knower Who gives the best advice and Whose guidance is best for 
our future regardless of what we desire. He is the best Knower of what 
guidance we should have. 
3 There are many disbelievers, infidels, and atheists today as the Bible 
teaches; the fool has said in his heart that there is no God. These ignorant 
sayings and attacks made against truth go for nothing today but 
condemnation with truth. (We do not have the type of God that they were 
taught of: some spook God and man. But, there are supreme men among 
man and this Supreme One is referred to as God, having infinite wisdom and 
knowledge over all things.) 
4 There will be no sickness or disease among us when we learn and obey the 
law of nature. The law of nature is the divine law the Creator set for us in the 
beginning of the creation of the universe. This race (white) of people has 
ignored and disobeyed this law and has met with disaster. They seek, and 
have tried throughout their civilization, to change the very natural religion of 
the black man. 
5 But, time has proved that the white man was a failure and now has met his 
unnatural and false teachings and practices with truth and reality of the law 
of nature and it’s workings among the created creatures of God. This law is 
now to defend us against the false guidance and rebelling of this race 
(white). 
6 Let the white man eat all the hog he wants. It was made for him, not for us. 
It was made for a cure for many of their diseases and is used for salves. 
7 If you want to enjoy good health, eat only once a day and nothing between 
meals if you are not sick. There is an allowance made for the sick ones who, 
sometimes, are not able to eat enough at one meal to take them over to the


--- PAGE 26 ---
next meal, or whose bodies are weak and must be built up for the one meal a 
day. In this case, they sometimes eat two meals a day, but never three. 
8 If you can eat one meal every other day, you will enjoy both health and a 
longer life. Even the men and women who do strenuous mental work can go 
along with one meal a day if they eat the proper food and never want more 
than that.


--- PAGE 27 ---
How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 13 Chapter 13 Chapter 13 Chapter 13  
Fruit Is Digested Better When Eaten Raw Fruit Is Digested Better When Eaten Raw Fruit Is Digested Better When Eaten Raw Fruit Is Digested Better When Eaten Raw  
 
1 Since being given knowledge by the All-Wise One in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad on "How To Eat To Live," we should not confuse 
ourselves by studying the advice of all the people, doctors, and quacks of 
the world on what kind of medicine, vegetables, meats, herbs, and fruits 
we should eat. If we keep getting advice on the above after getting the 
correct advice, we will never enjoy good health. All will be confusion. 
2 As I mentioned earlier, nearly all vegetables are good to eat that have 
been classified by the scientists who have studied the poisons that the 
vegetables contain as well as the non-poisons they contain. We do not need 
to eat everything just because the Bible (in Genesis) said that Adam (who 
represents the white race) could eat nearly all of the herbs of the earth (that 
are not poisonous). Our scientists teach us of that which is poisonous and 
of that which is not poisonous. 
3 If we are travelers and are stranded, we eat whatever we can find edible, 
to non-poisonous roots and the bark off trees. But this is not good for us if 
we wish to live a long time because our stomachs are not made to digest 
the bark off trees and roots of trees or blades of grass and leaves. 
4 Our stomachs were not made to live off raw foods, except certain raw 
foods such as fruits, which- beyond a shadow of a doubt-should be eaten 
raw and never cooked. When we cook fruit, it takes away the vital property 
that is necessary for our good health. An apple (or peaches or berries) is 
better eaten raw than cooked, unless our health and body are weak and 
unable to digest the raw apple. 
5 There is a great need for knowledge on what to cook as well as how to 
cook it. We can live a long, great and healthy life by just drinking good, 
wholesome milk and eating good whole wheat bread if the bread is cooked 
correctly. 
6 Some people will eat whole wheat kernel. But, this is not good to do 
because it is the hull of the seed and our stomachs are not made to digest 
the raw wheat seeds, regardless of the great property of vitamins in them. 
7 The whole wheat kernel should be milled and ground very fine. When 
you are ready to make bread, add water and yeast to it and set it aside to


--- PAGE 28 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 14  
Overindulgence, The Enemy  
 
1 Yes, a quick trip to the cemetery if we indulge in too much of anything. It 
becomes an enemy to us. Remember at all times when you are eating that you 
are to live and not to die. As I said previously in this book, white bread and 
corn bread are not good for our stomachs to digest. Regardless of how many 
hundreds and thousands of people eat this before you three times a day, it is 
still not the food for you and me to eat if we wish to live a long and healthy 
life. 
2 America’s people consume more sweets than any other people on earth. 
They love their sweet, fat pies, cookies and cakes at every meal. America has 
more bitter trouble with her health. Eating too many sweets piles up sugar in 
the blood and it becomes the enemy of our lives. Our blood is our life. 
3 Just think of the way we destroy our lives by eating too many sweets or too 
much meat; or eating white bread and corn bread. Ask yourself that question. 
4 America is a great candy seller. She reaps a harvest of wealth on just selling 
sweet candies and nuts. They fill the candy full of nuts, as well as their cakes, 
cookies, and other pastries. The only thing with stomach enough to digest 
nuts is an animal. Birds love nuts and they have what it takes to digest them. 
Nature made them that way. 
5 Just as horses can digest corn and anything else in their line of foods, birds, 
squirrels, hogs, coons, rabbits, and worms can digest nuts. They can eat nuts 
and digest them and they will not wear out their stomachs like yours will 
wear out trying to digest them. 
6 A dog’s stomach and his digestive juices are like any carnivorous eating 
animal’s. He can digest a rare steak. In fact, he can digest it as soon as he 
kills the animal. You do not have to cook their food. They do not like it 
cooked; they like their meat raw. That is the way nature made them-to take it 
raw.


--- PAGE 29 ---
7 People (like the white people) who love dogs and other animals, change 
their way of eating so that it is against the very nature in which they were 
created to eat. You cannot make him a member of your family by seating him 
at the table, to eat good, cooked food. He will live off it, but it is not the way 
nature made him to eat.  
8 Try offering him some raw meat and cooked meat. He will eat the raw meat 
before he will eat the cooked meat. Offer a cat a piece of raw fish and a piece 
of cooked fish and see which she will eat first. Raw foods appeal to their 
appetites as cooked foods appeals to ours, but we can eat both. 
9 It is very dangerous for you (whose civilization is not limited, but is limited 
if you follow the limited ones) to follow a civilization made by nature for a 
short time in their ways. This is what we have been doing, and this is what we 
must stop doing if we expect to survive. 
10 There are hundreds of drug stores throughout the country into which we 
should not go for anything except first-aid if we hurt ourselves down the 
street or road somewhere; not for something to stop aches and pains in our 
stomachs caused by eating the wrong food. We should not call the doctor for 
such foolish and ignorant mistakes as eating the wrong food and eating it too 
often. We should be ashamed to call the doctor for these errors. 
11 Eating the wrong food and eating it too often starts trouble in the physical 
body everywhere-from the sole of your feet to the crown of your head. As I 
said, you do not have to eat everything that people say is good to eat. It is a 
fool who does that. You do not need everything that is good to eat to live a 
happy life. Take some of the things that are good to eat. Of course, you 
should have a balanced diet. I certainly agree with you there. 
12 There are several ways you can prepare your meat and bread that will give 
you a sharp appetite at every meal if you prepare it differently. Bread can be 
cooked two or three times and also meat. It is best for our stomachs and our 
longevity. 
13 They both should be cooked twice before eating. Of course, they will not 
look as fancy as when they are freshly cooked, because the more you cook 
them, the more the surface beauty fades away. But the more permanent your 
life will be and that good old stomach will last a long, long time if you allow 
it to rest after a hearty meal, no matter how good the meal was or how easily 
digested. 
14 Give your stomach from 24 to 36 hours to rest to digest its food. And, if 
you can take 48 hours or 72 hours, that is fine. But first try 24 hours and then 
48 hours next. Do not try to start with 48 and 72 hours.


--- PAGE 30 ---
15 Get used to eating one meal a day, then when your appetite is not strong 
for the next meal, by eating once every 24 hours, start eating every 48 hours. 
Never start 72 hours regularly until you are able to do so. 
16 Some of us have started eating every 48 to 72 hours and have to change 
back to one meal a day. This is not good to do. Fast 72 hours every now and 
then while you are eating once every day, (if you want to), once a month or 
once every two or three months. 
17 Never eat more than one meal a day unless you are sick and unable to eat 
the proper food due to the weakness of the body to carry you over 24 hours. 
 
 
How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One How To Eat to Live, Book One  
Chapter 15 Chapter 15 Chapter 15 Chapter 15  
Our Big Problem Is Eating Too Much And Too Our Big Problem Is Eating Too Much And Too Our Big Problem Is Eating Too Much And Too Our Big Problem Is Eating Too Much And Too 
Often Often Often Often  
 
1 I repeat, the main thing in "How To Eat To Live" is to eat only once a 
day or once every other day. This will take care of everything. You cannot 
go all over the earth trying to eat everything that people say is good to eat. 
But give what you do eat time to get out of the way for the next meal and 
the effect that it probably will cause. Brothers and sisters, let your 
stomachs rest. Stop trying to eat three meals a day and all in between. That 
is enough to kill chickens and hogs. 
2 Anyone who eats all the time has a very short life. Our greatest trouble, 
when it comes to sickness, is due to staying at the table, eating too much 
and too often. You have no regularity about your eating at all. 
3 "Eat any time," they will tell you. One of the gravest wrongs you could 
do is to eat when you do not want to. They say behind that, "Eat before 
you get hungry," which is one of the silliest things of all. 
4 If your stomachs are not asking you for food, please, brothers and sisters, 
do not put any in. The stomach will let you know. Wait until you are really 
hungry. Do not act like a pig and want food everytime you see it. 
5 Nature did not make the hog and bird with any regularity in eating. 
Although hogs stop eating when they get enough, the foolish pig will never 
stop eating until he  is sick and all but ready to drop dead. The horse will


--- PAGE 31 ---
stop eating and the house cat will stop eating when it has enough, but 
people will not. It is just as the old saying goes, "We dig our own graves 
with our teeth." 
6 We drive many impurities out of our bloodstream if we do not fill our 
stomachs with food two or three times a day. Some Christians never fast 
until their doctor tells them to do so. They know nothing about stopping 
their eating for even one day, let alone over three or four days. 
7 The majority of them are afraid to miss even a single meal. They think 
they will be sick from missing a meal. This is very ignorant. A dog will 
stop eating if he gets sick, but not some people. The doctors have to force 
them to stop eating so their medicines can give good results. 
8 Your main trouble is eating too often and eating the wrong kinds of food. 
Time and again I have warned you against eating that rotten, stinking pig 
with millions of worms in his flesh. He is the ugliest and most stinking 
animal. Even his house and everything about him stinks. If you cook him, 
he stinks. With his ugly, muddy, reddish eyes, his ugly mouth, and his ugly 
ears, he is just ugly. He is the silliest and most brazen animal. 
9 The devil certainly did a 100 per cent job in turning the people against 
everything that God said "Thou Shall Not Do." He has made the words say 
in works "I shall do." Allah said that these ugly animals (the pig) take 
away your beauty appearance. 
10 Live right, think right, eat right, and do right. You will not have to die 
to go to heaven to be like angels; you will be like them while you live. 
 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER SIXTEEN CHAPTER SIXTEEN CHAPTER SIXTEEN CHAPTER SIXTEEN  
Why and How We Fast in December Why and How We Fast in December Why and How We Fast in December Why and How We Fast in December  
 
1 I have chosen (for quite a few years) the month of December for my followers to 
fast as in the month of Ramadan. It serves as a sign that we (the Lost and Found 
Nation) are the end of all signs pertaining to the pilgrimage and fasting in the month 
of Ramadan.  
2 We fast the 12th month of the Christian year to relieve ourselves of having once 
worshipped that month as the month in which Jesus was born. It is now known and


--- PAGE 32 ---
agreed upon by the scholars and scientists of religion that nothing of the kind took 
place 2,000 years ago. Jesus was born, not in the month of December , but rather -- 
as God has revealed it and according to the season that history claims existed in that 
time -- the first or second week in September.  
3 The Christians have made holidays which are used mostly for commercialization. 
They buy wine, whiskey and beer and fatten up pigs and hogs for the kill and roast 
this divinely-prohibited flesh to celebrate what the Christians call the birthday of 
the Son of Mary. Jesus condemned such things as drunkenness and the eating of 
swine flesh.  
4 Nimrod was an enemy of God and one who came in the last 300 years of the 2,000 
years of Moses. He led the white man against the laws of Moses and worship Allah. 
He (Nimrod) wanted them to worship idols and that which was other than God (as 
they did in ancient Rome).  
5 Let us, my followers, remember the right way. Waste not your earnings in such 
ways as worshipping and feasting as the Christians do. They only say and do not. 
They have taken for themselves the profit of God and the place of God.  
6 In this month of fasting we shall keep our minds and hearts clean, and we shall not 
indulge in the eating of meats (land meats). You may eat fish and such fat products 
which come from land animals such as butter and cheese.  
7 In this month, we should keep our minds on Allah, Who came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad: my God and your God and my Saviour and Deliverer 
and your Saviour and Deliverer to Whom be praises forever for giving us life after 
our mental death for the past 400 years.  
8 During this month, eat before day and after the sun goes down (if you wish) but 
not during the daylight hours. This also goes for drinking; drink whatever you are 
going to drink either before dawn or after dark. The eating before dawn is for those 
of us who love to eat breakfast in the mornings. But if you eat one meal a day, you 
may eat that meal either before dawn or after dark. It is better for your health, 
however, to eat one meal after dark.  
9 Keep up prayer, and let us all be grateful to Allah for His coming in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad throughout the month of December and every month. 
And during this month, let there be no quarreling or disputing in our homes or 
abroad. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 17  
The Food and Its Eater


--- PAGE 33 ---
1 Neither I nor you can thank Almighty God Allah, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, enough for going after the very mainspring of life; that which 
everyone loves to keep as long as he possibly can. Even animals, beasts, insects, 
fowls of the air, and fish of the sea want to keep their lives. And I do not care how 
good a Christian you are, or how much you would love to see Jesus, or how much 
you would like to go to Heaven to see Jesus and to sit down beside him, as the 
Christians teach you will do (smile), you never make any preparations to hurry to 
go out of this life to find another life.  
2 The very law of nature teaches us to hold on to this life and not let it go if we can 
help it. We only know of this life and not any other life. You strong Christians and 
lovers of life beyond the grave -- and life somewhere in the skies that you imagine -- 
never prove to anyone that you would like to leave this life for that life by killing 
yourself or telling the doctor not to come to administer medicine or any aid that he 
can give you when death is approaching.  
3 Whenever death approaches, you want it to go back and let you stay. In view of 
that, the best thing to do is to try to preserve and keep this life that we have and 
know as long as we can and go when we cannot stay here.  
4 The only way that we can have life, keep life and prolong life, is by what we eat 
and how often we eat it. This is the way of life. The Bible teaches us that God will 
prolong the lives of the righteous. But, there is no God Who can prolong our lives 
without checking on what we eat and how often we eat it.  
5 We must not be confused, I repeat, with the various advice offered to us from the 
modern-day food and medical scientists. If you take their advice and try to eat all of 
the different kinds of food, cooked in their many different ways, at all different 
times of the day, and their many different suggestions on how much you should eat, 
you will most certainly die. Brother and sisters, I repeat: it will most certainly kill 
you -- with the exception of the Orthodox Jews’ foo d, which is good.  
6 According to the history of the white man by Almighty God Allah, in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due forever for His life-giving 
words, teachings and guidance of us, the Lost and Found members of the aboriginal 
black nation, the white man began eating meat. They had no stoves and cooking 
utensils as they had today, when they were driven into the confines of the hills and 
cavesides of Europe. They ate animal food, beast food and with all of its modern, 
scientific knowledge of how to grow food and receive the best food the earth 
produces, are still great flesh eaters.


--- PAGE 34 ---
7 They have taught the world of man to eat as they eat. Their medical scientists have 
learned that meat hastens and destroys the life of man. But, they practice eating the 
very worst meat (the poisonous and filthy swine, wild birds, wild fowl of any kind, 
and even reptiles) and teach man to eat it. To follow them in everything they eat and 
drink means that you are absolutely inviting death. Even to seafood, they drag out 
in their nets the very scavengers of the water and advise you to eat it because they 
eat it.  
8 We must remember that this race is conscious that they are not to live on this 
earth for very long. Therefore, eating poisonous food and drink and eating three 
and four times a day, will take you along with them very fast. This is the secret 
knowledge of the death that they caused us to suffer through foods.  
9 The poor, blind, deaf and dumb Lost and Found so-called Negro will eat and 
drink anything he sees his white master eat and drink. But, I want you to stop doing 
this ignorant thing and eat the right food that you will find in this book. And, eat 
only once a day. I do not care what kind of work you are doing, eat only one good 
meal a day.  
10 If you work is light office work or light housework, you could eat once every 
other day if you wanted to without any hindrance. Once you get used to it, your 
stomach will only ask for a meal at the time that you have trained it to eat.  
11 In regard to you who suffer from sugar diabetes, fasting and staying away from 
sugar and starchy foods if far better than having your limbs cut off your body 
because of your foolish carelessness in eating sweets and starchy foods all times of 
the day. Cut out that sugar; do not use any at all. Use honey, but not the whole 
bottle full at one time. If you have too much sugar in your blood, be careful not to 
eat any sugar of any kind until you get it out.  
12 Some doctors will tell you that you have low sugar. But just tell them that you 
will have "high life" in you. Do not eat any potatoes, beans and bread. Eat 
vegetables. You may eat chicken if it is raised away from filth.  
13 There are poultry raisers who raise chickens in clean places and give them good 
food such as corn, oats and other little grains that are not harmful to the chicken or 
to us. They also give them bread and milk. You do not have to fear eating chickens 
like these. But, if you can do without eating any kind of flesh, that is fine.  
14 Whole milk that is clear of TB germs if best for us to drink. But, if we cannot get 
whole milk, we can drink the milk that the dairies have but we should boil it at a 
certain temperature in order to kill that probable germ.  
15 Drink plenty of milk and eat butter instead of so much of this artificial butter 
made of vegetable fat, and you will have better health.


--- PAGE 35 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book     One  One  One  One  
CHAPTER 18 CHAPTER 18 CHAPTER 18 CHAPTER 18  
Food Can Be Life or Death Food Can Be Life or Death Food Can Be Life or Death Food Can Be Life or Death  
 
1 We can shorten and destroy our lives by the way we prepare and cook the food we 
eat. Allah, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to whom praises are due 
forever, taught me that all of our food (not including fruits) should be cooked, and 
cooked until thoroughly done. And it should be seasoned with salt, where necessary.  
2 The food we eat should not be poisonous food, such as the flesh of swine and of 
wild animals, birds and beasts. We should not eat fish that weighs more than 50 
pounds. Water scavengers in form of the fish family, and other water animals of 
that kind.  
3 As we know, there is much animal life taken as food from water today that we 
should not eat. The believers of Islam should be aware and not eat such foods.  
4 In cooking your food, be sure that you cook it thoroughly, but not to the point 
where it loses its taste. Safeguard your delicate stomach that has to digest all that 
you eat by not over-burdening it with trying to digest half-cooked food or raw food 
and the acid gases from such foods. This is what hastens the doctor to your bedside -
- and after that, the undertaker, and after that, the grave digger.  
5 Remember, we kill ourselves by what we eat and how we eat it. Just as food is our 
source of life, it is also our source of death, as God has taught me. Food keeps us 
here and it takes us away. For long life, take long intervals between your meals, and 
do not eat over one meal a day.  
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 19 CHAPTER 19 CHAPTER 19 CHAPTER 19  
How to Live More Than 100 Years How to Live More Than 100 Years How to Live More Than 100 Years How to Live More Than 100 Years  
 
1 Allah (God) has taught me, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, how to eat 
to live, so that I also may teach you. He desires to extend our lives from a short span, 
averaging 62 years, to a span of one thousand (1,000) years -- or for as long as we


--- PAGE 36 ---
desire to live. He said there is no set time for us to die. We kill ourselves daily by 
means of what we think, what we eat and what we drink.  
2 Think about it, and you will agree that we kill ourselves. As I said in an earlier 
chapter "How to Eat To Live," there is no way of prolonging life except by being 
careful: watching and examining what we put into our bodies to sustain life, and the 
regularity of our eating and drinking habits. We have been taught what to eat and 
what to drink by a people (the white race) who has never obeyed the law or religion 
of Allah (God).  
3 These rules Allah (God) gave Moses’ people in the Ten Commandments for their 
good -- clear as a mirror: law and guidance, which they should not forget. However, 
they kept none of this. Everything that Allah said "Thou shalt not do" they have 
ignored and said "Thou Shalt Do." Therefore, the Christian race is no example or 
guide for one who seeks to obey the law of Allah (God) for God now threatens to 
remove them from the planet earth. If they would stop deceiving the people, making 
them believe they are what they are not, and trying the change the natural religion 
of Allah (God) into the unnatural, which is false, their doom probably could be 
delayed.  
4 There is a sect among them whose members call themselves Orthodox Jews (a few 
who still try to follow the Ten Commandments given to them through Moses). These 
are wiser, more skillful, than the Christians.  
5 How to Eat to Live? Allah (God) said to me, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad (to Whom praise is due forever) that we who believe in Him as our God 
and Saviour should eat but one meal a day (once every 24 hours). Eat nothing 
between meals, not even candy, fruit, or anything which would start the stomach, 
digestive processes. In this way, our eating of the proper foods and drinks -- at the 
proper time -- would extend our life to 140 years. This would protect us from 
sickness.  
6 He said if we would start our infants eating one meal a day, as soon as they are 
able to partake of solid foods, it would enable them to live to an age of 240 years.  
7 I then asked Him, "How about eating once every 48 hours?" He said to me, "You 
would be ill only one day out of four or five years."  
8 I asked Him what was the cure for that one day of illness? He said "Fast three 
days and you will be all right." I asked Him, "What about eating one meal every 
three days?" He said "You will never be sick if you eat once every 72 hours." This is 
about two meals every six days, which would extend our lives to a span of 1,000 
years -- for there is no poison from the previous meal three days ago which has 
enough power to do you any harm. The fast destroys the accumulation of food 
poison.


--- PAGE 37 ---
9 The body is made up of water, chemicals, stone, metals, vegetation and air. All 
that is in the earth is, in some form, in our bodies, and you have no birth record of 
the earth. Although there is a record, you probably do not have it. It is a very old 
earth. It is not -- as you have been made to believe -- only 6,000 years old. It is more 
than six trillion years old, and it will be here for a long, long time yet.  
10 What comes out of it, such as life, cannot live as long as the earth itself. But it can 
be made to live a very long time if carefully nursed, according to its nature, as you 
see and scientists teach you the long life of the California Redwood tree (sequoia 
sempervirens). There is mentioned in the Bible of Allah (God) a saying that His 
people’s life will be as the tree. There is an oak in Arabia -- under which they claim 
Abraham met God -- that is still alive today. Allah (God) never intended that 
righteous lives should be cut short of 100 years on this earth.  
11 I have experience in living and eating according to the way He taught me a while 
and I found it one of the happiest and most peaceful ways of which I ever dreamed. 
I began with eating one meal a day and forced my family to do the same for several 
years, until I was picked up and sent to prison for teaching Islam in 1942. Of course, 
the government said they sent me up for failing to register. That really was not the 
reason, for I did not come under the draft law at that time. Some of my followers, 
60-65 years old, were sent to prison at the same time. Persons of such an age were 
not desired by the War Department.  
12 While in prison, the Christians made it hard for us to live as we had been. They 
deliberately put swine, or the essence of the swine, in everything and the assistant 
warden made mock of it when I told him my followers lived on nothing but bread to 
avoid swine. He said that even the bread had swine in it. We used to make a meal of 
dry, baked white potatoes. We had it hard -- and all my followers now in prison still 
have it hard. All those converted to Islam in prison at present suffer in order to 
avoid eating the divinely-prohibited flesh of the swine. And all that God said "Thou 
Shalt Not do," they said "Thou Shalt Do." You who read this book know the 
Christians are the great false teachers of God, who care nothing for Allah’s (God’s) 
law.  
13 Since returning from prison, it has been hard for me to adjust my eating habits. 
For many days in prison, we had to eat two or three times a day in order to make up 
for one meal a day through trying to avoid eating the divinely-prohibited flesh of the 
swine. This caused me and the others illness after we had cleansed our stomachs of 
bad food and had begun to eat at the proper time.  
14 When we were eating the right food in the right way, we had no doctor bills and 
no medical bills. There were no medicines to be found in our medicine cabinets. 
However, as soon as we changed and began to eat between meals (24 hours), we 
began to call on the doctor and his drugs -- and it brought about one complaint after 
another. I would never have suffered today from bronchial asthma if I had not


--- PAGE 38 ---
disobeyed the law of the right foods to eat. Now I am on the way back to try and 
adjust my life according to the way Allah (God) taught me.  
15 I experienced eating once a day for several years and I experienced eating once 
every two days for a long time. Then I experienced eating one meal every three days 
(twice a week). I never had any symptoms of disease or sickness when I was eating 
once every 48 hours and once every three days. With this method, you feel as though 
you never were sick in all your life -- even if you are a 100 years old.  
16 Nothing shortens our lives but our foolish selves. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 20 CHAPTER 20 CHAPTER 20 CHAPTER 20  
Proper Food for Body and Mind Equals Good Health Proper Food for Body and Mind Equals Good Health Proper Food for Body and Mind Equals Good Health Proper Food for Body and Mind Equals Good Health  
 
1 On the coming of God, according to the Bible and Holy Qur-an, He began to 
create a people that must and will enjoy a long life and good health. They will not 
suffer sickness or grief and sorrow. They will live lives of complete happiness.  
2 The earth is full of food; but good health cannot enter our bodies until we have the 
proper food in the body and the proper food for thought. If we do not have the 
proper food for our way of thinking, we still cannot enjoy peace, good health, joy 
and gladness of heart.  
3 We can eat the best food, we can take fasts for nine days or for 20 or 30 days if we 
want to; and we will still suffer if we do not feed the brain with the right food. These 
two bodies -- the brain and digestive tract -- have much in common with one 
another. Whatever hurts one hurts the other. We must treat both well.  
4 The Bible teaches you that God gave the dead more life. He comes to give you 
more life and an abundance of life. How can He do that for us unless we help 
ourselves to the assistance He is helping us seek? We must help ourselves in this way 
to prolong our lives.  
5 Obey and do all that Allah bids us. Think the way he thinks; the thoughts of good. 
Seek to be like Him, both physically and mentally. As the Holy Qur-an teaches us, 
when we have submitted ourselves entirely to the will of God, He then guides us into 
His path, His way of life. And then we come to enjoy the paradise of life in these 
words of the Holy Qur-an:  
"O soul that is at rest, Enter into My gardens, Into My paradise among


--- PAGE 39 ---
Servants well pleased And well pleasing."  
6 This is what man has sought: the heaven within and the heaven without. If heaven 
does not begin within, we will never enjoy it on the outside. We do not go to a 
certain place for heaven. Nearly all of my followers and I are already in heaven (a 
peace of mind and contentment for the necessities of life, such as food, clothing, 
shelter, and without the enemy of fear and grief). And, with the protection of 
Almighty God, Allah, what more do we want?  
7 If we went into another place, we still would not enjoy it more. Oh, certainly, we 
would be happy to live in a place where there was nothing but people like ourselves, 
thinking as we think and trying to obey the law of God.  
8 But still, within ourselves, we are happy because this evil world does not attract us 
anymore. We do not desire this kind of life that the wicked live. Our thoughts or 
minds feast upon the spirit of goodness. Therefore, the spirit of evil cannot find a 
place among us to dwell.  
9 Remember, life is what we make of it. Stay away from hog (the swine), the stinking 
tobacco weed, the hot fiery alcohol, wine, beer, drugs, foolishness, ignorance, 
madness, drunkenness, gambling, murdering, robbery, deceitfulness, lying, mockery 
and seeking to take advantage of your brother and your sister, and believe in the 
presence of God in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are 
due forever.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 21 CHAPTER 21 CHAPTER 21 CHAPTER 21  
The Benefits of Eating Once a Day The Benefits of Eating Once a Day The Benefits of Eating Once a Day The Benefits of Eating Once a Day  
 
1 As many people are writing to me for personal answers as to what we should and 
should not eat, I think it would lessen my work and be wise if you kept this book 
where you may refer to it when needed.  
2 Many of my followers write and tell me of the results they are receiving from 
eating one meal a day or one meal every other day. This will produce good results 
and lengthen our lives. But children should not be forced to fast or to eat once a day 
or once every other day.  
3 Children and babies should eat at least twice a day. If you are now eating three 
meals a day and you would like to eat one meal every other day, you should not -- all 
of a sudden -- change from three meals a day, every day, to one meal every other 
day.


--- PAGE 40 ---
4 First drop to two meals a day, then one meal a day, and then one meal every other 
day. It is better to do it this way so that you will not make yourself sick. And if you 
eat every other day, do not begin your meal with heavy food.  
5 I receive many questions in regard to meat, fish, and poultry. The main thing 
Allah, as well as the Holy Qur-an, reminds us of is that when it comes to meat and 
fish, Allah forbids us to eat the flesh of swine or of fish weighing 50 pounds or more.  
6 Although some people will not eat fish at all, there are many fish that we can eat; 
some weighing as little as a pound or a pound and a half.  
7 When eating fish, we should confine our fish-eating to those fish weighing between 
one and ten pounds. As I said previously do not eat the scavengers of the sea such as 
oysters, crabs, clams, snails, shrimp, eels, or catfish.  
8 The catfish is a very filthy fish. He loves filth and is the pig of the water. Some 
people write in, complaining about the fish that swim on their sides, but these fish 
can be eaten.  
9 Allah has taught me that chickens are not good for us to eat. They are quite filthy 
(inasmuch as they do not eat the cleanest of food), but we eat them.  
10 We eat beef and lamb; but Allah also said that they are not very good for us. It is 
not a sin for us to eat them. It is not a sin for us to eat camels. But if we can find 
better food, we should not eat the above mentioned food. Many write and ask if they 
should eat meat at all. It is not a sin for you to eat meat, but it is a sin for you to eat 
the meat of the hog.  
11 If we want to prolong our lives, it is best that we do not eat meat or do not eat it 
so often. Beef is very coarse and many of our people do not eat it because of that. 
Horsemeat can also be eaten. It is cleaner than the average meat. But we should not 
eat it unless we are extremely  
hungry and have nothing else to eat because it is a domestic animal and is gentle and 
close to the home.  
12 It is not even a sin to eat rabbit. But since Allah said that the rabbit is so closely 
related to the house cat, we do not eat it. The rabbit, however, is cleaner than the 
house cat because he eats vegetables, roots and herbs and he does not eat insects or 
other animals.  
13 Allah has said that no wild game should be eaten at all. Regardless of how you 
love deer meat, the deer is not good to eat. No game that run wild in the woods or 
birds that fly, with the exception of baby pigeons, called squabs, they have never 
flown away from the nest where they were born, should be eaten. Please do not eat 
coons, possums, turtles, turtle eggs, or frog legs. None of these are good for us.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Ho Ho Ho How to Eat to Live, Book One w to Eat to Live, Book One w to Eat to Live, Book One w to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 22 CHAPTER 22 CHAPTER 22 CHAPTER 22  
A List of Foods We Must Not Eat A List of Foods We Must Not Eat A List of Foods We Must Not Eat A List of Foods We Must Not Eat  
 
1 Do not eat the swine flesh. It is forbidden by the divine law of Allah (God).  
2 Do not eat field peas, black-eyed peas, speckled peas, red peas or brown peas.  
3 Do not eat lima beans, or baby limas. Do not eat any bean but the small navy bean 
-- the little brown pink ones, and the white ones.  
4 Do not eat corn bread because it is very hard on the stomach, and not easily 
digested. Eat whole wheat bread, but not the whole grain. The whole grain is too 
hard to digest. Never eat freshly cooked bread. It rises and buckles in the stomach. 
Eating freshly cooked bread will shorten your life. 
5 Do not eat the rich soy bean flour. Neither the flour nor the oil from the soy bean 
is good for our stomachs.  
6 Do not eat the vegetable kale, nor sweet potatoes and white (Irish) potatoes, which 
are a staple food for people who live in frigid zones, or for people who cannot afford 
other vegetables.  
7 The main thing you must do -- I will repeat -- is eat one meal a day, or once every 
24 hours. And never eat -- or even touch -- the swine flesh.  
8 When you begin eating once a day, certainly you will begin to lose weight until you 
are used to eating once a day. Then you will start gaining weight again. But fat is not 
wanted for health. It is an enemy to health. 
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23 CHAPTER 23  
You Don’t Need Numerous Diets; Just Eat Once Daily You Don’t Need Numerous Diets; Just Eat Once Daily You Don’t Need Numerous Diets; Just Eat Once Daily You Don’t Need Numerous Diets; Just Eat Once Daily


--- PAGE 42 ---
1 In the Christian world, you have innumerable food diets and numerous ways to 
prepare them -- and these numbers are ever increasing.  
2 We must remember that the Christian world commercializes on everything -- even 
on the gospel of Jesus Christ (spiritual food).  
3 God is visiting us to teach us -- the Lost and Found members of God’s family -- to 
prolong our lives (give us more life and abundancy of life), as it is written.  
4 By no means can we get this life from any other source. We must follow the 
guidance of Almighty God -- Who appeared in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom praise is due forever -- and not the ways of the people whose 
diets have sent us calling the doctor and being hurried off to the hospital and from 
the hospital to our graves.  
5 The white people called the Christian race, after they were driven out of the Holy 
Land and roamed the caves and hillsides of Europe, lived there for 2,000 years, 
eating raw food. They did not know how to cook anything, or the use of fire until 
Moses taught them.  
6 Can we accept them and their way of life instead of Allah’s? No, we will take 
Allah’s will and His guidance. It goes something li ke this: Eat one meal a day. If this 
does not make you well, eat one meal every other day -- nothing between meals.  
7 And eat only the right foods. He said milk, bread and navy beans would lengthen 
our lives to 140 years. He did not give us a long list of different food diets and foods 
to confuse us on what to eat.  
8 Cook your foods well done -- especially animal meat. Boiling your food until it is 
well done is better on your digestive system than baking and frying meats. Baking 
and frying it makes it about as hard on your digestive system as eating it raw. Never 
try to put a baked crust on any of your food except bread.  
9 Drink plenty of wholesome milk. Eat butter, bread and fresh foods. If you eat 
fowl, lamb, squab and fish, cook it well done. Keep your food under steam -- 
pressure cook it with the lid on.  
10 Do not look up a variety of things to eat. Most vegetables are good to eat except 
those which you have been forbidden to eat, such as collard greens, black-eyed peas, 
and a lot of green cabbage sprouts.  
11 Eat the white part of cabbage and cauliflower. Stay off those peanuts, coconuts, 
and nuts -- period.


--- PAGE 43 ---
12 The Christian world eats according to taste. It eats -- not for life, but for taste.  
13 Cook well done whatever you eat. Cook bread thoroughly. If you have a 
refrigerator, put your leftover bread in it, or place it where it will keep moist and 
won’t dry out. If that does not taste good, cook it  over again. There is no such thing 
as stale bread. Let no bakery or anyone fool you. It is for your health.  
14 If you do not have the knowledge of how to prepare your bread, seek a Muslim 
who knows how to prepare it. Some Muslim sister will teach you.  
15 Give the corn bread back to the horses and the mules -- that is their food. Do not 
eat grits or coarsely chopped corn. The corn is fit for you only in its milk stage.  
16 Eat to live and not to die. Food, God said to me, keeps us here and takes us away. 
Three meals a day are needed by a savage beast but not by a human being. No 
human being should eat more than once a day.  
17 Eat when you are hungry, if it is not until six or seven days. Let no one fool you 
about the above instructions. They will keep the doctor away from your bedroom 
and will prolong your life.  
18 Keep from eating those sweets that are prepared to hurry you off to your grave. 
And you diabetics, eat only one meal a day. Stay away from that starchy food and 
sugar if you are a diabetic, and you won’t have to get a doctor to pour insulin and 
other medicine into you to balance your life.  
19 All that I have said in this book I have experienced myself. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24  
Feeding Babies Feeding Babies Feeding Babies Feeding Babies  
 
1 Mothers should feed their babies from their breast milk if they possibly can, as 
this is the best.  
2 When you are able to start feeding them on solid food, give them weak bean soup -
- not the highly seasoned, strong soup that you eat. You also can start them out with 
orange juice and mashed apples. This is done whenever you think the baby is able -- 
after he is about three months old. This depends on the health of the baby and its 
age.


--- PAGE 44 ---
3 Plenty of good milk and good, thoroughly cooked bread are good for you and the 
baby.  
4 We must not get the idea that we can nurse the baby with everything we eat. This 
is what will start sickness and disease in the family.  
5 Some mothers are very careless. The baby can act as if he wants what mother is 
eating, and even if it is a beef steak, she will cut him a piece.  
6 We create sickness right in our homes, from the cradle to the grave.  
ORTHODOX JEWISH FOOD  
7 A Muslim, according to the Holy Qur-an, should not fear to eat food that the Jews 
eat. And the Jews do not fear eating a Muslim’s foo d, because they both eat the 
same type of foods.  
8 Orthodox Muslims are very careful of what they eat. The only food we shun that 
they love are nuts. The Muslims are warned against eating nuts of any kind. And, 
they are warned against drinking the blood of the animals and fowls, because blood 
is in the fluid of life. Therefore, no human being should eat or drink the blood of 
anything. The Jews were warned against this by the teachings of Moses, the Servant 
of Allah.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25  
Meat, Part 1 Meat, Part 1 Meat, Part 1 Meat, Part 1  
 
1 It is useless to keep repeating to you the same truth day and night, month after 
month, and year after year when you have it written in your book, the Bible. The 
main meat that our people like to eat is what they have been taught not to eat -- the 
cheap and filthily-raised hog.  
2 This is a divinely-prohibited flesh. This truth has been before our eyes ever since 
we have had permission from the white man to read the Bible. Nothing good is said 
about it in the Bible in Leviticus. The priests of Israel were warned not only against 
the eating of this prohibited, poisonous flesh, but that they should not even touch its 
carcass. But now the Christians, who claim they are better than all the religious 
people of the earth, not only touch the carcass, but eat the carcass -- and then advise 
you and others to do the same.


--- PAGE 45 ---
3 Then, they say they are followers of Jesus, the son of God, while he himself was 
against the eating and touching of this hog.  
4 You can read a parable concerning this filthy swine: Jesus found a man possessed 
of evil spirits, and wanting to relieve the man of such evil spirits, he sent the evil 
spirits (devils) out of the man into the swine. The preachers (representatives of the 
son of God) and the priests know this to be true, but they preach that it is all right 
now to eat swine -- and still say they are the beloved of Jesus. How could they be 
when they broke the laws of God by eating the swine? Nowhere in the scriptures 
does it bid us to break the law that God set up for this prohibited flesh.  
5 The Christians laugh at my followers and me for not eating this filthy animal, as 
though they have an option from God and Jesus to eat it. It is the filthiest, ugliest 
and silliest animal, in whom nature did not put any shyness. Those who love to 
relish his flesh have very little shyness, as you can see today in the Christian 
Americans who love to go half nude and say that they are all right with God.  
6 They say this with a stomach full of divinely-prohibited flesh, intoxicating drinks 
and now, on top of that, dope or drugs. Should America boast that she is a people 
following Christ or Jesus? Americans are making a mockery of God and his prophet 
Jesus. They hate His law of righteousness, health and decency.  
7 The hog is a grafted animal, so says Allah to me -- grafted from rat, cat and dog. 
Don’t question me. This is what Allah has said, bel ieve it, or let it alone.  
8 You have witnessed that the rat is involved with the grafting of this hog in Isaiah 
66:17. "They that sanctify themselves (self-claiming righteous of the Christians), 
and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine’s 
flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the 
Lord."  
9 He will kill them. He doesn’t want them willfully  and knowingly eating such flesh, 
which is filled with poison in the shape of worms (trichina or pork worm) which 
gradually destroy humans as termites destroy timber. This filthy, evil worm can 
stand a temperature higher than any known flesh worm. He can’t be seen with the 
naked eyes. You have to get he microscope. Put a little piece of his flesh (fat part), or 
just grease a glass slide of the microscope with his flesh. Take a look, and you will 
see him crawling around.  
10 These worms begin in the stomach, weaving themselves to breed their families in 
the walls of the stomach; from there into the walls of the intestines; from there into 
our muscles, and from there into the spine and brains where no medicine can reach 
them and the victim dies with the disease that they produce with their presence.  
11 White Christians represent pork as being good for you to eat. This is enough to 
each you that they never wanted to obey the divine law, nor do they want black


--- PAGE 46 ---
people to do so. It is one of the most commercialized meats in America, and 
wherever they can sell it.  
  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26  
Know th Know th Know th Know the Truth about The Flesh of The Swine e Truth about The Flesh of The Swine e Truth about The Flesh of The Swine e Truth about The Flesh of The Swine  
 
1 In an earlier chapter of this book, I told you how Allah taught me about the birth 
of the swine, and that this animal was made only for the whites. Because theirs is a 
grafted race, they were made weaker physically through the man from whom they 
came (the black man). Since the body of the grafted is weaker than the original 
body, it would be easier for them to attract germs than the original man. You should 
not argue with me about this because all of the diseases that trouble us today -- from 
social diseases to cancer -- came from the white race, one way or the other.  
2 Do not tell me about four or five hundred years or one thousand years; I am 
referring to this people’s entire historical scope. They have had 6,000 years to mix 
with and poison our people. Some of you are foolish enough to accept all the blame. 
But God clears you of it. This refers to those who love the devils so much that they 
would like to dispute God about them. I am only teaching you the truth -- take it or 
leave it.  
3 They are too wise to dispute the truth. Read the story in the Bible in which Jesus 
met a man who was possessed of evil spirits. When the evil spirits recognized Jesus 
to be from God -- knowing they would have no chance to contend with him over 
their presence in the man where they did not belong -- they pleaded with Jesus to let 
them go into the swine, and Jesus agreed. The man who was possessed of evil spirits 
was none other than the American so-called Negro. The evil spirits in him are from 
the white race, who made him eat the divinely-prohibited flesh of the swine. The 
devils were allowed to go into the swine. They ran down a steep place into a lake or 
sea and perished.  
4 Here the picture changes; the meaning changes a bit. The hog was made for the 
white race for medical purposes -- not even for them to eat -- but they could eat it if 
they wanted to, since they were created to be destroyed. They use this hog in much 
of their medical preparation, even in the German 606 (606 poisonous germs).  
5 Allah taught me that one of these germs came from the swine. However, the white 
man will advise you to eat it. He would have you think the swine is cleaner now than


--- PAGE 47 ---
he was in Jesus’ time, but wouldn’t God know -- 4,0 00 years from Moses -- if this 
swine would be clear of poison? You admit God is a Foreknower.  
6 The whole story was twisted around. They want you to think God did not know 
about this process of the devils leaving the man and entering the swine until after it 
happened. Actually, God knew it was going to happen before it took place. Using 
deceit, they have succeeded in getting you to eat the swine as food, though it was 
made to produce a poisonous germ for medical purposes in curing the diseases of 
the white race.  
7 This is how he makes you break all of the commandments of God. Because he is 
God’s enemy and yours and mine, he has you break the divine law. We did this 
because we saw him doing it and at that time had no teacher of our own. These are 
the tricks of your hidden enemies and their own concocted religion called 
Christianity, which is deceiving and leading you to your doom with them.  
8 I am your brother, and Allah has revealed to me the truth for your salvation. 
Jesus also prophesied that the truth would free you -- that is, if you accept the truth. 
The thing you must understand in this parable of Jesus is that, actually, the visible 
swine could not have gone crazy and choked in the sea or lake, because the spirit of 
the devil was sent in them. The true meaning that you should understand is the 
swine that was choked to death in the sea after the spirit of the devil was taken out 
of the man represents the believers among the so-called American Negroes, and the 
swine that ran into the lake and perished represents the disbelievers among the so-
called  
American Negroes who refuse to accept the truth. They are so obsessed with the evil 
doings of the devils they will not accept their own salvation and will be choked into 
hell-fire with the devils.  
9 As you have in the Bible, Lucifer’s (Yakub) fall also represents the fall of his race. 
The lake or sea in which they choked and perished in the same lake mentioned in 
the Revelations of John -- that all that had the mark of the beast, the representatives 
of the beast and the false prophets (priests and preachers of Christianity) referred 
to as being cast alive in a lake of fire.  
10 I hope you understand. What I am trying to get over is that you who reject Allah 
and his true religion -- entire submission to His will as the Arabs call it, Islam -- will 
perish in the lake of fire with this race of adversaries of Allah and His true religion, 
to which they refuse to submit. They now are trying to woo you into sharing hell-fire 
with them, though they know that you have a chance to go to heaven while they do 
not.  
11 I cannot force you to halt your downhill plunge with them into the lake of fire. I 
have been missioned only to warn you in the simplest language. I cannot force you 
to go to hell or heaven.


--- PAGE 48 ---
12 Your sweethearting and wanting to marry them is like a frog trying to court a 
rattlesnake. The rattlesnake gives the frog freedom to do so because he intends to 
swallow the frog. Taking the death-dealing pill and the knife to destroy your future 
generations are examples. Socializing with them is no sign of justice, but a sign that 
they have deceived you into going to hell with them. Take it or leave it. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 27 CHAPTER 27 CHAPTER 27 CHAPTER 27  
Live A Thousand Years Live A Thousand Years Live A Thousand Years Live A Thousand Years  
 
1 In the past, our appetite was our God. We ate as many times a day as we could 
find an appetite to. We worshipped our appetite as though it was our God. This 
shortens our lives.  
2 Some of us have never gone a day without eating, unless we were sick and the 
doctor stopped us until his drugs could aid in killing the germ that eating thee or 
four meals a day had caused.  
3 We think we cannot miss a meal, unless we are unable to buy the next meal. So we 
wear out our stomachs that could possibly live a thousand years, if cared for and 
protected from the enemies that will shorten and destroy our lives.  
4 We can soon get accustomed to eating once a day and nothing between meals. 
After getting used to eating once a day, we can get used to eating once every two 
days. Our stomachs will not ask us for food -- except at the time that we make a 
habit of putting food in them.  
5 Surely one meal a day and eating the right kind of food at that meal will do away 
with much sickness and add many years to our lives. Try it for yourself.  
6 Do not eat everything you see the Christians eat. That is why they have so many 
hospitals and must produce so many doctors every year.  
7 Eat to live, and not to die, because how you eat does both -- it keeps you here, and 
it takes you away. Do not fill up your stomach with sweets. Keep away from greasy 
foods.  
8 Allah (God) has brought us this knowledge, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad. Believe in Him, obey and follow His teachings, and you will always be 
happy.


--- PAGE 49 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28 CHAPTER 28  
Train Yourself to Eat As Allah Has Advised Train Yourself to Eat As Allah Has Advised Train Yourself to Eat As Allah Has Advised Train Yourself to Eat As Allah Has Advised  
 
1 To keep healthy and strong, and live a long time on this old earth. Allah said to 
me, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, eat one meal every two or three days. 
Do not be frightened, brothers and sisters, that with your meal hours being 
lengthened you may die or become too hungry.  
2 You will live and you will not be hungry, after you have gotten your stomach used 
to the long intervals between meals. Your stomach will take food only when you give 
it food. And, it won’t ask you for any food until t hat certain hour to which you have 
accustomed it to being fed.  
3 I used to think like you, before the coming of our God and Saviour, in the person 
of Master Fard Muhammad, To Whom Praise is due forever. I began practicing 
eating one meal every day -- with no food in between. I got used to that within a 
couple of weeks. And, after a certain length of time, I tried eating once every two 
days, with nothing between but coffee.  
4 I did not try to pour all of the cream and sugar out of the cream and sugar bowls 
into the coffee. I sweetened and creamed it as I had done when I was eating three 
meals a day, because we can live on cream sugar for a long time. But it is not good 
that we do this through our coffee, for our health’ s sake. I felt better eating one meal 
every two days, or 48 hours, with nothing between.  
5 I also tried eating one meal every 72 hours, as He had told me that if I ate one 
meal every three days I would never be sick, and I thought I would try it, before 
teaching it. So I did for a few months and I felt better than I felt when I was eating 
one meal every 48 hours. And, I can bear witness that I did not have the symptoms 
of illness at any time. My whole body felt light and my head was clear. I could 
almost hear insects crawling. (smile)  
6 It is not so much what you eat when you begin eating one meal every day, or every 
two or three days, it is just that you do not eat foods that are against your health. I 
have described in this book, time and again, that which he pointed out to me. But 
most poor people like us eat the inexpensive food, because we do not have the money 
to buy expensive foods that rich millionaires eat. So, He prescribed for us dry navy 
beans and bread and milk.


--- PAGE 50 ---
7 There are some people asking about eating sardines. They are for us to eat only if 
we are traveling and cannot get others foods. But, please do not buy them, unless 
they are fresh when you can clean them, and not those that are packed already. 
There are some packed that are clean, but they are a little expensive. They are 
called Portuguese sardines.  
8 There are other herbs that we can eat that are not mentioned here in this book. 
But please, whenever you decide on eating something that is not mentioned in this 
book, write me, because there are some on the market that are not good for you and 
me. 
  
How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book How to Eat to Live, Book One  One  One  One  
CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29  
"The Death Way" "The Death Way" "The Death Way" "The Death Way"  
 
1 Under the system of this world, the baby is born wrestling with life and death, and 
death wins this struggle and throws the majority of us into our eternal graves before 
we reach the age of 50, and the remainder before we reach the short age of 100 years 
-- when we should live 500 to 1,000 years. And the weakest one should live at least 
100 years.  
2 Why is our span of life so short? Because we try to follow and practice the way of 
the wicked, whose span of life was limited in the beginning of their time of 6,000 
years. And, due to their lack of the essence of righteousness, and of eternal life, they 
care not for a long span of life.  
3 They desire to shorten the span of life for the aboriginal people, who have no 
beginning or ending -- and have done just that -- because we have not lived the way 
of their life.  
4 What we were and what we are given to eat and drink has shortened our life. The 
way we live -- that short term of life from 12 to 30 years -- is but a fleeting moment 
of the time we should live. The earth is an old, old earth, and the life that is in it is 
our life also. It produces us and it takes us back, as dead material to fertilize the life 
germ that is yet to be made into man.  
5 We should live far longer than we have -- as long as we see where we came from, 
and that the material that made up our bodies is still alive. But, what has happened 
to us? We were fed with death at the very beginning -- the wrong food and drink, 
given to us when we were babies by our wicked enemies, until today, we think that it


--- PAGE 51 ---
is a mistake to contemplate living 100 or more years; not to think of 1,000 years. We 
think that is impossible.  
6 But it is no more impossible for us today to live 800 or 900 years, than it was for 
Methuselah, who lived 969 years (each year carrying 12 months like the ones we 
have today).  
7 The Holy Qur-an teaches us that a year with Allah has always been 12 months. 
And the civilizations of earth must count their years according to the time it takes 
the earth to rotate around the sun, and get itself into position. That, the astronomers 
teach us, will give us a more correct way of counting the time.  
8 We and our sons and daughters are fed on poisonous foods, milk and water, from 
the start of life. This way of eating like the beasts soon robs us of life, and we go 
away within a few years.  
9 The baby eats poisonous animals, fowls and vegetables and drinks milk that is not 
his milk -- it belongs to the cow’s baby, goat’s ba by and horse’s baby. Here the child 
is reared on animals’ and cattle’s food.  
10 This is why we have such a great percentage of delinquency among minors. The 
child is not fed from his mother’s breast -- she is too proud of her form. Therefore, 
she lets the cow and other animals nurse her new-born baby. And, the baby cannot 
have too much love for its mother. It loves the bottle that its food is in -- food that 
his mother robbed from the cow’s baby to feed her own baby.  
11 When the baby reaches the age of 10, and if it is a male, most of them begin to 
indulge in drinking alcoholic beverages and using tobacco in one form or another.  
12 Alcohol and tobacco, with their poisonous effect upon the male, cut his life down, 
as far as his reproductive organs are concerned. He is unable to produce his own 
kind. And, nowadays, with dope added to all of the above-mentioned poisonous food 
and drinks, we can easily say with truth, that the people are committing suicide.  
13 In a few days (years), they lose sexual desires. Tobacco and whiskey will most 
certainly destroy it. The flesh of swine and alcoholic drinks will give a false 
impression of feeling to the victim  that you are strong and able to finish the course -
- but you can’t depend on it. Soon, one finds himse lf needing strength again and 
again -- not to think of how venereal diseases destroy those who indulge in the 
extremes of life.  
14 Let us eat to live, as Allah (God) has taught me. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30


--- PAGE 52 ---
Do Not Take Birth Control Pills Do Not Take Birth Control Pills Do Not Take Birth Control Pills Do Not Take Birth Control Pills  
 
1 It is Allah’s (God’s) love and my love, as His Me ssenger, to teach you and keep 
you  
aware of the tricks the devil devises to trap you into accepting death and not life. As 
it is written, Allah (God) has come to you to save you from death and not life. As it is 
written, Allah (God) has come to you to save you from death and destruction by the 
wicked and to register you in the book of the living (the Black Nation) with 
unlimited future.  
2 He has declared that we are the true members of the Nation of Islam, the 
righteous, who shall never be removed from the earth by any foe. He even laughs at 
plans to destroy the nation of righteous.  
3 The birth control law the enemy is preparing for you, with the aid of their angels, 
the blind, deaf and dumb black preachers and ignorant black politicians, is not 
concerned about your future. The white priest knows what these plans will do for 
you. They know that Christianity has been exposed to the civilized world as nothing 
less than bait to enslave the black people of earth, the original people who serve the 
white race as slaves. He offers you death in a pill for your future generations of 
children.  
4 He tells you what it is going to do to you. But it is like telling a world-be suicide: 
"Here is the loaded gun. Put it to your silly head, and blow your brains out." Then 
he stands aside, throws up his arms and says to the world that he is not responsible 
for your suicide. This is what you do when you swallow the pills. He knows you are 
blind, deaf, and dumb.  
5 I know you do not know the plans and secrets of your enemies, but Allah and His 
Messenger have known for a long time -- for this was ascertained when we first 
learned to read the history of Pharaoh, who sought to destroy the future of Israel 
through the midwives. We know that this, too, is aimed at you in these last days.  
6 We know by the words of the Holy Qur-an on this attempt to destroy your 
newborn babies; to destroy the very seed of you. You also are warned against birth 
control law. They say you are not able to provide for the many children with which 
Allah (God) is blessing you. They say you should be willing to stop giving birth to 
children they will have to feed.  
7 Who is responsible? Is it not the slave master’s and his children’s fault that you 
are not able to care for your family? It is theirs not yours. Why don’t they divide the 
country with you, give you a few of these United States and let you raise all the 
children you want so you can provide a proper living for them.


--- PAGE 53 ---
8 But, no! He would rather you were dead than to see you living free of his authority 
and power to enslave and murder you at will.  
9 You are aware of this, but yet you are a fool. You do not understand that they are 
after your life -- and you are seeking death by following and agreeing with them to 
destroy you and your Nation.  
10 The earth belongs to the black nation, and its people will rule it in the near 
future. God never gave the whites any of the earth. He only gave them time to live 
on it; time to make fools of you and me. However, that time was limited, and I now 
can say in truth, that "time is up."  
11 I will defend the interest and life of my people, even at the destruction of my own 
life, and the lives of those who follow me -- for that is why I have been raised among 
you. It is a disgrace upon us black people of America to permit ourselves and our 
future generations to be cut off and destroyed by ignorant, foolish, pleasure-seeking 
girls and women of our own, who do not know what they are doing when they 
swallow the birth control pill.  
12 I repeat: If you accept Allah (God) and follow me and if you give birth to 100 
children, each of you girls and women is considered more blessed and right in the 
eyes of Allah (God) than those who try to kill the birth seed.  
13 Because of the advice of those who hate you and hope that you destroy 
yourselves, the clergy -- the priests and elders -- is united to help deceive you. The 
Catholic religion is our greatest enemy today. It seeks to woo you into its net where 
your future will be hopeless in the Hereafter. This old scheme of attempting to 
destroy the so-called Negro when the day of his salvation comes to him from God, 
has long been known by us and Allah (God). The nation of righteous is fully 
prepared to meet it.  
14 Jehovah thwarted Pharaoh’s wicked plan to prospe r through destroying the 
future of Israel. Pharaoh was afraid of Israel’s po pulation, who was populating 
Egypt faster than the Egyptians. However, he did not want the Israelites to leave 
Israel. He decided to kill off the male children, which would have stopped Israel 
from increasing her nation. The birth control laws employed by the white race were 
used by his father, Yacub. It is no new thing today. He does not teach you this, nor 
does he teach you the sciences of modern warfare or chemistry. Of course, we do not 
care to learn any more about warfare, for it is the purpose of God to erase war from 
the human family. He now plans to destroy those who delight in making war against 
humanity.  
15 Who said the white man had to carry us forever? Who gave him the right to cut 
our birth rate so that he could take care of a small number of us? Who is willing 
swallow the pill? The 2,000,000 so-called Negroes can be placed in Africa or Asia. 
The country is so large, they would not know they were there. Or they could be put


--- PAGE 54 ---
on island in the Pacific. But he wants to exterminate all of them with the pills so that 
he and his people can have free reign of the earth. But he should have reckoned with 
Allah (God), Who has come for the purpose of saving the poor, black man from 
their wicked plans.  
16 The Negro has been a group of people, held in the hands of the white man, for 
400 years and yet, today, he is like a lazy horse or dog who does not want to leave his 
master because of fear -- and has taken all kinds of abuse in order to get a little food 
or whatever the master has to give. It is a shame. It is not because of lack of 
education, but because he holds the offer of Allah (God) in mockery.  
17 But this pill is a bold offer of death, openly made, inviting the Indians and so-
called Negroes to accept death -- and also the people they have under their power in 
the Pacific islands. It is accepting extermination through a harmless looking pill 
designed to take away the future birth of our Nation. Think well, you "white 
Christian lovers." You sign up to be swallowed up.  
18 Israel was taken into a country where she could do all of the populating she 
wanted to without the interference of Pharaoh. Allah (God) had Pharaoh drown in 
the Red Sea, and the white race is going to be thrown into a lake of fire for its plans 
against the so-called Negro.  
19 I shall always rise to your defense against such an artful, wicked race of people, 
who has nothing in mind but death for the black man -- its scheme covered with a 
semi-bait of good. Once you have swallowed the birth control pill, it is death.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31  
Food and Health Food and Health Food and Health Food and Health  
 
1 I have said to eat no peas. At that time, I did not think about what we call sweet 
peas, which grow into pods. They can be eaten, but not field peas. I had reference to 
field peas, such as black-eyed peas, brown, yellow, and black peas (there are some 
black field peas).  
2 We all know that food and health keep us here and the same makes us sick and 
takes us away -- if we do not make a practice of eating the right food and drinks that 
will not make us sick and cause an early death.  
3 The way that Almighty God Allah, in Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to 
Whom praise is due forever, has taught us, makes sense.


--- PAGE 55 ---
4 When we get used to eating one meal a day, or every 24 hours, we start eating once 
every two days, which will give to you and me better results than eating one meal a 
day. Even eating one meal a day -- and eating the right kind of food and having a 
pure drink -- will bring us health and prolonged life of which we would not even 
dream. You will not be sick if you eat correctly. And let what you drink be pure -- 
that which will not harm the body.  
5 Again, you will agree with me that we Americans are a very gluttonous people and 
that we prepare our own sick bed, hospital bills, and undertaker bills with what we 
eat and what we drink. And besides this comes a sick mind, and after a sick mind 
comes death.  
6 You just try eating and drinking and living at peace with yourself and others, and 
you will write me and tell me that these words are true.  
7 As for the swine (hog), he is well known to be an animal that we should not take 
for food, because he puts an almost incurable disease in those who eat his flesh.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32  
Foods to Avoid Foods to Avoid Foods to Avoid Foods to Avoid  
 
1 We should not be asking questions about what kind of foods to eat as much as we 
should be trying to eat one meal a day. This is where good health and the 
prolongation of life come from. Good health and the prolongation of life come from 
abstaining from filling our stomachs too frequently with food of any kind -- good or 
bad. Of this I can assure you from self-experience. 
2 If we keep food going into our stomachs only once every 24 hours or 48 hours, and 
do not get the foolish idea that this cannot be done, then we can train our stomachs 
to eat once a week and our stomachs will not call for food more than once a week. 
This has been tried. If we could eat one meal a week, we could live as long as 
Methuselah.  
3 We can get away from eating animal flesh and all kinds of scavenger sea foods. Do 
not eat large fish that weigh over 50 pounds -- such as canned tuna. Sometimes this 
canned tuna comes from a fish that weighs nearly a thousand pounds or more. Do 
not eat halibut, catfish, or carp.  
4 There is a cheap fish called buffalo (white buffalo) that you can eat. But do not eat 
any stale fish if you can help it.


--- PAGE 56 ---
5 Even fish is not very good for us, due to their animal-like instincts in the water. 
But we eat them, and it is not a sin to eat them (edible fish).  
6 Many of the bass fish that are found in lakes, rivers, and running stream water are 
good to eat. White fish, channel trout (which is better), river trout and most perch 
are good to eat. You may eat fish that weigh from one and a half to four or five 
pounds.  
7 We were reared on the animal flesh that was the divinely-prohibited flesh (the 
hog). We must not eat or put our hands on the carcass of the hog, or sit around a 
place where it is being slaughtered or cooked. We should not even get the odor of it 
in our nostrils. It is a sin to deliberately stand and smell it being slaughtered or 
cooked. The devil did this harm to you and me and to the people all over the earth. 
Of course, we cannot blame him for doing this, because he was not created to do 
righteousness, anyway. Do not think hard of them for anything they do or teach you 
to do, because they are just doing their job. Nature has made them to be as they are. 
I pray Allah that He will remove them from the planet earth, so they will not deceive 
and misguide people from the right way.  
8 Eat only one meal a day and do not take food between meals, unless you are sick. 
A person that is sick and weak is excluded from the above said time of eating.  
9 Remember, do not eat those ugly horse beans that you have been eating (lima 
beans, field peas, etc.). Eat only small navy beans. They are white and pink in color. 
There are also large beans of the same color, but do not eat the great big beans -- eat 
the small ones. Cook them thoroughly. Feed them to your children.  
10 Do not eat freshly baked cakes. Give them a day to dry out, after baking. Do not 
ever hurry bread to bake, because it is better for us if it has been baked twice.  
11 Stay away from eating fried foods. Do not make a habit of filling your stomach 
with aged cheese. Eat cream cheese as much as possible, it is better for your 
digestive system.  
12 Stay away from eating all meat and vegetables that are canned in metal cans as 
much as possible. Sometimes we are forced to eat them because we do not have any 
other. Try to get your food canned in jars; or while the food is in season, buy it and 
can it in glass jars yourself. If you eat a vegetable meal, try to get fresh vegetables, if 
you can purchase them from a market.  
13 Remember to eat one meal a day, regardless to your type of work. You can live 
on one meal a day. This will help keep your doctor away from your door. Of course, 
eating one meal every two days or three days is even better, but you are not going to 
apply yourself to eating once every two or three days, so try and eat only one meal 
every 24 hours. Make a habit of this and you will feel better and have fewer 
ailments.


--- PAGE 57 ---
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33  
The Safest Way to Eat The Safest Way to Eat The Safest Way to Eat The Safest Way to Eat  
 
1 The safest way of all to eat is to stop eating so often (three meals a day and meals 
between those three meals). In the past, our appetites were as the appetites of swine. 
The swine has no certain time to eat. It will eat until it is sick and has to lie down, 
but as soon as it finds a vacancy in its stomach, it eats more food. It doesn’t matter 
what kind of food it may be; the swine eats anything. The swine’s life is very short, 
because it comes here eating itself to death, and death soon takes it away.  
2 We eat too much and too often, and we eat the wrong food (poisonous foods). Most 
of our drinks are poisonous.  
3 Allah has blessed America with the best of foods and with good water that is 
plentiful. America has been blessed with everything that she could desire, but after 
all of these blessings, she is ungrateful and turns good things into bad, and wages a 
war against the God of good and His people.  
4 After telling the slaves they were free, America kept them here in order to prey 
upon them. Now today, many of the slaves wish to be free of America, but her reply 
by her actions to our wanting to be free is "no." And America continues to give the 
so-called Negroes the same bad food and drink that her (America’s) fathers did in 
the days of slavery.  
5 America’s markets are loaded with swine, and loaded with vegetables and fruits 
which are preserved and made to look beautiful by having poisonous chemicals 
poured upon them. There are thousands, and hundreds of thousands of herds of 
cattle and sheep and there are hundreds of thousands of fowls. Yet, Americans 
decorate their tables with the divinely-prohibited flesh -- the swine -- and represent 
themselves as being the true Christian followers of Jesus. 
6 Americans have poisonous whiskey and wine by the barrels and vats all over the 
country, yet when this does not make them intoxicated (drunk) and crazy enough, 
they resort to drugs (the poisonous weeds).  
7 Now today, Allah threatens America with all kinds of plagues -- not one kind, but 
many kinds. Allah withholds the rains from her wheatfields; sends terrific cold and 
snow upon her fertile bread basket areas; kills her cattle, livestock and fowls; and 
kills her fish that are inland in ponds and rivers, with droughts.


--- PAGE 58 ---
8 All of these plagues are falling upon America because she is against God’s giving 
freedom, justice, and equality to the so-called Negroes, whose labor she has had for 
400 years. Because of America’s having broken the Divine Law which prohibits 
eating swine flesh, and because of her having fed this forbidden meat to her slaves 
and to other nations of the earth, Allah (God) is now taking His blessings away from 
her.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 34 CHAPTER 34 CHAPTER 34 CHAPTER 34  
The Poisonous Animal Eater The Poisonous Animal Eater The Poisonous Animal Eater The Poisonous Animal Eater  
 
1 God, in the Bible, through his prophets, has condemned the eating of the 
poisonous animal (swine).  
2 Leviticus 11:7-8 "And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be cloven-footed, 
yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you. Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and 
their carcass shall ye not touch; they are unclean to you."  
3 The dietary law given to Israel by Moses is true today. Israel was given the proper 
food to eat Jehovah approved for them, and that which was forbidden to eat we 
should not eat today.  
4 The Christians have said that since Jesus the swine is good to eat, because Jesus 
made it good in his teachings. But this is all false and a shield for the Christians’ 
eating the divinely-prohibited flesh of the filthy swine. They even teach you that he 
has a poison in his flesh. They call it the trichina worm, that is only revealed under a 
microscope. High school children have microscope sets to see this worm in the flesh 
of swine. But yet they eat it. Why? Because their teacher eats it and their teacher 
was the slave master and his children. The white race teaches that we should obey 
the law of God, but they themselves disobey. And they want you to disobey the law 
of God. Why? Because they are the devil-opponents of righteousness and all the 
right laws given from the author of righteousness. They want you and me to disobey 
Allah’s laws, so that we will come under the curse and destruction of Almighty God, 
Allah, as they know they are doomed and they hope that you and I will suffer the 
same.  
5 Through the eye of the microscope, we see this poisonous worm, that will creep in 
our own flesh if we eat the poisonous animal, swine, hog, or whatever you may call 
him.  
6 The nature of the hog is to eat and thrive on anything edible -- filth, or clean food. 
But, clean food will not remove the pork worm (trichina). The worm travels from


--- PAGE 59 ---
our mouth into our stomach; from our stomach into the walls of the intestines; from 
the walls of the intestines, he weaves his way into the muscles of our body; from 
there, into the spinal cord and up to our soft gray matter (brain). He is there to stay, 
until the preacher says "from dust we came, and to dust we returneth."  
7 The hog or swine causes many ailments of various symptoms (names) mentioned. 
Medical scientists know what has caused these symptoms that we are troubled with. 
The medical scientists know that the hog is unfit for our consumption. Medical 
scientists also know that the swine will shorten our lives. But, medical scientists also 
know that they can get rich from the effect of the swine in our bodies, as the hog 
raiser can get rich by selling 100 or 200 pounds of poison that will take us away 
gradually. It does not take us away quickly, but gradually. The pork worm will 
finally bring you and me to our grave.  
8 Not to think of eating the swine, Leviticus mentions in the 8th verse that we shall 
not even touch the carcass of the swine. But, we are not only touching the carcass, 
we are eating the carcass.  
9 Isaiah 66:17 condemns the people who think it is all right to eat the swine, just 
because white people eat it, and they think they can be holy in the presence of God, 
or in religion they call Christianity (which they received and have been taught is a 
God-verified religion). This is wrong. God never verified Christianity as being His 
religion. If He did, He changed His Mind when he taught the prophets to submit to 
Him. His religion is entire submission to Him. The Arabic work for this is Islam, 
which means to submit.  
10 There are so many little new groups that call themselves sanctified, holy, 
Jesusfied, Christified, and Godified. Such people should read this chapter, Isaiah 
66:17-18.  
11 "They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one 
in the midst (the one in the midst is the preacher, inviting them to disobey the law of 
God), eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, an d the mouse, shall be consumed 
together, saith the Lord."  
12 Death is for you who eat the swine. God will not accept swine eaters as His 
people, after knowledge that the swine is a divinely-prohibited flesh. The hog 
(swine), God has taught me, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, To Whom 
praise is due forever, was made from the grafting of cat and dog. The rat is 
mentioned in the above quoted verse of Isaiah, but the cat and dog are not 
mentioned. The white theologians knew that if they had given the names of these 
two animals (the cat and the dog), you would have probably not accepted the hog. 
But, Who is better knowing than Allah.  
13 The hog was made, Allah taught me, for medical purposes, to cure the white 
man’s many diseases, since he had been grafted out of the black man, and he


--- PAGE 60 ---
attracted germs and diseases easily that were possibly incurable. At that time, the 
Arab medical scientists did not have anything that would kill most, or probably all, 
of his diseases, so they made a medicine for him -- that is the hog. The hog contains, 
Allah said to me, 999 poisonous germs. This is what makes up the hog. And, the 
Christian will look at you, with a Bible at home and in his pocket, and say, if you do 
not eat it, "what is wrong with the hog?" They will even ask you what is wrong with 
strong alcoholic drinks (whiskey, beer, and wine). This proves beyond a shadow of a 
doubt that we have been reared and taught by an enemy of God, the real devil in 
person (the white race). Therefore, we are before God, today, with the sin of the 
white man, which He offers to forgive us for, if we now will accept the truth and will 
walk and practice righteousness, in the path of the righteous.  
14 In the 17th verse the swine is called the abomination (this means hated). It is true 
that all good Muslims hate a swine. Some places, in the dominant areas of Islam, 
you will be killed if you carry any swine among them.  
15 See Isaiah 66:18: "For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that 
I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory."  
16 The glory means the right way that He will teach the people in the last days; that 
He will approve of our doing what He gives to us in the Resurrection. He knows 
your works that ignore His law of righteousness, given to His prophets of old, and 
your self-centered thoughts, or your thinking that you can deceive others, while 
breaking the law of God, into thinking you are right in eating the swine. But, He has 
promised death to you in the 17th verse. He will consume such people all together.  
17 We must remember that these warnings given in the 17th and 18th verses of 
Isaiah are referring to the general resurrection, and the accountability of our 
actions and disobedience to the law of God, because the 18th verse say, "...it shall 
come that I will gather all nations and tongues."  
18 This is also prophesied in Matthew 25:32: "And before him shall be gathered all 
nations..."  
19 Since the white race is more guilty than anyone else of breaking the law of Allah 
(God), He threatens with chastisement and total destruction. We may quote Isaiah 
65:15. It reads like this: "And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen; 
for the Lord God shall slay thee (the disobedient white race), and call his servants 
by another name."  
20 Here we are warned that God will not accept us in the name of the white race, 
because He has another name that He will call us by, and He mentions this 
throughout Isaiah and the New Testament. We must have a name of God and not 
the name of an enemy of God


--- PAGE 61 ---
21 Isaiah 56:1-5: "I am sought of them that asked not for (the lost-found members 
of the Black Nation are the ones who never sought after Allah, because they did not 
know how. The enemy did not teach them how to seek Allah, since they did not obey 
Allah, themselves); I am found to them (lost-found Black people -- so-called Negro) 
that sought me not: I said Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called 
by my name.  
22 "I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh 
in a way that was not good (This is referring to Israel, to whom God sent prophet 
after prophet, to guide them into the right way, who rebelled against right guidance 
and then made a religion called Christianity, after their way of thinking, and put the 
name of Jesus on that religion to make us drink down the falsity they added to 
Jesus’ teachings), after their own thoughts; A peop le that provoketh me to anger 
continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars 
of brick (they barbecue the hog upon bricks and call it their barbecue stand); which 
remain among the graves (the graves mean their homes),....which eat swine’s flesh, 
and broth of the abominable things is in their vessels (this is referring to hog or 
swine in their vessels); which say, stand by thyself (This is referring to the Muslims, 
when it says stand by thyself), come not mean only Israel or the white race, but the 
white race has made the so-called Negro follow his religion, say the same and 
especially those who claim sanctification in Christianity.)  
23 "These are a smoke (the offensive smell of the cooking of swine flesh)...a fire that 
burneth all the day (the Christian is cooking the flesh of the swine all day long and 
the Muslims and the obedient servant of Allah (God), smell this flesh, prohibited by 
God, which is a stink to their nostrils, being cooked. They feel they are guilty of 
being partakers of the cooking and eating of the swine flesh, by smelling the 
poisonous odor.)"  
24 Keep away from the filthy swine. Do as Allah (God) bids you. Do not eat its flesh 
or touch its carcass.  
 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35  
Beautiful Appearance and Long Life Beautiful Appearance and Long Life Beautiful Appearance and Long Life Beautiful Appearance and Long Life  
 
1 Allah, in the person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praise is due forever, 
came to give us a spiritual life which would automatically give us a physical life of 
Himself (the life of the righteous), which we lost by following other than righteous 
guides.


--- PAGE 62 ---
2 We cannot be successful in making the progress of a spiritual life, unless we have 
the guidance for the physical life. This guidance comes to us through laws, rules and 
regulations of our physical life.  
3 We must make this teaching of eating once a day binding upon us, as a law, in 
order to get any good from it, as Allah (God) desires. The purpose of these dietary 
laws and the time that we should partake of food is to lengthen our lives, by ridding 
us of the greedy desire to eat three times a day and between meals if we are offered 
food.  
4 The main purpose of this teaching, "How to Eat to Live," is to prolong our lives.  
5 Beauty appearance is destroyed in us -- not just our facial appearance, but the 
most beautiful appearance about us, our characteristics (the way we act and 
practice our way of life). We achieve one of the greatest beauties when we achieve 
the spiritual beauty and characteristics through practicing them. We achieve the 
spiritual beauty through practicing or carrying into practice the spiritual laws.  
6 We know that we have been made ugly by our enemies’ rearing of our parents. 
We know that many of our people throughout the earth have been made ugly by not 
practicing culture that would beautify them. But we are blessed that God, Himself, 
has visited us to guide us in His way. What people on the earth has God visited in 
person today, other than you and me here in America?  
7 The Wisdom that He teaches us is the Wisdom of God and of the Gods. It is 
Supreme Wisdom, because it is above and far ahead of what we have ever heard and 
what we see practiced by others today. Should we not obey that which is good for us, 
when we are members of the nation of good? Why should we not practice that which 
is good for us?  
8 It has come to us and Allah (God) has said that it is ourselves that He is giving to 
us. Should we not accept the good for ourselves, instead of accepting evil and 
disobedience to the law of goodness, when the bible verifies this truth?  
9 Why should you and I not accept such good teaching and practice it? It will do 
away with sickness and keep death standing outside our doors for a long time -- for 
many years. Think over Methuselah and Noah who kept death standing outside of 
the door for nearly one thousand years. Now we cannot stay here one century, which 
is one tenth of that time. We invite death inside the door, instead of obeying a law of 
God that will keep it outside for a long time.  
10 Eat one meal a day. Stay away from the hog, of which 10 ounces takes away from 
you. God has said, three one-hundredths percent of the beauty appearance.  
11 This civilization has a thousand and one things for you to eat. It is not necessary 
for you to go around trying to eat everything people say to eat to have good health.


--- PAGE 63 ---
But, what you eat, let it be good and do not eat yourself to death at that one meal a 
day. This book has described to you good, common food. You do not have to be rich 
to purchase it.  
12 And I would not like you to follow the Bible in Genesis where Adam is told to go 
and eat of all the herbs of the earth. There are some poisonous herbs that would 
have killed Adam. This is a mistake that the theologians put in the Bible. You 
cannot eat all herbs; some of them will kill you. But, eat the best of herbs that God 
approves for you and me and do not think He approved of Adam eating all the 
herbs of the earth.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 36 CHAPTER 36 CHAPTER 36 CHAPTER 36  
Divinely Prohibited Flesh Divinely Prohibited Flesh Divinely Prohibited Flesh Divinely Prohibited Flesh  
 
1 Good health can be enjoyed by obeying the teachings of God (who came in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad. To Whom Praise is due forever), that is, by 
eating one meal every 24 hours (one meal a day).  
2 It is not so much eating various kinds of food as it is not eating food any kind too 
often. Of course, we know the Divinely prohibited flesh of the swine is totally 
forbidden not only to eat, but we are even forbidden touch or handle the swine. It is 
punishable under the law of God to eat the swine.  
3 Many of the readers may think that it is all right with God for them to do as they 
please about His laws, but we are punished for willfully disobeying the laws of God, 
regardless of how small or how great the offense may be.  
4 The Christians have been eating the swine for four thousand years. Now, their 
punishment is total destruction by fire.  
5 The white race was not made to obey the Divine Law. They were made to oppose 
it, therefore following after them and doing what they do will lead you to hell. It is 
no excuse for you. The average so-called Negro thinks it is all right for him to be evil 
too, but we are two different peoples. The so-called American Negro is a Divine 
member lost from the Divine circle, while the slave master, who has been his 
teacher, is an enemy to God, by nature. This is why the Bible teaches you that hell 
was created for them the day they were made.  
6 So, do not practice the evil things that the white race is doing, as you are following 
them now. If they pull off their clothes, you will pull off yours. Do you think you 
have an option to ignore divine law, while you do not? A doom is set for the whole


--- PAGE 64 ---
race of them, and you will share their doom with them if you continue to eat and 
drink intoxicating drinks just because you see them doing such things and going 
nude in public (women with dresses above their knees and men wearing just trunks 
in public). You are following one of the most filthy things that even an animal could 
follow, by doing such things. White people do this to tempt you to do the same so 
that you can share hell fire with them.  
7 Eat one meal a day and eat good food as has been prescribed for you in this book. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37  
Poisonous Food and Water Poisonous Food and Water Poisonous Food and Water Poisonous Food and Water  
 
1 If what we eat and drink keeps us alive, then we must be careful of what we eat 
and drink, because the same that keeps us alive can bring death to our life, as there 
are so many of us who do not know the kind of food and drink that we should eat 
and drink for long life.  
2 Living under the guidance of the enemy of right and the God of the unrighteous is 
a very dangerous position to be in. This is just the position you and I, the poor, 
righteous so-called Negroes (lost-found members of the aboriginal Black Nation), 
are living in. Poisonous food and water we are now eating and drinking -- sometimes 
too much poison to kill poison that is in our food and drinks. And, maybe it is the 
wrong poison for us human beings, whether it is in food or in drinks.  
3 Take, for instance, the use of fluoride, chloride, and sodium, which if not used 
correctly can destroy our entire life. Maybe it is best to find something else that will 
clear our water without killing both us and the poison in our food and water.  
4 The scientist should not advocate the use of such poisonous chemicals as fluoride, 
chloride, and sodium, which may have a bad effect on our brains and our human 
reproductive organs. The scientist that uses such poison on human beings wants to 
either minimize the birth rates or cause the extinction of a people.  
5 D.D.T., which is sprayed on food while it is growing up from the earth, is also a 
poison that should not be put into the human body, regardless of the desire to kill 
insects, that loves to dine on the same food on which we dine. The poison may not 
take instant affect on us, as it does the insects, but it can, over the long years, help 
shorten the span of our lives. We live in a world commercializing on everything 
where money is involved, and this has speeded production of everything but human 
lives, in order to fill the demand of the people. This has caused many scientists to 
overlook the dangerous effects that such fast production has on the health of the


--- PAGE 65 ---
people. Therefore, the only way out for us, the poor Lost-Found, is to seek refuge 
and guidance in Allah for our protection from evil plannings and doings of Satan.  
6 Allah (God) has pointed out to us in both the Bible and the Holy Qur-an that right 
foods for us to eat and He has pointed out the poisonous food and drinks. Follow His 
guidance or suffer the consequences.  
7 Do not eat the swine -- do not even touch it. Just stop eating the swine flesh and 
your life will be expanded. Stay off that grandmother’s old fashioned corn bread 
and black-eyed peas, and those quick 15 minute biscuits made with baking powder. 
Put yeast in your bread and let it sour and rise and then bake it. Eat and drink to 
live, not to die. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38  
Bad Food Causes Us to Look Old Bad Food Causes Us to Look Old Bad Food Causes Us to Look Old Bad Food Causes Us to Look Old  
 
1 The number one thing you should not eat is the hog (swine). You should also not 
eat field peas, lima beans, soy beans, bad stale beef (rotten beef), frozen stale turkey 
and chicken (Some of the turkey has been in cold storage so long that when it is 
thawed, it begins to disintegrate).  
2 Try eating fresh food and do not eat stale, rotten food that will destroy your health 
-- keeping the doctor around your home trying to administer drugs for the poison 
you have eaten, which you could have avoided -- and take you to your grave very 
quickly.  
3 There is also bad, stale fish for sale -- all but rotten -- that some of you buy and 
eat. Do not eat such rotten food, if you want to live long. If you want to live a short 
life, that is up to you. Eating bad food will soon shorten your life.  
4 Do not eat canned meats, if you can help it, or canned beans, if you can buy fresh 
ones. Do not eat any canned goods, if you can find fresh food. Most of us can 
purchase fresh food from the market.  
5 Some of you buy meats from the Jewish stores and some of you believe that all the 
Jewish people are religious Orthodox Jews and will not eat or sell bad meats, but 
you are wrong. There are "Christian" Jews who will eat everything and drink 
almost everything. The merchandise of these Jews must be shunned, if you desire to 
live.


--- PAGE 66 ---
6 We use the name Orthodox to refer to religious Jews who want to follow the law of 
Moses, their prophet, and who want to eat the food that he prescribed for them.  
7 The Holy Qur-an teaches us that their food (meaning the food of the religious 
Jews) is good for us and our food is good for them. That is true, so long as both of us 
are eating the food that Allah prescribes.  
8 Do not hasten the cooking of your food -- not even your bread. Bread should be 
baked slowly, so that it will bake thoroughly. Do not eat freshly baked bread; let it 
be at least a day or two old. There is no such thing as stale bread. When the bread is 
a day or two old, it is better for our stomachs.  
9 Eat the kind of vegetables that are prescribed for you in this book and do not eat 
nuts of any kind. They are not good for us. They are too hard on our digestive 
systems.  
10 Bad food causes us to look old. The skin of those who eat such bad foods is tight 
and drawn. All the foods mentioned above are bad for our appearance.  
The Pig  
11 The hog takes away the beautiful appearance of people and takes away their 
shyness. The people who eat the hog have no shyness because they eat the hog. 
Nature did not give the hog any shyness. God, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, taught me that the scientists have found that the hog carries 999 
poisonous germs in it and they are not 100 percent poison, but nearly 1000 per cent 
poison. The swine takes away our life gradually and creates worms in our bodies.  
12 The worms eat away our digestive tracts and cause bad thinking, because once 
they get into the spinal cord, they make their way to the brain and there they begin 
to affect the way of thinking, until they have eaten your life away. They are parasitic 
worms, referred to as pork or trichina worms. They cannot be seen by the naked eye 
-- only under a microscope. They destroy  
three one-hundredths per cent of the beauty appearance of the eater, besides giving 
him fever, chills and headaches. Hayfever is also common among swine eaters.  
The Poisonous Drinks  
13 To drink whiskey, beer and wine when they have a high alcoholic content is 
against your and my health. These drinks have a tendency to be habit forming. 
When we become habitual drinkers, we are destroying our lives. If you want to live, 
you should not drink such beverages. You should not even drink a lot of soda pop. 
Some intelligent people will not drink one bottle of soda pop.


--- PAGE 67 ---
14 There are many bad drinks. Some water is poisonous for us to drink. There is 
water even in Chicago that is not good for our health. It is not pure enough. Water 
should be at least 99 per cent pure in order for it to be good for humans to drink.  
Tobacco  
15 If you want to live, stop smoking and chewing the poisonous weed (tobacco). 
Some of us are foolish enough to refer to our parents who chewed it and were 75 to 
80 years old. That does not mean it was not harming them. Any medical scientist 
will tell you that the tobacco weed is a very poisonous weed.  
16 The poison it contains is called nicotine. The full extent of the poisonous nicotine 
has not yet been known to scientists. Nicotine produces a tar-like substance 
wherever it is used -- on the lips, fingers and in the mouth all the way down to the 
lungs.  
17 Manufacturers are trying to put something like a filter on cigarettes that will 
keep the nicotine from going into your mouth, but this will not prevent you from 
getting some of it into your body. Tobacco is a weed that should not be used.  
18 The poison which tobacco contains is what pacifies the smoker, who thinks he is 
feeling fine. Due to your habit of using the tobacco, you think it is giving you a sort 
of pacification, just like other drugs which make a patient feel that his nerves are 
better from the use of them.  
19 Since Allah revealed this to us, the medical scientists and the government of 
America now acknowledge and admit some of the harm tobacco causes (You will 
find that the scientists and the government will admit most of the truth that Allah 
has revealed to us). They warn the users of tobacco that it is poisonous and that it 
creates lung cancer in tobacco users.  
20 Tobacco and alcoholic beverages also affect the organs of reproduction of young 
men. You should never use tobacco, whiskey, beer or wine. They ruin the 
reproductive organs and waste away the man power. Tobacco and alcoholic 
beverages also have this destructive effect upon the reproductive organs of women. 
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39  
Little Pure Food on Market Little Pure Food on Market Little Pure Food on Market Little Pure Food on Market  
 
1 There is no way we can ever enjoy good health unless we obey the teacher of 
health. Who advises us the proper way to eat. No people has ever been as fortunate


--- PAGE 68 ---
as the Lost and Found members of the Black Nation (so-called Negroes), to receive 
guidance of life from God, Himself, present among them -- the God who will bring 
about a total change of civilizations of this world: Who has the histories of how 
people practice a way of life for themselves back into the hundreds of thousands, 
millions and billions of years. Should He not know the best way to eat to live?  
2 The Devil is a race of people for experimental purposes, whose way of life the 
people of the God of truth, justice and righteousness did not intend to follow, but 
have followed for a short time.  
3 Remember our success is obedience to the Will of the God of truth, justice and 
righteousness, as we have been obedient to the devil in following and practicing 
other than truth, justice and righteousness. What we eat, I will repeat, keeps us here 
and takes us away. This is God’s teaching to me, an d it is so logical that there are no 
questions.  
4 This race of people experiments on everything other than good. This includes what 
they grow and prepare for us to eat. There is very little pure food on the market 
today. And, there will not be any pure food on the market tomorrow, if they prepare 
it for you, because they are experimenting on your life to see what can take you 
away and what they can keep you here with for a certain length of time. Our lives 
are limited by what we eat that this race of people (meaning white devils) prepares 
for us.  
5 The earth brings forth good food the natural way, but the food is poisoned by 
other ways. The fertilization process they use and the preservatives are all 
poisonous. They know in their limited time of six thousand years to rule that they 
are experimenting on themselves and us, too. Even the very earth is poisoned where 
they are experimenting on growing food for their markets, because it is the almighty 
dollar they seek and not the almighty health and long life for you and me.  
6 Good will help the enemy devil, but since by nature they are not made of good, 
they cannot prosper under that which they do not practice.  
7 Eat one meal a day and get the best you can out of what is before you.  
8 The most important thing of health which prolongs life is accomplished by not 
eating poison food, which shortens our lives and brings disease into the body. This is 
accomplished, secondly, by not feeding the stomach too often.  
9 All the white race, referred to as the Christian European race, eats too often. 
From two to four or five times a day, they are feeding their stomachs with some type 
of food. They even eat  
sandwiches between regular meals (or as they call it, they have brunches and 
lunches between their regular meals).


--- PAGE 69 ---
10 The stomach begins to be stuffed with various kinds of foods, and more foods, 
from the time they awake in the morning until they are asleep at midnight or later. 
They even eat late at night and early in the morning, if they awake, although they 
have already eaten two or three heavy meals the previous day. Their stomachs are 
continually churning and trying to digest a combination of meals.  
11 Then, in addition to eating frequently, they eat nuts of various kinds and candies 
full of nuts, which the stomach is unable to digest without harming its delicate 
digestive tract. Trying to digest these various poisonous foods forces the stomach to 
empty all of its digestive juices, thus causing it to wear out early from hard work.  
12 The loss of our stomachs can cause the loss of our lives. There is a limit to the 
amount of digestive juice that starts flowing when our food enters our mouths and 
continues until it is in the large colon of our body.  
13 Some of the foolish people -- when they hear of eating once a day -- laugh in fun 
and scorn and say they cannot live like that. You most certainly cannot live long 
eating three and four meals a day, and stuffing your body with hog, tough beef, 
lamb and veal --or any meats.  
14 By nature, the human body was not made to digest meats. Meat causes a great 
shortening of our lives. We all eat meat. I eat meat also, but it certainly is not good 
for us. I do not, however, eat pig.  
15 We should not eat any kind of bird. When it actually comes to the best diet for 
our bodies, no kind of bird should be included except the baby pigeon, called squab, 
which eats its food from its mother’s mouth, after it has been chewed by the mother. 
Allah (God) has taught me that as soon as the squab is weaned from its mother, and 
starts eating its own food, we are not to eat it.  
16 No grown pigeons or other birds -- not even chickens -- are good to eat. Of 
course, a lot of chickens are raised for the market on corn, oats, and other various 
types of food, because such food quickly fattens the fowl. When they are raised in 
the above-mentioned manner, the chickens do not have a chance to eat poisonous 
food, such as worms, bugs, and filth, which they will do by nature. They will eat 
anything the hog and the buzzard will eat, if allowed the freedom to do so.  
17 We are, by nature, vegetable and fruit eating people. Bread is also for us to eat. 
Eat good bread and good fresh vegetables and fruits. Although all of us are not able 
to eat the right foods, I warn you to stay away from the pig -- and I warn you not to 
eat more than one meal a day. Allah (God), in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom praise is due forever, has taught me that we are to wait until 
we are very hungry before we eat. And, after we eat, we are to wait until we are very 
hungry before we eat again.


--- PAGE 70 ---
18 Ninety-five per cent of our sickness comes from eating before we are hungry. 
Frequent eating puts our stomach to work before it calls for food. Let us eat one 
meal a day or one meal every two days, as Allah (God) has appointed for us.  
How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One How to Eat to Live, Book One  
CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40  
God of Right Prescribes Best Foods God of Right Prescribes Best Foods God of Right Prescribes Best Foods God of Right Prescribes Best Foods  
 
1 We must remember the god of this world (the devil) cannot be taken as a guide for 
health and life, because he is not such a guide.  
2 We must remember the Biblical prophecy of a God coming to us, whose aim and 
purpose is to teach the way of life and the prolongation of life, accomplishing these 
things through the food that we eat (both physically and mentally) and the set times 
this food should be taken.  
3 The Bible prophesies of His great work of giving to us longer life and the eternal 
happiness of life without being troubled with the enemy of life and the enemy’s 
effect on life.  
4 The god of this world (the devil) had to try to build a world and teach the people 
something different from what they had been accustomed to. This is why you see so 
much change in the way of good to the way of evil.  
5 We must bear in mind that the god of this world was made of the essence of 
weakness, taught wickedness and trained by a wicked-minded god to destroy the life 
of the righteous and to change the natural religion of the righteous (the very nature 
of the righteous), so they would not follow the right course, but follow the wrong 
course.  
6 He introduced the eating of swine flesh, snakes, reptiles, and all kinds of sea fish 
that can be considered nothing but scavengers of water, as the hog is a scavenger of 
the earth. Shrimp, crabs, oysters, catfish, eels (water snakes), and many other 
species of the water; all types of beans, peas, and nuts were not produced by nature 
for us to try to use as a diet for our delicate stomachs to digest -- not to mention the 
pig.  
7 The enemy of the righteous has gone to the extreme in everything to shorten, 
waste, and change the way of right. In trying to make a different world and people 
from the right world of the original people (Black people), he made a hell for us all.


--- PAGE 71 ---
8 The foods that the God of righteousness prescribes are the best foods. Let us 
accept our own (the ways of Master Fard Muhammad -- to whom praise is due 
forever -- has taught us).  
9 We cannot charge the white man with his way of life, and we follow it. If the white 
man eats poisonous foods and eats three or four times a day, that is his business. We 
have now learned to distinguish the poisonous food from the non-poisonous. Why 
should we eat poisonous food? We have learned that eating too often causes us to 
suffer. So, why should we do so?  
10 Eat one meal a day or one meal every other day, and see how much better you 
will feel.  
11 There are many different kinds of food that the white man has grown and made. 
Eat the best of the food that will not destroy your health and bring about a short 
life. Eat one meal a day and one meal every two days and live.

