=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Elijah Muhammad~Our Savior Has Arrived.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 150
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:45:23.226423
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
 
"In the book I have gathered Truth God gave to me and the way He gave it to me.  The 
way He gave it to me was a flowing spring or a flowing fountain. The Supreme Wisdom 
that I teach is what Allah has taught me. That Wisdom is called the Supreme Wisdom 
which is the Supreme Wisdom. I am equipped with the truth from Almighty God, Allah. 
No man on earth can teach you what I am teaching you. I am charged with the delivery of 
the message. I thank Allah that I have been sent by Him. He is backing me up to bring the 
enemy to his well brought doom (hell.) We want what God had taught us." 
 
Chapter 1  The Black Man Must Know the 
Truth  
Chapter 2  The Sure Truth  
Chapter 3  Knowledge of Time  
Chapter 4  The Hidden Truth  
Chapter 5  Time  
Chapter 6  Truth  
Chapter 7  Time Has Arrived that Allah will 
Fulfill His Promise  
Chapter 8  Never Taught a True Knowledge of 
God  
Chapter 9  The Truth and Our Mistakes  
Chapter 10  I Want to Teach You  
Chapter 11  The Knowledge of God Himself 
(Savior’s Day, February 26, 1969)  
Chapter 12  Allah, God, the Supreme Being  
Chapter 13  God in Person, Not a Spirit!  
Chapter 14  The Light of Allah


--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 15  The Days of Allah  
Chapter 16  Day of the Resurrection of Dead 
So- Called Negroes Has Arrived  
Chapter 17  A Few White People are Muslims 
by Faith  
Chapter 18  Be Yourself  
Chapter 19  The Black Man  
Chapter 20  Why Black Man Should Be Called 
By The Names of God  
Chapter 21  Black and White Worlds near a 
Showdown  
Chapter 22  The World  
Chapter 23  He (Allah) Makes All Things New  
Chapter 24  God Helps Those Who Help 
Themselves!  
Chapter 25  Islam Will Unite Black  
Chapter 26  The Will of Allah is Being Done!  
Chapter 27  Friendship of Allah (God)  
Chapter 28  Christianity Versus Islam  
Chapter 29  Mary, Joseph, and Jesus  
Chapter 30  "And We Made The Son of Mary and 
His Mother a Sign..."  
Chapter 31  The Christian Holidays  
Chapter 32  Whose Christmas?  
Chapter 33  Christmas!  
Chapter 34  Days of the Son of Man; Confusion 
of Nations  
Chapter 35  Being Ashamed of Your Own God  
Chapter 36  Islam: A Unifying Religion  
Chapter 37  Submit to Allah (Their God)  
Chapter 38  The Cruel Days of The Lord  
Chapter 39  Certainty of The Punishment  
Chapter 40  The Angry World


--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter 41  The World's, The Two Camps  
Chapter 42  The Threatened Day  
Chapter 43  Old World Going Out, New World 
Coming In  
Chapter 44  The Great Day  
Chapter 45  Revelation Guide All Right


--- PAGE 4 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 1 Chapter 1 Chapter 1 Chapter 1  
The Black Man Must Know the Truth The Black Man Must Know the Truth The Black Man Must Know the Truth The Black Man Must Know the Truth  
 
No. 1 -- To know the truth of the Presence of the God of Truth 
and that His presence is the Salvation of the Lost and Found 
people of America is to know your life and its happiness.  
No. 2  -- Truth is in favor of you and me; for the truth of our 
enemies whom we have been serving here in the U.S.A. for over 
400 years (whom we did not know to be our enemies by nature) 
is the truth that the Black Man must have knowledge of to be 
able to keep from falling into the deceiving traps that are being 
laid by our enemies to catch us in their way which is opposed to 
the way of righteous of whom we are members.  
No. 3  -- The archdeceiver . We are warned throughout the 
Bible and Holy Qur'an to shun this deceiver if we are members 
of the Black Nation (the righteous). There is nothing that is left 
of the truth of these people that God has not made manifest. And 
I am teaching you daily of this people. There are some Black 
Americans who will, after knowledge, sympathize with the 
archdeceiver (the devil) for the sake of advantage. Even some of 
our highly educated people will accept speaking in defense of 
this arch enemy of ours for the sake of trying to gain higher 
places with the archdeceiver. And some of them will tell me and 
the believers of Islam that they do not believe in any religion nor 
in any God of religion. The Bible foretold that this kind of talk 
against the truth would come in the last days; that this fool will 
say in his heart "there is no God." This prophecy is now being 
fulfilled among even our most educated class of people. You 
cannot see the hereafter unless you believe in righteousness and 
unless you are a submissive one to the God and Author of 
righteousness because righteousness is the type of world that we 
will have to live under after the destruction of this evil and 
deceitful world. 
 
No. 4  -- The Christian church . There are "diehards" in the 
Christian church. Slowly but surely the Spirit of Allah is making 
manifest to the Black Man that the church and its religion called 
Christianity is the chain that binds the Black Man in mental


--- PAGE 5 ---
slavery (seeking salvation where there is none) and thinking that 
he must die first to get to heaven. This is really a 
misunderstanding because heaven is a condition of life and not a 
special place. 
Heaven is enjoying peace of mind and 
contentment with the God of the righteous and the 
Nation of the righteous . It can be here in America, in the isles 
of the Pacific or on the continents of Asia and Africa. But it is 
only a condition of life. Black Christian believers are warned in 
the Bible in the 18th Chapter of Revelation (last book) to come 
out of her. "Her" means the way and belief of the white race and 
the so-called Christian religion) that we be not partakers with 
them in the Divine plagues of God upon her (U.S.A.). This is the 
religion that the prophets prophesied to you that the enemy will 
deceive you with. Christianity is not the teachings of Jesus. Their 
theologians and religious scientists will agree with us in a show-
down that it was not the religion of Jesus; for the religion of Jesus 
was Islam as it was the religion of Moses and all the prophets of 
God. The Holy Qur'an teaches us that the prophets' religion was 
none other than Islam, the religion of Truth, Freedom, Justice, 
and Equality. This, the Christians preach with their mouths, but 
they do not practice Truth, Freedom, Justice, and Equality with 
us, the Black people. Since knowledge of them, we do not want 
to follow them in any religion because they are not by nature 
made to lead people into righteousness.  
No. 5 --Revolution between white and Black is due to the work 
of Allah and His Truth among the Black people of America. 
Never before in all your life have you seen the white man so 
anxious to keep the Black man near to him in his society and 
especially in Christianity, the great false, deceiving religion . He 
even offers to bribe any Black people of note, but for accepting 
his invitation and high places, they are reduced by a sudden fall 
to the level of disgrace and shame.  
No. 6  -- Leaders . We, the Black Nation, today with the 
knowledge of the truth cannot accept leaders made and offered 
to us for our guidance. I warn each of you to no more accept the 
white man's made or chosen leaders for you. This is what has 
kept us bound in the mental chains of slavery since the days of 
slavery. Our leaders are by their choice. These kind of leaders are 
Uncle Toms who are licking the boots of the white man for his 
pleasure and wealth regardless of what happens to you and me; 
for they care not.  
No. 7  -- Abraham's prophecy . But, I ask you to remember 
this: in the parable in the Bible of the rich man and Lazarus --


--- PAGE 6 ---
which means none other than the white and Black people of 
America -- the rich man died deprived of authority and wealth. In 
the anguish of the torment of his loss of wealth and power, the 
parable refers to the rich man as being in hell. And in this 
condition, the beggar (Lazarus) saw no hope in begging that 
once rich man any longer for some of his sumptuous food. Then 
he turned to go for self (Abraham's). The prophecy which 
Abraham was the recipient of only means that after 400 years of 
our enslavement, all these things are coming to pass. I ask you to 
be in time and accept the truth and not mix up the truth with 
falsehood while you know it for the sake of untrue friendship.  
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 2 Chapter 2 Chapter 2 Chapter 2  
The Sure Truth The Sure Truth The Sure Truth The Sure Truth  
 
1    (Taken from Chapter 69 of the Holy Qur'an). What is said there in 
Chapter 69 of the Holy Qur'an is so true and is being fulfilled in this 
day and time.  
2    This Chapter is warning the people in the time of the Resurrection 
of the mentally dead of what happened in the histories of former 
people who were doomed to destruction and how they reacted to the 
truth and warning and how they called the truth of their approaching 
doom a lie. This Chapter is warning the people of the calamities that 
are now besetting America and Europe; the sure truth that they are 
heading for their doom like Ad and Thamud who gave the truth a lie 
and were overtaken by Allah's Judgment of a violent wind roaring 
seven days and eight nights. This was the kind of destruction that Allah 
destroyed them with.  
3    The Chapter also mentions of the destruction of Sodom and 
Gomorrah how these cities were overthrown by earthquakes and unto 
this day they have not been rebuilt. Pharaoh who opposed the Truth 
and called it a lie suffered the Judgment of Allah (drowning in the Red 
Sea). The Black Man in America is now suffering under the falsehood 
of his enemies while truth is being sounded in his ears. He sees the 
evidence of it with his eyes: yet he would like it a lie. The main warning 
of the Holy Qur'an to those who take the  truth for a lie and the lie for


--- PAGE 7 ---
the truth is that they are subject to the same type of Judgment that 
these former opponents of Allah were subjected to.  
4    We are now witnessing the truth being spread all over the 
continent of America and jumping the borders and spreading around 
the earth. Allah is backing up His Coming and Presence to defend the 
horrible plight of the so-called American Negro.  There is no plainer 
truth that could ever come to both white and Black than what Allah, in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad to Whom praises are due 
forever, has delivered to me whom He chose to deliver this Message of 
Truth. The enemy is ever seeking a way to oppose the truth and take 
you and me to their doom if we are foolish enough to give a lie to the 
truth.  
5    Everything mentioned in the Bible and Holy Qur'an such as 
plagues and judgments taking place in ancient times of the Bible and 
Holy Qur'an against the opponents of Allah is to warn you and me that 
the same thing is coming upon America and Europe but America is 
No. 1 (first). This is the truth that God has given to me to warn you. 
He (Allah) is Sufficient to back up His Own Words.  
6    The cold and violent wind blowing for seven days and eight nights 
to destroy an enemy people of Allah; the earthquakes taking place, 
overthrowing cities and the destruction of Pharaoh and his army are to 
warn you and me that the same thing will take place here in America 
and is now going on (This is the sure truth). The evidence of this 
sure truth that I, Elijah Muhammad, am preaching is that 
America is in for every known destruction that plagued the 
people of old.  
7        As the Bible teaches us (symbolically), God says He will use 
every one of His arrows against the wicked world today. When a man 
says he will shoot all of his ammunition to try to kill you, you want to 
know how much ammunition he has to shoot. I say plenty; for Allah 
has no such thing as a limitation to what and how He can destroy since 
all the powers of heavens and earth are within His Hands. The forces 
of nature (which He is using and will continue to use) are 
things that we have no defense  against. I say, Black Man, 
believe in Allah and come follow me.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Our Saviour Has Arived Our Saviour Has Arived Our Saviour Has Arived Our Saviour Has Arived  
Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapter 3  
Knowledge of Time Knowledge of Time Knowledge of Time Knowledge of Time  
 
1    If only the American so-called Negroes had knowledge of the 
time in which we now live, they would accept Islam at once; for it is 
just the acceptance of Islam which will bring the so-called Negroes 
the things they desire; good homes, money, and friendship in all 
walks of life. This is the time that they should enjoy such heaven, the 
Time of God. They are really chosen by God to be His people, and 
not the Jews nor white Christians. It is you, the American so-called 
Negro, but it is just you who are blind, deaf, and dumb to the 
knowledge of the Time of your salvation and the judgment and death 
of your enemies. 
2    Remember the story of Moses and his people. Jehovah said to 
Moses: "I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in 
Egypt, and I have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I 
know their sorrows" (Ex. 3:7). Jehovah had seen and heard the 
afflicitions and cries of His people while His people were yet dumb 
to the knowledge of Him, for they called not on Him. They 
worshipped the gods of Pharaoh and his people and not Jehovah Who 
was the God of their fathers. Jehovah had not represented Himself as 
being the God of Pharaoh and his people. It was to the slaves of 
Pharaoh and the slaves' fathers that Jehovah, their God, was to show 
mercy and deliverance. 
3    Pharaoh was against Jehovah and His religion and the people of 
Jehovah who were his slaves. So it is and Allah's true religion of 
Islam. But it is time that the mentally dead Negroes, who are afflicted 
daily by the evil hand of white America, should be delivered and 
given freedom, justice, and equality and a land that they can call their 
own. Day and night their cries go up into the ear of Allah, the God of 
our people (the Muslims).  
4    We cannot hope for justice from the devils when by nature there 
is none in them. All the day long the Negroes are mistreated. If Allah 
and I, His servant, will not stand up for them, who shall stand up for 
them? You, by far, are unable to do so; for you know not God. The 
devils have you afraid and worshipping that which you know not. 
Fear not and come follow me and God will love you and will set you


--- PAGE 9 ---
in heaven at once while you live.  
5    Jehovah told Moses to go first to the elders of Israel and say to 
them: "The Lord your God (not Pharaoh's) the God of your fathers, 
He has appeared unto me saying, "I have surely visited you and have 
seen that which is done unto you in Egypt (America)" (Ex. 3:16). But 
the elders would not even meet with Moses, only by way of 
disputation.  
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 4 Chapter 4 Chapter 4 Chapter 4  
The Hidden Truth The Hidden Truth The Hidden Truth The Hidden Truth  
 
1    Hiding the truth is a very serious thing to do. It causes harm and 
disappointment and causes one to be misled. It causes loss of 
property and life. It causes loss of friendship, beloved ones and loss 
of confidence and trust. In court, it causes heavy penalties and 
someone's being sent to prison or to death for that of which they are 
innocent. The greatest and gravest of all is the slavemasters' hiding of 
the truth that will exalt and save his slave. This is that great truth that 
white America is hiding from her once slaves (the Black man and 
woman).  
2    The white people know of and see the Salvation of their slaves 
that is now present. They are doing everything they possibly can to 
deceive the Black man and woman into thinking that they (white 
people) hold out greater and better promises for a future to the Black 
Man and woman in America than Allah (God). This will deceive 
many of our people. Read the 7th Surah (Chapter) of the Holy Qur'an 
where the devil is made to confess his deceiving of the people in 
these words: "Allah promised you the promise of truth. I promised 
you, but failed to fulfill."  
3    As you know, the Revelation of the Bible under the title of John, 
teaches us that the old dragon beast (referring to the white 
civilization) deceived the whole world, and they have done just that. 
Allah has taught me they deceived 90 per cent of the total population 
of the planet earth.  The only way the white race can survive and rule 
is by making false appear as truth and truth to appear as false. The


--- PAGE 10 ---
white race was made by nature without the truth. Jesus said (Bible 
John 8:44) that there was no truth in them, for their father was a liar 
and a murderer. Therefore his children (white race) cannot be 
otherwise. We should know the truth of the seriousness of the time 
that we are now living in.  
4    The truth will save our lives if we believe it. America is at war 
with the darker people (Brown, Yellow, and every race regardless of 
color) today, but she refuses to tell you the truth of this war that is 
now taking many lives. This is hiding the truth. What is she trying to 
get peace for? If these people's losses are as great as the radio and 
other news media state, the enemy would be on his knees begging for 
peace. It seems as if it is now vice versa. This is hiding the truth. 
Allah has said to me that America will not admit the truth of her 
losses until we see it on our heels.  
5    The Black Man of America never has put any confidence in 
anyone but his white slavemaster. Regardless of how ill - treated the 
Black Man may be, he still has hopes of his master telling him the 
truth. The real truth is that America is under Divine Judgment to 
destroy her for the evils done to Allah's people (the Black Man in 
America). Hiding the truth takes away confidence, trust and love.  
 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 5 Chapter 5 Chapter 5 Chapter 5  
Time Time Time Time  
 
1    If you who disbelieve in the Truth would only consider the time 
in which we now live, you would bear witness that it is the very 
truth from your God that I am teaching. Just when should we expect 
Truth to be triumphant? The answer is. after the removal of 
falsehood.  
2    The Time referred to in this book is the time of the present world 
as Allah (God) has revealed it. This time covers a period of six 
thousand years. It began from the day that the first white person was


--- PAGE 11 ---
made which was in the year nine thousand of our calendar history.  
3    This date is taken from the beginning of the present cycle of 
world history writings by 24  black scientists of which only 23  
actually do the writing, and the 24 th one acts as judge of the 
writings of the other 23 . This takes place once every 25 thousand 
years. In this history is written everything that will come to pass for 
the next 25 thousand years.  
4    The original scriptures of the Bible and Holy Qur'an were taken 
from it and revealed by word of mouth and inspiration to prophets. 
We are now in the 16th thousand year of this cycle and have nine 
thousand, nine hundred and fifty six years to be finished before the 
next cycle. But we are not concerned with that which the present 
time holds for us. A thorough knowledge of the time and changes to 
be made is the important factor for you and me.  
5    The time given to the white race (Yakub's grafted people) to rule 
the world is between the ninth and fifteenth thousandth year of our 
cycle of 25 thousand years which is six thousand years.  
6    This time expired in 1914. A few years of grace have been given 
to complete the resurrection of the Black man, and especially the so-
called Negroes whom Allah has chosen for the change (a new nation 
and world). They (so-called Negroes) have been made so completely 
mentally dead by the enemy (white race) that the extra time is 
allowed.  
7    The time (six thousand years) ruled by the white race has been 
the worst of our known history; a time of complete trouble-making, 
war, bloodshed, and death of both the righteous and the wicked as 
never before. Therefore, the black nation and our God, Who is the 
Originator of the universe, have decided to remove the 
troublemakers from our planet Earth, as there is no way of the black 
nations getting along in peace with this wicked, grafted race known 
as the white race. They have flooded the nations with deceit and 
divisions.  
8    The time now has arrived for plain truth, wherein you shudder 
and call the truth a lie and call falsehood the truth. This is due to 
your being reared and taught by the deceiver! But your disbelief in 
the truth will not hinder its progress, for it is the Time of Truth and 
this Truth is in our favor.  
9    The white race progressed under falsehood for the past four 
thousand years because it was given to them. Now, that time has


--- PAGE 12 ---
expired and the time of truth and righteousness again will rule. The 
interval of six thousand years of evil and falsehood makes the 
average person think that the original black nation was never 
anything worthwhile. Consider the time!  
10    Most surely man is in loss except those who believe and do 
good and enjoin on each other truth (Holy Qur'an 103:1-3). The time 
of the white race is divided into three periods of two thousand years 
each. The first two thousand years was the period between Yakub, 
the father and grafter of the white race, to the birth of Musa (Moses) 
to the birth of Isa (Jesus), the last Great Prophet to the white race. 
The third two thousand year period is from the birth of Isa (Jesus) to 
the coming of Allah, often referred to by the Christians as. "The 
coming of God, the Christ, the Messiah, the Son of Man", or the 
"second coming of Jesus." In Islam, it is referred to as the "Coming 
of the Great Madhi, the coming of Allah" to the birth of 
Muhammad.  
  
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 6  
Truth Truth Truth Truth  
 
1    I am well aware of my disputers who dispute without knowledge 
and who are followers of the devils for certain privileges. They 
claim to be representatives of God and Jesus Whom they claim to be 
the Son of God, but they are licensed, ordained, and sent by the 
devils (God-sent men are licensed by the world). This class which 
loves to be revered and honored by the people whether God has any 
respect for them or not are really agents of the slavemasters (the 
devils). They are secret persecutors and murderers of the prophets of 
God and will say: "If they had been in the days of the prophets, they 
would have been their followers and would not have opposed them." 
Yet they persecute me and my followers and all who teach the truth 
for the same reason that the enemies did to the prophets of old.  
2    It was special privileges that Pharaoh offered the "enchanters" to 
oppose Moses as being a liar. "He promised them that they would be 
drawn near to him," (Pharaoh); Holy Qur'an (7: 113,114). It is the


--- PAGE 13 ---
nearness (friendship) of the white race that the majority of the so - 
called Negro preachers seek, and not the nearness, love, and 
friendship of God. They openly confess that in their position 
(licensed and missioned by the white race to preach according to 
their likings), they cannot preach the truth if that truth is against the 
white race. Their followers (church members) burdens are ever 
made grievous to carry because of the love and fear of their enemies 
by the preachers. They call preaching the truth hatred.  
3    The source from which my teaching springs, or fountain from 
which I drink, is the same source from which Noah, Abraham, 
Moses, and Jesus drank, Almighty Allah (God) in whom you 
probably do not believe; as the disbeliever's of the above - 
mentioned prophets did not believe in those prophets' truth. The 
early man (original man) knew the earth's revolutions, the 
circulation of blood, and the existence of microbes. The only man or 
people who were late in acquiring such knowledge was the white 
race which is the only late or new race we have on our planet. 
"Adherence to the unknown is a throw-back to anyone or nation." 
This is the number one holdback to the so-called American Negro. 
Without the knowledge of self or anyone else, or the God of their 
salvation they are lost, strictly adhering to or following those who 
preach and represent a mystery God (unknown), but yet charge that 
mystery God with getting a son out of wedlock and of waiting 4,000 
years to produce His Son to give His made people (the Adamic race) 
the religion called Christianity.  
4    This is the gravest charge that could be made against the all-
wise, all-knowing, and all-powerful God. And they say: "The 
beneficent God has taken to Himself a Son." Certainly this is an 
abominable assertion; the heavens may almost be rent thereat, and 
the earth cleave asunder, and the mountains fall down in pieces that 
they (the Christians preachers) ascribe a Son to the beneficent God. 
And it is not worthy of the beneficent God that He should like to 
Himself a Son. "There is no one in the heavens and the earth, but 
will come to the beneficent God as a servant." Holy Qur'an (19:88-
93) I bear witness with the above-said; that an all-wise. all- powerful 
God does not need a Son; and if He would get one as the Christians 
charge Him (out of wedlock), He could be charged with adultery.  I 
repeat, "The white man's so - called Christianity is not only no good 
for the Black man; but it is fast proving to be no good for the white 
race who are the founders of that religion, and not Jesus, as they 
would like for you to believe."


--- PAGE 14 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 7  
Time has arrived that Allah will fulfill His Time has arrived that Allah will fulfill His Time has arrived that Allah will fulfill His Time has arrived that Allah will fulfill His 
Promise Promise Promise Promise  
 
1    The so-called Negroes are the prey (Isa. 49:24) of the mighty 
United States as Israel was in the days of Pharaoh. They were a prey 
under the power of Pharaoh. According to the Bible, they had nothing 
like a share in the land of Egypt. A few cattle and the land or home 
given to Joseph's fathers house in the days of Joseph all seemed to 
have disappeared in the time of Moses.  
2    Jehovah appeared to Moses in the bush. Moses was made to see 
the bush in a flame of fire though there was no actual fire. The fire 
represented the anger of Jehovah against Pharaoh and his people. It 
was a declaration of a divine war against the Egyptians for the 
deliverance of Israel.  
3    The time has arrived that Allah (God) should fulfill His promise 
made to Abraham. According to the Bible (Gen 15:13, 14) we do not 
find wherein Israel had ever sought Jehovah through prayer or from 
any scripture; nor did they know of any prophet before Moses. The 
only knowledge we have is in the words of Jehovah's address to 
Moses -- that they knew Him only by the name of God Almighty (Ex. 
6:3). But the real issue was not in the name as much in the time. It 
was the time that Jehovah should fulfill His promise, though Israel 
was a disbelieving people in Moses and Jehovah. Jehovah could not 
lie to His prophet, Abraham, though Israel was a rebellious people 
(disbeliever's) and Pharaoh had to know the time of his end. There 
was a limit to his rule over the people of God, though they knew not 
their God nor their fathers. The time had arrived that they should be 
delivered from the power of Pharaoh, and that they should become an 
independent people in a land that they would be given that they could 
call their own.  
4    The devils are universal snoopers. They pretend to be interested 
in your spiritual meetings, but only to listen to what you are saying 
among yourselves. You may see him in all of the churches and 
gathering places of the so called Negroes listening in on their 
meetings to keep them from accepting the Truth (Islam). The so-
called Negroes think that it i s an honor to have the devils come


--- PAGE 15 ---
among them because they are ignorant to this, their open enemies' 
intentions. I am for the separation of my people from their enemies; 
that they share not in their enemies' destruction, even though I may 
lose my own life in this daring attempt to save them by the plain, 
simple Truth of God and Power. It must and will be done regardless 
of whom or what. It can be done in one day, but Allah desires to 
make Himself known in the West, as it is written of Him.  
5    Our sixty-six trillion years from the moon have proven a great 
and wise show of the Original Power to build wonders in the heavens 
and earth. Six thousand years ago, or to be more exact, 6,600 years 
ago, as Allah taught me, our nation gave birth to another god whose 
name was Yakub. He started studying the life germ of man to try and 
make a new creation (new man) which our twenty-four scientists had 
foretold eight thousand four hundred years before the birth of Mr. 
Yakub; and the scientists were aware of his birth, before he was born, 
as they are today of the intentions or ideas of the present world.  
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 8 Chapter 8 Chapter 8 Chapter 8  
Never taught a True Knowledge of God Never taught a True Knowledge of God Never taught a True Knowledge of God Never taught a True Knowledge of God  
 
1    You, who have been here in America for four hundred years, 
have never been taught a true knowledge of self, God, and His 
religion, Islam. As long as you are without such essential knowledge, 
which is the key of salvation, freedom, justice, and equality, you are 
not free. It is true that the truth shall make the lost and found 
members of the Tribe of Shabazz (the so-called Negroes) free, (John 
8:32) but they have never known what truth it was that shall make 
them free.  
2    That truth comes to us at the end of the Caucasian world. The end 
has come and Allah has also come to make manifest this hidden truth 
to us, the Black nation of the earth; and first, to the lost members of 
that nation. According to the Bible and Holy Qur'an Sharrief, it is the 
divine purpose of Allah to make known this hidden truth that shall 
make the Black nation free.  
3    A thorough knowledge of our own history and the history of the 
white race has been kept from the ears of the Black people of


--- PAGE 16 ---
America who were enslaved by their enemies and the enemies of all 
dark people the world over. The so-called Negroes' problem of 
getting the truth is very hard, but the hardest problem to solve is 
getting them to believe it after getting it in their ears. This is due to 
their being brought up solely under the teachings of their enemies. 
Black people are schooled one hundred per cent in the fear of their 
enemies and the enemies' own fixed religion called Christianity with 
the name of Prophet Jesus on it in order to make them believe that it 
came from Jesus. But their enemy's own translation of the Bible 
omitted the mentioning of any of the prophets' religions by name.  
4    On the other hand, the Holy Qur'an teaches us that the prophets' 
religion was none other than Islam, the Religion of Peace. Shall we 
accept the scholars of the white race to teach us the knowledge of our 
God and history which has no birth record while they themselves 
were made by one of our own gods only six thousand years ago? 
5    Let us give praise for the coming of our God, Allah, Who came in 
the person of Master Fard Muhammad, and whom our enemies 
persecuted and ordered out of the country. His power they cannot 
persecute and drive out. Neither persecution, evil spoken, nor death 
will stop this truth that shall make you free which I have received 
from the very mouth of Allah (God); for it is time that the dead (so-
called Negroes) should know the truth and accept their own place 
among their own kind in the holy nation of Islam.  
6    This is the time. There never will be any peace among the nations 
of earth until the so-called Negroes have heard the truth and those 
who accept it are separated and placed in the paradise of their God, 
Allah. The so-called American Negroes, with their God, Allah, shall 
become the universal rulers, believe it or not. They can do it now if 
they will quit this slavery religion called Christianity. No Black 
people who accept Christianity will ever be free. You automatically 
become the servant of the white race and not of God upon accepting 
their religion. The so-called Negroes, with their leaders, should come 
out of it into their own religion; but they cannot until they first have a 
thorough knowledge of self and others.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 9 Chapter 9 Chapter 9 Chapter 9  
The Truth and Our Mistakes The Truth and Our Mistakes The Truth and Our Mistakes The Truth and Our Mistakes  
 
1    "Oh Allah, Originator of the Heavens and the Earth, Knower of 
the seen and the unseen, Thou judgest between Thy servants as to 
that wherein they differ." (Holy Qur'an 39:46).  
2    No civilized nation wants the so-called Negroes. Only Allah, our 
Loving and Most Merciful God Who came in the person of Master 
Fard Muhammad in 1930, will accept us. It was not until 1933that he 
began revealing his true self to us as being the answer to the 
Prophecy of Jesus, the coming of the Son of Man, the Seeker of the 
Lost Sheep. (I was expecting Him. The devils knew not to acquaint 
the so-called Negroes with Him). They will never acquaint the se-
called Negroes with Him, nor will they ever tell you anything of good 
that is in your favor. Even if all of their enemy nations were closing 
in on them, they would not tell you until you saw them.  
3    I am not concerned with what the white race believes in as a 
religion. They are not my people nor are we their people nor is our 
God their God. I am never surprised to see or hear of evils committed 
by white people. The only time they would surprise me is on seeing 
or hearing of some good that they are doing.  
4    My people, the so-called Negroes, will soon learn and recognize 
the Truth, for the Author of Truth is with us. They yell their lungs out 
over a dead Prophet (Jesus of two thousand years ago) who cannot 
and did not come to do anything for us but prophesise of us going 
into slavery and of God delivering us; and He was not even sent to 
us. The white race and their tampering with the Truth of the Bible 
(their slavemaking Christianity) have poisoned the very hearts of our 
people against themselves and their Own God. No one can unite the 
so-called Negroes in America without the help of Allah (God). We 
must think of self unity, and not love and unity with our enemies 
whom Allah (God) will destroy from the face of the earth in the very 
near future.  
5    In their minds they are saying to me that Allah (God) does not 
want our enemies. "We do not want Allah (God) nor His religion if 
our enemies are not accepted." Their ignorance make fools of


--- PAGE 18 ---
themselves; they love their enemies in spite of the fact that the white 
slavemasters kept our fathers out of their religion, Christianity, for 
approximately three hundred years. As long as they were children, 
they accepted the fixed and poisoned white man's religion. Now 
today, the white slavemasters are scared stiff from looking at the 
consequence coming to them for their deceiving the world of the 
Black Nation. Now they sit with you in your church. They are not 
there to hear you preach and teach them of their own religion, but to 
deceive you into thinking that now we all are brothers and God's 
people together; and that the church is the place for your safety and 
that you should not believe in any other religion other than 
Christianity.  
6    They try to convince you that the church is Jesus' house where He 
has put His name and "the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it." 
And remember what He said to Peter: "Upon this rock I build My 
church." After the injection of such poison, the so-called Negroes are 
lulled off to sleep with the death of the ignorant; The Gates of Hell 
will not try prevailing against itself, but the "Gates of Heaven" are 
now prevailing against the church and all that she stands for. And the 
"Gates of Hell" will not prevail against the "Gates of Heaven" (Allah 
and Islam).  
7    If Peter's confession was the only thing necessary for Jesus to 
build the church, he should have been able, with twelve disciples, to 
have converted all of the Jews and destroyed their temples with the 
stone of Peter. But he did not; for Jesus was not the Founder of the 
white man's religion and church any more than was Moses or the 
former Prophets of Allah (God). The Bible further says that Jesus 
said to Peter, "Flesh and blood did not reveal it to him." We never get 
Divine Truth unless it comes through flesh and blood. But really the 
flesh and blood that will not reveal truth is the devil (white race). 
Such is fulfilled today.


--- PAGE 19 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 10  
I Want to Teach You I Want to Teach You I Want to Teach You I Want to Teach You  
 
1    Yesterday you could not find Me. I was so wrapped in the 
mist that people were trampling on me and they didn't know that 
I was down there in the mud. All praise is due to Allah. Allah is 
all of us. But we have a Supreme One that we can throw this 
name "Holy" upon. He is Allah, The One over all of us; The 
Most Supreme One, the Wisest One, the Mightiest One; The 
One that Sees and Hears that which we can't see and hear. That 
Is He. He Is rooted in all of us. Every righteous person is a god. 
We are all God. When we say "Allah" we mean every righteous 
person.   Allah teaches me that He is a man -- not something that 
is other than man. The Holy Qur'an refers to Him in such 
pronouns as "He" and as "We" and as "Us."  
2    There are so many of us who are ready to argue and dispute 
about the God. If you don't believe that he is a man, then bring 
me the one that you represent. You say,"I don't believe in God 
being a man."  What do you believe in? Show me what you 
believe in. I can show you my God. Show me yours. On the Day 
of Resurrection, the Bible and the Holy Qur'an teach us that we 
will be brought face to face with The True God; the evil and the 
Good One. This is going on today, my friends. If I preach to you 
that the white race is the devil, then where is the Good God? If 
this is the evil god, then where is the Good One? If you tell me 
that he doesn't have any form, then I say how in the world can 
you prove to me that you are making me acquainted with a God? 
How can I see nothing?  
3    Some enemies of the True God, the Visible God, have 
deceived you and are making you think that there is no such 
thing as a visible god. I want to say to you, my friends, if you 
don't have one that is visible -- see Allah the visible way!  
4    The Bible and the Qur'an teach me and you that on this day 
there is a man whom God Chose for His Last Messenger. Whom 
have you benefited by other than a man? Do you sit down and 
pray to the space in the sky to drop you down some wheat? You 
may look up that way, but the wheat comes out from under your


--- PAGE 20 ---
feet. You don't plant wheat in the sky. You plant it in the earth 
and it comes up out of the earth. And the Holy Qur'an teaches us 
that we have root in the earth. Everything that breathes is 
Allah's. Out of it (the earth) comes our bread and meat and out 
of it comes us. We come out of the earth. We don't drop down 
out of space. But all of us come up out of the earth. If we are 
born from some man and woman, they came from the earth. The 
very sperm that makes a human being appears out of water and 
out of the vegetation of the earth -- it didn't drop out of space.  
5    I want to teach you who you are. So many people have been 
made blind, deaf and dumb to the knowledge of God. Why are 
they made deaf and dumb to the knowledge of God? Because 
they are blind, deaf and dumb to the knowledge of self. How can 
they know God? But Allah Is here and has Risen up in your 
midst by the Power and Wisdom of the Supreme who is a Man to 
teach you the knowledge of self and the knowledge of God and 
the Devil.  
6    Some people don't want you to teach them who the devil is 
because they love the devil. They don't want to bear with me that 
this is the devil. But the Holy Qur'an teaches you and me and 
the Bible also. They don't want it translated into their language 
but nevertheless they didn't get all of this out of our knowledge. 
They are visible people; they are not invisible people. They are 
visible and on the Last Day these true people will be made 
manifest to you and me. The devil will be made manifest to us as 
he is. The Holy Qur'an teaches that he is an open enemy. He is 
not something concealed; he is not something invisible. But he is 
a visible being.  
7    Your Lord Is One Lord. If He were a spirit He couldn't be 
one spirit because there are many spirits. Can you believe that 
your God Is something that is not visible but yet He has great 
interest in man's affairs? Who other than a man will care about 
your affairs? Take, for instance, the wild beasts -- they don't care 
anything about you or me...except to try and stay out of our way! 
Now here is something standing out here with no form at 
all...and on the Day of Resurrection we will see Him, but 
nevertheless He still will be invisible; He will be a spirit! We 
should get away from that. We used to not believe that man 
could go to the moon. But if he goes to the moon, that shows you 
that he is God and not the moon and the flying apparatus that he 
made and went up there on. No one came down from the moon 
and taught him how to get up there, He was God enough in 
himself to fix up a machine that would take him to the moon. It 
was not an invisible god that taught him how to measure the


--- PAGE 21 ---
distance. It was a visible God that taught him mathematics.  
8    You may ask me, "Well why did we not know all of this?" 
Because you were under an enemy of yours who wanted to make 
you ignorant so he could move you and me. That is why you are 
in such condition that you are now, because he actually made 
you like this.  
 
Our Saviour has Arrived  
Chapter 11  
The Knowledge of God Himself  
(Saviour’s Day, February 26, 1969)  
 
1 We thank Allah for His great Blessings that He has bestowed upon 
us, to remember us, who were lost and now found, whom He 
Himself came forth, leaving everything of His Glory and coming to 
us. He came searching the Earth to find and locate that lost member 
of the Aboriginal people here in the farthest part of our planet, the 
West, who were brought here over 400 years ago in chains. There is 
One that has been born to take the shackles off us and relieve us of 
those chains that have shackled and poisoned us for 400 years. We 
are happy and thankful to the God; a God that has mercy on us; a 
God that loves us. We are happy and thankful to be here, to bear 
witness that today we have on our side a God who is able to lead and 
guide us and protect us and deliver us back to our own. We are 
happy. 
2 Glory has many obstacles. We are tried by many things. We have 
a hard time getting back home, as we did leaving home. But we 
want to say to you that this is not Our Saviour’s Day as we call it by 
birth, but it is Our Saviour’s Day because every day is Our Saviour’s 
Day! 
3 For the first time since our fathers fell into the chains and shackles 
of their enemies and were brought here for the purpose of being 
made blind, deaf, and dumb, we have come to the knowledge of self, 
to the knowledge of our God, our people, and to the knowledge of 
the way back to our Native land. For the first time, a Friend has 
come to us! A Friend indeed! A Friend who is so powerful that He 
can just desire a thing, or say, "Be" and it comes to pass. Such a


--- PAGE 22 ---
Friend! I’d like to be His Friend! 
4 But first we have to consider a few topics. We want to think over 
how it happens that we are here. We want to think over the time that 
we are now living in."Why, Elijah Muhammad, are you always 
preaching all over the country that this Judgement?" "Why, Elijah 
Muhammad, are you constantly warning us that we ought to unite 
with our own kind?" "What is going to happen than other than our 
kind?" "Why should we separate?" "Why should we unite to ourself 
and not to everybody?" "Why should we think more of ourselves 
than we think of other people?" "Why should we leave the religion 
of other people and come to what you call Islam?" "Why should we 
serve another God?" "Why should we believe in another religion?" 
"Is not the religion called Christianity right for us?" "Why should we 
give up our Christian names?" "Are not the Christian names of the 
white people right for us?" 
5 I only want to acquaint you with what belongs to you. 
6 If you are free, why not exercise that freedom? You can’t be free if 
you are begging and serving and looking forward to freedom from a 
master who says he freed you a hundreds years ago. Let’s look at 
these few little topics. You say "I don’t want to be separated." Who 
said they are going to force you to separate? 
7 Our fathers were brought here; not that they came on their own 
accord. They were brought here. They were forced to come here. 
They wanted to return home, but they could not swim 9,000 miles. 
They stood on the shore of North America with grief - tears flowing 
down their Black cheeks begging that "Ship," "Oh Ship Jesus, take 
me back," But it was leaving them. They knew not the people! Oh, I 
want us just to look into this thing. They knew not the strangers 
because it had been prophesied and predicted a long time ago to 
Abraham that they would dwell among strangers, not among their 
acquaintance, but among strangers in a strange land. Think that over, 
Brother. In a strange land they will dwell. "But after 400 years, I 
will judge that people." "And bring again, Abraham, your people." 
Who is Abraham? The Holy Qur-an, the 22nd Surah, says that 
Abraham gave us the name Muslims. Who gives you Christianity? 
Who gives you Christian names? We want to look into it a little. 
You say your name is that which white people call themselves by. 
Are you white people? You say, "Christianity is my religion; it’s 
Jesus’ religion." Who said it was Jesus’ religion? Did Jesus say that 
it was his religion? You are now arguing, fighting, disputing over 
the religion in which you should believe, having no knowledge of


--- PAGE 23 ---
your own religion nor the one that you are in that is not yours. 
8 How can Christianity be God’s religion? How can it be His 
Religion when He changes not? Did he give that religion to Adam? 
No. The Adam - people, from the time of Moses to the time of 
Muhammad, had their own religion, their own God. We know by 
their history. Every nation on earth has it’s own God, and still has 
it’s own God, but you. You bow down and worship what your 
slavemaster says to worship, and that He is a Mystery. That means I 
don’t know Him. A Mystery God is One that no one knows. I think 
the white man is pretty smart. He puts you in falsehood and fixes it 
so that you cannot condemn him. You ask him, "Where is that 
God?" He says, "Look up." "Where is that heaven?" He says, "Look 
up." I say he is a very smart man to fool people by the hundreds and 
millions and whole nations and races. They don’t question. They 
bow their heads and say, "Yes Sir" - and go on with nothing. Say, 
where is that God?" No man knows. He doesn’t even think to ask, 
"Well what are you trying to teach me then?" He never asks any 
questions - -takes, it and swallows it, hook, line, and sinker. No 
questions. Then you come and say; "Look, I have a little statue over 
here, I have a God! Oh, you should bow." "What do you worship, 
Mister?" "I worship God." "Well, where is He?" "Oh, no man has 
ever seen him." And if no man has ever seen God at any time, then 
no man knows anything about God. 
9 Well, you and I will come to some conclusion about this thing in a 
while. Hindus have been on this planet for untold ages. They are an 
Original people. They have been here a long, long time. For 35,000 
years they have been worshiping other than the Real God. Think that 
over. But there’s no time. After a while we will learn that is nothing; 
just 35 days or 35 minutes to time. A long, long time! We are 
talking about God’s today. I want you to have patience. God let the 
Hindu go astray and worship whatever he wants to. Today you find 
the Hindu with more gods than he can mention. Everything is a god 
to the Hindu. He is far worse than any religious people you know of. 
He makes his God, and when he gets out of ideas how to make 
them, he starts worshiping himself. That’s the Hindu. God was 
talking to me about these two people, the Christian and the Hindu, 
one day. He said "You know, Brother," (He called me ‘Brother.’) He 
said "There is a law among Us, a ruling;" He said, "if the Hindu and 
the Christian are walking together," He said, "kill the Hindu first 
because the Hindu is more poison than the Christian." And he is. For 
35,000 years he has been believing in other than the Real God; that’s 
a long time; 29,000 years before the Christians.


--- PAGE 24 ---
10 We have Indians. They have their own God looking like them. 
We have Japanese. They have their own God looking like Japanese. 
We have Chinese. They have a God looking like Chinese. Think that 
over. We have the Jew who does not believe too much in worshiping 
Idols. He still holds to Moses’ teaching. He is nearer to us than any 
other race in the way of worship. We have the Christians who have 
idol worshiping. They carve out statues of Jesus and Mary, set them 
up in church, and tell you to bow down to them and worship them. 
That’s a piece of wood he carved out or that is a piece of stone he 
carved out. Make it to look like the statue of a woman and a baby, 
and they tell you as you pass by to bow or cross your heart. That’s a 
good way to do that thing too; cross your heart, and you don’t pull 
your heart straight up and down because you are not bowing to 
anything like straight truth. So you put a cross across it. That means 
that you are cross; at the crossways of truth and falsehood. 
11 One fellow told me one day - he said, "Elijah," he said, "you 
know, you go into too much definition." I said, "Why do you tell me 
that?" He said, "Because people don’t understand." I said, "Do you 
understand without any definition?" 
12 Now they have Gods molded after their own fashion and 
likeness. Where is yours, Brothers? You don’t find in America a 
little "nigger" God, do you? The so-called American Negro bows to 
everything that looks white. Now he has on the walls of his home 
and in his church white pictures and statutes that are made by the 
imagination of white people. He call them after these names; this is 
the disciple; this is Peter; this is Paul, or this is Mary and her 
beloved baby, Jesus. You are absolutely blind, deaf, and dumb. This 
is Mary. Yes. And he bows down and he kisses the little baby and it 
looks white. But you show him a Black one and he gets back. Then 
he wants to question you. "Oh that’s not Mary’s baby!" You are 
brought up believing and worshiping white and hating Black. "I 
want to integrate. I want to be the brother of you white people." 
That’s what Martin Luther King said. When he started talking about 
being the real brother, then the white man killed him because the 
white man knows that his race cannot produce Black children! 
13 The Black God. The Black man’s God. He could not say out 
there to the public, between 20 and 30 million people here, he could 
not say; "I would like that all of us unite who are Black. He could 
not say that! He was a lover of white people - the people that nature 
did not make him to be. Nature made him to be one member of the 
Black People. And then after all the hell that white people hav e


--- PAGE 25 ---
given to his people for 400 years, he comes out talking about; "I 
don’t want to be your brother-in-law; I want to be your real brother." 
A man who is supposed to be a theologian, who has studied 
theology and the scriptures of the Bible is fool enough to tell the 
world that he wants to be the slavemaster’s brother. I say, Brothers, 
you worship all the leaders you want. I am not trying to force you to 
follow me. I am happy without you if you are happy without me! 
14 I only want to tell you the truth of Self. If you are Black, why do 
you want to be white when white came after Black? If you are 
Black, I say and repeat, you produced white! There was no white or 
light before you. You produced both of them; light and white. You 
are natural - born and part of that in which you were created. You 
are the only man who needed light to light up Your Universe. You 
brought forth that light. You are walking around looking for a God 
to bow to and worship. You are the God! 
15 Think over these things. The Black man, think over that, made so 
blind, deaf and dumb in Africa and America that he seeks now 
white. He doesn’t like his color. Why? Because the white man 
doesn’t like it. He doesn’t like that; he (the Blac k man) should have 
the color because that color will live forever. Praises be to Allah. I 
think the white man is wise. You are here today to learn in what 
direction you should turn to seek God - look at Yourself! Look at 
yourself. You certainly don’t know yourself. But He Who has been 
born to bring you out of darkness now into the marvelous light of 
wisdom and understanding of yourself and your kind (the Black 
man’s kind) knows and understands. 
16 Shall we bow to a God that was just born 6,000 years ago? Six - 
thousand years ago? Take that from our deportation from the Moon 
66 trillion years ago. Just deduct now, 6,000 years from 66 trillion, 
not 66 thousand, but trillions! We’re not talking in any thousands. 
We are not talking into millions nor billions, but trillions! If you 
don’t mind, I will preach. I don’t know anything but preach. God 
made me a preacher. I always wanted to be one. I was about to start 
preaching Christianity, but He caught me before I ever started. He as 
good as said, "Little Fool, you are yet to be taught what religion you 
should teach. He took me with Him for three years, night and day. 
He said, "Here it is , Elijah, you can go now, and I can go." I said, 
"Thank you." He said, "You don’t need Me anymore." Oh, yes, I do 
need You. 
17 Every race has a God looking like itself. But here in America, 
poor, blind, deaf and dumb Originals, my own Brothers, don’t have 
a God looking like them. He doesn ’t have any God at all - only the


--- PAGE 26 ---
white man. Now comes the time that he should be separated from 
the white man and go for Self. He says, "No, no, no, I want to stay 
with him!" What must be done to make him go for himself? He is 
sold to his Master. What must be done? 
18 Angel said to Baal and to his donkey - He said; "If the donkey 
had not seen me, I would have slew both of you." The donkey He’s 
mentioning there means; "If that little dumb Messenger’s eyes had 
not come open to the knowledge that I am God, I would have killed 
all of you." Because it’s time, it’s time that you should be killed. 
"But it happened that he opened his eyes and he saw Me; he 
recognized Me." Praises be to Allah. "I am going to give him a key. 
I am going to give him the Keys for all of them, that he can open 
their cave-doors." "Open them up, Elijah, here are the keys! And tell 
them to come forth, that I am here. Tell them I will set them in 
Heaven at once - money, good homes, friendships in all walks of 
life." The Black man’s God. "Tell them that I have come for them. 
Tell them that I will walk up in a mountain 40 miles to teach just 
one of them. Tell them, Elijah, I love them!" "They have been here 
400 years, and their is none that has befriended them. I am their 
God," He said , "and I love them. I will destroy the Nations of the 
Earth, to save them and then die Myself." And I said, "I’ll do the 
same." I said, "I can’t destroy the Nations, but I will die trying to 
teach them." He (Allah) looked at me and smiled. He said, "Yes," 
He said, "You will do that." He looked at me some more. He said, 
"Yes, He will give his life." He said, "Jesus didn’t do anything; no 
more than any believer." Well, that’s right. If I say I believe in God 
and His true Religion, certainly I will give my life for it. 
19 For more than 40 long years, I have been calling on you to accept 
Heaven at once. You are rejecting it. You want it from the white 
man. I say, my friends, that today you have to do something for 
yourself. I say that the white man has done a great thing for you to 
give you education how to go for yourself. I again give the white 
man credit for even trying to feed you when you are hungry. You are 
begging him and won’t work for Self! This is right. I say he is very 
nice to you because if I had a whole Nation of people into the 
millions and they would not go out and do something for 
themselves, I would sit down on them. I would. 
20 But he nurses you like the slave or like his fathers did when you 
were under them in servitude slavery. He still nurses you - gives you 
bread and water, clothes, shelter, money, jobs, just to keep you with 
him. That is all now. He pulls the string if too much is coming down 
and turns it off. He keeps you in that position. He doesn’t try to help 
us go for Self. He doesn ’t want us going for ourselves. He wants us


--- PAGE 27 ---
a subject people to himself. Regardless to you being free, he still 
wants you to remain with him. He will give you today, not 
yesterday, but today, better jobs - if you will go along with him and 
stay with him. He knows that this is the Days of Your deliverance. 
He knows that a God has visited you. He knows that God has raised 
up a Messenger as a guide to you. They are very wise - a long way 
from dumb. It is you that is dumb. They don’t want you going out 
building for Self. They want you to ask them to build. That means 
you are their slave. He doesn’t want you going out farming even as 
much as making your own food. That means that you soon will be 
stuffing your stomachs with bread and meat that you raised; and he 
cannot profit from that. Think it over. 
21 You want to go along with your good white folks. I want you to 
show me where they are good! I beg them on the last page of our 
paper, Muhammad Speaks, to let us go and give us a place just 
across the border here in another state somewhere. Let us live to 
ourselves since we cannot get along together in Peace. He won’t do 
it. No, no, no! You may learn to do something for yourself! But, I 
say, it will be wise if they (the white race) would do so. But if they 
don’t want to do so, God is here to give us a Place. 
22 The scriptures must be fulfilled. We are between 20 and 30 
million Black people here in America and have been here for over 
400 years. Now the white man who kept us blind, deaf, and dumb to 
the knowledge of ourselves still doesn’t want to see us go free. This 
is an open proof. I put that on the last page of our paper knowing 
that the white man was not going to do it. As God said to Moses; He 
said, "You go tell Pharaoh to let them go." But he (Pharaoh) 
wouldn’t let them go by a long ways. (God said,) "I have to kill 
Pharaoh to get them." This is what happened; He had to drown 
Pharaoh and his army in a sea of water. They call it the Red Sea but 
it is not a ‘red’ sea; it’s a ‘blue’ sea. And I mea n it’s really blue. I 
looked in it and I said, "Why have reference to; not that Sea, but a 
sea of fire that is coming to get Pharaoh the second he refuses to let 
his slaves go free. The Bible says; They refused to let their prisoners 
go free and hold on to them; hold them as a prey. You know what 
this meant there, ‘hold you as a prey!’ So whenever the God or Your 
People come after you, he will say; "If you take me, you will take 
him too." This is what it means. I say, Brothers, the time is here, that 
you should think for Self. You should build up an economy for 
Yourself. You say, "Why should I go out there and work and grow a 
crop when you are prophesying Judgement?" I say, "Brother, if 
Judgement comes tomorrow, you’ve go to eat today!" 
23 We have to do many things. This Earth was made for you. Your


--- PAGE 28 ---
Father and my Father created the Earth for us - for Black people. It 
was not created for White people; it was created for Black people. I 
want you to know that; the God of the Black man. 
24 How came the Black God, Mr. Muhammad? He is Self-created. 
How could Self create Self? Take your magnifying glass and start 
looking at these little atoms out here in front of you. You see that 
they are egg-shaped and they are oblong. You can crack them open 
and you will find everything in them that you find out here. Then 
were there some of them (atoms out here? Well who created them? I 
want you to accept the Black God. You say, "There is no beginning 
or ending." I admit that. But we do know that they had to have some 
kind of beginning. But how it happened, we don’t know. That’s why 
we say that His Beginning we don’t know anything about. 
25 Imagine, you close your eyes now; imagine the whole entire 
visibility of the Universe is gone from you. This is the way He was 
born; in total darkness. There was no light anywhere. Out of the total 
orbit of the Universe of darkness there sparkled an atom of life. 
Once upon a time; but don’t ask me when it was. How could that 
atom of life make a record of it’s own creation? It could not write 
it’s own creation, the record of it, because He was the First; there 
was no recorders around Him. He was First to record His Ownself. 
How long was that? We can’t tell; we weren’t there.  He was the only 
One in the whole entire dark Universe. He had to wait until the atom 
of life produced brains to think what He needed. How long was that? 
I don’t know, Brothers. But He was a Black man! Coming out of 
total darkness at that time, we all could say that we are produced by 
a white God. But there was no light nor any white anywhere; there 
was All Darkness. So God revealed to me. In that Darkness, which 
had no end to it there - that Darkness Created an atom of Life, and 
the Color to be the Color had to be Black, as there was no light; 
therefore, it had to be the Color of the thing that Created it! All 
Praise is due to Allah! 
26 Hating Black, the late ‘minute - man’ came yesterday and turned 
you into a fool. You have been here so long that the record could not 
be kept on planets. They couldn’t write it on the planets and make it 
stay there. Only you planned to betray the time that life had been in 
the Universe. That’s all. You hate Black and are out here trying to 
kill me because I teach you your Natural Self. "I don’t like Black." 
White people made you hate Black. Not so much they hated Black; 
they wish today that they were Black. Oh, Yes, they do. I receive 
lots of letters from White people wanting to join and follow me; lots 
of them. They are wise.


--- PAGE 29 ---
27 How could they (white people) teach you to love Black when 
their Black God (Yakub), Who made them, made them by nature to 
deceive you? How could they have ruled if they had taught you who 
was the Natural ruler? They can’t teach you today that you are the 
people, the First and the Last. They can’t say that in that sense 
because they know you will say; "Well then, I think it’s about time 
to make you the last." Don’t think white people are fools. They are 
wise. It’s you who are the fool. Don’t take them for nothing like 
ignorant people. They are wise people. They are the gods of their 
own world. This is true. They were made to be gods of their own 
world. This is the truth. They have proved that they are gods of their 
own world. Everything that they want, they can bring it before their 
people and tell them "Here it is." Whatever idea that they create in 
their minds that is necessary for their own life to live here on this 
planet, they bring it into perfection. But you don’t have that creative 
mind; that’s’s a creative mind they have. It was taken from you 
6,000 years ago to allow them to build a world after their own 
thoughts. I say, my friends, you won’t believe it if I keep talking to 
you about your own God. 
28 Now let us take a look at the white God and the Black God. The 
Black God produced Himself; He’s Self-created. Then that Black 
god made the white man. He didn’t create him. He made him from 
Himself. If He had made him or given him the power to create 
himself, He could never rule him. He is doing a hard job at it now. 
The Bible teaches you in Genesis that God said; "Let Us make 
man." I want you to wake up. Well if somebody is talking about 
making a man, why did He use ‘Us’? The Holy Qur’an says; "We 
made man." We! There’s no difference in "Us" and "We." Who is 
that "Us?" Who is this "We?" You say, God made the man. Well, 
God did make the man. But why did He have that "Us" and "We" 
around Him? Because that’s impossible now. God can’ t make a man 
without a help. No, no! He was Self-created Himself, but He can’t 
make a man without help now because the law of Nature, Creation, 
won’t allow Him to do so. So it takes an "Us" now. It takes two 
people to make a man. Therefore the Bible and the Holy Qur’an 
plainly teach you, "Us" and "We" made him; did not create him, but 
made him. 
29 You don’t say that you created this metal here because the 
essence of it is out there in the earth. You didn’t create that. But you 
take it and melt this, the metal, out of something like stone or sand. 
You can scoop it up down there and sift it - but it was already out 
there. Then you make whatever you want to from that metal. But, 
now, go and create something! As the Holy Qur’an says; The white 
race cannot create anything. They use what has all ready been


--- PAGE 30 ---
created. They don’t argue with you about what they cannot do; but 
they know that they were given power as gods to rule you for the 
past 6,000 years and they have done that. They have built for you 
the necessities of life. They made clothes for you and me. They built 
houses for you and me. They got our bread from the Earth and gave 
it to us because they were the gods; not because they were so kind 
and good to us, but they must rule as a god. They must give the 
people the necessities of life because they are the gods. We had no 
other god to look forward to. Our God was put to sleep to let the 
white god rule. How could the white man rule if the Black man is 
going to rule while he rules? The Black man is self-created. Two 
Gods cannot serve at one time. Think that over. 
30 Let’s now consider this a little deeper. In the first place, one God 
was the God of the Universe. In the last place, One God is the God 
of the Universe. Everything that is of life and everything that is of 
metal or everything that is matter in the Universe came from Him. 
He created it! The Holy Qur’an says to the white race; show Us 
what you have created? What part of the Universe have you created? 
None, none, no part! Well, the, if you didn’t create all of this you are 
living off, why not serve Allah then? He said, "I can’t serve Him. 
You made Him; You made Him Black and You made me of clay. 
And I just can’t bow to that. I wasn’t made like th at. You didn’t 
make me to serve Black. You made me to serve my white self and 
made Black to serve me until the day that they are raised up into the 
Knowledge of me. That will be the end of me then." 
31 Who, I say? Never has this kind of teaching been poured into 
your ears since the Earth was or the Nation was. I teach you not of 
prophets, but of God? No, no, no. I am not teaching you of Isaiah 
and Moses and the others. Those are prophets. I am bringing you the 
knowledge of God Himself! 
32 The Black man’s God. Why do you reject the Black God when 
the Black God is Your God! The Black God made the white god! 
Why do you reject Him? Long before ever there was - as the old 
people used to tell me when I was a little boy - a when and a where, 
He was God. I bear them witness today. Just think it over; a little 
small atom of life rolling around in darkness. Think it over; Building 
itself up, just turning in darkness, making its own self. Let’s go into 
it. Do I have any proof of this? Yes, sir! He made Himself into total 
darkness. He put His Ownself turning, turning on His Own 
Timetable in the Black womb of the Universe. He started rotating. 
He demands every life that comes into the Universe today to start 
turning first. "Over to Me, for I had that to do myself." "Now I am 
going to see, that every life that comes into this Universe comes out


--- PAGE 31 ---
of total darkness - every life!" Yes sir! It must come out of total 
darkness. Out of the womb of our mother did we come. We were 
created there out of the sperm that was emitted into that total dark 
room, the womb. It took that to make that child. He couldn’t be 
made in the light. He must be made in total darkness. 
33 We must know ourselves, we must know the Nature of Life. We 
must know the law of Life before ever we can say that we are 
Masters. 
34 Now, if, by nature, we are born in total darkness, think it over. 
And, if, by nature, life brings us out of darkness; and, if, by nature, 
we walk in light from out of total darkness; and, if, by nature, we 
can think through darkness, and bring light out of that darkness by 
our own brains, we did so with the white race. Look right into the 
sperm of life and find him - here’s an unlike. Take it! separate it! 
Your first separation from the white and Black was done. Now, you 
say, "No separation will settle it." "It won’t settle it with you, 
maybe, Mr. Fool, but it will as once upon a time you could not see 
out of Darkness. Now, today, you can’t see out of Light. 
35 Who was it that did this? Was it a white god or a Black God? It 
was a Black God! That is Who did it. He has taken His Universe, 
(think it over), and engulfed it with the path of light that you call the 
Milky Way. Think that over. He engulfed His own Universe with 
nothing but a path of Light. He made the lights so close to each 
other that the light of this one never stops before this one ties his 
light in with that one. It was a whole path of nothing but light, a belt 
around His Universe. He thought so much of His Earth, He loved 
His Earth so well, that he took His own Earth and divided the live 
planets rotating around it with light - stars. Think it over. About 600 
- million miles out from this planet, He has a region of stars that 
divides the other planets from these inner planets. He has made a 
wreath around His own Head of nothing but stars. Think it over. He 
made a crown for Himself out of the Earth with stars. "This is My 
House, and I want to put a crown around it with stars." You tell me 
you don’t like the Black God! 
36 He speaks, Brothers; His Desires come to pass. He takes His 
Enemy, folds him up with the power of nature , and makes him beg 
to be let go. He speaks to His treasures of snow in the North. He 
tells them to "Roll down on my Enemy." - Here they come! He lifts 
up the clouds from the Earth that He made and the water that He 
made on it and bears them up to a certain height and tells them to 
pour it back down. Can you do that? This is the Black man doing 
that. He drowns out His En emy; floods His Enemy out; takes His


--- PAGE 32 ---
Sun; "I made you, Ball of Fire, 853,000 miles in diameter . Sun, go 
out there and burn up the crops; they don’t like Me. Burn up that 
grass out there that their cattle are eating." And the cattle begin to 
grit their teeth towards the Sun, begging for more rain. The Sun 
says, "I have orders from my Master; settle it with us." 
37 What hopes have you in the future of the White race? I want you 
to tell me that. Write it to me; 4847 S. Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois. 
Write it to me. What hopes do you see? Today right at this hour, 
they are destroying themselves. They are fighting trying to bring 
about Peace, and there is no peace for them. They are talking Peace, 
but the Old Prophet says; "While they talk Peace, the sword reaches 
to the sword." It’s going on. Do you see any future for them? They 
don’t have any, here nor there. The time of that clock has run down, 
and the hand is stuck on six. 
38 I am not trying to make mock, nor am I trying to be happy in that 
way because of their destruction. Their destruction means your 
destruction in the condition you are in. You are a disbeliever, and 
that means you will be destroyed. The thunder of war is now 
engulfing civilized Earth like a belt on a man’s body. Nowhere is 
there a sign of Peace but in the Nation of Islam. 
39 He created the Heavens and the Earth. How did He do it? First, 
He created Himself and He was Like of Himself. He emitted light 
from the live atom of Self. And they still can do that. They can 
crown you with light. I say, my friends, wake up. The Black man 
does this. He creates as light out of darkness where there was no 
light and calls forth light to come. "I Am here, and all around Me is 
darkness. I need a Light." The Sun, having come into existence, 
started to shine. He didn’t have to go get wood, coal or gas. He just 
said, "Come on Sun." She refused to stay back, and She brought 
Him warmth - heating that dark Universe, and then giving Him 
Light. Later, another One says, "I think I need another Light over 
here. There, Be a Light." They kept on saying, "There, be a light." 
until They filled the space with so much Light that you can’t find a 
telescope that will take you to the wall of darkness. You can’t see 
out of Light. "I must not disobey my Master one second." The cattle 
say, "We’re dying for grass." Allah says, "Yes, but if the rains come, 
and you fill your belly full of grass, you will fatten. And the Devil 
will eat you. Then the Devil will rob the poor man of price for you 
that he didn’t feed; I fed you! He won’t give Me credit for growing 
his corn, his hay, and producing your food that you may be fat in his 
stalls. But he will take you and set you on the market for a high 
price. And My poor People are begging for your flesh. But I have 
got to stop your flesh in order to stop him. Burn them up! They


--- PAGE 33 ---
don’t believe in Me. They didn’t create the Heavens  and the Earth. 
They didn’t create the clouds. They didn’t create you, little animal. I 
created you; I caused you to grow! I put water in the Earth for you. I 
put food in the Earth for you. But you are fattening off what I give 
you; and he is commercializing on My Own Property and causing 
My People to suffer." 
40  We went over the country trying to buy beef  - cattle to sell to 
ourselves. He ( the white man) says, "No, I am not going to cut one 
penny for you even if you buy a hundred - million tons - the same 
price." He goes down in the South, he does, sits, looks over our 
people’s little herd and crosses his legs, "Bring them on here. Oh 
yes. I will give you so much for that." Don’t even tell them to weigh 
them. "Oh, yes, I’ll give you $200.00 for them." Think that over. But 
when he gets them in the North, he says, "You will not smack your 
jaws on this beef until you pay me my price." Getting it for probably 
10¢ a pound on it’s feet, he is selling it for 45¢ and 47¢ wholesale. 
Then you have to sell it for 55¢ to $1.65 per pound to try to get 
anything out of it. I say, let us unite! Build up your own economy! 
The white man makes it impossible for you and me to live in Peace 
Together. He robs us until we have to lay down on his doorstep and 
beg him for existence. I say the day has arrived that we a re going to 
get up from your doorstep. Regardless to what the cost, we must get 
up! We have to raise us some cows, We have to raise us some sheep. 
 
41 Let us go to work and multiply. When they multiply, let us take 
them and eat them ourselves and feed our people on them. The time 
is here that we must do for Self. Stop laying at the white man’s gate, 
begging him. He says you are free. Show him that you can take this 
freedom. Make good of it for Yourself by uniting and doing 
something for self. Go to Your Black God. Stop looking for a white 
god to take care of the Black people. They just don’t do it. It is not 
in their nature to do these things. They are not going to make you 
independent. No, I should say not. If you get independent, you will 
have to do that for yourself! 
42 You are no national; you are no citizen of this country! The only 
citizen here is white. You are not American; the only American is 
white. You can’t be Americans unless you are white. But you can be 
a slave for the Americans. Brother, I don’t mean to make you feel 
bad. Mr. Politician, who thinks you are smart and know the law, I 
don’t want you to think that I am trying to make fun of you. But you 
are yet ignorant to the fact that you are not a citizen. You are not a 
National man. National means "to be citizens of that country," but 
not a slave of that country; and especially not to a foreign slave - he 
comes from abroad! Think t hat over. "Well, I was born here." Yes,


--- PAGE 34 ---
there are many people born here; English, Swedes, Germans, lots of 
them born here, but they have a country that they are citizens of. But 
you don’t have a country that you are a citizen of. You have to make 
yourself now a citizen of Africa, your native country. You can’t go 
back there calling yourself "Mr. Willie Jones." You can’t go to 
Africa today and get good friendship with them. They are afraid of 
you. They say that you are just another white man under a Black 
man’s skin. They don’t want you. But if you say you are Muslim, 
they want you - They spread out their arms for you if you say you 
are Muslim. We know. We have been there. Our Secretary here, and 
my son standing here, and myself, we have been there. They are 
visiting me almost weekly. I have asked them right before my own 
family and others there at the table with us, "Would you take them if 
they Christians?" They say, "No." They don’t want any Christians. 
This is what has ruined their country - Christians! 
43 You say that Christianity is your religion and it was the religion 
of God and Jesus. You are just as silly as you can be! If you read 
your Revelation, you will find out how Christianity came about. 
Read it in the Bible, that last little Book. If you don’t understand it, 
come to me. If I tell you for understanding, and if I miss it, I will 
give you $10,000 out of my Brother’s vest pocket - paper lined. 
44 You nurse the Bible. You nurse the enemy of the truth of the 
Bible. You worship him while the Bible teaches you against 
worshiping the Devil. Well, (you say) "He is all right with me." 
How is he all right with you when he’s not all right with your 
people? You can’t make yourself one of them unless you graft 
yourself back into them. You’ll still bear the seed. I want you to 
remember this, my Friends. I am not making fun. I only want you to 
know Your God - Your Black God. That’s all I want you to do. Just 
know Your God. And I want you to know the white god. 
45 Now, you say, Christianity is your religion. You don’t want 
anything else. Offer you anything else and you would rather be an 
atheist now than to accept anything else. This is the truth. "Oh, I 
don’t believe in any of it." An atheist, (he thought he was an atheist), 
came and had dinner with me one day. And I laughed inside. I said, 
"Now, you poor fool, how can you prove that you are an atheist?" 
And so, I looked at the man and started talking with him. And when 
he went out, he admitted that he was a fool for ever believing like 
that. You can’t be an atheist except if you are a fool. But if you 
wake up and get wise, you can’t be an atheist.  
46 My beloved Brothers and Sisters who are thinking yourselves 
Christian, you are not Christians! You can ’t be a Christian unless


--- PAGE 35 ---
you are white. That is the only race on Earth that is Christian; white 
people. I say, today Christianity is in an awfully terrible condition. 
The Father, the god, sitting in Rome, is in a terrible condition trying 
to keep his people together. Look at how they are now, demanding 
to give them something new. Don’t you see their Bible being 
fulfilled? And look at the name that the Bible gives to that man - a 
Dragon. The Pope of Rome is spoken of in the Bible as a Dragon. 
Think it over. And the people that he serves, as Beasts! Don’t go out 
of here angry with me because I say what you wrote yourself. This is 
what the white theologians and scientists of the Book, or their 
religion wrote themselves. I got hold of a little book once on the 
argument between the Pope and Martin Luther over some of his 
symbolic work that he was doing in the Bible. And they began to 
question what this meant and what that meant. You would be 
surprised. I don’t have time to go through in detail. But God has 
given me the knowledge of the Book. And therefore I wish to tell 
you that you are so wrong in calling yourselves Christians. You are 
so wrong! There are no Christians but the white man. I’ll tell you the 
true meaning of Christian which refers to us, the Muslims. 
"Christian" means to be crystallized into one. Christians are not yet 
crystallized into one. They say, "We are followers of Christ; that is 
why we call ourselves Christians." Where are your works if you are 
following Christ? And who is Christ? They say, "Jesus Christ." 
What Jesus Christ? Jesus wasn’t even a Christ back then, 2,000 
years ago. According to the meaning of ‘Christ’ that name means 
One coming in the Last Day or Crusher - He Crushes the wicked; 
Christ, the Crusher. Jesus didn’t do that. That is the Mahdi who will 
do that today; the One whom we are representing to you; The Great 
Mahdi; the Restorer of the Kingdom of Peace on the Earth. 
47 You should remember that the time of wisdom, now, is coming 
for you. And creative thoughts, now, are coming to you. And the 
God Who has chosen you to be His People will teach you and lead 
you how to fashion them into actual beings as the white man has 
done. Our creative thoughts were taken from us until he (the white 
man) rules his world under his own creative thoughts. 
48 But he had to use the same material that Our Father put here. He 
(the white man) wasn’t able to create his materials because 
everything was already in the Earth. Therefore, when he was made, 
he had to use what we, Our Fathers, had made to fashion him a 
kingdom of the material that was already created. And now, when it 
comes to worshiping the Gods, I say; A Jesus, A Christ, A God, that 
is Born for you and me today! Who is He? He is what they call, 
"The Son of Man." Who is the Son of Man? And why do they call 
Him that? Because He Himself is coming to judge the Ori ginal Man


--- PAGE 36 ---
and the mankind. The mankind is the white race. The Original Man 
is not a mankind. Don’t get yourself mixed up in that kind of 
representing - all mankind. You are not a ‘kind’ of  a man; You are 
the Man! This is what I have been teaching you here. You will try to 
take me to task, but you can’t because you don’t know what material 
to use. As I say, I am teaching you of the God, not of the prophets. I 
am the Last of them. 
49 We want and we must have, some of Our Good Father’s Earth - a 
place for ourselves to live on; we must have it. We cannot live under 
or in this other shadow; We cannot do that! It is time that we live 
ourselves, under and in the shadow of our Own. All of this big old 
Earth here. Think over how big it is. It’s a great big old Earth. They 
are trying to practice birth-control over you. What do you look like 
accepting birth-control? When has the Earth got too small for you? 
There is actually plenty of Earth for us. There has never been an 
exhaustion of the Earth or of the food that it burns out; it goes back 
down and fertilizes the Earth without aid. But everybody wants to 
live in Chicago; naturally someone will get hungry here. There is not 
enough food in Chicago to feed everybody. But that is no reason to 
start killing babies; just to live in Chicago. That is wrong; the Holy 
Qur’an teaches us. Birth-control is not even thought of in Islam. If 
this is our Earth, and it is, we haven’t over-populated it. We still 
have plenty. You say "China." Well, China is a little grafted race of 
people, and they are piled up there in that country. They can’t spread 
out so much because they have a boundary to the race - the Red, 
Yellow, and the White races. There is a boundary set for them. And 
this boundary, now, has been jumped by them. This is causing 
trouble. This is why the Original Owner decided He would take over 
His Part. When He takes over His Part, there will be no part left for 
any other part! 
50 Your Black God. Why shouldn’t you love Him? Look at how He 
made you to verify the Truth that He is God. There was never One 
before Him. He made the axis, the Heavens, the Earth, and the 
spheres that float around the Sun to bear Him witness - ‘I am the 
First." 
51 Look at the ball of your eye. Think it over. That ball of your eye 
is white, all around a black. A Black sphere there, sitting, 
surrounded with white. Not the white in the center of this ball; it’s 
Black here in the center. But white around the Black. Right? He has 
made it like His Universe - around Him is light, but He, Himself is 
Black! All praises are due to Allah. Look into His Eyes. His eye tells 
you who He is. And all the offspring from Him bear witness that I 
came from that Black center there in His eyes. They bear witness


--- PAGE 37 ---
that their eye testifies to the truth that it must have been grafted from 
yours because it is not the equal of your eye. All praises are due to 
Allah! Would you trade your beautiful Black eye, surrounded with 
the beautiful white, for a green-blue eye? Would you do that? No, 
you won’t. It is a more beautiful eye, Black. Clear Black, and clear 
white around it like His Universe He made. He was Black inside, 
and then He said, "Let there be Light - "On The Outside." It is an 
unending teaching you about your Black God. 
52 He has power that He doesn’t have to go and fix up mechanically 
to produce. But he say, "Be" and there it is - coming into space. Be! 
There it is. Just orbits, just burst out of space. And in a few billion or 
trillion years, there they are. He takes and puts Him a planet far out 
on the edge of the power of the Sunlight, and warms it. They call it 
Pluto or Plouton. Pluto is a scientific name representing ‘A Little 
Fool.’ It comes back to you and me. For 400 hundreds years we are 
off from our people, frozen - up in the power of the white man. We 
could not rotate according to the light and power of the wisdom of 
our Own God. Pluto sits out there, something like four - billion six - 
hundred - million miles from the Sun; but still just a touch of the 
Sun moves her. Think that over. The Sun has so much power in her 
that she just touches Pluto on Her equator and makes her to make 
the same speed of rotation as all of the other planets. All praises are 
due to Allah! A sign for you and me. The white race just knew she 
was out there in the same year that Allah found you and me. A 
coincidence, you call it. No, no. Something else was behind that. 
Why are they just learning about the Moon? For 6,000 years, they 
have not known anything about that dead piece of our Earth floating 
around this one - until today. Why didn’t God let him up there years 
ago? Because the Black God is going to make a change now. This is 
true. Whenever He gets ready to destroy people, a powerful people 
who have ruled people; the Holy Qur’an says; "He takes him up and 
lets him peep into some of His wisdom." (Allah says,) "Look at this 
planet here, Little Enemy, I made it. Can you make one like it? (The 
Enemy says,) "No, Sir." "Go back to the Earth then, and pretty soon 
I’ll be down there and seep you off then." 
53 They (the white man) wish that they could make the Moon a 
resting place to shoot their arrows at God and His people if they 
attack the Earth. They talk about a way - station. Russia and 
America are after each other under their skin. Russia is pretty smart. 
America is as smart. We like them both smart like that. Russia goes 
and saddles the space right around the earth to watch America! That 
is who she is watching. America wants to watch God because she 
knows that Daniel said she would be the One that God would get 
first. She knows the Revelator, John, sai d that she would be the first


--- PAGE 38 ---
that God would destroy. The Fat Beast that everybody is frightened 
of, kill him first, because He has killed my people! I must tell you 
the Truth! The time is here! It is written, but you didn’t understand 
it. I saw the Beast take him. (Think over these prophesies) and the 
false prophets with it. I saw that Fourth and dreadful Beast that rose 
up on the sea and land. I saw him take him. Both prophets bear 
witness. He was taken, and his body was given to the burning 
flames. That is the prophesy of Daniel. And I saw behind this Beast 
the Ages of days sinning. Think that over. The color of his head was 
white as snow; kinky likes lamb’s wool. The color of his hair shows 
how ageable he is. Think it over. He is an old, gray-headed man - 
been here a long time! Think it over. His hair is not wooly, but it is 
not animal-like; it is curly hair, it balls up and twists up. Who is he? 
Daniel says, "He is the Ancient of Days?" "He is the First. I can’t 
count His Days. I don’t know the number of the years, but as He 
was of Ages’ Time. He is coming in after this one. Praises are due to 
Allah! 
54 You don’t like your God? You don’t like Him? You  don’t want a 
Black God. That is Who Daniel said is going to rule. Praises be to 
Allah. Let us love Black. I love Black. A color that you can take and 
put anywhere - even the North Pole and it will be the same! Put it on 
the Equator, put it in the jungles of Africa, in the hottest zone of our 
planet - it is the same. But all other colors fail when changing them 
into various zones, but not Black. Why should Our God, Our Father, 
create Himself of a color that would change by the climatic 
conditions of His Planet? You have the best color! You have the 
best eyes! You have the best teeth! Oh, no. But they’re robbing you 
of them - mechanical tests, pulling out your teeth, and putting all 
types of dope around and in the gums, destroying those pearly - 
white teeth; the most beautiful teeth in the human head. All praise is 
due to Allah! 
55 I say, "love Black." I say, get together Black, and unite, Black, as 
never before. They try to destroy the beauty of Black and have just 
about done so. And they look at you and laugh. But still, go out 
there today - right now - and you will see every color out there 
looking at the Black woman. They want her! She’s the best walking 
in the Sun! We’re going to take her; we’re going to  tie her up at 
home. We know she is the best. We’re going to tie her at home and 
set the bedsteads on her if necessary to keep her there! We’re not 
going to let her run rampant - not like wild animals. She is too good, 
she is too beautiful! 
56 I say, love your God. He is a Black God and He is forever and 
forever. There is no such thing as trying to destroy the Black man.


--- PAGE 39 ---
You can’t do that. It is impossible! One of Our God-Scientists, 66 
trillion years ago God taught me, tries His best to satisfy His mind 
by trying to destroy us. But we are here today, and we see His idea 
right up there - they call it the Moon. That is what He tried to do. 
Now there is no life on that Moon. He didn’t allow anyone to be left 
to write His days of Himself and His great Wisdom of Himself. We 
wrote it! We will do the same by you. You won’t be able to write 
our doom, but we can write yours. All is set for this thing - before 
you ever were created or made. He looked into you before you were 
born, saw your thoughts, listened to what you would be saying today 
and saw your works. We just fold up our own arms, and sit down, 
and wait for Time. Allah aid, "They just waited. They’re so glad that 
the day has come now that they can show you now that the Black 
man is God!" 
57 This is the day and the time that you should know God. There are 
two on the scene at the present time; An evil God and a good God. 
When we say "Allah" that Name means God and covers all 
Muslims. All Muslims are Allahs, but we call the Supreme Allah the 
Supreme Being. And He has a Name of His Own. This Name is 
"Fard Muhammad." 
58 "Fard" is a Name meaning an independent One and One Who is 
not on the level with the average Gods (Allahs). It is a Name 
independent to itself which actually means One whom we must 
obey, or else He destroys us. This honorable, Majestic, Person 
comes in the last day. The reason why we call Him the Supreme 
Being is because He is Supreme over all beings and or is wiser than 
all. The Holy Qur’an teaches; He is wiser than them, meaning all the 
Gods before and all who are now present. 
59 Now, the Just and Righteous One is on the scene to take His 
place to rule the people in righteousness. 
60 Remember, Allah means Gods. Many Muslims go in this Name. 
All Muslims go in the Divine Supreme Being of Names from Him. 
The meaning of these Names are Himself. The Bible teaches you 
and me that He would give use His Own Names, and this, we are 
receiving. 
61 You have the white man’s name, and the white man’s name is not 
to live. I don’t say that just here alone, but I say it in London. I’ll say 
it in any part of the Earth I go, and they will bear me witness. That’s 
why they don’t care what they are called. You can call white men 
fish. You can call them cat. You can all them lion, birds, bees, 
anything - he doesn ’t care because he knows his name is not going


--- PAGE 40 ---
to live anyway - it is the end of him! He cannot go in the Name of 
God; these names such as I am called by live forever. It’s me - not a 
name just called by me. Muhammad - that name will live forever. 
The meaning of it is; One that is praised, and praised much. It will 
live; that is God’s Name. And your Bible says, "He will give to you 
and me His Name, and all that take His Name, they shall live." So 
all that have taken the name of the Enemy of God, they were seen 
going down in a lake of fire with him." 
62 I warn you to join with me. I warn you that is (the fire) is not 
going to be ten, fifteen, or twenty years from now; it is going to be 
soon! 
63 Have you ever seen times like they are now? A President going, 
running all over the world, trying to find peace for his people. He 
may mean well, but that doesn’t mean anything to the Finger of 
Time that wrote it and is saying in his writing that; Mr. white man, 
the year 1914 was set as your end. And you will have a short - a 
little short stay - and that little short stay, after it’s done, will be it. 
When America comes out of Viet Nam, don’t shout - the big trouble 
is just beginning. 
64 They can’t help it. Don’t hate them because they are devils. One 
of your Gods made them like that. I don’t hate a white man just 
because he is a devil. He can’t help himself. He was made like that, 
and I cannot remake him. The Sun is setting; I can’t remake him - 
takes too long, 600 years. It took our Brother 600 years to make 
him. Six days, there in the Bible, means 600 years. Everyday 
represents 100 years in making the man. Now to make or graft him 
back into that which he was grafted out of would take another 600 
years. Why, Brother, we could build on our planet many many 
millions of babies. You don’t have to graft anybody. We make them 
plenty babies. In 600 years, there would be so many babies that there 
would be babies’ babies. We don’t have to graft any body to you. 
They haven’t been that good for us to graft them! 
65 Be sure to get onto your own kind; that is, if you want to live! 
Live in your own - the Black people and under the Black God Who 
believes in Mercy, Justice, Equality and Peace. I am not begging you 
now because it is immaterial to me. I can get a whole Nation besides 
you. I can! He (Allah) has offered that to me. He said, "If not One 
goes with you or believes you, Muhammad, come on and bring Me 
the Keys, and you and I will go." 
66 Don’t be too proud of yourself, Mr. Politician, Don’t be too 
proud of yourself, Mr. Black Educator. What are you looking


--- PAGE 41 ---
forward to - to keep you going? I think they’re knocking the pillars 
out from under you. Don’t be too conceited and proud, Mr. 
Preacher. I think your Bible is going to burn up. 
67 It is not predicted in your Bible that somebody will come outside 
of America to lead you! Right here, under your feet, will rise up that 
man who will lead you. These people have no knowledge much of 
themselves. I am raised up here to teach you of yourself and others 
and of the God Who created the Heavens and Earth and His Powers 
- and I am not alone. I say to you, don’t forget! Try and join onto 
your own. Let’s go and get some of this Earth that we can call our 
Own. Let’s build a Kingdom of our Own. I say that to you. 
68 Moreover, I pray Allah that we die not unless we are Muslims. 
Give your families, your babies my best love. Tell them the 
Messenger’s praying that they grow up in the Faith of their Black 
God, Allah; and in His True Religion, of entire submission to His 
Will - Islam; and that they live, as we live, in the Faith of Allah.  
 
Our Saviour has Arrived Our Saviour has Arrived Our Saviour has Arrived Our Saviour has Arrived  
Chapter 12 Chapter 12 Chapter 12 Chapter 12  
Allah, God, The Supreme Being Allah, God, The Supreme Being Allah, God, The Supreme Being Allah, God, The Supreme Being  
1 "Oh, my servants, there is no fear for you this day, nor shall you 
grieve." 
2 The fear of displeasing the slavemasters, who are the enemies, 
haters and murderers of the lost-found members of the Tribe of 
Shabazz, is causing millions of the American Black people to 
suffer, and they finally will suffer "hellfire" for this fear! 
3 The aim of Islam, which is now being preached throughout 
America to the fearful so-called Negroes, is to remove their fear 
of the slave-masters which is the greatest hindrance to their 
salvation.  
4 "This day", as referred to in the above verse (meaning in the time 
of the presence of Almighty Allah among the lost-found members 
of his people, lost for four hundred years from their native land and 
people), is the end of the time of the white race. 
5 This race of people was not created to live on our planet  forever;


--- PAGE 42 ---
only for six thousand years. 
6 They are the only people on our planet whose time is limited. We 
can clearly see today why Allah limited their time. It is because of 
their mischief-making and their causing bloodshed. It is impossible 
to live among them in peace. They are the world’s meddlers and 
snoopers. They are not contented to live alone without "snooping" 
around and meddling in other people’s affairs. Even though you 
divide the earth equally with them, they want your part or try to run 
your own business for you the way they think is best. 
7 The so-called Negroes will never get rid of the fear of their 
slavemasters as long as they believe in the white race’s religion and 
follow the scared preachers and politicians. You should not fear 
today. 
8 You will not fear if you will only believe in Allah. His religion is 
Islam. Follow me! Islam is the religion our salvation. You will soon 
come to know. There is no future for you and your families here! 
9 Of all the knowledge that one may have or obtain, the knowledge 
of God is the greatest and the most necessary of all knowledge. I 
would say that 98% of the people of the earth are without 
knowledge of the God, the Supreme Being. 
10 The Christians and most of the old world Muslims are alike; not 
having a true knowledge of the Supreme One, referred to as Allah, 
and God makes most people believe that God is something other 
than a man. 
11 Looking at God’s creation ( the universe) and His creatures 
without number and unlimited, we have never been able to obtain 
the knowledge of just how God created the Universe and Himself. 
12 We have never known where He Himself began or who was 
first, God or the Universe? Just who is God? What is He? Is He of 
the essence of this universe or some invisible power, spirit, or force 
that has no equal comparison in His creation? 
13 The knowledge of God has been kept a secret by twelve men on 
our planet for many thousands of years. The twelve pass their 
knowledge on from son to son, but the number possessing this 
knowledge is never more than twelve; and they are not to ever 
reveal it. 
14 The wisest of scientists have worked, studied, and searched all


--- PAGE 43 ---
their life long for the actual knowledge of God and have failed to 
obtain it. Finally, they formed their own opinions of God. 
15 Many claim that there is no such one (God) and that the Creation 
of the Universe came by chance. Man’s creation, they say, took 
place from some lower form of animal life of the sea. But they are 
never able to prove such theories. There, the people formed their 
own ideas of God, for they had no true knowledge of God. 
16 How can we know God if He kept Himself from our having a 
true knowledge of Him? Just what was the purpose of this secret 
knowledge of God? 
17 We just could not know God unless God made Himself known 
to us, and there was a set time for Him to make Himself known. 
Why was there a set time? It was done to keep from interfering with 
the rule of the devils who also had a set time. The devil is the God 
of the wicked (the Caucasian race) whose world must be destroyed 
to allow the World of Righteousness as its ruler. For He has not 
ruled universally for over six thousand years. Therefore, we have 
been without the true knowledge of God. 
18 The Bible’s prophets make a prophesy of His coming and not of 
His presence and only of the spirit of God, not as a person. 
Therefore, the people worship the spirit (joy and gladness) of God 
as being the real person of God. They do not believe in the reality 
of God; only in spirits, wood, stone, iron, gold, silver, Sun, Moon, 
and Stars. Some even worship beasts, animals, and fowl, snakes, 
fire, and water as God. This nonsense is to be broken up in these 
days by the presence of the real God in person. 
19 I am with Allah to convince the world that He is God in the 
person of Master Fard Muhammad and that idols are things, not 
persons. According to the Bible and Holy Qur’an, god is referred to 
by the pronoun "He," never as "She" - always in the masculine 
term. 
20 All these scriptures show that He sees, hears, feels, tastes, 
smells, talks our language, walks, stands, sits, eats, and drinks. 
Therefore, God must be a human being. He must be a human being, 
a man since we all refer to Him as being our Father. 
21 Everyone looks forward to seeing the coming of God but who 
has prepared to meet Him on His coming? What do we expect to 
see, a spirit? Well we just cannot see spirits. We can only feel the 
spirit. Will we see a man? The world does not believe that God is a


--- PAGE 44 ---
man. What are we to see for God if He is not a man? Let us check 
on the Bible and Holy Qur’an and see whether or not we should see 
a spirit or see a man for God. 
22 "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." 
(Genesis 1:1) "All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds" (Holy 
Qur’an 1:1). 
23 The above is said by representatives of God and not directly 
from the mouth of God although the words are true. The whole of 
the book called Genesis of the Bible is said to be Moses’ Book and 
what Moses’ said of the history of God’s creation; and of Adam, 
Seth, Enos, Methuselah, Lamech, Noah, Abraham, Lot and 
Melchizedek. 
24 Now God has not addressed Himself to us in Genesis, the 
opening of the Bible; it is His Prophet, Moses. The Holy Qur’an’s 
opening chapter is a prayer said by the Prophet Muhammad and all 
Muslims. 
25 Here God is represented as being the One due all praise; for He 
is the "Lord of all the worlds" while Moses says that He is the 
"Creator of heaven and earth." But the prophet did not say who was 
God’s creator. Nor does the Holy Qur’an tell us. 
26 The Bible reads that He is the "first and the last," so does the 
Holy Qur’an. The Holy Qur’an, in referring to God, uses the 
pronoun "we" far more than the pronoun "I". The "I" is used in the 
opening of the second chapter; "I am Allah, the Best Knower." 
(2:1) 
27 He addresses Himself to us as being the "Best Knower"; but 
what we know is; who is this "I am"? And who is this "we"? Is it a 
man, or the spirit of man, or a spirit without man, or any living 
creature of the heavens and earth? 
28 The Bible says, "Enoch walked with God (Genesis 5:24). "God 
talked with Noah" (6:13) and to most of the prophets. Can He be a 
man or other than a man? God said that, "His spirit shall not always 
strive with man for that he also is flesh: (Genesis 6:3) 
29 We have a great subject before us to open up to the world. So 
have patience and, by the help of Allah, I shall prove to you that 
God is man. 
30 The Nations of the Earth expect the coming of a God Who will


--- PAGE 45 ---
overcome and destroy all idol gods and set Himself up as the 
Supreme God over all; for all nations have made their own gods 
according to the Bible (Kings 17:19). 
31 Many people have been saying for a long time that God is 
already with us. Most of the people believe God to be a "spirit". If 
He is only a spirit, it is not necessary for us to ever see Him; only to 
feel Him, for a spirit cannot be seen. And this has been the only 
God that we have had in the past. 
32 Let us search the Bible and see if it teaches us to believe in the 
coming of God to be a spirit and not a man. The Bible teaches us of 
the spirit of God in many places; but only once do I find where it 
mentions God as being only a spirit (John 4:24). And this came 
from a Prophet (Jesus) and not from the mouth of God. 
33 If one reads the previous verse (John 4:23), he or she will find 
that even Jesus could not have believed God to be only a spirit in 
these words; "But the hour cometh and now is when the true 
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the 
Father seeeth such to worship Him." 
34 Here it is made clear that the "hour cometh." This "hour" cannot 
be referring to anything other than the doom or end of the devil’s 
wicked world of false worshippers who claim that they are true 
worshippers of the true God but are not. For the Father (God) 
seeketh true worshippers. So Jesus could have only been referring 
to the time of the presence of God, in Person. 
35 The world of Satan, the devil, did not convert people to God 
according to the parable of the wicked husbands whom the Lord let 
His vineyard out to (Matthew 21:23;41). In the 42nd verse of the 
same chapter, Jesus makes another parable of the true worshippers 
under the "stone that the builders rejected"; that it became the 
"headstone." 
36 It is the so-called Negroes who have become rejected by the 
builders of governments (civilization) who are now destined to 
become the head in the new world (or government) under the 
Divine Supreme Being in person. 
37 It is natural to say that God is the Spirit of Truth, of Life. It is 
natural to say such and such a one is a liar, but where there is no 
one to tell a lie, there is no liar. 
38 So it is with truth or spirit of truth. If there is nothing to produce


--- PAGE 46 ---
the spirit, there is no spirit; nor can we know the truth without 
someone to teach the truth. Where there is man, there is the spirit. 
Where there is no man, there is no spirit, for the spirit cannot 
produce itself. 
39 We cannot expect to see that which cannot be seen. A spirit 
cannot be seen, only felt. It is like electricity. Electricity is a power 
produced by friction from a substance that has such power (electric) 
in it produced by the sun and moon upon the earth. It is not seen, 
but we know what makes it. So it is with God. 
40 We know that God exists and is All Wise, All Powerful, and that 
this quickening power called spirit is from Him. But who is this 
God? A spirit cannot think, but thinking can produce spirit. So 
according to God’s own words, through His prophets, He must be a 
man. He is interested in man’s affairs according to the Bible 
(Genesis 1:27); "God made man in His own image and likeness, 
both male and female." 
41 If we believe in that alone, that God created man in His own 
image and likeness, that is sufficient for us to expect God to be 
nothing other than a man. 
42 A father has pleasure in his son and in his son’s affairs because 
the son is a part of himself and his very image and likeness. There 
is no true scripture that teaches us that God is something other than 
a man. The Bible teaches us (Hosea 11:9); "For I am God and not 
man; the Holy One is in the midst of thee." 
43 Here the latter part of the verse makes it clear that God is a Holy 
One (man) and the man that he is not is an unholy one (man). This 
only means that the Holy God is not the wicked man’s God (the 
Caucasian race). 
44 Ever since Adam, the Caucasian race has been referred to as the 
man-made man or race and mankind; the world has taken this to 
include all men. "No man hath seen God." (I John 5:19) This is 
another confused teaching to the ignorant masses; for if no man 
hath seen God, then there is no God for you and me to look forward 
to seeing on the Judgement Day. 
45 If such is true, how will we know Him since no one has ever see 
Him? But we do know Him and what He looks like. "We know that 
we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness" (I John 
5:19).


--- PAGE 47 ---
46 The whole world of the white race is full of wickedness and this 
is the "world" referred to. We are not of this "world" (the white race 
or devils) nor is our God the God of this world of devil. Our God is 
One today, as we had only one God in the beginning. "In this day 
(this is the day) shall there be One Lord and His name One" 
(Zachariah 14:9). This refers to the time when the true God is made 
manifest. Before His manifestation, the people worship what they 
think or what they want to be their god. The devil’s teaching is a 
division of gods - three gods into one god. The Hindus have many 
gods. 
47 The Muslims worship one God - Allah. "Say; He, Allah, is One 
God." Yet 99% of the old world Muslims think that Allah is only a 
"Spirit" and is not a man. Then they too need to be taught today the 
reality of Allah. 
48 Certainly He is One God, but not a "spirit", for a spirit cannot be 
said to be "one God." If god were only a spirit, we could not say 
that the spirit will come only after the rule of the devils, the wicked; 
for we have had the spirit all the while. A king that has no equal in 
power or no associate, that king will rule the world until a superior 
one is born. 
Chapter 13  
God in Person; Not a Spirit!  
1 According to the dictionary of the Bible, Teman, a son of Eliphaz, 
son of Esau by Adah, (Gen. 36:11,15 and in the I Chronicles 1:36). 
Now if Habakkuk saw God come or coming from the son’s of Esau 
(Eliphaz), then God must be a man and not a spook. 
2 If Habakkuk’s prophesy refers to some country, town, or city; if 
there be any truth at all in this prophesy, then we can say that this 
prophet saw God as a material being belonging to the human family 
of earth, and not a spirit. 
3 In the same chapter and verse, Habakkuk saw the Holy One from 
Mount Paran. This is also earthly, somewhere in Arabia. Here the 
Bible makes a difference between God and another person who is 
called the Holy One. Which one should we take for our God? For 
one is called God while another one is called Holy One. For this 
Holy One, glory covered the heavens and the earth, and the earth 
was full of His praise. 
4 It has been a long time since the earth was full of praise for a Holy


--- PAGE 48 ---
One. Even to this hour, the people do not care for holy people and 
will persecute and kill the Holy One if God does not intervene. In 
the fourth verse of the above chapter, it says; "He had horns coming 
out of his hand; and there was the hiding of his power." 
5 Such science used to represent God’s power could confuse the 
ignorant masses of the world. Two Gods are here represented at the 
same time. (It is good that God makes Himself manifest to the 
ignorant world today). 
6 "The burning coals went forth at his feet" has a meaning; but what 
is the meaning? The ignorant do not know. "The burning coals" 
could refer to the anger and war among the people where his foot 
tread within the borders of the wicked. (Here God has feet - spirits 
do not have feet and hands). This Holy One does not refer to anyone 
of the past - not Moses, Jesus, nor Muhammad of the past 1300 
years. 
7 "For this Holy One measured the earth, drove asunder the nations, 
scattered the mountains, the perpetual hills did bow, cushan in 
affliction, the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble." (What is 
meant by the curtains trembling?) (Who is cushan?) 
8 "The mountains saw thee, they trembled." (Who does this mean?) 
"The sun and moon stood still in their habitation." (What does this 
mean?) The answers to the above questions are easy when we 
understand who is this God called the Holy One coming from Mount 
Paran is. 
9 The 13th verse should clear the way for such understanding; for it 
tells us why all these great things took place on the coming of the 
Holy One from Mount Paran. It says; " 
Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people (not for all 
people); for the salvation with thine anointed (His apostle). 
10 He wounded the head out of the house of the wicked by 
discovering the foundation unto the neck (by exposing the truth and 
the ruling powers of the wicked race of devils). "Cush" or "Cushan" 
represents the Black nation which is afflicted by the white race. 
11 "The curtains of the land of Midian" could mean the falsehood 
spread over the people by the white race and their leaders trembling 
from being exposed by the truth; "the mountains" represents the 
great, rich, and powerful political men of the wicked; and they also 
are trembling and being divided and scattered over the earth. "The


--- PAGE 49 ---
Holy One" is God in person, and not a spirit! 
12 The Holy One coming from Mount Paran (Habakkuk 3:3) is not a 
spirit, but God in person. Jesus referred to Him as being the Son of 
Man (Matt. 24:27) - not the Son of Mary, Whom He was and whom 
the Christians teach us to look forward to seeing on the last day. 
13 If there is or was any truth in looking forward to seeing the return 
of Jesus (Mary’s Son) whom the Bible claims was killed two 
thousand years ago, what contradicts this prophesy of the coming of 
the Son of Man? 
14 The prophesy of the coming of the Son of Man by Jesus 
compares with other prophets, and especially Habakkuk 3:3. "Jesus 
saw the coming of the Son of Man as a light coming from the East 
that shineth unto the West." "Habakkuk also saw the Holy One as 
being a light as well as being Holy" (Habakkuk 3:4). 
15 Some of the Arab scholars say that the Holy One mentioned by 
Habakkuk (3:3) coming from Mount Paran refers to Muhammad - 
and they are right. But it does not refer to the Muhammad of the past 
but to the One Muhammad prophesied of in the Sunnah who came 
from His family in His name under the title, "Mahdi" (meaning the 
Guide, the Restorer of the Kingdom of Righteousness). 
16 This Holy One called "Mahdi" or Muhammad coming at the end 
of the world would come from the East out of the present Holy City, 
Mecca, Arabia, which is in the East. 
17 This is the only place we know of that can produce a Holy One. 
Neither of the past two prophets, Jesus nor Muhammad, taught the 
people that they were Holy Ones, nor did they say that they were 
from heaven. Jesus himself denied that He was good; the only one 
good is God (St. Luke 18:19). 
18 The Holy Qur’an and the history of Muhammad teach us that 
Muhammad was only a common Arab as his fellow Arabs were until 
he was missioned to be an Apostle of Allah; as was the case of 
Moses and Jesus who was before Muhammad. 
19 All of the prophets (Moses, Jesus, Muhammad) prophesied of the 
coming of a greater one than they. The belief in God being a spirit 
and not a man goes back to many thousands of years according to 
the word of God (Master Fard Muhammad) to me; and especially to 
the days of Yakub when he was grafting the white race.


--- PAGE 50 ---
20 This man, Yakub, taught his people every trick that he thought 
would help them in ruling the Black nation up to the time of the 
coming of God from our nation. Without the knowledge of the 
history of our people before the making of the white race, you will 
never be able to really understand who God is. With the teachings of 
the prophets and their histories, it is really foolishness to believe that 
God is other than a man. 
21 Let us quote another prophesy of Jesus on the coming of the Son 
of Man; "But first must He suffer many things, and be rejected of 
this generation" (Luke 17:25). The words "this generation" is not to 
be taken to mean the generation in the days of Jesus and His 
rejecters, the Jews, two thousand years ago. It means the people and 
generation of the Son of Man who would reject Him in His day of 
coming to reclaim His lost-found people; and at the same time, 
suffer persecution of Self and His teachings as Jesus was by the 
same enemies in His time. 
22 For He further says; "As it was in the days of Noah, and in the 
days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they 
bought, they sold, they planted, they built; even thus shall it be in 
the day when the Son of Man is revealed" (Luke 17:27-30). It is 
being made manifest that He is God and yet a man and not a spirit; 
for these things are now fulfilled as you and I see them that have 
eyes to see. 
23 I think I have made it clear to you that if we look forward to 
seeing or meeting God, He must be in the form of a man. The 
Christians’ Bible bears me witness that God is a man of flesh and 
blood. The Bible predicts God coming as a man (Luke 21:27; 
Matthew 24:30; Revelation 1:7, 14:15). There is much proof in the 
Bible to support my claim that God is a man. That is, if you want 
proof. 
24 You have been taught so long that God is not a man, so you have 
become hardened against believing in anything other than what you 
have been taught. "Every eye shall see Him" (Rev. 1:7). 
25 No eye can see spirits. The above chapter says; "All kindreds of 
the earth shall wail (shall be sorry to see His coming) because of 
Him." Never was this so true as it is today. 
26 The wicked world of the white race today actually does not want 
a God of Righteousness to set up a government of justice and 
righteousness, for they love what they have - wickedness, sport, and


--- PAGE 51 ---
play. Therefore, they are sorry and angry (Rev. 12:12,13). 
27 The devils see His hand at work and they are so upset that they 
are even preparing their own destruction while thinking that they are 
preparing for the destruction of others. The devils have been and 
still are leading the people away from the true God and His true 
religion, Islam. 
28 They never wanted Islam as their religion because they cannot 
live the life of the righteous. And they do not want the so-called 
Negroes to believe in it nor pray to Allah. Why? Because Allah will 
answer prayer, and believing in Him and His religion will not only 
get us universal friendship, but will give divine aid and help against 
our enemies. 
29 We need a God who will help us and answer our prayers when 
we call on Him; not an unknown mystery God, not a dead crucified 
Jesus of two thousand years ago. But we must remember that to get 
something worthwhile, we must be willing to sacrifice all that we 
have. 
30 The prophesy of Jesus (Luke 21:12) of the sacrifices and trails to 
be made by the so-called Negroes could not be expressed in a 
clearer language; "But before all these, they (the devils) shall lay 
their hands on you and persecute you delivering you (the Muslims) 
up to the synagogues (churches) and into prisons, being brought 
before kings and rulers for My names sake." 
31 It refers to none other than the so-called Negroes who accept 
their own religion, Islam, and a divine name from Allah. We are the 
hated ones in your midst and are persecuted for no other reason 
except that we are Muslims - under other charges such as our not 
joining on your side after truth and righteousness have come to us, 
and knowing God face to face as we know each other’s faces. 
32 Shall we go back to that which He has brought us out of? No! As 
it is written; "Shall the throne of the iniquity have fellowship with 
thee, which frameth mischief by a law? They gather themselves 
together against the soul of the righteous and condemn the innocent 
blood (the so-called American Negroes) Psalms 94:20,21). And 
again it teaches, "Can there be fellowship with light and darkness?" 
33 Let the American so-called Negroes return to their Allah and His 
religion or suffer what was poured upon Pharaoh and his people for 
their opposition to Moses, the servant of Allah.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
Chapter 14 Chapter 14 Chapter 14 Chapter 14  
The Light of Allah The Light of Allah The Light of Allah The Light of Allah  
 
1 1. Say; I seek in the Lord of the dawn; 2. From the evil of that 
which He (Yakub) has created; 3. And from the evil of intense 
darkness when it comes; 4. And from the evil of those who cast (evil 
suggestions) in the form of resolutions; 5. And from the evil of the 
envier when he envies (Holy Qur’an 113). 
2 The dawn of a new day has arrived to seek our place in that which 
is new. We must have a guide. Allah (God) has always provided 
guides for those who seek to walk in His path. 
3 We should hasten ourselves to the light of truth as we hasten to get 
ourselves into the light of the day (the sun). The light of Allah (God) 
is even greater than the light of our day (the sun). We must learn to 
be intelligent enough to distinguish truth from falsehood and seek 
refuge in the God of truth. 
4 If we shall know the truth (John 8:32) and that truth will make us 
free, we can truthfully say that we already have long since known the 
truth that Jesus was referring to was yet to come and not in his days 
(John 16:8, 13). If that truth had been revealed 2,000 years ago, there 
would no be any falsehood in the world. However, Jesus, being a 
prophet, foresaw the devil’s rule. "Seek the end of the devil’s rule. 
Seek refuge from the evil of that which He (Yakub) has created." 
5 The Father (Yakub) of the world created a world of evil, discord, 
and hate. If you do not agree with their evil-doings, your goodness is 
then called hate or infidelity and you are called peace - breaker. 
6 This world of Christianity has gone mad and they think that every 
cry is against them. They are like robbers who have robbed and are 
afraid that they will be recognized by their victims. Thieves know 
that light makes them manifest. 
7 Since Christianity has falsely claimed Jesus as her founder, she is 
now being plagued with spiritual darkness and confusion. Under such 
darkness the Prophet and His followers (the Muslims) are warned to 
seek refuge in the light of Allah (God); for under such spiritual 
darkness the wicked seek to persecute and kill the Prophet of Islam


--- PAGE 53 ---
and His followers. 
8 They are mad and cannot see, nor hear the truth. So they call the 
truth false and the false they call truth. The truth (Islam) has angered 
them (Christianity). "And the nations (Christianity) were angry. Thy 
wrath is come. The time of the dead (the mentally dead Black nation 
- especially the so-called Negro), must come into the knowledge of 
the truth of their enemies and the enemies’ false religion that was 
used to deceive them. They shall give reward unto Thy servants, the 
prophets, and the saints, and will destroy them which destroy the 
earth." (Bible, Rev. 11:18).  
9 The white Christians and Jews are the guilty race. They have 
persecuted and killed the prophets of Islam and their followers (the 
Muslims or Black people in general). Now should not they be 
destroyed or get what they put out? 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 15 CHAPTER 15 CHAPTER 15 CHAPTER 15  
The Days of Allah The Days of Allah The Days of Allah The Days of Allah  
 
1 We are living in the Days of Allah (God). This means that Allah 
(God) Is Present and He Is Laying a foundation for a New 
Government -- a Government of Peace and Security for the 
righteous -- a Government that will not be left to the scholars and 
scientists of this wicked world lest the scholars and scientists of 
this world try and build the same thing that they have already 
built; for they do not have the knowledge to build anything.  
2 The world (of the white race) is doing what it was made to do -- 
to try the righteous with wickedness and filth. The white race 
cannot do any better than what they are already doing. So we do 
not argue and quarrel with the, which they, by nature, are made 
to do. I repeatedly teach you this -- that you cannot change the 
nature of the white man unless you graft him back into that 
which he was grafted out of. This is what Jesus means in the 
Bible Ju. 3:7 in his conversation with Nicodemus. He told him 
that in order to enter the kingdom of heaven he must be born 
again because in Jn. 8:44 (Bible), Jesus had condemned all of the 
white race to be devils, and their father was the devil. There was


--- PAGE 54 ---
no good nor truth in the father that made the white race. So 
when a thing is what it is by the nature in which it was made or 
created in, you do not change it unless you go altogether back to 
the material that it (he) was made out of. So this demands a 
rebirth. Jesus was right -- a rebirth -- born again, all over. Some 
of the clergy and the scholars of Christianity take this to be a 
spiritual rebirth . But it means that the actual flesh and blood that 
was discussed in this conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus 
has to be changed. Then when the man has been put back into 
what he was taken from, the spirit of that which he was put back 
into will come to him as the spirit to do evil comes to him now in 
what he is made in. For he was made out of evil. The white man 
was not made to obey Allah (God) and to seek after His 
Righteousness. So, therefore, to make the white man one of the 
righteous, the white man has to take on a new birth -- the flesh 
and the blood has to be changed.  
3 The reader must not take it for granted that all people are 
made of the God of Righteousness. When you have never learned 
the two Gods you think the God of Righteousness made both evil 
and good people.  
4 Since the white race had the privilege to translate the Bible, 
they fixed the Bible’s translation not to read in s uch way as to 
condemn them as being what they are. That would make people 
not follow them. They could not trick the people.  
5 But let us leave the white race alone for a while and turn to our 
own Black self. The white race has done what their father made 
them to do which was to rule for six thousand (6,000) years and 
rule us under that which was other than Righteousness and 
Justice because their father did not make them of the essence of 
Righteousness and Justice.  
6 These are the days of the change of worlds since the time of the 
God of evil and his people is up. The God of Righteousness is now 
Taking His Place to Reign and He Will Not Accept those of us 
who are unrighteous.  
7 Take a look at the change of names. The Bible teaches us that 
He Will Accept those who are called by His Name. And some of 
us are so foolish as to say, "What is in a name?" Everything is in 
a name. The Bible teaches us that all of these Names of Allah 
(God) are more valuable than fine gold, because in the Judgment 
they will save your life from being destroyed.


--- PAGE 55 ---
8 All people who do not have a Name of the God of Righteousness 
and Justice will be destroyed. Read your Bible; it is there in the 
last Book. Revelations warns you that all who have the name of 
the beast are pushed into hell-fire -- all of the beast’s disciples or 
false prophets such as the preachers of the Christian religion and 
those who are helping the beast to deceive us, as they are 
deceived. Read your Bible. It teaches us that they were blind 
teachers who could not Idad a seeing one, nor could they lead 
another blind one; for they are blind themselves.  
9 The Jesus in Matthew (Bible) condemns the clergy -- class and 
even prophesies that they will not receive the understanding of 
the truth until the very last. It even honors the harlot as being 
over the preachers and as being more righteous than the 
preachers of the Christian religion. For the harlots understand 
and accept the truth when it came to them while the preachers 
try to condemn the truth and fight against it. Reverend, I would 
not be in your shoes today even if they were made of gold and 
diamonds. Christian preachers, the mark and the name (of the 
beast) referred to in the Bible are only the mark and the name of 
the caucasian (white) people.  
10 Brother preacher, do we see where they are trying to be good? 
Do not we see what kind of evil world they have set up and which 
they are trying to maintain teaching your (Black) people to do all 
kinds of evil, murder, lying, rape, and stealing because they 
(white people) are like that? Why do not you teach your people 
against following him and do not follow him yourself?  
11 We do not allow a Black Woman to come into our Temple 
wearing a mini-dress. Why do you let them come into what you 
call your ‘holy temple’ of God (church) indecently dressed? You 
are not respecting the God, you are disrespecting Him, when you 
allow His followers to do all kinds of evil and to go filthily 
dressed. You do this because you like it yourself.  
12 The Holy Qur’an teaches us that the devil leads you only to 
evil and filth. This is referring to the white race and you see this 
going on now. Their world is a world of sport and play. All day 
and all night they try to keep you busy on some sport and some 
other foolishness such as games of chance.  
13 Preachers, you are making a poor job of trying to reform your 
people. Why do not they come to me? When they come to me, you 
see a difference in their actions, in their talk and the way that 
they dress because it is the Spirit and the Power of Allah (God) in


--- PAGE 56 ---
the truth that I teach them, and they change themselves.  
14 If I were you, I would lay that poison book down which you do 
not understand, and come and join up with me and we will soon 
have a new nation here. But as long as you oppose me, you will be 
spiritually blind until Gabriel blows his trumpet. Remember 
what the Bible teaches you concerning your seeing and 
understanding the truth in the Last Day -- that the preachers and 
the priests will be the last to understand because they are the 
ones who try to condemn the truth and keep others from 
believing. So Allah (God) Is Just in blinding them so that they 
cannot see and understand.  
15 The Days of Allah (God). These are the Days of The Son of 
Man and the days of the removal of the old world of evil, filth, 
and unrighteousness. These are the Days of setting up a clean 
world under the guidance of the Original People (Black Nation) 
who were never guilty of doing evil until one of the gods by the 
name of Yakub discovered the essence of the Black Man to make 
a white man and Yakub did just that -- he made the white man.  
16 Now since he has discovered this essence, today we are under 
the God (Allah) to do away with that very essence in us so that no 
other man can make another people who are different from us. 
This will never happen again. That is why you are taught that 
you will be born again physically. This rebirth is in order to get 
rid of that wicked material in the very essence of the sperm of the 
Black Man. This wicked material will not be in the Black Man 
for any one to use after the removal of the present world and 
people.  
17 You will be caused to grow into a new person and the nature 
will be different. It will be the nature of righteousness and then 
we cannot sin. In that kind of rebirth it will be impossible for us 
to sin.  
18 So the days of Allah (God) mean the setting up of a new world 
and a new people. Allah (God) Will Not even accept the names 
that we used in the old world.  
19 The Holy Qur’an teaches the scholars like this t hat I am about 
to write -- I say the scholars for the average reader cannot 
understand it -- that after the removal of this world -- after 
twenty (20) years you will not be able to follow and do that which 
you are now following and doing in this world today. Within 
twenty (20) years the thought of this world will vanish from your


--- PAGE 57 ---
mind. You will not even be able to remember what this world 
looked like or what went on in it. Your mind will be clean. Ask 
the wise scholars and scientists. They will agree with me.  
20 Do not look for a spirit, a spook, or a formless thing. The 
formless is what we think in our brain. It is formless until we 
make a form for it. We cannot use a God or follow a God that is 
not something like ourselves; for if He Is Not something like 
ourselves He Cannot Have an Interest in our affairs.  
21 Therefore the Bible prophesies and the Holy Qur’ an also 
teaches us that a Son of a Man will Come to us to be the Judge of 
the Judgment Day. This Son of Man Will Sit As Judge. Why He 
Is Called the Son of Man will have to be taught to you. Here I do 
not have the time and the space to teach you why He Is called the 
Son of Man.  
22 The days of Allah (God) means ‘years’ of Allah ( God) and not 
a twenty-four (24) hour day. It means years. These ‘Days’ or 
‘years’ of judgment, according to the Bible and the  Holy Qur’an, 
will not run over twenty (20) years. And according to the 
scientists of Islam the teachings of the Holy Qur’an, which are to 
be understood, the Judgment is to take place between 1380 and 
1400 years after the death of Muhammad, the son of Abdullah.  
23 And according to the scholars and scientists of Christianity, 
they have it just about right too. The time that they say the 
Judgment will come is based on two thousand (2,000) years after 
the death of Jesus. This is right. And in the Bible, the Books of 
Daniel and Revelation, the time is given, if understood.  
24 So we use a very quick and simple word that covers all that I 
have said concerning the Judgment and the Judgment Day or 
time of the Judgment that we are living in. And these are the 
days of Allah (God), the God Who Will make a new heaven and a 
new earth after the removal of this world, god, and people 
(wicked).  
25 I am mighty sure that from what I have said here you will see 
the very necessity of the God changing our way of thinking and 
then He will change our name and give us a Name, for we never 
had a name of our own. All of the names that we have been going 
in are the names of our slavemaster (white race).  
26 Now, Black brother, Allah (God) Demands you to go in your 
own Nation ’s Name. Those who are in the Names of Allah (God) -


--- PAGE 58 ---
- these Names are telling you their very nature and the Power of 
God. There are about one hundred (100) Different Names of 
Allah which take up all of the Attributes of Allah’ s (God’s) 
Power and the Nature of God.  
27 The only white people who have a name that is any good are 
ones who have of these Names of Allah (God). A lot of white 
people go in the Names of Allah, for there are a lot of white 
believers in Islam. I have met many of them and they are sincere 
in their faith. There will be quite a few thousand in America. 
When the time comes you will learn of them, but you will not 
learn of them at the present time.  
28 Just remember how evil has made you. It has made you 
foolish and ignorant to the knowledge of good. And you make 
mockery of good and you worship evil. This is why the Bible calls 
you blind, deaf, and dumb. Spiritually you cannot see and 
distinguish truth from falsehood and you are not interested 
enough in the truth to listen to it. And you are not capable of 
speaking the language of truth and you do not practice righteous 
intelligence.  
29 All of this was done to you and me by the white race who were 
not created and made righteous. Therefore they taught us that 
which is of themselves, evil.  
30 We try to teach some of our people Islam who have never 
heard Islam before. The first thing they want to do is to start 
making mock of it. That makes you look pretty ignorant to 
dispute that of which you have no knowledge. This is what we 
meet with in our people. They dispute without knowledge.  
31 Even white people do not dispute with us, for they know 
Islam. Islam is the Arabic name for the righteous people whom 
you call Muslim. Accordingly the word in the English language 
means ‘submission’ -- and we add -- ‘to the Will of  Allah’ (God).  
  
32 The days (years) of Allah -- we should be happy to see Him 
take to Himself to Reign in Justice and Righteousness today since 
we are the children of the God of Righteousness.  
33 For this is what we lack -- we are not even free to do 
Righteousness. As long as we do not know righteousness, there is 
no such thing as Justice for us. You are justified in t his world of


--- PAGE 59 ---
the white race for being nothing but a fool.  
34 As the Isaiah put it "none called for justice and none sought 
justice and justice was trampled under foot." He was so right in 
his prophecy.  
35 Let us unite upon the base of Righteousness. And when we 
agree to live under the Law of Righteousness we will learn to love 
each other. We cannot treat each other right unless we love each 
other. We cannot love each other until we know self.  
36 The God Has Raised me from you and in the midst of you to 
give you the knowledge of self. You will not find me making a 
mistake in teaching you the knowledge of self. I am so sure of the 
truth of you and others that I always offer a reward of $10,000.00 
if you can find one word wrong that I teach you in the knowledge 
of yourself.  
37 I am not to make a mistake in teaching you, for a mistake in 
such teaching will put the people into a fisher’s n et and you will 
be cast into hell-fire.  
38 The days of Allah. These are beautiful days. He Created you 
to be the righteous. He Came to you to Bless you and to Give you 
the Reward of the Righteous. That is why He Forgives you for 
your sins that you committed with the white people. He Blots 
them out and He does not remind you of them if you will turn to 
righteousness. He does not even mention the acts of evil that we 
did under the white man, for He Charges the white race as 
making us an evil, and unrighteous, and a filthy people.  
39 Let us glorify Allah (God) and Make Him feel happy for 
visiting us with Freedom, Justice, and Equality and the 
necessities of life. Do not you think that we should be happy of a 
God who Gives us what we have been wishing for and striving for 
all of our lives and which we were never able to get?  
40 I say, let us accept Allah (God) and follow His Messenger so 
that we successfully live in heaven while we live.  
41 MAY THE PEACE OF ALLAH (God) BE WITH YOU WHO 
BELIEVE.


--- PAGE 60 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 16 CHAPTER 16 CHAPTER 16 CHAPTER 16  
    Day of Resurrection of Dead So Day of Resurrection of Dead So Day of Resurrection of Dead So Day of Resurrection of Dead So- - --Called Negroes Called Negroes Called Negroes Called Negroes 
Has Arrived Has Arrived Has Arrived Has Arrived  
 
1 I don’t have to say to the so-called Negroes that hell is for them in 
the white man’s Christianity! They know it and have experienced it 
in this Christians’ hell. The white Christians and their religion which 
they falsely say and teach is from Jesus is, in reality, from the Pope 
of Rome who is the head of the church, and not Jesus. Therefore my 
people can never hope to be successful with their white enemies 
acting as their religious heads and guides. 
2 The false Christian religion is for the white race and not for the 
Black nation. Islam is our religion. Allah is our God and the Author 
of Islam. No Black nation can be successful trying to play the white 
race’s game of civilization. They will only be trapped as slaves. 
3 Islam is a religion of divine power and will give power to the 
helpless so-called Negroes to overcome the devils and their false 
religion, Christianity. It has never helped the so-called Negroes 
against the white Christian’s brutality. Black Africa should have 
learned her lesson from it and driven it back to Europe and America 
where it belongs. The white Christians preach that Jesus, whom they 
killed 2,000 years ago, will hear and save the so-called Negroes. Let 
them prove that lie! How can a dead man hear and save people? You 
are not taught to pray to be heard by Moses and other prophets, not 
even Elijah whom they say went to Heaven whole soul and body. If 
Elijah cannot hear a prayer and he was not killed as Jesus was, then 
how can Jesus hear a prayer? We must not pray to dead prophets. 
They can’t hear our prayers. 
4 The Muslim loves all of Allah’s prophets, but we will not pray for 
life to come to us from a dead prophet; not even to Muhammad who 
lived nearly 1,400 years ago. We pray in the name of Allah and 
mention the name of His last prophet in our prayer as an honor and 
thanks to Allah for His last guide to us. 
5 The day of resurrection of the dead so-called Negroes has arrived. 
They have lived overtime in bondage to the white Christians. The 
white Christians will not accept Islam, for Islam is a religion of 
truth, freedom, justice, a nd equality. They have lost the power of


--- PAGE 61 ---
attraction and rule over the Black of Asia and in their frenzied effort 
to restore it, they are now running all over the world trying to 
deceive the Black nation so as to allow them time to continue their 
wicked rule of injustice. 
6 We must do our utmost to keep our nation pure by keeping the 
white race away from our women. We’re proud of our Black skin 
and our kinky wool; for this kinky wooly hair is that of the future 
ruler. Look into your poison book, Dan. 7:9, Rev. 1:14. It has been 
boasted that America is a white man’s country, but why did they 
bring us here? If the white race is such a super race, why don’t they 
live alone and leave us to live alone in our own country? Why are 
they fighting to stay in Asia? Why not be satisfied with Europe and 
America? We didn’t ask to be brought here. 
7 Mr. White Christian, tell us who brought you and your race into 
civilization when you were walking on all-fours, climbing trees, 
living in the hills and cavesides of Europe just 4,000 years ago? Was 
it one of your super whites or one of our blacks? Who put you there? 
Was it yourself or did we put you there? Where did your race first 
see the Black man -- in the jungles of Africa or across the border 
east of Europe in beautiful cities and homes? Who did you find in 
the Western Hemisphere, your people or our people? Who created 
the Heavens and the earth, my fathers or yours? Who created your 
race, yourself, or one of my nations? Can you claim this earth or any 
other planet to be that which your fathers created! 
8 Who started the dust storms in your country? Who is quaking your 
country, your kind or Allah? Drive us out and see how long you will 
remain. But if we drive you out, we will live forever without you as 
we did before you. Let the white race keep silent about who shall 
live on this planet, for they haven’t anything. This is our earth! Be 
happy, white folks, that you have the so-called Negroes in your 
midst, and especially those who are Muslims, for if they were not, 
you wouldn’t last very long. But they shall be taken from you. It is 
binding upon Allah to fulfill His promise to Abraham that He would 
return them again to their people.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 17 CHAPTER 17 CHAPTER 17 CHAPTER 17  
A Few White People Are Muslims By Faith A Few White People Are Muslims By Faith A Few White People Are Muslims By Faith A Few White People Are Muslims By Faith  
 
1 It was Islam, through Moses, that brought the white race out of the 
hills and cavesides of Europe. It was Islam (as revealed to 
Muhammad of nearly 1,400 years ago) that again gave you spiritual 
crutches with which to walk after your weakness there in what is 
now known as Turkey and the Balkan States in Europe. 
2 There are white people in Europe who believe in Islam. They are 
Muslim by faith and not by nature. They believe in righteousness 
and have tried, and are still trying, to practice the life of a righteous 
Muslim. Because of their faith in Islam, Allah (God) Blesses them 
and they will see the Hereafter. 
3 There are quite a few white people in America who are Muslim by 
faith. Good done by any person is rewarded and these white people 
who believe in Islam will receive the Blessing of entering into the 
Hereafter. 
4 The white people who believe in Islam will not enter the Hereafter 
that is Promised to the Lost-Found Black People. The Lost-Found 
People will take on a new birth. 
5 But the white people who believe in Islam will not take on a new 
birth because they will not be the people to live forever. Because of 
their belief in Islam, they will escape the great world destruction that 
we now face. 
6 The white race (devils) have deceived the darker people of the 
earth by implying that they came from the God of Righteousness 
and that they are equal with the righteous, by having been created by 
the God of Righteousness. 
7 The white race is not equal with darker people because the white 
race was not created by the God of Righteousness. The white race is 
not a created people; they are a made people. They were made by 
Yakub, an original Black Man -- who is from the Creator. 
8 Yakub, the father of the devil, made the white race, a race of 
devils --  enemies of the darker people o f the earth. The white race is


--- PAGE 63 ---
not made by nature to accept righteousness. They know 
righteousness, but they cannot be righteous. Jesus made this clear 
when he was trying to reform the white race (devils) two thousand 
(2,000) years ago (Bible, Jn. 8:44). 
9 If you and I believe that the devils are from the God of 
Righteousness, we are making the God of Righteousness an evil 
god, who created an evil god, and made the evil god to become the 
best guide for the people of righteousness. The God of 
Righteousness Would Not Make an enemy of righteousness as the 
best guide for keeping the righteous people on the right path. 
10 Allah (God) Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due 
forever, Comes in Person, to teach us the right way and to point out 
to us the great arch deceiver (white race, devils). That the white race 
is a race of devils is the most hated truth that they are opposing in 
the last days (resurrection of the mentally dead). 
11 This is the Judgment of this world of the white race. They are 
bringing themselves into the Judgment of God, Himself, by trying to 
take vengeance, in the Last Days, on the Apostle of Truth and on his 
followers. 
12 Remember these words, (Bible, Is. 65:15)... "The Lord God shall 
slay thee (the enemies) and call you (who submit to His Will) by 
another Name." Glory not in the name of satan, but Glory in the 
Name of the Lord God of Truth Whose Name abideth forever, and 
His Names have the Most Beautiful Meaning. 
13 Now Allah, the God of Islam, Invites us to accept Islam. 
Holy Qur’an  
14 "And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, 
and he is invited to Islam. 
15 They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but 
Allah will perfect His light, though they may be adverse. 
16 He it is who sends His Messenger with the guidance and the true 
religion, that He may make it overcome the religions, all of them, 
though the disbelievers may be adverse."


--- PAGE 64 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 18  
Be Yourself  
 
1 Allah’s great teaching and warning to us (the so-called Negroes) is: 
"Be Yourself." What is our ownself? He answers that "Your ownself 
is a righteous Muslim, born of the Tribe of Shabazz. 
2 He taught us that we are the original people of the earth who have 
no birth records. He calls on us to submit to him that he would set us 
in heaven at once. He has made it clear what constitutes heaven on 
earth; freedom, justice, equality, money, good homes, and friendship 
in all walks of life. This Christianity cannot give us (not the 
Christianity that has been taught to us). 
3 He greatly rejoiced over us and was very happy that He had found 
us. He said that He would make a new people out of us who submit 
to Him by causing us to grow into a new growth; not an entirely new 
body but a reversal of the old decayed body into a new growth which, 
He said, would make us all as we were at the age of 16. 
4 There will be no decay in this new growth of life. He also stated 
that the next life is a life of unlimited progress. 
5 He taught us the things that were and are and a glimpse of the 
things to come. His fiery warnings of the judgment of this world 
make one feel as though there will be a very, very narrow chance for 
any life to survive such a destruction. He taught us that our 
foreparents were deceived and brought into America by a slave trader 
whose name was John Hawkins in the year of 1555. 
6 Just what happened to our foreparents and us, their children, after 
landing here in the Western Hemisphere would make a dog weep and 
fight that her pups were treated in such manner as our forefathers an 
their children were treated. 
7 Our first parents who were brought here, he said, were killed after 
giving birth to their first babies to prevent them from teaching their 
children anything of self or of their God and people. 
8 This act of murdering our forefathers (by the slavemasters) left 
their children to be taught and reared in whatever pleased the


--- PAGE 65 ---
slavemasters and we are from those children. That made us blind, 
deaf, and dumb to the knowledge of self or anyone else and it stands 
true today that the American so-called Negroes don’t know 
themselves or anyone else and the worst of all is that they don’t know 
that they don’t know themselves or others. 
9 We can’t be considered a free people as long as we are in the white 
slavemasters’ names; this the white man never advised the so-called 
Negroes to do, but yet he claims that we are free. He also refused to 
teach us the truth of our kind, their civilization before bringing us 
into slavery. 
10 The knowledge of Allah, the Supreme Being, the true religion 
(Islam) had never been taught us by anyone before the coming of 
Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad. 
11 The whole of the Western white civilization is opposed to Islam, 
the only true religion of God; therefore they (devils) don’t teach of 
Allah and Islam to us. He said Christianity was organized by the 
white race and they placed the name of Jesus on it as being the 
founder and author to deceive the Black people in to accepting it. 
12 After our first parents landed here they saw that they had been 
deceived by the devil, John Hawkins. He brought them here on a ship 
named "Jesus". 
13 This ship was on its way back for another load of our people. Our 
forefathers started at the old slave ship as it departed, and they 
begged to be carried back. But it was to no avail. And our forefathers 
said to the whites: "You can have this new Western world, but give 
the ship "Jesus" back to our people and country." This has now 
become a song among our people which goes something like this: 
"You can have all the world but give me Jesus." 
14 But our poor foreparents did not know at that time that it would be 
400 years from that day before the real ship Jesus (God Himself) 
would come and get them and their children and cut loose every link 
of the slave chain that held them in bondage to their slavemasters. 
This would be done by giving us a true knowledge of self, God, and 
the devil. And 400 years of tears, weeping, mourning, and groaning 
under the yoke of bondage to the merciless murderers would be 
wiped away. 
15 The slavemasters’ children are doing everything in their power to 
prevent the so -called Negroes from accepting their own God and


--- PAGE 66 ---
salvation by putting on a great show of false love and friendship. 
16 This is being done through integration as it is called; so-called 
Negroes and whites mixing together in schools, churches, and even 
through intermarriage with the so-called Negroes. And because of 
this, the poor slaves (the so-called Negroes) really think that they are 
entering a condition of heaven. But it will prove to be their doom. 
Today, according to God’s Word, we are living in the time of a great 
separation between Black and white. The members of every nation 
must go to their own, and the American so-called Negroes are the 
most handicapped in the knowledge of just what they should expect 
at this time. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 19  
The Black Man  
 
1 According to the teachings to me of man’s histories by Allah 
(God) in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, praise is due to 
Him forever, The Great Mahdi and the Messiah that the world has 
been expected to come for the last two thousand years, has come and 
is going about His work as has been predicted that He would do. 
2 He taught me for three yeas (night and day) on the histories of the 
two people, Black and white. 
3 What he taught me verifies the teachings of the Bible and Holy 
Qur’an (if rightly understood) of the two people, Black and white. 
4 He said that there was no birth record of the Black Man and 
therefore none can say how old the Black Nation is. As far back as, 
He said, a record has been kept, it dates 76 trillion years. These 
years (76 trillion) were divided into periods of six trillion years 
beyond 66 trillion years which would make the said figure 76 be 78, 
instead of 76 trillion. I will not go into the finer details here. I hope 
to go into the details and analysis of our Lord’s (Master Fard 
Muhammad’s) teachings to me in a book entitled Black and White. 
5 Allah, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises 
are due forever, taught me that there are not any gods Who live


--- PAGE 67 ---
forever. Their wisdom and work may live six thousand or twenty-
five thousand years, but the actual individual may have died within a 
hundred or two hundred years, or the longest that we have a record 
of, around a thousand years. 
6 There is no God Living Who was here in the Creation of the 
Universe, but They produce Gods from Them and Their Wisdom 
lives in us. 
7 Human Beings are created according to the life of the Universe 
(planets). Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due 
forever, taught me that the Original Designer and Maker of the 
Universe created it on time and there is an end to it. 
8 Scientists have learned by study that everything we see that we 
call Universe is not endurable. It is gradually decaying. The Bible 
and the Holy Qur’an both verify this decay of the Universe and that 
one day a Wiser God than Them all will exist in a new Universe. A 
new universe means that it will not be exactly like this one that we 
know. According to the hints of the Holy Qur’an, it will be a better 
one than we have. Naturally, after experimenting with a thing that 
has been made, we can improve on a new make of it. 
9 The Black Man’s Gods, according to the history He taught me, 
have All been the Wisest. They made the white man after their order 
in wisdom except the knowledge of how to bring into reality and 
perfection their vision and idea of what they want to perceive equal 
to the Black Man’s Wisdom. This was kept back. They are forced to 
build their world on the basis of what they found in the Wisdom of 
Black Man. 
10 The white man only made, formed, and put into service those 
things that met with the carvings and necessities of his people. 
11 The white man was given the power of vision and different ways 
of life to enable him to build an unalike world from what we have 
had throughout the millions, billions, and trillions of years. 
12 No God Who is going to rule the people of earth universally, as 
the white man has ruled for the past six thousand years, was to be 
given a history or knowledge of the God Who ruled the people 
before Him. This is in order to keep the Present God from patterning 
after the Former God and to force Him to use His Own Wisdom in 
making a world and not a world patterning after previous Wisdom of 
the Gods Before Him.


--- PAGE 68 ---
13 The white race did not get a chance to rule solely according to 
their wisdom because we were present and they patterned much of 
their world after what they saw of the Gods of the Black Man. This 
was due to the fact that the white race was made an enemy to the 
Black Man; therefore their time to deceive the Black Man was 
limited to a short span of six thousand years that are used by the 
Black Gods to rule. 
14 The Wisdom of Each God, according to what Allah (God), in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom praises are due 
forever, taught me, has a cycle of twenty-five thousand years. 
15 Once every twenty-five thousand years, another God would be 
given a chance to show forth His Wisdom to the people. 
16 This has been going on for many trillions of years, according to 
His teachings to me -- at least since the deportation of moon and 
earth, according to the science of why we use a cycle of twenty-five 
thousand years, this is compared to the circumference of our earth at 
the equator, which is approximately twenty-five thousand miles. 
This is also compared with the rotation of our earth or the change at 
the poles which also makes a complete change once every twenty-
five thousand years. 
17 The White Race is an unusual people and their ideology is 
unusual. He has and was given the gift of a creative mind. To allow 
him to use his own ideas, the Black Man or Gods were put to sleep 
in order that the Wisdom of the Black Man did not interfere with 
what the white man is made for (to rule us under wickedness, 
enslavement, deceit, murder, and death for six thousand years). 
18 The Black Man or gods of the Black Man are infinitely wise. 
They are being aroused to their Wisdom today to rule the people 
again throughout the ages of time. 
19 The Present God’s (Master Fard Muhammad’s) Wisdo m is 
infinite. No Scientist can see an end to This Man’s Wisdom coming 
in the future. That is why the Bible and the Holy Qur’an refer to 
Him as The Greatest and Wisest of Them All and say that He will 
set up a Kingdom (Civilization) that will live forever. 
20 The Black Man in America is not an example of the Original 
Black Man; for he has been used by his slave masters for four 
centuries in what we call experimentation. Through the 
experimentation by the wicked slavemasters who were made without 
love or mercy for B lack people, they have the Black Man in


--- PAGE 69 ---
America before the world as a wrecked, robbed, and spoiled human 
being without knowledge of himself or anyone else. And he is used 
by the white man as a tool for whatever purpose the white man sees 
fit. 
21 He is called a "Negro" by them. The name means something 
dead, lifeless, neutral (not that nor this). 
22 They call the slave after their own names because he is the 
property of the slavemaster until he is redeemed -- although he is a 
member of the Original Black Nation. 
23 To restore him back to his people, he must be re-educated to give 
him the knowledge of self and the knowledge of those who deprived 
him of the knowledge of self. 
24 This knowledge of self will unite him onto his own kind with 
love of self and kind. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 20  
Why Black Man Should Be Called By the Names of 
God  
 
1 The Black man from the root beginning is from a Black Father. 
Therefore, he should go in the Name of his Black Father. 
2 As I have said, as long as the so-called American Negro is blind to 
the knowledge of self, he does not know by what name he should be 
called. You could call him anything and he would answer to it, for 
he does not know his True Name. 
3 The white man calls the so-called American Negro by many nick-
names. The so-called American Negro then re-nicknames himself 
the nick-names of the white man, although he does not even know 
what they mean. 
4 The Black man (so-called American Negro) is a member of the 
family and a direct descendant of the Creator Who made the 
Heavens and the Earth. Therefore, the son should be called by the


--- PAGE 70 ---
Name of his Father and not called by the name of an alien. The 
white race is an alien people to the Black Man. 
5 So many times you have heard that God has ninety-nine (99) 
Names or Attributes (That Which is Attributed to God). The 100th 
Name or Attribute of God is the Name, Allah, Which Represents 
that He is All in All, of every Good name. His Name Begins with 
the Name Creator and Ends with The First and The Last, The 
Eternal. Many of His Attributes refer to such names as Power, 
Force, The Mighty, The Wise, The Most Merciful, The Maker, The 
Fashioner, The Best Knower, The All-Hearing One, The All-Seeing 
One. 
6 The Holy Qur’an says that He has the Best Names the Most 
Beautiful Names. So many of these Names that we should have are 
pertaining to Our Father. 
7 His Name of Praise and of "worthy of Praise" are just a few of the 
Great Names Which Belong to God, and He Wants to Give Them to 
us. The Bible teaches us that He Will Give His Names to those who 
believe in Him. According to the Bible, Rev. 7:3, the Judgment 
cannot take place until those Who Believe in Him are Given His 
Name (sealed in their forehead). 
8 Will you turn down a Great Name which will Live Forever, Bible 
Is. 56:5, in exchange for the nick-names of your very enemies? They 
have no meaning as to a human being, such as Mr. Fish. We are 
human beings and should not be called Mr. Fish. They name you 
Mr. Hog. You are not a Hog. They call you Mr. Bird. We should not 
be called bird. We are not winged fowl. They are names which are 
worthless to human beings. 
9 The only white people who are allowed to use One of the Names 
of Allah (God) is one who has accepted Islam. These Names are 
given to them because of their faith in the religion of Allah (God). 
However, this does not mean that by nature these Names belong to 
them. 
10 It is only you, Black Brother, that by nature should be called by 
the Names of your God and Father, the Creator of the Heavens and 
the Earth. 
11 This is what Allah has taught me. Believe it or let it alone!


--- PAGE 71 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 21  
Black and White Worlds Near a Showdown  
 
1 Due to the presence of Allah in Person, (Master Fard Muhammad 
to Whom Praises are Due forever) and His Aims and Purposes to take 
over His own, it brings us hourly to a showdown of who shall rule the 
Nations of Earth. 
2 The present world (white people) have had their time and have 
gone over their time to rule. Nevertheless they still want to rule or 
destroy the idea of someone else ruling as shown by their 
preparations made for the total destruction of the Human Family of 
the Earth. They boast that they can destroy the present total 
population of our earth 30 times over...again and again. 
3 We know that they will not be able to destroy it one time. But they 
are preparing to do so should they be given the chance. This is very 
hard for you to listen to or accept from a man who stands at your 
door telling you that he is prepared to destroy you again and again 
and blast you out of your own house. We are now told in many 
skillful and deceitful ways that the white world is prepared and is 
putting those preparations into action against the Black Man. 
4 The earth actually belongs to the Black Man. This is made clear in 
the Bible and Holy Qur’an. The prophetic sayings of the prophets for 
4,000 years from Moses have constantly warned the present rulers 
(white) that the day of showdown was coming and that the world 
belongs to the Original Owners (Black Nation). 
5 The white race was given a limited time (6,000 years) to be the 
overlord (white) of our earth and ourselves. He is well aware of it 
(time). The white man is well aware that he does not own the earth 
and that he had no part in its creation. The scientists of the white race 
well know this, but, nevertheless, as it is written (Bible) Jer. 49:21, 
we see that today trouble is brewing everywhere; even between Black 
and Black where it should not be. But where Black wants to live with 
white and does not want to take his responsibility to go for self, 
Black has trouble with Black due to this desire. Integration is against 
the Desire and Will of God Who Wants and must Do that which is 
written He Will Come and Do: Restore the earth to its rightful owner


--- PAGE 72 ---
(Black Man). 
6 The white world, as it goes out, has not been asleep to its 
responsibility. They have been building up their arms and arsenal and 
factories for this day, in order to kill the Black Man. They are doing 
this in so many ways with drugs and the surgeon’s knife in the 
hospitals. It is the greatest desire of the white man that he does not 
leave the Black Man in position to keep populating the earth under 
his own color. Our women are the target. They want to stop them 
from bearing children. Millions of our women fall for this destruction 
of their race. 
7 The Black Nation is under the Guidance and Guardianship of our 
God, the Great Mahdi, He is The Restorer, The Defender of The 
Black Nation. He Will Restore and Defend us. 
8 There is nothing that the white race can think of in this day and 
time that is not already known by the God of the Black Nation. 
Therefore, the showdown will be victorious on the side of the God 
Who Knows what we think and plan. He has power over us and over 
the atoms of the atmosphere. The attacker would have no power 
whatsoever to defend himself in a showdown against such a Wise and 
Powerful God. The Great Mahdi. 
9 The Great Mahdi has and exercises power over everything of the 
creation carries or brings forth power. One would be silly and greatly 
the loser to attack such a God. But nevertheless the world must see a 
showdown between the two Gods. His Eyes and Ears are ever Open 
in both camps...the wicked and the righteous. So these two worlds 
draw nearer and nearer together for a showdown. 
10 The American Black Man is to be warned and he is warned of this 
showdown which is coming between the two worlds. He should fly to 
God (Allah) of his people Who Has Power to save them. 
11 My work, to bring you into the knowledge of Allah (God) and the 
God of your fathers and the knowledge of the power of that God and 
to ask you to accept your own, has been given to me. The Black God 
is well able to give you your own. 
12 Fly to Him, I say. Fly to me and I will guide you to Him as you do 
not know Him. If you do not know, seek to know. I will teach you to 
know. To reject your share in the earth and the universe which is 
rightfully your own would be such a foolish act that it could never be 
blotted out of your future history.


--- PAGE 73 ---
13 Come Follow Me, I say. I will lead you to your God of Salvation. 
If you stay where you are, you will suffer the consequences. Just as a 
reminder, read the Bible Jer. 50:46 and II Pet. 3:10. It is terrible, 
awful, and frightful, to look up and instead of seeing a blue sky, see a 
sky of flames and fire. This will surely come. Allah (God) has 
affirmed this prophecy with me. The whole heavens will be blotted 
out and in its place there will be a canopy of flame. The heavens and 
elements that make up the atmosphere of the earth will melt with 
fervent heat. There will be an explosion of the total atmosphere of the 
earth by God Himself. Take Heed of it, for the Holy Qur’an says such 
a time as we are entering into now is a grievous time. It will make 
children’s hair turn gray. If the grief and excitement will make 
children turn gray because of the terribleness of judgment, what do 
you think our hair will be doing? The Bible prophesies gray and 
baldness upon all heads. 
14 My people, stop thinking of sport and play and think over your 
life and the safety of your life. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 22  
The World  
 
1 The World (under the rule of the white race) that we have been 
living in had a duration of time of 6,000 years. We have been 
living in The World for the duration of her time, and now her time 
is up, and she (The World) is conscious to the fact that God Will 
Rule the people in a government of Righteousness. 
2 The Old World (of the white race) that is now going out cannot 
rule the people in righteousness because nature did not give them 
any righteousness! 
3 Therefore, the two (the righteous and the unrighteous) disagree 
with each other and they cannot live in peace with each other. 
4 Therefore, the two must be divided, and the followers of each 
can go along with their own leader. The righteous will follow their 
own leader and the wicked will follow their own leader.


--- PAGE 74 ---
5 This is symbolized in the Bible under the symbols of "the Sheep 
and the goats." If you study the nature of these two animals, you 
will find that there is a great difference between them. 
6 One Animal (the sheep) is trustworthy; and the other animal (the 
goat) is untrustworthy. By nature the Black People are good, but 
the Black Man is like a sheep -- if the wrong people, the evil 
people, teach and guide him, he will become like his evil guide. 
7 But as soon as you take the Black Man away from the evil guide 
and put him under his own good guide, he will go to his own good 
guide and he will follow him because, by nature, the Black Man 
loves good. 
8 This is why the Bible prophesies of a great separation (of the 
people) coming about before the end of The World of the wicked 
who love to take people and mix them up and make them to 
believe in other than right. 
9 As you may have learned, if there is any good Black Man in 
America, and if his goodness is such that he refuses to teach 
people to follow the guide who is no good -- then the no-good man 
becomes a hater of that good person and seeks the death of the 
good person. 
10 The no-good man speaks evil of that good man just because the 
good man makes manifest the no-good man. Being no-good he 
does not want to be made manifest to The World because the no-
good man seeks to keep The World under his no-good guidance. 
11 The Doom of The World (of the white man) and the Time when 
his doom will come (now is the time of his doom) but those whom 
he has made blind, deaf, and dumb do not know who he is nor the 
time that he is to be taken away. 
12 So, therefore, The World (of the white race) is filled with 
confusion and they do not know that to do themselves. They have 
confused the Black Man to the extent that the Black Man does not 
know now whether he should go for himself or remain seeking 
guidance from the devil. 
13 But Allah (God) Will Not Let any of us be blind, today, to the 
truth. This is why He Came Himself; to be sure there will not be 
any mistake made. Allah (God) Makes For Himself A Messenger. 
14 Then Allah (God) Guides the Messenger Himself. He does Not


--- PAGE 75 ---
Leave the Messenger to do all of the Guiding. Then Allah (God) 
Sends Angels to see that His Guidance is carried out like He 
Taught the Messenger to do. 
15 Great World of confusion -- fighting is raging all over this 
World of those who love fighting. The proper thing that we Black 
Folks should do, today, is to unite together behind the Divine One 
whom God Approves -- the One whose work is seen -- the one 
whose work is made manifest to the eye of The Whole Entire 
World. 
16 This is He Who Wrote This Book! 
17 Hurry, Black Man, And Get Out Of The Name Of The White 
Man Before It Is Too Late!!! 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 23  
He (Allah) Makes All Things New  
 
1 He, Master Fard Muhammad, God in Person, will create a new 
heaven and a new earth, a new Islam and new government and 
people. The new earth referred to is a new people who will change 
the old into such a great future that actually the earth will look like a 
new earth and a new earth will be made here in what we call 
America.  
2 America is the place where the new earth will actually take place -- 
after one thousand years of the destruction of the fire that is 
mentioned throughout the Bible and the Holy Qur’an. (In this, the 
prophecy of the Bible and the Holy Qur’an agree). America -- as it is 
called -- will be void of life after the burning up of the wicked and 
their world or their way of civilization so that no one will pattern 
after them in the new civilization of the Hereafter. 
3 This is the way of the Gods. One God is not allowed to pattern after 
another God when it comes to universal change. He is to use His own 
Wisdom. The white man brought about a universal change and so 
will Master Fard Muhammad, Allah, (God) in Person, bring about a 
new universal civilization even as Yakub, the father of the white race,


--- PAGE 76 ---
brought about a new universe of wicked people and a wicked rule 
over righteousness. 
4 This is what is meant by the old passing away and a new coming 
into existence. There was a new world of the white race that came 
into a vacuum in our history, from the 9,000th year to the 15,000th 
year of our calendar history, a vacuum made in our past 16,000 years, 
of 6,000 years, given to the white race to rule. We are now in the 
15,000 year of our calendar history of 25,000 years. 
5 The rule of the white race terminates at the 16,000th year and that 
year is the beginning of the Black nation’s rule again, as we ruled 
before the 9,000th year of Yakub’s making. This is the beginning of 
what is prophesied -- the 7,000th year, meaning the seventh 
thousandth year after the rule of 6,000 years by the white race, and in 
our calendar history, it is the white race, and in our calendar history, 
it is the 16,000th year (this is called the 7,000th year by the Christian 
writers). 
6 There is much more on this subject that I would like to teach and 
write, but the space is limited. 
7 Only the principles of the present Islam will remain the same. It is 
the Black man of America who is referred to as the lost member or 
lost sheep of his people. The awakening or rising of the Black man in 
America must come first because he is the choice of Allah (God) in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad for building a new heaven on 
earth. 
8 They are the blindest, deafest and dumbest of people who are 
without the knowledge of self. They are trod under the foot of 
civilization as "no people," as referred to in the Bible and Holy 
Qur’an. 
9 As God created the present heaven and earth out of nothing, so will 
God, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, build a new heaven 
on earth from nothing (a people who are nothing) so that this world 
will have no claim on the making of the new people of the new 
heaven on earth. 
  
10 The universal awakening of the Black man must also take place. 
He is also blind, deaf, and dumb, from the touch of the white 
civilization. They do not know themselves. They are referred to in a


--- PAGE 77 ---
prophecy of the Bible as being a sleeping lion that must be awakened.  
11 As in the problem given to us by Master Fard Muhammad, they 
are referred to as a lion caged, that must be let loose. In Isaiah of the 
Bible, we are referred to as a people who are robbed, spoiled, 
imprisoned, and a prey. And those who have us as prey will not let us 
go free. 
12 The Black man must be awakened to the knowledge of self -- that 
he is not what the white race has taught him to be. He must come out 
of this hopeless state. He thinks he is worthless. He should be 
brought into a state of worthiness and the knowledge and reality of 
his great place into which Allah, (God) in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, will put him. He is to place him on top and not the 
bottom -- because the bottom is where he is today -- and make him 
no more the tail, but the head. He is to become the head of 
civilization of the new world or new heaven or earth. He is not to rule 
over this people, but he is to be the ruler of self, after the rule of the 
Caucasian, wicked world. 
13 You will have to look to your own God, Master Fard Muhammad, 
and your religion, which is peace, Islam. Islam significantly means 
the makings of peace, but not making peace with the enemy of peace. 
The so-called Negro is arising to the knowledge today that I am 
teaching -- knowledge Allah (God) revealed to me throughout the 
Black man’s world. 
14 Go to Asia or Africa and you will hear more about the happiness 
of the people over what Allah has revealed to me than among the 
American Black people. They all know that it is the truth that they 
have been waiting to learn for 6,000 years. 
15 Read Isaiah 65:17 and 66:22 and Revelation 21:1 of the Bible. 
Read the second Surah of the Holy Qur’an. The new generation will 
be raised up. 
16 My main mission and work, put upon me by Allah (God), in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praise is due forever, is 
to put you on the right path so you may go for self under the guidance 
of Almighty God Allah in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad. 
17 He (meaning Master Fard Muhammad) will end the present 
conflict between the slave and his master. If they will do anything for 
us of good, they will be rewarded for that good act by Allah (God), 
Master Fard Muhammad, and they know this.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Rev: 21:5 What Will Become of the old? 
18 We must have a new government, a new ruler and a teacher of that 
new government, since it is not patterned after the order of the old 
government (world). 
19 As the God of Truth, Justice, and Righteousness, Allah Is Going 
to Be the Ruler or the Creator of the New Government. Then by no 
means can He Carry any of the old world into His  
New Kingdom of Truth, Justice, Equality, and Peace. We must have 
a new government and a new people to operate the new government 
(Bible Ez. 18:31). 
20 A new heaven and a new earth (Bible, Isaiah 65:17, 66:22). Here 
is the mention of a new heavens and a new earth. Some of the 
scholars take it literally and some take it spiritually. I say the 
meaning is both literal and spiritual. 
21 After the destruction of the old world by fire and by other means 
of destruction, there is nothing of the old wicked world that can be 
salvaged to carry into the new world of righteousness. Note Bible, 
Ez. 18:31. 
22 The prophet (Exe. 47:12, Bible) says that Allah (God) will even 
make new trees and shall bring forth new fruit. Jn. 13:34 prophesies 
that a new commandment shall be given to us which will make you 
able ministers of a new testament 2 Cor. 3:6. And 2 Cor. 5:17 says 
that "if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature." Eph. 2:15, 
prophesies "of twain, one new man, so making peace." 
23 The Bible, 2 Pet. 3:13, prophesies, "We look for new heaven and a 
new earth" and Rev. 21:5, "He said, ‘behold, I make all things new.’" 
24 Since the Bible here has promised through the mouth of the 
prophets, that Allah (God) Raised Up in Israel will be brought about 
when the God of the Resurrection of the Dead Appears, the Dead will 
no more be as they once were. They will become new creatures. 
25 The Holy Qur’an teaches us that "He caused things to grow into a 
new growth." Here we have something which the Holy Qur’an says 
"is worth praying for." Under the God of Freedom and 
Righteousness, we will grow into a new growth instead of growing


--- PAGE 79 ---
into decay any more. 
26 Also in the Bible Isaiah mentioned the long life of the righteous in 
these worlds: "that a person one hundred (100) years old will be like 
a child"...meaning that their age will never cause them to look old. 
They will have the freshness of youth says the prophet, Isaiah. And 
the Holy Qur’an, also verifies the same. Allah (God) in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever -- out of 
His Own Mouth -- Said to me that He Causes us to Grow into a New 
Growth. And that we would have the look and the energy of one who 
is sixteen (16) years of age and our youth and energy of a sixteen 
year-old would last forever. 
27 In that new life there will be not such things as a stoppage or cease 
to beget children. As you may read in the Bible Noah was six 
hundred (600) years old when the flood came (Gen 9:28,29). That 
number six hundred (600) is very significant. Noah lived nine 
hundred and fifty (950) years. The Bible teaches you that he begat 
children all of those nine hundred and fifty (950) years. 
28 They claim that there are people today in certain parts of the earth 
who are way over a hundred (100) years old and they still beget 
children. This is referring to the Muslim people who live in the 
Himalayan mountains. 
29 On the earth, wherever it is fertile and with water and rain is due 
time, and in good warm climactic conditions, we find trees and 
vegetation produced the year round. 
30 According to Allah’s (God’s) Teaching to me, the  age of the 
present earth is around seventy six (76) trillion years old. Of course 
the earth’s material does not decay fast, but it is decaying. Science 
proves this. 
31 Then the Bible and the Holy Qur’an verify these prophecies that 
everything will pass away or that there will be a gradual decay except 
Allah (God) Himself. Holy Qur’an Chap. 26:3..."everything has a 
beginning and everything has an ending except Allah (God) 
Himself." Allah (God) Cannot Be Destroyed, for He Is the Maker of 
the Present heaven and earth and before these are destroyed He 
Brings In a New heavens and a new earth or He Reproduces the 
present one as the Holy Qur’an teaches us. 
32 Since there was no calculation of time in the beginning of the 
creation of the heavens and the earth, we do not know the exact time, 
but we do know that it took place. We do know that the material out


--- PAGE 80 ---
of which it was made will not last forever. The moon is a good sign 
of that decay. Since the moon has no water on it, it has become a 
decaying mass of once-earth with water. 
33 What we will direct our attention to now is the type of government 
and people who will replace the present government and people. 
Since this is a wicked world and its making was not based and made 
upon righteousness, we cannot expect it to endure any longer than the 
limited time of six thousand (6,000) years. For at the end of six 
thousand (6,000) years the old world meets with the God (Allah) 
Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
Praises are due forever, Whose Wisdom, Might, and Power are 
Greater Than the god, Yakub, who made this world (white race). 
34 Yakub, the father of the white race, did not make the white race 
from nothing. Yakub made the white race from us (Black Man). So 
he took living material (Black Man) to bring out a new people. And 
so Will Allah, the God of Righteousness. Allah (God) Will Take 
living material, the so-called Negro, and make a new people out of 
them. The so-call Negro, the Black Man, up from slavery of four 
hundred (400) years, here in America, is the people out of whom 
Allah (God) Wants to build a new heaven and a new earth or we say, 
a new people and a new government. 
35 There has been decay in the government of the wicked for the past 
two thousand (2,000) years -- since the death of Jesus. I am positive 
that you see the corruption in this government which is bound to end 
in the complete fall and destruction of this government. 
36 We, the Black Man in America, the once-servitude slave of white 
people, are now rising up. This is what the Resurrection means -- to 
rise up -- to stand up and act civil and do civil things for yourself. 
The fall of one government and people (white) is the rise of another 
government and people (Black). 
37 The Muslims and their religion, Islam, will triumph and dominate 
the people of earth. We need a new people and a new mind. A new 
mind will give to us a base for the building of something new. 
38 In the next life, which will grow out of the old life, there will be 
no such thing as sickness and drugs used in the human body for the 
purpose of destroying disease germs because we will not do that 
which will cause disease or sickness. It starts on the order that the 
righteous shall not eat but one meal a day or every two days and eat 
better food. This will prolong our life and double and triple our life-
expectancy. To be blessed to see the next life is worth praying for,


--- PAGE 81 ---
my Black Brothers and Black Sisters. 
39 The New Heavens and the New Earth are coming in now. The old 
heavens and the old earth are going out, as Peter prophesied in the 
Epistles of Paul (Bible). What I would like to say here is that the so-
called Negro or the Black Man in America, up from slavery has, as 
Isaiah prophesied, "seen a great light." 
40 It is impossible for this world to overcome the King or Ruler of 
the New World of Righteousness, Freedom, Justice, and Equality. 
Number one...the time of the white race is up. Their time has passed. 
The hold-up is the slow-awakening of us, the Black People in 
America, and the slowness of the Black People to accept Islam. We 
cannot follow a recent or temporary religion. We have to have the 
Religion of Allah (God) in order to survive forever. Islam is the 
Religion of Allah (God). Islam means our entire submission to the 
Will of Allah (God). 
41 We need a new everything. He (Allah) makes all things new. 
42 Are you surprised that Allah, the God of Righteousness, Will 
Bring in a new world after the removal of the rule of the God of evil? 
The term of office of the God of evil is up. Are you surprised that 
you will have to accept a change? Do you love the white man’s type 
of civilization and its doing...that way of deceiving and murdering? 
Do you love this evil civilization more than you would love a 
government of peace where the Freedom of Man is given and where 
equality is not withheld from those who are qualified to be their 
equal? 
43 Would you like to say to the prophets who prophesied (and their 
prophecies are written) that they lied when they said that this world 
of evil had a limit of time of six thousand (6,000) years? The six (6) 
work-days in their work-week are to remind them of their eventual 
end. "Six (6) days (6,000 years) thou shalt do all of they work and on 
the seventh (7th) day thou shalt rest (die). And all of thy work shall 
be destroyed and thy name shalt be destroyed that this race be no 
more remembered among the Nations of the Righteous." 
44 Do you think all of this is false prophecy just because you love 
evil and hate good? 
45 This is not the first time that a new change has come into effect 
among the people. Take, for instance, their six thousand (6,000) years 
are divided into two’s (2's). Also at the beginning of our (Black 
Man ’s) Creation, it is divided into two ’s (2's) and ends in the number


--- PAGE 82 ---
six (6). 
46 This is the reason that in the Book of Revelations the Bible 
teaches us that the enemy’s number is the same as the number of the 
Black Man. The enemy has a number of six (6), but the difference 
between his number six (6) and our (the Black Man’s) number six (6) 
is that the enemy’s time of rule is of short duration while we (Black 
Man) can look proudly to infinity of time in our history. 
47 He makes all things new. Who Is He and what is He Going to 
Make New? He It Is that Comes after the time of the wicked god and 
his wicked rule. 
48 The actual Foundation Base that Allah, the God of righteousness 
and Truth, is Building His New Kingdom of rule upon is Freedom, 
Justice, and Equality and Entire Submission to His Will. 
49 What can Allah (God) do with this world of the white race since it 
has not come into his line of Guidance and government of people? 
There is no place for the evil practices of their evil kind in Allah’s 
(God’s) World or Kingdom of Righteousness. 
50 To make all things new means to go to the very root of everything 
that exists. We are taught that we ourselves will become a new 
people. The Holy Qur’an teaches that He would Cause the righteous 
to grow into a new growth. The Bible prophesies that you (the 
righteous) "will be changed in the twinkling of an eye." The disciples 
of Paul did not know exactly what you would look like in that 
changed form but they concluded "you will be like Him (Allah)." 
51 He makes all things new. Allah (GOD) Who Came in the Person 
of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever, taught 
me that every twenty-five thousand (25,000) years, each God Coming 
After the Other God made a new civilization. His Belief, Teaching, 
and Theology were Different From the Other God Who Preceded 
Him Who Made a beautiful change in the History of the wisdom of 
man. 
52 The making of the white race was something new. The difference 
between the two people (Black and white) is that the white race is a 
made people and they have a beginning and an ending. The Black 
Man is a created people and we have no beginning nor ending. 
53 Before the making of the white race, we never had their type of 
evil people. The Black Man was never under an evil rule. Evil was 
never practiced among the Black People before the making of an evil


--- PAGE 83 ---
world by Yakub. We never saw or experienced a civilization like the 
white man’s civilization. We never had an unalike people among us 
before the white race was made. We were all alike especially in 
color. 
54 In the angels’ decision over the making of the white race, they 
said to the Maker of the white race, "What will you make but 
something that will cause bloodshed...a mischief-maker in the land 
who will cause bloodshed." But the Maker, Yakub, did not deny that 
he was making such a man; but he said he "knew what the angels did 
not know." He did not know what the angels did not know. The 
angels knew that he was about to make a man who was going to 
destroy the peace of the Original Man and they told Yakub, the 
Father of the white race, what he had in mind to do in the making of a 
new man from us. So does Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
Praises are due forever, Know what He is About to Do in Making a 
new civilization. 
55 The new man, the white man, came from us, but he is different 
from us. After Yakub grated his man (white man) from us, his man 
became a new man to us. We are not a part of the white man. 
56 The white man just looks like a human being, and he is a human 
being but he is not kin to us at all. You say, "I cannot understand how 
that is, Mr. Muhammad." This is true. After the white man was 
grafted completely out of the germ of the Black Man the White man 
was made into a new man, different from the Black Man who he was 
grafted from. The white man became a new person altogether and his 
very nature is new to us. They do not have the same nature as we 
have. The white man is different by nature than the Black Man and 
the white man has made many things new. 
57 The white race are the gods of their world. The white man puts us 
on wheels. You say, "Oh, but we had wheels before." That is all right 
if we did have wheels. He himself put you on a new wheel, one 
different from the one you were using for transportation. The white 
man moved you off the camel’s back and the donkey’s back and he 
put you onto fast-powered transportation such as automobiles and he 
put you on wings in the sky. All of this was new compared to what 
we had. So we would like to show you that the white man himself has 
made a new world. Therefore should we be surprised when the God 
of Righteousness Comes in and Makes a New World and that He 
does not want any material of the old evil world? Are you surprised 
or is it due to your desire to remain with the old wicked world? The 
Next World is a World of Righteousness. You do not want to be 
righteous. You want to have Freedom , Justice and, Equality. But you


--- PAGE 84 ---
still would like the wicked to continue to rule because of your desire 
to be wicked. 
58 The God of Righteousness Who Will Rule in the Hereafter Will 
Have an unlimited Rule and not a limited rule like the rule of Yakub. 
59 How Must the God of Righteousness Begin? What thought do you 
have of Him and His Beginning? He Makes All things new. The first 
way to bring about something new is to change the way of thinking 
of the people. When you have removed from the people the old mind 
and idea then you can insert new ideas into their minds. This is done 
by the old being attracted by a new way of teaching...a new school of 
learning to condition their minds to that thing that you are about to 
present to them that is altogether new and different from what they 
have been accustomed to. 
60 Should you worship the old wicked world and its wicked god or 
representative and allow it to exist forever and not allow a better 
world to come in? We cannot hinder Allah (God) in His Building of a 
new world because we lack the power to hinder Him. There is no god 
or nation with equal power to exert against Him to prevent His Idea 
from Becoming What He Wills them to be. Whatever He Desires He 
is Wise enough to Bring it to Pass. Many Times this Wisdom is  
misunderstood and the people think that it is some example of the 
person. We say, Wisdom, Power, Force! There is no Power or Force 
of Power until we have the Wisdom to Produce it. 
61 He makes all things new. He teaches us that He Could Use 
nothing of the old world and that after the removal of the old world 
He Is to Bring About the New World. Allah (God) Does Not Want 
the old god to think that He is weak in Wisdom and Knowledge and 
Power to Bring something altogether new without using their old 
wicked material. 
62 This is like the Creation of us. In the beginning, the God Who 
Created Us had no material to use to begin a creation. He Had only 
Himself. Therefore out of darkness and the thoughtless and invisible 
He Brought Out the Visible Vision and Thought and Idea. He Made a 
Brain which had the power to cover the sphere of our thinking and to 
produce from that thought what image or vision that the brain cells 
could conceive. These things at that time were all new; there was no 
plan or universe except His. This is our Father, the Black Man, the 
Maker. 
63 The Wisdom, Idea, and Way of Thinking of Master Fard


--- PAGE 85 ---
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever, is Superior to any way 
of believing today. There is no one to hinder His Image or Thought 
for that which has not yet been conceived in our brain. 
64 He goes after the root of all things like our Black Father did in the 
beginning when He Built the universe out of nothing. He Is as One 
Sitting out in space with no material of space to Make something 
altogether new. He Goes after the Root in Making this New World of 
people. 
65 As He said, "first He Makes a New Mind for us and a New Way 
of thinking." He teaches us a different education, one that we have 
never had before. He Gives us Education on the Wisdom, 
Knowledge, and Understanding of Gods...not of prophets...but of the 
Gods of the Prophets of the past. He builds our minds according to 
the way Gods Think and not the way of thinking of servants 
(prophets). The prophets of the past were inspired and their 
inspiration was true. 
66 For the past six thousand (6,000) years there was no god present 
who was superior to Yakub. Our God and Scientists were not 
permitted to interfere with the people of Yakub and their civilization 
or in the way in which they were thinking. That is why they (white 
race) would kill prophets who came among them teaching the way of 
righteousness to the people because Yakub’s people, the white race, 
was not to build a civilization on the basis of Righteousness. The 
white race was to build a civilization just the opposite of 
Righteousness, and this he has done. This is the reason why the God 
of Righteousness and Justice cannot use the white race’s way of 
civilization. The God of Righteousness must remove the white race’s 
way of civilization altogether and build upon a new Foundation, as I 
keep repeating. The thoughts, the minds of the people must be so 
conditioned into the way of thinking of that new world that we must 
not think in terms of the new world being a part of another old 
world...Even your education of this wicked world will not be a part of 
the education of the new world. 
67 I think that you are thinking that I am going too far 
now...However no education of this world of the white race will be 
accepted into the new world. For the new world you have a new 
education and government. The God of the New World is a New 
God. He is not the God Who Ruled from the Beginning but He Has 
the Same Idea of that rule as the God In the Beginning Had to create 
Something new. 
68 As you notice, the effect of thoughts or your thinking at times has


--- PAGE 86 ---
such deep effect on the brain that it affects the surface of your face, 
skin, and body. Your eyes are also affected by that tremendous 
thought or way of thinking that you have as it acts upon your brain. 
69 Allah (God) makes it very easy in the next life...that new life. You 
will be happy all the days that you are in it. The Holy Qur’an teaches 
us that "He causes the righteous to grow into a new growth." The 
basis or pillar of that new world is when the old mind has been 
changed to a new mind or our thoughts are changed to a new mind or 
our thoughts are changed to a new thought or new way of thinking 
which brings about a change of the whole body. 
70 In the new world you will not even be able to speak the English 
language. The speaking of the English language by us will be 
stopped. No language of the wicked should be spoken by the 
righteous, as there are some in Islam, in the Orthodox Muslim world, 
whom I have met myself, and they refuse to speak English; for it is 
an infidel language. This is the truth. English is a bastard language, 
for it is a language that is made up of other languages. It is a 
dependent language. So we see here why it is necessary for us to 
have a new language. 
71 He makes all things new. Go back to the very earth, as the 
prophecy concerning this change goes like this. The prophets say that 
they "saw a new heaven and a new earth." We and the earth both will 
be new because the Powerful God or the Supreme Being over all Has 
Superior Wisdom and He Will Cause everything to grow into a new 
world from that of the old world. 
72 The curse of Yakub and his people veils all of the earth and the 
atmosphere of the earth. After the removal of the curse of Yakub 
there will be a new way of thinking by a new God. He is Superior to 
all other gods who Existed before Him. The power of heaven and 
earth will submit to His Power and a change is made easy and 
inevitable; for the heavens and the earth are controlled by the God of 
the Black Man, Allah, Who Came in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever. 
73 He makes all things new in order to keep it from being said or 
written that He had to borrow some of the wisdom of this world...this 
would make Him Lacking of Wisdom and Power to Produce 
something other than what had already been produced. 
74 Therefore, the Holy Qur’an teaches us that He Has the Power to 
Destroy the entire universe and bring in a new one and He Can


--- PAGE 87 ---
Reproduce the present universe. 
75 I would like to say to the reader that you have that Powerful God 
in your midst now. As the Bible teaches you, "He Came After the 
workings of satan, the wicked." 
76 He will not even Accept you and me if we are not willing to be 
called by his Name. You cannot keep the present name of the wicked 
and be present as one of the Righteous in a righteous government. 
77 He makes all things new. In one place in the Bible it is prophesied 
that "you will have a new name." In another place it is prophesied 
that "you cannot see the Hereafter unless you have A Name of God." 
This is why the white race does everything that it possibly can to 
keep you from being called by one of the Names of Allah (God) 
which consist of ninety nine (99) Names. If you refuse to accept one 
of the Names of your God then you are the servant of the devil and 
you go to his doom with him. 
78 The Psalmist teaches you and me that the names of the white race 
have no meaning and value of good. They are not the Names of God; 
therefore these names of the white race and the people who go in 
such names as Wood, Fish, and Bear will be removed. The people of 
Righteousness will not be called by such names. Imagine your being 
called Mr. Briar! You are not a Briar or Mr. Fish; you are not a Fish. 
These names are worthless to be used as names of human beings. 
79 This is why I mentioned earlier that you must have a Name of 
Allah (GOD) even to see the hereafter. The Bible teaches you, "Bring 
every one that is called by his Name" and the worlds follow that "He 
Has Created them for His Glory!" Their minds have been changed 
into His Way of Thinking. 
80 How will the earth be changed? The Bible teaches us that He will 
Burn the wicked up and their wisdom will be destroyed by fire and 
that after one thousand (1,000) years this place will bring forth 
vegetation, water, and trees. It will be new vegetation, water and 
trees. It will not be the same as that which we have here today. Do 
not ask me what kind of vegetation it will be. That is one thousand 
(1,000) years from now. But I do know that the earth will bring forth 
new garments of vegetation from this destruction of the world of the 
wicked. 
81 You say, will you have the make of automobile of Chevrolet, 
Ford, and Cadillac? No. The people of the new world will not use 
anything that you see used today in this civilization. The people of


--- PAGE 88 ---
the new world will have a superior automobile and planes. They will 
not be fueled with the same fuel that they use today in this 
civilization. The fuel that they use today contaminates the air. They 
speak of the dangerous level of air pollution constantly on the radio 
and television. Look at the lighting. See how hard it is on the eyes. 
You will not have this type of light. No. You will have a more soft 
and clear light than that which is created by the power of electricity. 
82 He makes all things new. He has the Power of heaven and earth. 
There have been many guesses made of just what type of power will 
be used in the hereafter. Some guesses have come close and some 
have not even scratched the surface of that which will come as a new 
world. You are a long way off in some of the way of thinking and 
understanding and knowledge of what is yet to come according to 
what I have been taught by Allah (God) Himself, Who Came in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever.  
83 "For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: the former 
shall not be remembered, or come into mind." Bible, Is. 65:17. 
84 Here we have a prophecy that Allah (God) Will Make All Things 
new. "He causes things to grow into a new growth," according to the 
Holy Qur’an. He Would Not Be a God Who Has Power over all 
things if He could not Change things according to His Will. If He 
Could Not Make New People of an old dead people, then He Has Not 
the Power to Bring In New Things because reproduction is less 
trouble to do and does not require such a skill as it does to Make 
something outright new. 
85 Here it refers to both the spiritual and the physical side, but did 
not He Make us in the Beginning out of nothing? 
86 Look at our creation from sperm to that of a human being. This is 
a marvelous piece of work of nature which bears witness of the First 
Creation. We are making new creatures every day. What helps to 
bring about new creation? When you make a new way of thinking in 
a person, he is bound to do something new; for he cannot do 
something other than new since he has a new mind, new ideas. A new 
mind and new ideas produce a new thing. Just because we have not 
seen the creation of these things we are quick to disbelieve that they 
can ever happen. 
87 The Bible, 2 Cor. 5:17 says "Therefore if any man be in Christ, he 
is a new creature; old things are passed away: behold, all things are 
become new."


--- PAGE 89 ---
88 "All who are in Christ is a new creature." This Christ Who is 
referred to in the above verse is Allah (God) in Person (The Mahdi). 
This is true and the scripture’s prophecy teaches you that You have to 
be new to be one of His Followers. He changes you in mind; and as it 
is written "as man think, so is he" (Pr. 23:7). 
89 Christ...the true interpretation of the Name is "The Crusher." 
When understood, It makes the God Coming in the Last Day to Crush 
the wicked to be the True Answer to that Name of Christ. You call 
Him the Anointed One...That is true. He is Anointed to Crush the 
wicked. He does Not Come loving the wicked as you would like Him 
to do since you are wicked yourself. 
90 The Christians twist the truth of the Bible up in such a way that it 
will read in their behalf and confound the reader and cause him to 
think that the devil is also included with the Righteous to reap the 
Salvation of the Righteous. 
91 As it is written in the Bible, None shall be saved except him who 
is born of Allah (God)...born of the Nature of Allah (God). In other 
places of the Bible it is written that "none shall be saved but the pure 
in heart...the children of the Most High...none but the Righteous." 
92 All of these scriptures prophesy of the type of people whom Allah 
(God) Will Save. Allah (God) Will Save the people whoa re born of 
Allah (God), by nature, the Black Man. We are lucky to be born of 
Allah (God). 
  
93 The Black Man thinks in terms that he is just as much hated and 
despised by Allah (God) as is the white race. The white race is the 
enemy of Allah (God) by nature. The white race was born and made 
to be an enemy of Allah (God). The Black Man is not born to be an 
enemy of Allah (God). That is why Allah (God) Came to Seek us and 
Save us from that which is rightly due to His and our enemy, (white 
race). As you find it in the Bible, "He Went Forth to Save and to 
Deliver His People." The Black People are the people of Allah (God). 
 
94 The Father of us (Black Man) in the Beginning was a Black Man 
and the Father of The Mahdi, The God in the Last Day, is a Black 
Man. A Black Man is the Father of the Son of Man (The Mahdi). 
95 Black Brother, why should you not believe in your own God 
Allah, Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to 
Whom Praises are due forever? He Came to Help you and to Save


--- PAGE 90 ---
you from that which is set up for a destruction of another people 
(white race). 
96 Why should not you, Black Brother, want to be made new since 
the devil has made you ugly. The devil made you look ugly and he 
tries to keep himself looking good so that he can attract you to follow 
him to that which you should not go to (the doom of the white man). 
97 Behold He Makes All Things New. Allah (God) Will tear down 
the false one (white race). How can Allah (God) Build something 
new and better for us than that which we are living in if He does not 
first tear the false one down and Build a New house; for the old 
house has become so disagreeable to live in peace. We have got to 
find a better house than this one in which mischief and bloodshed is 
going on daily. Now we need another house better than this one. 
Read the Last Book in your Bible, Rev. 2:17, You must have 
everything new. Read Romans 7:6. These are references of your 
Bible that you believe in; now you see it verifies the teachings of 
Islam. Maybe now you will not accept these Bible verifications. 
98 Black Man, I only want you to know that what I am writing is all 
for your sake so that you may believe. Why should not you believe in 
your own salvation when everything is in your favor? 
99 As I have pointed out to you in the prophecy that He will make all 
things new, I have pointed out to you that this includes our being 
given a new mind which produces new ideas. The new mind and the 
new ideas are to condition us for the new materialistic things that He 
will make. 
100 The new people that are to be made are from us (Black Man of 
America). We will be made a new people, for we have been 
destroyed mentally and physically by the teachers and guides of this 
world of the white race. Therefore in order to renew us, (the once 
servitude slave and the now free slave of our enemy), we must have 
anew spirit that will produce ideas in us to become a new people. 
Both the Bible and the Holy Qur’an prophesy that a new generation 
(people) will be raised up as I have pointed out on the making of a 
new heaven and a new earth. He can cause a renewal or reproduction 
of the heavens and the earth -- to make it clear, cause them to grow 
into a new growth. He has the power to do these things. He has not 
only the Power to bring into existence all the things which we now 
see present, but He also has the Power to Change that which exists 
into something else, or to destroy the present existence outright and 
cause it to waste away outright and bring in a new creation in its


--- PAGE 91 ---
place. 
101 You are quick to believe in that which makes no sense at all, but 
that which makes sense you are not quick to believe in it. 
102 You have been born and reared into spooky beliefs, and you 
believe that all of the prophecies relating to heaven and the lives of 
those people are something spooky without form and with no desire 
to eat or even to drink. You make them formless. The fact is that the 
way we were taught and brought up instilled these spooky beliefs in 
our minds. The preachers who preached the Bible did not give to us 
the understanding of that which was written, but rather they preached 
as they read it. The reading is to be understood. Could we believe the 
Bible on face value when it says that Samson killed a lion and then 
came back and found bees making honey in the carcass and that he 
ate from it? Could we believe that he would be so foolish as to eat 
honey out of a dead carcass? No. In the first place it did not mean 
that he had killed a natural lion. Furthermore, the bee is not so 
indecent about food for its young that it would seek a carcass to build 
a home in nor would we be so foolish as to take it fro granted that the 
harlot, Delilah, shaved off the seven (7) locks of Samson’s hair or 
even that his hair was where his strength lay. These writings are to be 
understood. If we have not the understanding of the words of 
prophecy which were given to the prophets from Allah (God), then 
we do not understand the Words of God. 
103 How can such a spiritually blind person believe when he does 
not understand what he is reading himself? The Jesus was right when 
he prophesied that the blind cannot lead the blind Mt. 15; 14. This is 
the classification which he gave to the blind preachers and their blind 
followers. 
104 Black Preachers who make themselves preachers, although they 
lack the knowledge of the theology of the Bible, should not be 
licensed to preach, not to think of ordaining them. But you do so and 
the white man, who is actually the one who licenses you to preach, 
backs you up as a Black preacher, knowing that you do not have the 
knowledge of the scriptures. He did not intend that you have the 
knowledge of the scriptures. He makes all things new. Who Is He? 
He is the Son of Man. The Son of Man is made part of both peoples, 
the Black and white, so that he may be able to deal with both peoples 
justly and righteously. 
105 Now here in the Bible is it prophesied that something other than 
Man is going to do


--- PAGE 92 ---
something for man that will better his condition or even to destroy his 
existence...other than another man. Therefore nothing that we see in 
the animal or fowl world or in water-life on this planet has the power 
to lead or to guide us. There is none in the other worlds of life who 
has any interest in us at all. They are not given brains that will think 
in terms of man or interest in man and his affairs. 
106 He makes all things new. Allah (God) Who Came in the Person 
of Master Fard Muhammad must make all things new in order to 
bring in a new government based upon Freedom, Justice, Equality, 
and Righteousness to displace the world of evil and unrighteousness. 
107 The world of evil and unrighteousness has no base for Allah 
(God) to Build a world of righteousness upon or to make new 
heavens or a new earth for the righteous. He must build a new world 
absolutely from the very bases of righteousness and Justice. Nowhere 
in this world of the white race are there Freedom, Justice, Equality, 
and Righteousness. The father of the white race, Yakub, did not put 
the basis in his race to make a world of Freedom, Justice, Equality, 
and Righteousness; for the Black Man already has a world of 
Freedom, Justice and Equality before Yakub made his unrighteous 
world to oppose our world of righteousness. 
108 The Arab thinks it is something grave to talk about a new Islam. 
Why certainly, Brother! What have you been going through for the 
past six thousand (6,000) years under the rule of the devil. Now to 
reject The Righteous One Who not only brings about a new mind and 
a new idea and a new life and a new change as the Holy Qur’an 
teaches you and me today is fatal. It is not that the base of Islam is 
wrong. I say this time and time again; that the belief in One God, that 
the Bible and the Holy Qur’an prophesy that you must have, is true. 
The Belief in one Messenger or shepherd as He is sometimes referred 
to in the Bible stands true. You will no more have many Gods to 
believe in, but where both Christian and orthodox Muslim are wrong 
in that believe, the Christians believe in the return of Jesus to take 
part in the Resurrection which si contrary to the truth. The orthodox 
Arab teachers believe that what Muhammad gave is sufficient 
forever. Certainly it is the truth forever but it does not mean that we 
should be looking for Muhammad’s Holy Qur’an to jus t take wings 
and become a man and come among us whom the Holy Qur’an 
would not prophesy that a new nation, a new generation would be 
born if that which was received, the Holy Qur’an was sufficient to 
convert the world. Today the world is more opposed to Islam than 
ever in a manner of speaking, for the Islamic world is having 
confusion over the very principles they have been teaching. They 
have gone so far off the path themselves  that they cannot correct or


--- PAGE 93 ---
establish a return start for the future of Islam. They must admit that 
the Holy Qur’an prophesies of the "Coming of Allah (God)" an "The 
Days of Allah (God)" and what He Can Do. The Holy Qur’an also 
prophesies that the Messenger and Allah (God) Would Be as One 
Person, together, and that the Messenger would teach and train his 
own ministers in that day. 
109 The Muhammad of 1,400 years ago. The Muhammad in this 
prophecy is a man in the Resurrection, for Muhammad of 1,400 years 
ago knew nothing about us in this day and time. We were too far in 
the future. The prophecy did not prophesy that he would come back 
to teach us. He cannot teach us. 
110 He could only give us a book to read, an Arabic Holy Qur’an. 
The Holy Qur’an teaches us that Allah (God) would raise up a 
Messenger from among the dead, (the so-called Negro), and he must 
be one given the ministryship to teach them the Way to Allah (God). 
He makes all things new. I say to the world of Islam, Bow To Him. 
The Holy Qur’an teaches us that, "You shall see all nations bowing 
down to him," Who Makes All Things New, Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever. 
111 Study over the Name Fard; it is sufficient to warn you that this is 
not the Name that Muhammad prophesies of. In fact Muhammad 
never saw the God. Muhammad only Heard His Voice. The 
Muhammad of the prophecy of the Holy Qur’an teaches and 
prophesies of a Muhammad who would get his Word from the Mouth 
of Allah (God) and not through visions of talking to Him and never 
seeing the Speaker. So I say to the Arab world of Islam, prepare 
yourself for all that you hear coming from the mouth of Messenger 
Elijah Muhammad here in America. You can accept it or reject it. It 
Would be good if you accept it. Otherwise you can reject it and meet 
the fate of those who before you rejected a messenger because of 
their pride, for they wanted to be that which they were not to be. He 
makes all things new...


--- PAGE 94 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24 CHAPTER 24  
God Helps Those Who Help Themselves! God Helps Those Who Help Themselves! God Helps Those Who Help Themselves! God Helps Those Who Help Themselves!  
1 It is almost unbelievable to see and talk with our people and find in 
their talk, in this modern rise of advanced education for all, that our 
very educators and intellectual people desire nothing more than to 
remain in the "free" mental shackles of slavery with nothing 
constructive for themselves and their people. 
2 After 400 years (of which one hundred of these years the once-
slave masters claim they have freed us), there has not been much 
of an effort on our part to go free in "deed".  
3 Imagine people out here with B.A., B.S., M.A., M.S., and Ph.D. 
degrees still begging the white man to give them a job and to care for 
them as their fathers did in slavery times. This actually shows that the 
more highly educated and trained our people are, the more they want 
to be like white people and be recognized as one of them throughout 
the government of America. 
4 They are leading their poor brothers and sisters in Mississippi, 
Georgia, Alabama, Florida, the Carolinas, and other southern states 
as well as the northern states into a more slave-like condition than 
our parents were in, because this type of slavery (mental slavery) is 
worse than physical slavery. 
5 If you notice in talking to most intellectual Black people, you can 
see readily in their conversations that they want to be members in the 
society of white people. They care not what happens to the poor man 
in the mud. We could do wonderful things for ourselves if we get the 
idea of social equality and integrated with white people in their many 
societies out of our hearts. 
6 Regardless of how disgraceful that society may be (and they have a 
society now going partly nude), some of our people want to be 
members of it. Imagine these intellectual people, preachers, and 
pastors of churches going into spiritual places for the worship of God 
with their wives and daughters wearing dresses up across their thighs. 
 
7 What kind of God would recognize you in such a filthy and 
disrespectful manner of dress in a house called by His Name? God is 
not a God Who Will recognize respect of filth. He is a Decent and 
Intelligent God. Your wives and daughters go in a church, sitting,


--- PAGE 95 ---
with such styles of dress on, facing the pastor on the speaker’s stand 
and he makes no objection to it whatsoever, but condones it. 
8 We need a Divine Judgment for sure to check and bring to naught 
the disgrace of God and the worship of Satan (the devil). 
9 Join up with me on the decent and sensible program beginning on 
page 223 of this book. Get business minded; get a creative mind. The 
degree of education we have today, given to us by the white man, can 
be used effectively to go for self if we want to go for self. 
10 You do not like doing right. You do not like doing something for 
self. You glorify begging the white man to do for you that which you 
can do for yourself. I warn you that the day is not far distant when 
you will be forced to do something for yourself because the white 
man is bound to drop you. And that he knows, but he is not telling 
you. He is allowing you the chance to make a fool of yourself and be 
caught at that time like a grasshopper who enjoyed summer weather. 
But cold weather kills the grasshopper. It freezes him to death 
because he has no house to lodge in. 
11 You do not want to be separated from your enemies regardless of 
what kind of treatment you receive and they do not want you 
separated from them, as long as they can hold you with them. You 
serve as a protection for them and they know you love them and want 
to be like them. They will agree with you when you say separation 
will not settle the problem, while that is the main step to take from an 
enemy who will not do justice by you (leave and go for yourself). 
12 We were not originally born with white people. We have just been 
among white people four hundred years. So why do you think 
separation is the answer to your problem with your enemy? God 
Himself wants to separate from His enemy and you certainly are in 
the Divine plan to be separated. 
13 You will not even go out of the enemy’s house; nor from the front 
of his gate to do something for yourself that he will allow you to do. 
We need as a start a hundred million acres of farmland. You say: "No 
sir! I do not want to farm." 
14 The white man is one of the greatest farmers there is on the earth. 
American’s farms can feed many nations and people -- even you and 
me. Why should not we here, with such industrious people, learn to 
do the same for ourselves? 
15 You have hundreds of millions of dollars laying in banks here in


--- PAGE 96 ---
Chicago and in other banks throughout America. You put your 
money in the white man’s bank for him to use as he pleases. He gives 
you a little interest on it and you are satisfied. 
16 I proposed establishing a Black national bank for ourselves. You 
cannot see yourself trusting your own self. If you would loan me a 
few of your millions that you have laying in these banks -- not a 
hundred million, just loan me ten million -- I would show you one 
hundred million dollars for the use of that ten million. 
17 I have to turn to the white man for this loan. He probably will not 
turn me down because he is tired of taking care of you and having 
you jumping up in his face and lying down at his gate. He is tired of 
it, but he does not tell you. He will show you in actions. When he sics 
his dogs on you, turns his fire hoses on you and kicks you down in 
the streets, throwing you in his "lock up," he is telling you all the 
time: "Nigger, get away from my door." But you are like it is written. 
You take all of this humiliation. 
18 Just think: You have intelligent Black people disgracing 
themselves, begging the white man to create jobs for them and to 
accept them as his equal. 
19 Christian preachers, pastors of churches, and other Black 
politicians are caught in this disgraceful begging manner. 
20 In a time when we should be showing the world that after one 
hundred years up from slavery, we are leading ourselves out of that 
slavery mentality, put in us by the white slave masters, they are 
acting worse than our fathers did. Our fathers begged, but they 
begged to go back to Africa where the white man brought us from. 
21 You give the most ignorant and disgraceful answer, saying that 
separation will not settle or solve the problem of white people’s 
disrespect of Black people. I say you should suffer his disgrace of 
you, since he cannot get you to go from him nor will you try and do 
something for yourself, without him doing it for you. 
22 My followers and I, by the Help of God, and with the respect of 
the nations of the earth, are trying to do something for ourselves. 
23 We thank the white man for freeing us. And we shall show him 
that we are intelligent enough to try now to stay free.


--- PAGE 97 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25 CHAPTER 25  
Islam Will Unite Black Islam Will Unite Black Islam Will Unite Black Islam Will Unite Black  
 
1 Allah (God) has come to unite us. We, the Black People in 
America, must unite. But Unity only comes on the acceptance of 
Islam. Without Black Unity, we have no power regardless of how 
great in numbers we may be. 
2 Divine Wisdom of God is what puts us on the path to ascend to the 
heights that He Has Vouched for as being safe for us. Allah (God) 
Has Given to us Islam that we may be successful in the knowledge of 
self, and the doing for self with His Guidance. 
3 For the first time, Islam, the True Religion of Allah (God) Is Being 
Offered to us, the Black People in America, by Allah (God) Himself, 
Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
Praises are due forever. We came from righteousness by nature, but 
we were deceived by the enemy of righteousness (devil). 
4 As mortar cements and ties brick and stone together into one wall 
or building, so has Islam come with the love of Black Brother for 
Black Brother, in order to unite us so that we will become one -- one 
in the power of good and Unity. 
5 In Islam, Allah (God) Offers to take off the Yoke of bondage to 
satan, the devil, and the chains of slavery and give to us the key that 
will always be available to us -- a key that can keep us out of the 
prison cells of satan, the devil. 
6 Islam is only entire submission to the Will of God. There are other 
precepts of Islam that have been made into volume of books, but the 
main principle of Islam is for you and me to bow to the Will of God 
and do His Will. 
7 We have been faithful in bowing to the devil’s evil will. But now 
we must bow to the Will of the God of Truth, Righteousness, and 
Justice, or be removed from the planet earth. 
8 The light of Truth has come to us in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, God in Person, to Whom Praises are due forever. It is 
prophesied in the Bible, Is. 60:1,2..."Arise and shine, for the light has


--- PAGE 98 ---
come." This is the first time that the Light of truth, the knowledge of 
self, and the knowledge of the enemy of self, and God, Has Been 
Made Manifest. This is also the first manifestation of the cause of the 
spiritual darkness that we have lived in for the past six thousand 
(6,000) years. 
9 The whole world of Black Man which has slept for the past six 
thousand (6,000) years, under the rule of our enemies (devil white 
race) needs external washing as well as internal spiritual cleansing. 
We can find the Black Man living in slum-like conditions throughout 
the world. To be deprived of the knowledge of self for four hundred 
(400) years is a long time, but six thousand (6,000) years is even 
longer. 
10 God referred to this internal and external cleansing in these worlds 
(Mal. 3:3..."He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. He shall 
purge the priesthood of the people that they may offer unto the Lord 
an offering in righteousness." Islam comes to reform the so-called 
Negro and to save him from God’s destruction of the enemy devil. 
11 Islam, if carried into practice by you and me, will eradicate all 
such things as slums because it is people who create slums. When we 
ask other people to clean up our own filthy houses, we are disgracing 
our own intelligence and decency. 
12 But the sense of dignity that Islam puts into us forces us to qualify 
ourselves in intelligence and dignity and to remain qualified. This is 
the qualification that we need. 
13 Islam qualifies us to return to the Nation of Islam, to which we 
belong by nature, but from which we were deceived, and brought out 
of by the devils. 
14 Allah (God) Has Chosen us to Guide us to Himself and to Make 
of us a nation superior over the present nations -- to make us the 
head, and no longer the tail. 
15 Islam is the Great Wisdom that Allah (God) Promised us through 
His Prophets. Islam is the Religion of Allah (God) and of the Black 
Man. Islam is the religion of Jesus and of the prophets before Jesus, 
and the prophets after Jesus, according to the Bible and the Holy 
Qur’an. 
16 Allah (God) Could Not Change His Religion, Islam, because one 
would want to know why He Changed it. Allah (God) Created 
Himself and He Chose From Himself Islam. Therefore, by nature, He


--- PAGE 99 ---
Created Himself, The God of Islam. Islam has not changed since the 
Creation. Islam always was. It is our religion and He Will Not accept 
another religion. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26 CHAPTER 26  
The Will Of Allah Is Being Done The Will Of Allah Is Being Done The Will Of Allah Is Being Done The Will Of Allah Is Being Done  
 
1 The new world of Islam is coming in -- not the old world of Islam, 
but a new world of Islam. "Behold I make all things new!" Rev. 21:5. 
2 We are living in the change of worlds. The old world is going out 
and the new world is coming in. This is something to be happy and 
thankful to Allah for -- to bear witness to the change of worlds! 
3 This is the first time that Allah (God) Has Been Known in Person. 
The Coming of Allah in Person indicated this change of worlds -- 
signifying a permanent change, where God will set up His Kingdom 
is Islam without interference. 
4 This is the end of opposition and attacks against the righteous and 
their righteous religion, Islam. Islam has a righteous name that 
corresponds with the principles and beliefs of Islam. It is a very 
beautiful name. 
5 The white race works hard for 6,000 years to try to destroy the 
religion of Allah (God). But the white race missed. We are still here. 
6 The Name, Allah, is a Great Name! I’d rather call Him Allah than 
to Call Him God. God is an English name for the Supreme Being. To 
say God -- this refers to the supreme Being, but we have too many 
gods, and we would like to give Credit to only One God. So we 
rather use the name, Allah. I want Allah to have all the Credit that we 
can Give to Him! 
7 Allah Is a Great Name for the Supreme Being. It means Allah 
everywhere. It colors everything. I like that Name, Allah! 
8 Let Thy Will be done! The Will of Allah must be done! I want to 
talk with you a few minutes on the Will of Allah. Let Thy Will be


--- PAGE 100 ---
done. 
9 We want always that God do His Will, but we are not always 
prepared to receive His Will. While we wait for His Will, we do our 
own will -- that is no good! 
10 Thy Will be done! The Will of Allah must be done! We must, 
today accept the Will of Allah and not our will -- not the will of other 
than Allah. 
11 You have too many gods in your religion, Christianity. We do not 
know which one you mean. You curse with the Name of God and 
you are always disrespectful to the honor due to that Name. 
12 Allah says there is no God but He. Allah Is the Best Knower. If 
you want to make a spook out of me, look at me, good, -- I am not a 
spook. I stayed with Allah and we were together for three years and 
four months, night and day. If you think you know Allah, better, here 
I am -- question me. 
13 The Will of Allah must be done. Allah, through His Will, will 
come out Himself to be the champion and lead the righteous to 
Victory. His Will shall not be hindered by anyone. 
14 When a person gets righteous, God accepts him as His FRIEND. 
Then the will of each other is with each is with each other. What one 
wills, the other wills. It is the will of both. 
15 The Messenger’s will is in accord with the Will of Allah. The 
Messenger cannot will something opposed to Allah. Allah has taken 
over the Messenger’s heart, mind, and brain and Allah is making 
them to react according to His Will! 
16 This is what the Holy Qur’an teaches -- that the Will of Allah is 
the will of the Messenger and the will of the Messenger is the Will of 
Allah.  
17 Jesus himself said that he was not God. The coming of Jesus was 
not God. The coming of Jesus was not ever prophesied in the Old 
Testament of the Bible. What you read of Jesus, in the Old Testament 
-- that is myself: the last days with a government upon his shoulder, 
Isa. 9:6. Jesus did not have a government upon his shoulder, which is 
what he needed for a prophet that is to rule, attack, and destroy the 
Jews, Christians, and Greeks -- authorities over religion. He needed 
that knowledge and power. If he had a government upon his shoulder


--- PAGE 101 ---
-- what government? 
18 The Will of Allah must be done! Knowledge and belief are 
different. I can believe that there is an airplane out there on the 
doorstep, but there is no airplane out there. 
19 There are many people who believe that angels are out in the air 
somewhere, but if they are out there, we cannot see them. There is no 
such thing as formless spirits flying around out there somewhere in 
space, unless it is righteous minds. 
20 The Will of Allah must be done. Allah could not have a Will 
Himself until He had brains, Himself. Allah was created; self-created 
from an atom of life. The atom of life was not only able to create 
flesh and have blood from the earth that he was created on -- Allah 
(God) was created on the very earth that we are on today. But the 
earth was not as it is today. 
21 I want to come back to our subject, our text, the Will of God. The 
Will of Allah must be done. Allah’s (God’s) Will co uld not be done 
as long as He has an enemy powerful enough to force his rule against 
the Will of God. 
22 Allah (God) allowed the enemy 6,000 years in which to rule. Now 
this is the time that the enemy cannot force his will against the Will 
of Allah. The white man no longer has power to force his will against 
Allah and against the representatives of Allah, the prophets! 
23 Thy Will be done. The Will of Allah must be done. It is not the 
Will of Allah that His people, the Black People, be sick. When a man 
has no sickness in his body, we call him happy. He is happy. He does 
not feel any pain; the body is happy. 
24 This is just the life Allah (God) teaches you to enjoy. It is not the 
will of Allah that you get sick. You make yourself sick. 
25 Allah does not have a set time for you and me to die. We kill 
ourselves. We can prolong our lives by living right and eating the 
right food. 
26 People who want their will to be done, let them go to Allah and 
obey Allah and the Messenger.


--- PAGE 102 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 27  
Friendship of Allah (God)  
 
1 Of all friendships of friends and relations, there is no friendship 
that is equal to the Friendship of Allah (God). To have Allah (God) 
as our Friend, we have a Place of Refuge -- we have a shelter from 
the great stormy tempest of the wicked. 
2 The Friendship Of Allah (God) is the kind of Friendship and 
Refuge that the Black Man in America should seek. We, the 
Muslims who have submitted ourselves to the Will of Allah (God), 
do His Will so that Allah (God) May Be Pleased to Do For us and 
To Be our Friend. 
3 Within the scope of four hundred (400) years we have not had a 
friend here in America. If the white man says that we are from the 
jungles of Africa, then we say the reptiles, the beasts, and the other 
wild life of the jungle are better friends to us than the civilized white 
slavemakers. 
4 Now To Have The Supreme Being as our Friend and to have Him 
Befriend us -- we could not hope for a better friend. He is worth all 
other friends combined. 
5 Concerning Faith in Allah (God), the Bible teaches you and me 
that Allah (God) met Abraham and upon submission he was able to 
get the honor of being the friend of God because Abraham submitted 
to the Will of Allah (God). The history of Abraham is the history of 
all of the righteous who submit to do the Will of Allah (God) -- they 
are successful. 
6 From Noah to Muhammad, the righteous have triumphed over 
their enemies. We, the Black Man in America, are so foolish that we 
want to take an open enemy to be our friend instead of Allah (God) 
Himself. 
7 The White race has never shown true friendship to us. When they 
are planning to do evil against us they offer us a false show of 
friendship. 
8 The Great work that I am doing in your midst, in the Name of Him


--- PAGE 103 ---
Who Has Taught Me and Who Guides Me to Do His Will, should be 
enough for you to know that we have Allah (God) Who Came in the 
Person of Master Fard Muhammad for our Friend. 
9 I am so happy to know that I have a Friend in Allah (God). Never 
before in all of my life could I say that I had a friend. The Friendship 
of Allah (God) is the kind of Friendship that we all should have. 
10 Regardless to how many there are of us here on Western soil or 
in the Western Hemisphere, we should all seek Allah (God) Who 
Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises 
are Due forever, for Friendship. 
11 Some Of Us, being ignorant and proud of ourselves under the 
false friendship of the devil, think that we are secure under the 
devil’s false power. There is the noise of the thunder of war clashing 
over the whole world of mankind and it has touched the home of the 
original man as well. Everybody is fighting for survival. But as I 
have preached to you for nearly forty years, the population of your 
and my Black people, our Black Nation, reaches into the billions 
instead of into the thousands. 
12 The Muslim has not only the Friendship of Allah (God), but the 
Muslim has the friendship of all Black, Brown, Yellow, Red or 
whatever color people there may be other than the white people. 
You know and you have seen it printed in Black and white how the 
world of our People regardless to their color (except the white man), 
when it comes to the Muslims, they are our friends. This is due to 
Allah’s Love and Friendship for us who accept the Islamic Faith 
which is the religion of Abraham and the prophets. Islam is entire 
submission to the Will of Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad to Whom Praises are Due forever. 
13 We, the Black Man in America, have nothing -- no money and no 
decent homes to live in. Allah (God) Is The Giver, and to reject the 
offer of The Friendship of Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever, to better 
our condition and set us in heaven at once -- for our rejection, our 
flesh should fry in hellfire. 
14 I think that there are many meaningful Black professional people 
who could, if they would, unite with me and my Followers and the 
whole picture of America would change at once. 
15 With the Help of Allah (God), we will not fail. Allah (God) Will 
Not Let us fail. But we need the sure Friendship of a friend that will


--- PAGE 104 ---
not fail us in the time of trouble. For this is the time of trouble in 
which we are living. 
16 Do Not look for the Judgment to come. You are in the Judgment 
now. The ‘Day of Judgment’ means the ‘Years of Judg ment’. The 
‘Day’ referred to does not mean "a twenty-four (24) hour day". The 
Holy Qur’an refers to the ‘Judgment’ as the ‘Days o f Allah (God).’ 
The expression ‘years’ is used to refer to days and ‘days’ refers to 
years. 
17 But those days are expired now, and America is number one on 
Allah’s (God’s) List of countries for Him to Deal w ith, America is 
first because of her evil done and the evil which she continued to do 
to her Black once-slave. 
18 We must remember that the scriptures prophesy (Bible Rev.) that 
in one day death and mourning came to her (America). That day is 
not far distant. The people are so confused here in America that 
there is no agreement nor trust in each other. 
19 Believe and Obey me. And if you love Allah (God), He Will 
Love you. He Will Be your Friend and Protect you from the evil 
planning of this evil world; for they plan the destruction of the Black 
slave. It seems as though they should love the Black slave. It seems 
as though they should love the Black once-slave since the Black 
slave has done so much and has suffered untold misery from the 
hand of his white slave-master who has been so loyal in helping the 
white slave- master fight to the death in all of his wars for the sake 
of the white slavemaster. 
20 This is the day that the white slave-master continues to kill you 
and me as though the Black slave has once robbed the white man of 
his country; and so he wants to get even with the Black slave. 
21 But as it is written, "As she (America) has done, so shall it be 
done unto her." 
22 Take Allah (God) for your Friend, Black Man, for Allah (God) is 
a Sure Friend.


--- PAGE 105 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 28  
Christianity Versus Islam  
 
In Examining the truth of the two religions, Islam and Christianity 
the basic beliefs in Christianity are: 
1. God is the Father; 
2. Jesus is His son, and 
3. The Holy Ghost; and these three are one God. 
2 Note: Adam is supposed to have been the first man that God 
created, but he is never referred to as the son or as a begotten or only 
son. 
3 There is one thing I hope to make clear to my people and that is: 
the Christian religion, as taught and misunderstood by them, is not 
what they have thought it was. Jesus’ history refers more to a future 
Jesus than the past. There is a prophecy of a Son being prepared to 
redeem man (the so-called Negroes). This Jesus made His appearance 
July 4, 1930 and His work is now in effect. 
4 Jesus (Isa) of 2,000 years ago cannot do us any good nor harm. It is 
outright ignorance to believe that He can. We should be intelligent 
enough to believe in that which can be or has been proven true. 
Making the Son and the Holy Ghost the equal with the Father is 
absolutely sinful. There is no proof that there was or ever shall be a 
time when people will return to life after they are physically dead. 
There is no proof that God was the father of Mary’s son, nor is there 
proof that He is alive some place waiting to return for the Judgment. 
5 The Holy Qur’an’ says: "And they say: ‘The Beneficent God has 
taken to Himself a Son.’" 
6 Certainly you have made an abominable assertion. The heavens 
may almost be rent thereat, and the earth cleave asunder; and the 
mountains fall down in pieces that they ascribe a son to the 
beneficent God. And it is not worthy of the beneficent God that He 
should take to Himself a son" (19:88 -92). God is self -sufficient. He


--- PAGE 106 ---
does not need a son to help Him with the people. "What do then those 
who disbelieve (the Christians) think that they can take my servants 
to be guardians besides Me? Surely we have prepared hell for the 
entertainment of the unbelievers" (18:102). 
7 The Christians who are guilty of disbelieving in Allah and His 
religion, Islam, and who charge God with getting a son by Mary and 
here warned that Allah has prepared hell for them. You should 
question the teachers and their teachings of any religion. Take no 
religion without the knowledge of its truth, lest you be made a fool. 
8 Jesus did not make Himself the equal of God. The Holy Qur’an 
says: "Jesus said: ‘Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given to me 
the Book and me a prophet (not His son) and He has made me 
blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on me prayer and 
poor-rate so long as I live!’" (19:30-31). We cannot find anything to 
give Jesus as a title but a "prophet" and He did prophesy. BUT as the 
Holy Qur’an further says: "But parties from among them (the 
Christians) disagreed with each other, so woe to those who 
disbelieve, because of presence on a great day" (19:37). There just is 
no defense for such false teachings as the religion of Christianity. 
Who can say, with truth, that they have seen the Jesus in flesh and 
blood after His death? Who can say, with truth, that the Holy Ghost 
or spirit is the equal to its producer? The very emblem of 
CHRISTIANITY IS disgraceful to the righteous: a cross and the 
image of a man nailed thereon with a crown of thorns on his head and 
a wound in his heart. Such signs the so-called Negroes should never 
look at and they should hate and abominate the one who offers them 
such ghastly and shameful emblems. Most times the crucified figure 
is nude except for a strip of cloth over his private parts. 
9 This is the very way that they lynch so-called Negroes; mutilating 
their bodies and then offering you a piece of the rope that the man 
was hung with as a warning to you that you will be next. They burn 
the cross as warnings to you even though the cross, they claim, is 
sacred among their religious believers. 
10 I say with almost tears in my eyes: brothers and sisters give up 
believing in such a religion and join on to the religion (Islam) of our 
father, Abraham, and take for yourself the crescent for your emblem 
which is universally recognized. 
11 The truth has arrived for us, the lost-found members of the darker 
people of earth here in America, to stop playing the "fool" among 
ourselves and the world of mankind and make up our minds whether 
we are going to hold on to that religion which the white race teaches


--- PAGE 107 ---
us or believe in the kingdom of the God of our people which is taught 
by our people. 
12 We make fools of ourselves to please our enemies (the white 
race). The average so-called Negro in America is not concerned 
about love and unity among his own kind but is really interested in 
trying to get love and unity among other than his own kind. 
13 Of all the histories of people upon our planet earth, past and 
present, we can find no people who have loved their enemies and 
hated themselves but the American so-called Negroes. They love and 
admire their enemies and all that goes for their enemies. They are 
ready in an instant to dispute, oppose, and kill you if you are not 
likewise. 
14 I am a lover of my own people and a hater, like God, of all our 
enemies and I fear only God who has raised me up from among my 
people to bring them out of the darkness of falsehood into His right 
of truth so that they may enjoy heaven while they live. There are but 
a very few so-called Negroes who have spent any time examining the 
truth of the Bible and the white man’s Christianity. Therefore, they 
are without the real truth of the Bible and Christianity. I know the 
consequence of trying to bring truth to our people who are in love 
with those who have taken their fathers out of truth into falsehood. 
But my life and my death are for this cause. 
15 If we are to accept a religion that is said to be from God, we 
should diligently examine the truth and the author of that religion, its 
people, and the contents of its book or books before we bear witness 
that it is the truth from God and the right religion. Let the so-called 
Negroes take a second look at the Bible; every word which white 
Christians want Black men to believe in from God. There is no 
mention of a religion by the name of Christianity from God or the 
prophets. Again we must remember that God does not represent 
Himself to us in the opening or closing of the Bible. He is 
represented by someone other than Himself. 
16 There His creation is pointed out to us as a proof that there is a 
Supreme Being over all this universe and that it was made in six days 
(Genesis 1:1-31). God does not address Himself to us throughout the 
first chapter. Not His religion nor even the name of the representation 
of God is mentioned there. 
17 This reader is without authentic proof of just who is the author of 
the book called Genesis. You must remember that from the King 
James authoriz ed version of the Bible, it has been only 346 years and


--- PAGE 108 ---
you have only been permitted to read the Bible for the past 90 years. 
The white man, our slavemaster and enemy, had the Bible over 250 
years before we were allowed to read the book. 
18 Now you seem to know more about the purity of the Bible than 
those who translated it into their own language. Not only do you try 
defending the Bible as being the word of God, but you try equally to 
defend the white race and their wicked world. 
19 You must remember and never forget that the white Christian race 
made slaves of our fathers and will not allow you now to rise above 
the status of a free slave! Why is the Pope, who lives in Rome, Italy, 
the head of the Christian churches when Jesus was born in Palestine 
and did the greater portion of His teachings in and around Jerusalem? 
Why is not Jerusalem the capital and head of the Christian churches? 
We (the Muslims) took Jerusalem and the tomb of Jesus in 1187 A.D. 
 
20 Certainly there is a Saviour predicted for you, but not the one of 
two thousand years ago, but the one that Jesus prophesied would 
come after Him who will redeem us from the hands of our enemies. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29 CHAPTER 29  
Mary, Joseph, and Jesus Mary, Joseph, and Jesus Mary, Joseph, and Jesus Mary, Joseph, and Jesus  
 
1 The 25th of December is the birthday of Nimrod, the evil demon of 
the white race, who was born in the last 300 years of the civilization 
of Moses (17th Century B.C.). 
2 From Moses to Jesus, there were many minor prophets and there 
were many wicked rulers. Jesus came, warning the white race that if 
they did not accept the truth of their coming doom, it would come to 
them in a day that they would not be aware of. 
3 The deceitful theologians and writers of Christianity along with 
their chief, the Pope of Rome, know the truth; but yet have deceived 
the people as to the knowledge of the truth by deceiving them to 
worship an evil demon like Nimrod. They have the history of Nimrod 
with them and they use him under the name of Jesus to deceive the 
people to make them believe that the 25th of December was Jesus ’


--- PAGE 109 ---
birthday. And, in this way, they would have the world worshipping 
this wicked evil demon, Nimrod, for the all but perfect prophet, 
Jesus. 
4 But Jesus was not born in December. God in the Person of Master 
Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever, has taught me 
that his birthday took place between the first and second weeks of 
September, and that no one knows exactly what day he was born, for 
it was a secret kept between Joseph and Mary to save them both from 
being murdered by getting a baby out of wedlock. 
5 The real truth that the Christians hate to confess is that Joseph had 
gotten the child, Jesus, by Mary while he was married to another 
woman and at that time had six children by the first marriage. So 
Master Fard Muhammad (God in Person) has taught me. 
6 The Christians portray Joseph as someone taking care of a pregnant 
woman while he had nothing to do with the pregnancy of Mary. But 
let us think sanely, as the Bible teaches us that Mary was put in the 
care of Joseph. 
7 How could the theologians of the Bible write that the woman met 
Joseph to assure him that he does not have to fear taking Mary into 
marriage for that which she is pregnant with is not from man; it is 
from God, the Holy Ghost? 
8 And, how could Joseph accept such an excuse for Mary’s 
pregnancy when he had not the knowledge of any woman in the 
history of man being found pregnant with a Holy Ghost’s son? For 
ghost means something that does not exist. 
9 Instead, the theologians who wrote the history of Jesus and Mary 
should have used such words as: The child that Mary is pregnant with 
is a Holy child or a Prophet and you, Joseph, are the father of this 
Prophet and you should not fear accepting her and accepting the truth 
that you are the father of the child that Mary is pregnant with because 
the child will be the last Prophet to the white race (Jews). This would 
have made sense. Allah, in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, 
To Whom Praises are Due forever, had taught me that this woman, 
whom the Bible mentions, told Joseph to his face that he was the 
father of the child that she was pregnant with and not the false 
teachings of the Bible that Jesus was something of a Holy Ghost and 
not flesh and blood. 
10 The theologians got this from the Jews who also accused Joseph 
of being the father of the child and that he made Mary pregnant by


--- PAGE 110 ---
visiting her under the cover of darkness (the Jews charged him with 
acting like a ghost and visiting her under the cover of darkness and 
making Mary pregnant). 
11 Joseph and Mary had promised to marry when they were going to 
school at the age of 6 and they were separated. Since Joseph was a 
poor man and Mary’s father was a rich man, he refused to give Mary 
over to Joseph when he became a man and Joseph went and married 
another woman and had been married to her for six years and had six 
children by this wife. When the opportunity came that he could visit 
Mary (as she called him and told him of the opportunity), he made 
good of it. 
12 Then the love they had for each other when they were little sprang 
anew again while they were alone together in the absence of Mary’s 
father and this act took place. So Allah, in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are Due forever, taught me. 
 
 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30 CHAPTER 30  
"And We Made The Son Of Mary And His Mother A Sign, And 
We Gave Them Refuge On A Lofty Ground Having Meadows 
And Springs"  
 
1 If the Bible students would have taken this 50th verse of the 23rd 
Chapter of the Holy Qur’an, under study together with the birth, 
ministry and death of Jesus, as given in the Bible, Matt., Mark, 
Luke and John, they would agree that the man, Jesus, 2,000 years 
ago and his mother were a sign of something to come. 
2 But the preachers of Christianity have always been overly 
anxious to put some fancy myth (other than the truth) around 
Jesus’ birth, ministry, and death, 2,000 years ago, to the extent that 
the Catholics make monuments of an imaginary Mary and her son, 
Jesus, and bow down and worship their handmade statues. 
3 The Christians have no true pictures of Jesus and his mother, 
Mary, in possession, so they use imagery and the ignorant take it


--- PAGE 111 ---
for truth. 
4 The son of Mary and his mother, a sign. Let us see if we can 
direct the sign and find something that corresponds with her son’s 
birth and the hostile attitude of the Jews against the prosperity and 
future of these two people. 
5 Why was the government, at that time, against the birth of Jesus 
and his freedom to live as other men? The Bible, Matt. 2:8, teaches 
that on his birth, when Herod heard of it, sent spies to ascertain the 
truth of the news that Mary had given birth to a child called Jesus. 
He told them to bring word to him that he may go and worship 
him. But by no means did he intend to give a true worship and 
recognition of Mary’s son, Jesus. He desired death for the son 
because he had read the Torah and in it is a prophecy of the 
Coming and Birth of a Ruler who would be King of the Jews. He 
felt that his authorities and rule would be threatened and brought 
to a naught if this was the baby prophesied of. 
6 Take this anger and dislike on the part of the beast that seeks to 
destroy the child of a woman, Bible, Rev. 12:4 "...and the dragon 
stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to 
devour her child as soon as it was born." If Mary and her son are a 
sign, or an example, of that which is to come, then whose birth and 
enslavement could correspond with these prophecies and signs any 
more than we, the American So-Called Negroes here under the 
white man? 
7 Our god is nursing us into the knowledge of our Black self, as a 
mother nurses her babies from a nursing bottle or from her breasts. 
The angry enemy watches the growth of the children whom God 
Has Chosen to build for Himself a kingdom. The enemy becomes 
angrier and angrier as the American so-called Negro (the Lost-
Found Members of the Aboriginal Nation) grow into the 
knowledge of self, our God and our True Religion, Islam (Entire 
submission to the Will of God). 
8 In the Bible, the Book of Revelation gives a symbolic picture of 
the story of Mary and her son, Jesus, which is recounted in the 1st 
Chapter of Matt., but nevertheless, if understood, it is easy to see 
that Mary and her son were a sign of the American so-called 
Negro coming in the future. He would have a worse enemy against 
him; one who has the nature of a beast. 
9 As Herod did, the enemy admires the so-called Negro, but at the 
same time he hopes to trick t he Negro to go down with him to his


--- PAGE 112 ---
doom. As it is prophesied, Bible Rev. 19:20, actually the beast did 
deceive the people. 
10 The Prophets say that the slave, being deceived, worshipped the 
mark of the slave-master (his religion and name). There are many 
of our people today who hope to be dignified and respected by 
worshipping the cross and by going in the slave-master’s name. 
11 This worship called Christianity and the names of the white 
slavemaster dooms Black Americans to an eternal death in the fire 
of hell. This fire of hell will be kindled from the atmosphere and 
sun over America. This is the only part of the earth of which it is 
prophesied that God would turn it into a Lake of Fire; not the 
whole earth. The reason it is called a lake is because a lake is 
confined to a certain area. A lake is inland surrounded by land. 
12 The fleeing of Mary with her son to Egypt and Joseph’s aiding 
her to make haste to Egypt Bible Matt. 2:13, is a beautiful sign of 
the so-called American Negro fleeing out of America to the open 
arms of the Muslim world. 
13 The King, Herod, desired most of all to kill Jesus in his 
infancy. Bible, Rev. 12:4 tells us that the dragon stood before the 
woman. The woman here represents the Messenger of God. The 
child represents the followers of the Messenger. 
14 In the Bible, Rev. 14:1, we find the Lamb (Messenger of Allah, 
God) standing on the Mount Zion (foreign shore); with him was a 
hundred and forty four thousand (his followers who had escaped 
from the anger of the beast). 
15 The average so-called Negro preacher has always believed this 
was referring to Jesus, the son of Mary. But this is due to his lack 
of knowledge of the Bible story of Jesus. Jesus, as I have said and 
written, was only a prophet. He is not what the average so-called 
Negro is made to believe from the surface teachings of the Bible. 
They have been taught that Jesus is some kind of mysterious 
being, and not a natural man, and that he is God, and that he could 
be killed, put into a grave back there 2,000 years ago, and ascend 
up into space to await the end of the world. They have been taught 
to believe that he will return and usher in the Judgment of this 
world. All of this is wrong. 
16 The fleeing out of Jerusalem under the cover of darkness is 
backed up by prophecy made in the Bible, Ez. 34:12, "...and will 
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in


--- PAGE 113 ---
the cloudy and dark day." This is referring to the last days; that 
Allah (God) would gather us in under a cover of a cloudy and dark 
day. We go further back to prophecy. Bible Ex. 12:31, 42 says that 
Israel was brought out of Egypt under cover of darkness. The 
Bible, Rev. 8:12 refers to a time of darkness in which "the third 
part of the sun, moon and stars was smitten and it was dark part of 
the day and the night." 
17 Since the world that Allah (God) will be destroying is a world 
of spiritual darkness, it is natural then that his judgment should 
correspond with the spiritual darkness of the evil world that He is 
removing. 
18 In the Bible, Rev. 16:3, the angel dropped a vial into the sea, 
and the sea was turned to blood. The angel who had the power to 
do this work said that this was good as they loved the drawing of 
blood, they were given blood to drink. This refers to their evil 
murdering of people, especially the Black Man. No one fits this 
description better than America. She thought there was no help for 
us. But help has come to us as the Bible, Is. 62:4, prophesies, 
"Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken..." 
19 Retaliation is certain today, for Allah (God) has chosen us to be 
His People. Our enemy is angry against God Coming to our aid 
and His Raising of us into a true knowledge of self, Our God, and 
his True Religion, the same as Herod and the beast of Revelation 
(Bible) was against Jesus and the woman who was giving birth to 
her child. 
20 The white man hates to see anything of good come to the 
American so-called Negro whom he has made blind, deaf, and 
dumb to the knowledge of self and others. He is working 
feverishly to bring to a naught the progress of the salvation that 
Allah (God), Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad 
To Whom Praises are due forever, has brought to us, the Black 
Man of America. 
21 As Joseph was at his wits end trying to find a place for Jesus 
and His mother, Mary, at the time of his birth (Bible Lk. 2:7) so 
are we. Everywhere that we go trying to find an Inn to give birth to 
this baby (so-called American Negro) we are hindered, not by the 
common people but by the chief rulers of this land.


--- PAGE 114 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31 CHAPTER 31  
The Christian Holidays The Christian Holidays The Christian Holidays The Christian Holidays  
 
1 My Dear Black Brothers and Black Sisters, the religion Christian 
holidays that you celebrate are holidays for white people and not for 
Black People. 
2 The white people do not worship any day belonging to Black 
People. Why should you worship their days...days which are to their 
interest and not to the interest of the Black Man? 
3 On the 25th day of December, when you seek to worship the 
birthday of Jesus, you are just as far from worshipping his birthday, 
as two thousand (2,000) years ago is to this past September. For Jesus 
was not born in December. 
4 Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, 
to whom Praises are due forever, Taught me that Jesus was born 
between the first and second week in September. If any Christian 
thinks that Allah (God) Is Misleading you and me, let the theologians 
of Christianity attack His Word and show proof that they are 
worshipping Jesus’ birthday on the 25th day of  
December and that Jesus of 2,000 years ago rose from his grave on 
that day they celebrate as Easter. 
5 As a People who have been robbed and spoiled as we the Black 
People have been robbed of our own, naturally we dance by the 
music of the white slave-master and his children until we learn who 
we are. 
6 So now we are learning who we are and a great separation is taking 
place between Black and white. We cannot hinder this separation 
even if we try to do so because it was Divinely Appointed thousands 
of years ago that a separation between good and evil would come 
about. 
7 We, the Black People are from the God of Good; we are not from 
the god of evil. This, I repeatedly teach you. And the world of 
religious scientists will bear me witness, because this is true.


--- PAGE 115 ---
8 We make a fool out of ourselves by jumping up worshipping days 
and people that the white slave-master and his children say we are to 
worship. 
9 We, the Black People, have no right to worship one day of Jesus of 
two thousand (2,000) years ago; for Jesus came ahead of time to 
bring about a judgment of this people and he died for the mistake that 
he had made in understanding the scripture. Then Jesus declared that 
he would go away...give his life...for what he had stood for. 
10 So you do not have anything to worship on any day of the year for 
Jesus because he did not have any day for us to worship. If he had 
had a day to be worshipped on, it would have been for Jews and not 
for you and me, for we were not there to be represented. 
11 Jesus came to the Jews and not to us and then he got disappointed 
that he was ahead of the time of the Jews to preach the doctrine of the 
destruction or judgment and the setting up of a New Kingdom of 
Heaven after the destruction of the Jew’s civilization. Jesus was born 
two thousand years ahead of the judgment of the Jews. 
12 So you go out and spend your hard-earned money to worship with 
white people. They force you under disguise and defraud you into 
worshipping the birthday of that wicked old Nimrod on December. 
And if you knew the truth of him, you would not dare to worship it. 
13 And so many false statement have been made to keep the 
falsehood strong enough for you to continue to believe until today; 
falsehood has come face to face with truth. And falsehood cannot 
stand in the face of truth. Truth condemns falsehood. 
14 This world and this life and this way of civilization is falling and 
it soon will be no more. You are at the end of it before you realize it. 
Of course the scientists of the white people try to tell you, but you are 
so sold to the falsehood that they have taught you and me for the last 
four hundred (400) years that you have come to love it. You would 
rather have the false than to have the truth. That is why you do not 
follow me. 
15 But everyone of you should take those bells off your door. It is a 
foolish thing to worship a God with a bell, while the Bible tells you 
that God will use a trumpet. If you display anything, it should be a 
trumpet and not a bell to announce the Resurrection and Judgment. 
16 Leave off the false; for truth has come and falsehood must vanish.


--- PAGE 116 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32 CHAPTER 32  
Whose Christmas? Whose Christmas? Whose Christmas? Whose Christmas?  
 
1 If You look at the emblems which represents these two religions 
and understand their means, you will say, "How could I have ever 
been a Christian? Or ever to have believed in such a religion which 
will display such a gruesome sign -- a murdered prophet to beckon 
me on a path to murder." 
2 The whole history of the white race is written in the shedding of 
innocent blood. They kill the righteous. Do you not hear how openly 
they speak of killing me and my followers? Do you not see how they 
go in gangs, armed to the teeth, to kill me and my followers? They 
try to provoke us to strike back at them -- innocent people upon 
whom they prey. 
3 They attack our meeting places like wild jungle creatures; actually 
shoot up the walls of our temples to show their hatred of the 
righteous and the right-doer -- without any cause whatsoever, as you 
see and know. We carry no weapons, but this is no defense or 
excuse to the white race, which is, by nature, made to attack and kill 
the innocent without an excuse. 
4 They go in carloads and truckloads, raiding the poor innocent 
Black sections to take our lives without any cause or provocation 
whatsoever -- wrecking our property -- knowing that we have no 
arms. They cowardly, evilly come in great numbers as though they 
expect a great army to rise up against them. Cowards! 
5 They have no respect for good. They bomb our Black Christian 
brothers’ churches in the South. They Shoot them down on 
highways, in their homes and on the job -- anywhere he can satisfy 
his lust for blood; a blood-thirsty wicked human beast. 
6 They go out on the streets and run down the poor Black man to 
take his life, with no excuse except their hatred of him and to bear 
witness to the truth of himself that he is the devil. 
7 They have the nerve to tell the poor innocent victim (Black man) 
that the teacher of the truth is teaching hatred of him! Who could 
love him? There should be no need to teach hatre d of you to a


--- PAGE 117 ---
people who were born and brought up under your feet and who daily 
experience the cruel blows from your heavy boots, because that 
person already knows that you are the heartless enemy -- who will 
not let him go free in a separate place here in this wide territory. 
  
8 But You would rather hold them here under your eyes so that you 
can do evil things to them -- beat and kill them while they are 
helpless. Your enemies would gladly arm every one of them, but 
Allah (God) does not want us to bear arms. 
9 He wants to show you that he is God. He wants to fight you with 
His weapons, the forces of nature -- rain, hail, snow, and 
earthquakes; the sun, moon, and the star. As little as we respect that 
little dried up piece of our planet called moon, which looks 
harmless, it has such power of magnetic pull on our planet that it 
could affect our lives. 
10 Now comes the Christians’ big holiday which they call 
Christmas. With all the fantastic foolishness of jungle savages, they 
pretend to love worshipping the prophet on the 25th day of 
December. They stagger drunkenly all over the streets, campuses, 
and most of the homes and churches, with card games, dice and 
other games of chance and all kinds of whisky and beer -- to 
celebrate that great prophet; with fighting and killing and eating 
swine flesh. Such is the day which they call the birthday of Jesus. 
11 They have nothing of good in their behavior. It is like Isaiah said, 
"This people worship me with their mouth but their hearts are far 
from me." This is true. 
12 It is all false that Jesus was born on the 25th day of December. 
But the poor Black slave, who used to rejoice that his master gave 
him one day of rest from the hard labor which he was made to serve, 
until any day his master said was a holiday was all right with him, as 
long as he did not have to work. 
13 Until this day, they do not stop to ask what is the meaning of his 
holiday and where it sprang from. There is no holiday of the white 
people which the so-called Negro should worship as his day. He 
never seeks to find a day of his own on which he can worship. 
14 He seeks to worship what the white man worships -- and feels 
rejected if not permitted to go to war with his master regardless of 
whom his master is fighting, even though it be his own brother or


--- PAGE 118 ---
family. He thinks he is disgraced if he is not involved in whatsoever 
his master is involved in, and he believes he has a share in it because 
he wants the love and respect of his master so much. 
15 In fact, He does not believe in what he teaches you of 
Christianity. Even the very basic principle of Christianity is wrong 
and false (three Gods in one). And that one of them had to die, He 
being the Son of the Father, to save the wicked world of the 
Caucasian race is the most damnable teaching against your peace 
and happiness. It takes you right out of life. 
16 Another false practice on the 25th day of December: the children 
between the ages of 3 and 12 think a Santa Claus is visiting them, 
making them believe they are getting presents from some foreign or 
strange person other than themselves (the parents). 
17 Some of the parents go so far as to scratch the chimney and tell 
the children "Santa came down here last night." This is outright false 
and telling other than the truth. They even have pictures made and 
commercialized on it. 
18 How could one come from way around the North Pole driving a 
small sled-like cart? And where did he buy all of those toys? How 
does Santa drive his sled in the South where there is no snow or ice 
for him to drive on? They rob themselves of the honor of the child at 
his receiving their gifts. 
19 Jesus is garbed up and commercialized on by a world of evil and 
sin and you like this, my people -- you love this now. You defy 
anyone, even God Himself, to try and remove your love of what is 
false. 
20 You cannot prove that the 25th day of December is the birthday 
of Jesus and you are preaching out of a Bible which does not carry 
any such history. It gives you an idea that He could not have been 
born on December 25 by these worlds "While the shepherd watched 
their flocks by night." 
21 If it had been in December, could they have been sitting out at 
night watching the flock eat good green grass? December is 
wintertime! Winter starts on the 21st day of December -- you are 
four days into winter there. 
22 Of course, there are some parts of the earth where winter does not 
come and there is pasture for the sheep all year round. But it is not


--- PAGE 119 ---
like that in Palestine -- in the winter, especially at night. 
23 According to the Christian saying and representation, the Son of 
God is worshipped. His birth is mocked and disgraced with 
drunkenness, murdering, gambling, and every type of evil 
committed on such a day by the Christians while the Muslims walk 
through the midst, soberly, peacefully fasting through the month and 
not thinking or drinking alcoholic beverages -- not eating the flesh 
of anything -- eating once a day, and that only at night. 
24 At the same time, the evil Christian would disgrace the name of 
one of the most perfect prophets of the past, Jesus. Should not God 
take revenge on them for such mockery of Jesus? They lie when 
they say Jesus was born without the agency of man. Then they lie of 
his death and say that he rose again physically. 
25 And yet, the Black preacher today, in this modern, advanced 
spiritually scientific world which represents such falsehood, scorn 
the truth of Islam (entire submission to the Will of God). Should not 
the preacher be divinely chastised as it is written that he will be? 
26 The Pope of Rome knows that his followers here in the West are 
making a mockery of Jesus and his teachings, but he will not try to 
change it, for he is the father of it (church). 
27 The Sign of Christianity is death. The sign of Islam is life. Teach 
your children the truth. Make them practice truth. Make them 
practice truth, and do so yourself, as their guides.


--- PAGE 120 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33 CHAPTER 33  
Christmas! Christmas! Christmas! Christmas!  
 
1 On the 25th day of December comes another Christian holiday that 
they say is observed in remembrance of Jesus. Some say it is to keep 
in remembrance of his birth date. The late writers, on the word 
Christmas, seem to be ashamed to go along with the old writers that 
the 25th day of December was the birth date of Jesus because there 
has been so much research on whether or not Jesus was even born in 
December. But since it is a Christian holiday, they are not particular 
whether or not Jesus or the Roman Caesar was born on that day; for 
the real good of holidays by the Christians is to commercialize on the 
public. 
2 They sell much merchandise of various kinds, even now to 
automobiles, maybe airplanes, and boats. Suits of clothes are some of 
the main items of merchandise that are sold plentifully around 
Christmas -- shoes, new pieces of furniture in the home, and other 
home decorations. 
3 The merchants’ pockets are made fat for Christmas -- the tobacco 
factories, the beer and whisky traffic, and wine. These three things, 
beer, wine, and whisky, find a great sale at Christmas time. Also 
much wild game is bought. And the fattest pig that their farmer can 
produce is bought. All of these things, especially intoxicating liquors 
and the eating of swine flesh and drunkenness, dancing, and 
gambling, are done on the day that they commemorate for a man that 
they claim to have been a most perfect man; holy, righteous, the son 
of God. There is no holy worship on that day for him. The 
government of Christianity throw open the freedom of worship at that 
time (Christmas) to both savages, clergymen, and Christian sages (the 
wise) to disgrace the prophet of God whom they, themselves exalted 
to the point of being God Himself. 
4 What a world of Christianity. Now comes the date and birth of 
Jesus which no one knows. Allah (God) in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due forever, taught me that since 
Jesus’ birth was expected by his enemies, the date and place 
(especially the date) was kept as a secret between Mary and Joseph, 
the father and mother of Jesus, to keep the authorities from killing 
him; fo r the Jews had learned from their scripture that he was their


--- PAGE 121 ---
last Prophet and that he would curse them because of their unbelief 
and destroy their independence among their brethren (the white race). 
God said to me that the Jesus, who is so much talked about in the 
Christian circles, was born in the first or second week of September -- 
not on the 25th of December -- that the famous Nimrod, who broke 
Moses civilization by 300 years, was born on the 25th day of 
December. 
5 Here come us, the American Black people, who were kept blind, 
deaf and dumb to the reading of the Bible for 300 years; arguing and 
disputing on the birth of Jesus, saying that Jesus was born on the 25th 
day of December. 
6 Whatever he has learned from his master (white race), he is willing 
to die on it (that it is the truth); while he does not even know the truth 
of himself. They take the Bible as it reads; they know not its 
meanings at all. And they will scorn the meanings of it by one of 
them whose meanings have been taught to him by God Almighty -- 
that the scripture may be fulfilled; that He would send a teacher or 
preacher to us, the Lost and Found people; and raise him up from 
among us. Abraham and his son, Ishmael, according to the Qur’an, 
also prayed to Allah (God) that He might raise up an apostle from 
among the Lost-Found mentally dead people and to teach him the 
knowledge of the Book (Bible) and the Wisdom (Holy Qur’an) that 
he may teach others of his people the meanings of what they read out 
of the Bible and Qur’an. 
7 But what does this do to the rest of the people? It causes them to 
become jealous and envious of that tone whom God confers more of 
His Divine knowledge upon than He does the rest. This is what is 
happening right at this very hour. The Holy Qur’an plainly teaches us 
that every one of us wanted the same thing that He gave the 
Messenger. That is the knowledge of the Book and the Wisdom of 
God and the Qur’an. It is prophesied that the Lost Found Black Man 
would envy the knowledge that God would bestow upon his servant -
- to teach them the knowledge of that which before they knew not. 
8 This is the American So-Called Negro. The Bible teaches that they 
all wanted to be shepherds therefore the sheep went astray. What a 
jealous and envious people the Black people are. 
9 This is why we can be divided so easily against each other. It is 
because the devils soon see that none wants to follow the other. 
10 Look how they are reaching out at what I am teaching, placing it 
on their "coat lapels" and in their books, and mixing it up with t heir


--- PAGE 122 ---
own corrupted ideas; just to be called leaders. 
11 Not only has Christianity deceived the people by falsifying the 
birthday of Jesus; they have shown themselves as evil worshippers of 
righteousness by the way they celebrate this day they call the birthday 
of Jesus (25th day of December). The greatest drunken day in the 
whole year of 365 days you see on the 25th day of December; 
fighting and murdering each other. 
12 The week before this day (25th of December), the righteous are 
afraid almost to walk among the worshippers of Christmas. 
13 To call it Christ Mass (a mass of people meeting to worship one of 
Allah’s Divine Messengers and the last one to the Jews) is wrong 
because Christ was not born on that day two thousand years ago. 
Christ was born in 1877. Christ, according to the definition of its 
name and the teachings I have been taught by God (that I defy any 
theologian to dispute), means a man coming in the last days to crush 
the wicked -- Christ the Crusher. 
14 The Bible teaches us that means the Anointed One. But it also 
teaches that the Anointed One, the Christ, comes to destroy the world 
of evil (Christianity), a people who have taken the good name of a 
good prophet and put it on a religion that they teach the people; not 
the religion of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and 
Muhammad. All of these prophets taught the same religion -- that is 
entire submission to the Will of God. Not a new religion do the 
prophets bring. It has not happened so far. The basic principle of the 
religion of God is submission to His will. 
  
15 Nimrod gets a great ovation on the 25th day of December; one of 
the most wicked leaders that ever lived. 
16 He was capable of leading the white race in the last 300 years 
before the birth of Jesus, their last prophet. 
17 The great false worship of December 25 is a lie. The worship of 
Jesus’ birthday, which they claim is on the 25th of December, is one 
of the most open lies against the truth. And the authors of their 
religion, Christianity, know that they are wrong in trying to tell the 
world that that is the day Jesus was born on. Not a man on earth 
knows that day because it was not mentioned according to Allah, in 
the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due 
forever, the God of the Righteous and Truth. The way that He h as


--- PAGE 123 ---
taught us of Jesus’ history makes sense. His birth could not have been 
made known since the authority of his time was intended to kill him. 
They got a little mixed up in his appearance looking for the birth of a 
government and people for hell-fire (though Jesus, as God taught me, 
was actually believing that he could convert the Jews until he learned 
the history of the Jews). Then he changed his mind and denounced 
them as being a race of devils and his word of truth had no place in 
them, because there was no truth in them by nature. They were not 
made of truth; therefore, the Christmas, the 25th day of December 
that you worship every year, is not the birthday of Jesus. 
18 Some of you do not care whose birthday it is just as long as you 
are off from work and acting like a fool, wasting up all your money 
that you have made that year to buy whiskey, a few fine clothes, new 
automobiles or something to help enrich the world that has taught you 
such things. 
19 Here is what Allah taught me of the 25th day of December: He 
said that this is not the day that Jesus was born. Jesus was born in 
September between the first part of the month of September, because, 
as I have foresaid, the Jews were watching for his birth to kill him. 
But they were mistaken. The one that he was actually taken for to be 
Jesus was not that one. They thought that Jesus 2,000 years ago was 
the Mahdi, the Great Messiah that they called the Christ or the 
Messiah Coming at the end of their time to destroy them and set up 
another kingdom of the God’s like Him. God taught me that the 25th 
day of December is the day of the birth of Nimrod, and that the 
scientists know that that is Nimrod’s birthday. 
20 Nimrod was a leader, born as an opponent of Moses’ teachings. 
Allah taught me in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom 
Praises are due forever, that this man was born in the last 300 years of 
Moses, 2,000 years. The whole of the scope of independent teachings 
of Moses is 1,700 years and not 2,000 years. Because of this Nimrod 
breaks the 2,000 years by 300. But, nevertheless, Moses gets the 
credit for the 2,000 years, because this little fellow was not able to do 
what he was doing and his work was to reach not only 2,000 years, 
but the complete 6,000 years of the white race’s civilization. Nimrod 
was an evil, devil man, and according to sketches of his history, here 
and there that you may run across as I did, nothing good is said about 
him. He was an opposer of Moses’ Law and Order given to him from 
Allah (God) to guide Israel into independency of the original Nation 
of the earth. 
21 The Teachings that parents give to their children of the Santa 
Clause coming on the night of the 24th prior to the 25th of December,


--- PAGE 124 ---
to bring presents to the children, are false. And some say that his 
transportation is some kind of sled so he can get over the snow and 
ice pulled by reindeer. This is also something the children look for, as 
well as the children in the South, where there is hardly any snow for a 
cat to walk on let alone a deer. But, yet, they are taught the same 
thing. Then they go so far as to say that Santa Claus comes down the 
chimney with all those deer and with all that load of toys. Now you 
know that there has to be a mighty large chimney to accommodate 
those deer and cars of presents for the children in the community. 
Then the child grows up believing this is the truth as the parents 
affirm their lie by scratching on the back of the chimney making 
marks in the soot to make the child think that the Santa Claus came 
down the chimney. I know, as I saw and believed the same thing 
when I was a little boy. They had lied tome, and I thought that they 
were telling the truth, until I saw mommy and daddy putting things in 
the closet one night while I was keenly watching to see the Santa 
Claus. But to my surprise, it was my father and mother, and I told my 
sister what I had seen that night. So I was no longer a believer in the 
strange Santa Claus after catching them "red-handed" (slang). I could 
hardly enjoy the Christmas gifts that day after thinking over what I 
had so strongly believed what they had taught me was Santa Claus, 
and had learned that he was my parents. And when you learn the truth 
about Santa Claus after a certain age, then they stop giving you 
anything. They tell you that they will give you your presents in 
person. 
22 Then, for the first time, the child learns the truth that he was only 
deceived by what they had taught him. This teaches the child in an 
early stage to lie, because the parents bring him up with lying. 
23 So I ask all the children who read this article on Santa Claus to tell 
your parents to give you the presents that they want to give you, and 
do not tell you that some Santa Claus is going to give them to you, 
because they are the ones who buy the presents for you. Oh yes, they 
take other than the truth for a lot of fun, while we cannot take other 
than the truth for fun, when it is not fun. That is a sin before God. 
There is no lie in Him at all, and if we believe and follow Him, we 
must be the same and not liars. But this is due to the nature of the 
white race who was made like that. They were a false people, leading 
the people wrong, falsely. And the time will come when they will 
wake up like the child who wakes up to the knowledge that the real 
Santa Claus is his father and mother. So will you wake up to the Real 
God for his (white race) time is up and you will find out that the God 
is Yourself. And your parents, the Black Man, was the first God who 
created the heavens and the earth.


--- PAGE 125 ---
24 So, my little Brother and Sister, go home and tell your parents to 
buy you such and such things if you want something for the 25th day 
of December, and tell them they can give to you as they are the ones 
who are the real Santa Claus for you. 
25 And there is no such thing as your worshipping Jesus on the 25th 
of December. He was a righteous prophet of God, 2,000 years ago, 
and they disgrace this righteous prophet and his name by worshipping 
a false day that he was not even born on. And the material they use to 
worship the Jesus is drinking whisky, beer, wine, and fighting, 
gambling, doing all acts of evil on that day. When I was a little boy 
coming up, the men folk would think that there were not taking 
Christmas unless they had plenty of liquor and whisky to drink and 
they would get half drunk and vomit all over the streets and 
highways. It is a sin and disgrace to be calling yourself worshipping a 
righteous person and celebrating his birthday with all kinds of 
drinking and gambling. This shows you that this was not the Jesus’ 
birthday because if you acted like this on the real birthday of the 
righteous, the God would punish you. You do not get away with 
mistreating the righteous and not be punished. The evil people have a 
time to flourish in evil doings to do all kinds of evil until the end of 
their time which is now. That evil will be punished in the day of the 
God of Justice and Righteousness. You will read that righteous 
people, even to prophets, were killed by the white race, Jews, and 
some of those who killed the prophets were not destroyed because it 
was the time that evil was to triumph over the righteous. Now, today 
is the day of Allah (God) and His World Will Be Equality. And we 
cannot get away with falsehood in His Day and Time and in the 
building up of His Kingdom without being punished immediately. 
26 So, I say little Brother and Sister, go home and remember that 
mommy and daddy are your Santa Claus, and they ride in cars and 
not in ice-sleds with six to eight reindeer pulling it. That number six 
represents the time that falsehood would triumph. That is the number 
of the white race, meaning they would triumph for 6,000 years.


--- PAGE 126 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 34  
Days of the Son of Man: Confusion of 
Nations  
 
1 The prophecy of the coming of the Son of Man and the days of the 
Son of Man is almost the whole of the Bible, scriptures, histories and 
prophecies. The people who read the Bible should understand these 
things. You should want to read and understand. 
2 Let us see what and who is the Son of Man who is mentioned here. 
We are all sons of some man, but this specifies the Son of Man 
coming in the Last Days to Judge man. 
3 True understanding and the answers to these questions destroy any 
mistaken ideas or misunderstandings and prophecies of the Bible and 
Holy Qur’an concerning the coming of the Son of Man. 
4 The true knowledge of Who is the Son of Man and Why He is 
Called the Son of Man destroys the teachings of the Christians 
concerning the prophecies of the Son of Man and the coming of the 
Son of Man. This forces understanding upon the world that is blind to 
the knowledge of Who and Why He is Called the Son of 
Man...especially the once slave of the white slave-masters. 
5 The white Christians have never taught the true theology of 
scriptures to their Black slave; therefore they do not know Who to 
look for. They look for something other than a man to usher in the 
Judgment and Judge the world according to its sins. 
6 The Son of Man is the Son of a Man. He is not a spirit as the 
ignorant are prone to believe. He is the Son of Original Man, the 
Black Man. 
7 The Bible does not teach you that He is the son of mankind. 
Mankind is the made-man, the white man. The Great Mahdi is the 
Son of the Original Man, the Black Man. 
8 The Son of mankind is the made man, the white man whom the 
Original Man, the Black Man, drove out of the Garden of Eden. 
9 The Son of Man, Spoken of as Coming in the Last Days, is the Son


--- PAGE 127 ---
of Original Man. Therefore they have it right when they say He is the 
Son of Man...that is the Original Man, the Black man. 
10 The Great Mahdi, the God and Judge Who is now Present in the 
World, Master Fard Muhammad, To Whom Praises are Due forever, 
taught me that His Father was a real Black Man. His Father went up 
into the mountains (governments of the Caucasians) picking out a 
white woman to marry so that she would give birth to a son looking 
white but yet the Father is Black. 
11 This makes the preachings of the Christians that He is a Made 
Man to take the burden of seeking the Lost-Found people from out of 
the midst of their captors who are white. He would do this work in a 
Day that they least expected. Therefore the Bible says he Came 
without observation as a thief in the night (night of Spiritual 
darkness) (Bible) 1 Th. 5.2. 
12 As to the days of the Son of Man, I would rather say they refer to 
years rather than days consisting of twenty-four (24) hours. 
13 The Holy Qur’an also refers to it as the ‘Days’ of Allah. This 
means ‘years’ as it takes years to remove a whole world and bring in 
a new one. There is so much that has to be done. People have to be 
convinced that He is Justified to remove the world of sin, for the 
world of sin has ruled the people for 6,000 years. There are so many 
people who are sold to the idea of wicked world rulers. 
14 The Days of the Son of Man represent the Days (Years) that He 
Will Be Judging the world and punishing the world for her evil. The 
Son of Man is gathering, teaching, and training His People right in 
the midst of this wicked world. His People have gotten experience of 
the wicked world and He Teaches them how now to avoid the wicked 
world and its teachings and yet live in the midst of it. Their living in 
the midst of the evil world and yet avoiding it proves their worthiness 
since they have gotten experience living in the evil world and now 
they turn to righteousness while they are still in the midst of the evil 
world. These people have an experience of both evil and good. Then 
if these are brought out of the evil world, these people are the people 
that he said he Saved out of the Fire. The Holy Qur’an says that we 
were on a Brink of Fire. 
15 The Son of Man...the Bible is specific in its prophecy concerning 
this man. It tells us that we should make no mistake for there is no 
other prophecy of anything other than a Man coming and judging us. 
We all have been preaching of the day of the Son of Man. The 
mistaken  idea that God is a spook or spirit is due to that which was


--- PAGE 128 ---
added by you and your enemy while all the time He is telling you that 
He is The Son of Man. 
16 The Great Mahdi, the Saviour of His People...Bible Mt. 1:21 
prophesied that He Was Born to Save His People from sin. They 
were guilty of the same sin as that of their evil teacher, for they 
practiced the same sin. 
17 Upon the coming of God, the Son of Man, He being the Just Judge 
of Man and man-kind, He forgave us our sins because we are not 
guilty of that which we did not know. 
18 The mankind (white man) taught us from the cradle to follow after 
them. They separated us from our Original People of Asia and Africa 
in order to do a thorough job of making us other than ourselves, the 
Original Black Man. 
19 The white man went in and out of our grandparents until our blood 
became part of theirs...so we are today. This ties us up in his blood so 
that it will be easy for us to practice his way of life. In order to take 
us out of the life and doing of the mankind people, we had to have a 
knowledge of them. 
20 It is the Great Mahdi, the Great Messiah, who is so prophesied of 
by the Christians. Yet the Pope of Rome and his priests are trying 
their utmost to deceive us concerning this Great Visit of God in 
Person. They try to deceive us into believing that this is not yet the 
Day of the Son of Man. They want you to believe that they still hold 
the reigns on the guidance for the Black People. 
21 This defiant act is against the manifestation of the truth of them. 
By the Son of Man is the reason He is punishing them. He is putting 
priest against priest, church against church, and Christians against the 
Pope of Rome as we see it today Gen. 3:15. The Bible prophesies that 
the serpent will bruise the heel (followers) of the woman 
(Messenger). This means they would deceive the followers of the 
Messenger. But the Messenger will bruise the head of the serpent 
meaning the foundation of the chief to Christianity’s way of teaching. 
 
22 In the Days of the Son of Man there will be much trouble and 
confusion of Nations. Bible Is. 2.24:1 says the whole earth will be 
turned upside down and nations scattered abroad. The Bible says (Mt. 
25:32) "Before Him shall be gathered all nations." The Holy Qur’an 
says, "you shall see all nations kneeling before Him and they shall be 
judged out of their own books." The government keeps a record of 
their governmental accounts. They have books in the library and in


--- PAGE 129 ---
the courts which tell how they have ruled the people. They have a 
record of how they have judged the people. 
23 The Holy Qur’an says that God will Judge them out of their own 
books which have the condemnation of their own evil and unjust 
judgment which they did give out to the people, especially the poor 
Black slave. 
24 Boom, that is the end when this is accomplished. When the Son of 
Man proves that He is Justified in destroying the wicked, then they 
will be destroyed in the twinkling of an eye. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35 CHAPTER 35  
Being Ashamed of Your Own God Being Ashamed of Your Own God Being Ashamed of Your Own God Being Ashamed of Your Own God  
 
1 Because of Allah coming to us in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, teaching us that glorious, much prophesied Truth that 
will put us, the Black once-slaves of white America, into heaven 
while we live, should we be so foolish to reject that Truth which as 
been brought to us to take us out of this condition of hell (subjected 
to white Americans); should we be ashamed to confess the Truth 
publicly before our ever open enemies of both the Truth and of the 
Black Man or deny the Name of Allah, Who Came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad, To Whom Praises are Due forever, for the 
non-love and friendship of an evil people who were made by nature 
to hate and mistreat other Black people of the earth, we should be 
condemned to hell-fire along with the enemies of God. 
2 To be ashamed to confess the God of our salvation makes us 
unworthy of that God’s help and salvation which He has brought to 
us. Some of us, in the presence of white people, will deny our 
salvation while the white people do not, by any means, deny their 
hatred of the Black Man or their plans and their actions of robbery 
and death to the Black Man. 
3 The white people follow the nature in which they were made, but 
you do not follow the nature in which you were created 
(righteousness and truth).


--- PAGE 130 ---
4 There are many Black educators, scholars, and scientists who try 
to keep the false friendship of white people. They dare not accept 
the Name of God which shall live. 
5 Being ashamed of your own God and your own self before this 
evil world is like eating fire. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 36  
Islam; A Unifying Religion  
 
1 White man’s Christianity has absolutely failed to get recognition 
and respect for us -- even from those who taught it to us. It is a 
religion that teaches you to love your enemies and hate your friend 
and to seek your reward after death. It has produced more division 
and hate than all the other religions combined. 
2 White Christianity has robbed and destroyed our peace and love for 
one another. It was white Christians who brought our fathers into 
slavery; it is white Christianity that is keeping you a  
subject people. They don’t want you, nor do they like to see you go 
from them to your own. They fear your unity with your own. 
3 So let us unite and be one people under the crescent of our religion, 
Islam. Seek for our nation what others seek for their nation; a country 
to ourselves where we can live in peace away from our enemies. 
4 Islam, the religion of peace, in believing it, brings about a peace of 
mind and contentment. It is a unifying religion; its Author is God. It 
teaches against the doing of evil of every kind, great or small. The 
aims of Islam in America are: 
1. To teach our people the truth. 
2. Clean them up and make them self-respecting and unite them onto 
their own kind. 
3. Bring them face to face with our God and teach them to know their


--- PAGE 131 ---
enemies. 
5 The problem began 400 years ago from the very first day that our 
forefathers set the sole of their feet on the soil here in the Western 
Hemisphere in the days of John Hawkins. It was in the year 1555. 
Hawkins was an English slave trader. In the year 1555 when John 
Hawkins began bringing our people away from our own native land 
and away from our own people to sell us to his white brothers here in 
the West as merchandise for the slave markets, little did John 
Hawkins realize at that time that by bringing us here as slaves he was 
sentencing his white brothers here to their doom. For the evil that 
they have done and are still doing to our people here cannot be 
forgiven. 
6 But it was all for a divine purpose; that Almighty God, Allah, might 
make Himself known, through us, to our enemies; and second, to the 
world that He alone is God. But our poor Black mothers and fathers, 
who were deceived by this devil John Hawkins and his lies and 
empty promises, didn’t have the slightest idea that their coming here 
to be sold into slavery could create a problem that would take 
Almighty God Allah Himself and the righteous nation of Islam to 
solve...and that this problem would be solved at the end of the time of 
their archdeceiving enemies (the devils). That time has arrived. 1914 
was the year. But as long as you stay asleep from lack of knowledge 
about yourself you are extending the life of them. They can continue 
to live only as long as you remain mentally dead to the knowledge of 
yourself and the devils. 
7 My followers and I have spent and are still spending much time and 
money and are suffering much persecution and ridicule to awaken 
our people to the knowledge of their own salvation. But we must 
remember that this present suffering is nothing compared to the joy 
that awaits us! 
8 Before we ever suffered ourselves, He, Master W. F. Muhammad, 
our God and Savior, the Great Mahdi, Almighty God Allah, in 
Person, suffered persecution and rejection Himself; all for you and 
for me. 
9 We are now living in the days of the judgment and in the days of a 
great separation of peoples and nations. This problem of separating 
you and me from our enemies and placing us in our own land back 
among our own people and raising the so-called Negroes of America 
up to our proper place in civilization is taking place. 
10 Remember it was Muhammad who found the Black stone out of


--- PAGE 132 ---
its place and invited the four chiefs from the four divisions to come 
forward and take hold of each corner of the mantle and lift it into its 
place. Remember that it was Muhammad with His own hands who 
guided it into its place. This was a symbol of you and me here today. 
We need the help of our people who are living in the four major 
points of our compass to come and help raise us, their dead brothers, 
and put us back into our own place: in our own nation among our 
own people in our own native land. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37 CHAPTER 37  
Submit to Allah (Their God) Submit to Allah (Their God) Submit to Allah (Their God) Submit to Allah (Their God)  
 
1 The Divine Supreme Being. He is a Being which means that he 
exists and is not a spook. Christianity has blinded you to such 
worship as to worship that which you know not; as the Bible teaches 
you know not; (Bible, John 4:22). There has never been any change 
in the religion of Allah (God). It is their world’s wickedness to 
deceive the Righteous that changes religion. The Pope of Rome is the 
father of such teachings as bringing in a religion other than the 
religion of Allah (God). The white race does not do the Will of our 
God; they were not made to do so. So do not think hard of them for 
not submitting to Allah (God) and for not believing in His religion, 
Islam. That is against their nature. However, some (few) of them here 
and there, throughout the world believe by faith. And now even the 
Pope of Rome’s own preachers, priests and cardinals are in the spirit 
of rebellion against Christianity because they know it is not true. 
2 Jesus was no author of Christianity. You cannot even prove it. The 
Pope of Rome will not try because he is wise. He knows what Jesus 
taught. It was Islam, as all the prophets before him taught. And how 
can we get around to believing in God if we do not believe in Islam 
after we learn that it is entire submission to the will of God. 
3 Submit to God. It is the nature of the Black People. God does not 
permit you to come to Him as His servant unless you submit to His 
Will, His Laws, and His Rules. And if you are in His Country, he 
chases you out of it and puts you in jail for disobeying Him. This is 
the end of people having freedom to serve God in their own way. 
This is the most damnable teaching that could be taught to a man; to


--- PAGE 133 ---
tell him to serve God in any way that he sees fit or to preach God’s 
Word in the way he sees fit. This is what leads the whole entire world 
astray from God. Submit to the Will of Allah (The Divine Supreme 
Being) and see how the conditions of your life will quickly change 
today into better conditions. 
4 The worst blind teaching that is going on is from Black preachers 
trying to prove Christianity and trying to prove that Jesus is the Son 
of God and that he died to save the world. This carrying the Black 
Man to hell faster than anything that you can teach him; that Jesus 
died to save the world. This is an addition where the translators did 
not make it clear whose world the God will save. It was not the world 
of the enemies of God. This world is destined to be destroyed 
according to Jesus’ prophecy and all the prophets before him. The 
Black Man does not belong to this world. The only Black Men who 
belong to this world are those who make themselves belong to this 
world. You must remember that the white man’s world is a distinct 
world of his own. He is the god of this world until today when he 
meets the right Owner, the Great God, Allah. The Jesus says (Bible, 
John 17:9) that he did not even pray for the world; that he prayed to 
God to take care of those whom he had converted out of the world. 
He did not come to the God, praying to Him to save the world. And, 
again in the Bible, it is written that a sinner’s prayer is not even 
heard. And the real sinner is the devil. 
5 And what right do you have to preach that he died for the world 
when he said he did not even pray for the world or for you who are in 
love with the world that he was not in love with. He condemned the 
world as being a world of devils (Bible, John 8:44) and said that they 
were the prince of this world (Bible, John 12:31, Mt. 4:9). So the 
white race is not the universal ruler as god, but they were to rule for 
the time that they were given to rule. They were given power and 
wisdom to rule as god of their own world; and that is the civilization 
of the white man and his rule of the Black Man for the past 6,000 
years. This means that the white race has conquered the air as well as 
the sea and land because they have gotten out of the rotation of the 
earth. This means they have conquered the atmosphere of the earth 
and have gone into airless space. Oh, foolish Brothers, you certainly 
do not know the scriptures and you are too proud to be taught. While 
your Bible teaches you (James 4:4) that he who loves this world is at 
enmity with God, the blind preachers are leading the Black People to 
hell as the Bible teaches; they all went in the Lake of Fire with their 
followers, believing in the devil (Rev. 19:20). 
6 As Jesus was not of the world of the white man, so are we of the 
world of the white man. And the parable that he put before you


--- PAGE 134 ---
prophesies how God would come, searching for you to take you out 
of the world of the wicked, and put you into your own world of Peace 
and security. Also see Bible (Ez. 34, Bible). 
7 As Jesus prophesied of the Black preacher (Mt. 23:13, Bible), you 
will not come into the kingdom of Heaven (the religion of Islam), nor 
will you suffer those who are trying to come in. This is a bad 
scripture on the Black preacher. But you are so blind that you do not 
know that it is talking about you, but it is you, and not the Jews. (No. 
2 Th. 2:3) says that you will not come until the man of sin was 
revealed. 
8 God has raised me up among you to teach you the interpretation of 
the Bible which you are rejecting. There is nothing in the prophecies 
that God has not taught me the understanding of. And if I miss telling 
you the Truth of the explanation that He gave to me of the Bible, I 
will give $10,000 for every word that you can disprove or that is not 
true. I am not talking about the foolish among you who want to 
contend and dispute on. 
9 Read the Bible thoroughly, Black preachers and you will bear me 
witness that any man will be a fool to stand around and wait for the 
return of the Jesus who was killed here 2,000 years ago. He was 
nothing more than a prophet, and he has gone back to the earth, never 
to return alive. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38 CHAPTER 38  
The Cruel Days of The Lord The Cruel Days of The Lord The Cruel Days of The Lord The Cruel Days of The Lord  
 
1 What causes these Days to be cruel when God Himself Is a 
Righteous God? 
2 What now makes His Coming to be a Cruel Coming? 
3 It is because He Is the Righteous God, and He is the Owner of the 
earth. And the previous substitute (white race), that the earth was let 
out to, to rule the Original Black People for a time of 6,000 years, in 
that time they (white race) robbed God of the worship of His People,


--- PAGE 135 ---
the Original Black People. 
4 They (white race) refused to let the people worship Allah (God). 
Because of the time that was left to them, instead, they made all the 
people, whom they could Make, to worship them (white race) as 
being the owner of the earth! 
5 This angered the Real Owner! The Real Owner, Being Angry over 
how the non-owner had Treated the Original Black People of the 
earth, and how they (white race) had deceived the Original Black 
People, in the knowledge of the Real God and Owner -- 
6 The Real God and Owner of the earth Comes In Angry like a man 
who returns home and finds someone in his house who has destroyed 
his house and his best furniture and who has beat-up those whom the 
Real Owner has left among the erstwhile owner. 
7 The Bible prophesies of the Coming of God with Anger. He is very 
Angry against the evil people and He is Ready to Destroy them from 
the face of the earth! 
8 And everywhere there are a few who did a little good, He Does Not 
Destroy their Reward for a little good that they have done. 
9 But He Comes to Destroy the wicked for the evil done to His Black 
People -- for robbing them and killing them for nothing -- only that 
they are the Righteous and the evil people are the wicked! 
10 Ask me questions or write me if you want to. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39 CHAPTER 39  
Certainty of the Punishment Certainty of the Punishment Certainty of the Punishment Certainty of the Punishment  
(Holy Qur’an 70:6, 7, 8) (Holy Qur’an 70:6, 7, 8) (Holy Qur’an 70:6, 7, 8) (Holy Qur’an 70:6, 7, 8)  
 
1 Ch. 70:6, "Surely they see it far off," 
7, "And We see it nigh."


--- PAGE 136 ---
8, "The day when the heaven is as molten brass." 
2 The Holy Qur’an, is the truest religious Book, that can be found on 
the planet earth. It gives guidance to the wisest philosopher and to the 
most ignorant savage says Maulana Muhammad Ali, (translator of 
the Holy Qur’an out of the Arabic language into the English 
language). It is a wonderful Book. It verifies the truth of the Bible. 
Most of the teachings of the Holy Qur’an are directed to the Last 
Messenger, Muhammad. It is to inform him and teach him the truth 
of the Resurrection of the mentally dead whom he is commissioned 
to Raise. 
3 The Resurrection of his people is the Judgment of both the 
righteous and the wicked. The Holy Qur’an is mostly directed to the 
American so-called Negro, the Lost-Found Members of their Nation. 
It is to acquaint them with the knowledge of the immediate Judgment 
and with the enemy of the righteous. 
4 The Black Man must have a thorough knowledge of the enemy 
(devil) and a thorough knowledge of self; for by no means can they 
be directed rightly until they have a thorough knowledge of self and 
the devil and a thorough knowledge of Allah (God). 
5 The Lost-Found Black People, being reared by the devil; the devil 
knows them while they do not know him. Therefore, the Holy Qur’an 
was given and taught to Muhammad for the expressed purpose of 
saving his people from the fire of hell. 
6 It is so strange now today to see that the Black Man of America 
desires not to be separated from his enemy, but desires that the 
enemy and himself live together in love of each other, as brothers, 
while the enemy knows that it cannot be done. But he can use their 
ignorant love and belief in him to take him to hell with him. 
7 Therefore, Allah (God) has to Strike both parties, the white man 
(devil) and the Black, blind, deaf and dumb lovers of their enemy, 
with a severe chastisement, in order to open their blind eyes, as he 
did in Jesus’ parable of the rich man and the poor man, Lazarus 
(Bible Luke 16:19-25). Lazarus refused to give up begging his master 
for survival until Allah (God) sent a famine on the rich man. The 
worse famine that man has ever seen is prophesied to come upon 
America.


--- PAGE 137 ---
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40 CHAPTER 40  
The Angry World The Angry World The Angry World The Angry World  
 
1 The rapid spread of evil over the people is a manifestation of what 
is in the world that is called Christianity. The Great spread of both 
evil and filth is staggering in the Eyes of Allah (God) and the 
righteous. 
2 The Holy Qur’an teaches us to "fear a day where evil is spreading 
far and wide." 
3 The resurrection of the mentally dead Black People brings about 
the anger of those (white man) who put the Black Man to mental 
death. Both people are angry; the Black slave and the slavemaster. 
The lack of justice to the Black slave is the cause of this anger. 
4 Allah (God) Himself is bringing these things to pass because it is 
time that the mentally dead, so-called Negro and the Black People all 
over the earth should rise. The customary rule throughout history has 
been that the Black Man is the victim and he has been exploited most 
by all civilizations. 
5 The Black man is the true owner of the earth. Now the God of 
Justice Has Risen up to Deliver the rule back to the Black Man and 
give him a place in the sun that justifies his ownership. 
6 The Black Man of America (so-called Negro) did not know that he 
had fallen from a such a high place until the Coming of Allah (God), 
in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, to Whom Praises are due 
forever. Allah (God) taught me the history of both people: the Black 
and the white. He has given me the truth, wherein you see that it is 
being made manifest. You cannot get out of it because it is liken unto 
the light of the sun. We cannot get out of the light of the sun. When 
the sun shines on us, it banishes darkness...so it is with the truth. 
When the truth is told, it condemns falsehood and banishes it. 
7 The Black man has been ruled under falsehood by a false teacher 
(devil). His teachings are false because he did not teach the people 
truth. The devil himself was not made out of truth; he was made out 
of falsehood (Bible Jn. 8:44). Therefore, the Black People who 
follow the white  man (their made enemy) are not following truth;


--- PAGE 138 ---
they are following falsehood. 
8 The religion of the white man (Christianity) is falsehood. The white 
man adds falsehood to the truth and mixes truth with falsehood. 
Formerly this blinded the eyes of the man who had lost the 
knowledge of himself (Black man of America).  
9 The white man is now angry because Allah (God) Has Brought you 
and me the truth. They are despairing in their work of trying to get 
you to disbelieve the truth. The truth is your salvation and their 
damnation. They will put forthe very effort to keep you from paying 
attention to the truth which has come to you. 
10 Yes, the white man will offer you plenty of wealth as they are 
offering the invitation for you to walk into their homes and mix with 
their families by intermarrying with them. 
11 They know that in the days of your ignorance, you admired them 
and that you always wanted to intermarry with them. They know this 
of you Now they throw the door wide open, giving you this freedom 
at a time when it will take you to hell if you intermarry with them. 
Think about what you are marrying. Allah (God) has uncovered 
them. 
12 Certainly they hate me for teaching you. Certainly they hated all 
the Messengers of God (Prophets) (Iki. 19:10). The Bible teaches you 
their history and tells of the denunciation of them  
from being the killers of the Prophets of God and we see this made 
manifest today in my work among you. 
13 The white man is always planning my death because they hate the 
truth. The truth makes manifest their evil deeds, against you. They 
are angry and therefore the spreading of evil is from the angry people 
of Christian-doom. 
14 The devil (white man) will deceive many of you (Bible Rev. 12:9) 
with his soft buttered words and his love songs and with his promises 
to you that he never intends to fulfill (Holy Qur’an 4:120). It is 
written of him that he will deceive you in this way. But by having a 
thorough knowledge of the archdeceiver, you should not fall victim 
of his deceitful teaching and love-making. Any sane man who knows 
fire and its burn is not going to put his hand in it. So, when you know 
these things a surety, with experience, you should not be partakers of 
it.


--- PAGE 139 ---
15 Black People...Black men and women of intelligence and decency 
cannot walk the streets day or night without being tormented with the 
evil and filth that is practiced around them. The evildoers have no 
respect of decency. Robbery and murder are the order of the day here 
in Christian-doom. Children murder children. Children are robbing 
like grown-ups. No one can truth the other in such evil time. 
16 America is the modern Sodom and Gomorrah. "Fear the day when 
evil is spreading far and wide." 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41 CHAPTER 41  
The Two Worlds, The Two Camps The Two Worlds, The Two Camps The Two Worlds, The Two Camps The Two Worlds, The Two Camps  
 
1 The World is divided into two camps -- Islam and Christianity. 
Christianity, or we may say, the white man, has been in power for 
6,000 years. He has ruled independently since the birth of Moses, 
4,000 years. 
2 Islam came to Israel from Moses. Israel rebelled and Nimrod 
broke the civilization of Moses in the 17th century from Moses. So 
Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of Master Fard Muhammad, 
To Whom Praises are due forever, taught me. 
3 Confusion, dissatisfaction, rebelling, fighting, and warring have 
ever been in Israel’s and Christianity’s camp due to their desire to 
follow the very nature in which they were made...making mischief 
in the land and causing bloodshed. 
4 The time of the camp of Islam has arrived. Islam desires to take 
over. She will take over. Islam will rule the people under and in a 
government of Peace, Freedom, Justice, and Equality. 
5 This is angering the old world of rebelling and warring against 
each other...Judaism and Christianity. 
6 The two camps are angry with each other, but the anger of Islam is 
slow to come to its boiling point, as is cool water. In order to bring 
cool water to its boiling point, it is necessary to subject it to a heat of 
212 degrees Fahrenheit. But spirits, chemicals, are easy to bring to a


--- PAGE 140 ---
boil. They will boil at point approximately 170 degrees Fahrenheit. 
7 These two boiling points of water and spirits can easily be 
classified as the very nature of Islam and Christianity. These two 
worlds are now boiling over with dissatisfaction and anger against 
each other. 
8 Christianity now seeks peace but she is guilty of making trouble 
and of starting the woes that the people now suffer. She seeks peace 
and seems not to be able to find it. She runs to and fro, to nations, 
capitols of nations, leaders and rulers, seeking peace, but finds none, 
it is clear, as it is written, Bible, Eze. 7:25. 
9 The Beast, Bible, Rev. 13:2 is the symbolic name of the ruler of 
the United States of America. It is a very bad and ugly name, but it 
is the truth, and very understandable, as we see it today. The dragon 
gives the beast power. Here recently, we have two presidents of the 
United States of America who have left the seat of authority and 
have flown to the Vatican City of Rome to have an audience with 
the Pope of Rome in the hour of most needed advice. 
10 The Pope of Rome is the god of Christianity and not Jesus. The 
Pope rules the Christian world as a father rules his family. He is 
represented by some of the theologians in Christianity as being the 
Vice-General of God. But the prophets see him as far from being the 
Vice-General of God; otherwise they would not have given him the 
name, "dragon." 
11 We cannot deny the fact that these references are made in regard 
to the head of a government and not the beast or animal of the forest. 
 
12 These two camps, Islam and Christianity, are clashing at intervals 
and on small scales. One writer of scriptures, in his prophecy of the 
final clash between the two camps (two religions), says that when 
Islam and Christianity meet on the battlefield for a show-down, it 
will be the end of the cross. The theologians and scientists of 
Christianity know this very well. 
13 That which is written of the two camps (two religions): the 
scriptures must be fulfilled. 
14 The God of Freedom, Justice, and Equality desires to take over in 
His time, and not before. This is His Time to remove the burden of 
suffering and mistreatment under the law of their own courts from 
the shoulders of the people.


--- PAGE 141 ---
15 He desires to set up a government without this type of court 
(christian) which claims to be the courts of justice, but on examining 
their decisions, we find that the christian courts are courts of 
injustice. 
16 America is in a perilous condition. Why? Because she will not 
yield to the acceptance of  
the truth and the doing of justice to those to whom she can do 
justice, if she will, (her Black slave). 
17 This is the real reason we are in this condition of seeking Justice 
and Peace; because the American government will not give her 
Black slaves Justice, nor will she allow or help them to go for 
themselves. She will not do that. She may be forced to do it, but she 
is not going to do it willingly. Because of this, The God of Freedom, 
Justice, and Equality is angry and so is the Nation of Islam, the 
Nation of Peace. 
18 Knowing their mentality, America now sets out to deceive her 
once slaves, and now free-slaves who number between 20-30 
million with a meaningless offer of social equality but never any 
earth to live on. 
19 Allah (God) is well able to take the kingdom from whom He 
Pleases and give it to whom He Pleases...this we all know. America 
should, as it is written, give up the slave and set him on the road to 
doing something for himself in the way of financing him to do this. 
20 America is spending billions of dollars in a futile attempt to stop 
the stormy war clouds that are hovering over her concessions but she 
is not getting at the root cause of it. The reason why the cloud is 
rising with destruction is because of her so-called Negro slaves 
whom she refuses to let go. 
21 She divides them one against the other for her own sake. It has 
not proven worthwhile. It has proven to be against her own peace 
because the God of the so-called Negro is on the scene and is 
Directing His Own Cause, as it is written, Bible, Is. 43:13. 
22 Again the Bible teaches us, Is. 59:14... "...and justice standeth 
afar off: for truth is fallen in the street." This is true of America, and 
yet she looks for peace. How can she find peace when she is guilty 
of breaking the peace of the world and refusing to let her prisoners 
(so-called Negroes) go Is. 14:17.


--- PAGE 142 ---
23 The so-called Negro is too wild. He does not know how to strike 
to obtain the result of Justice for himself. He is swinging wildly, but 
still the God is with him to bring to pass that which is written. 
24 I say to you, my Black brothers and sisters throughout America, 
join onto Islam. Follow me and I will lead you into the right way 
and God will bless you with that which you desire in your heart of 
good. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42 CHAPTER 42  
The Threatened Day The Threatened Day The Threatened Day The Threatened Day  
 
1 As the Heavens are full of stars, it does not seem possible to the 
naked eye that we need add any more stars because the heavens are 
full of stars. 
2 As the Heavens are full of stars, so it is with the population of the 
earth today. The population of the earth is the greatest that it has 
been for the past 6,000 years under the rule of the white race. 
3 On our planet earth, every race in every country, city, and town is 
now so full of people that they have to look for room for expansion. 
4 It is an acute situation throughout the earth. Governments are 
taxed to the limit to try to house their population. 
5 This known, well-visited earth, in spite of its liberal habitations, is 
seemingly over populated, so much so that it is a problem of the 
governments to find houses for its citizens. 
6 Allah Himself threatens to reduce the seemingly over population 
of the earth by removing all of the people of the planet earth who are 
unwilling to submit in obedience of Allah (God), His Messenger, 
and the Message that he has sent. 
7 A great vacancy would be left, for there is only a small percentage 
of the population of the earth who want to do righteousness. 
8 Most of th e population of the earth has its own god and religion.


--- PAGE 143 ---
They will not let go of what they have for Allah (God) and His True 
Religion, Islam. 
9 My Black Brothers and Sisters, I am sorry for you if you think that 
the white man’s religion of Christianity will take you to heaven. I 
am sorry to tell you that it will not. 
10 The Holy Qur’an teaches us that if we bring any other religion, 
other than Islam, on that Day, it will not be accepted. Allah (God) 
forbids us to set up a god beside Him, making another His Equal. 
The Bible teaches you the same. 
11 You have disobeyed and added gods to the One God (Allah). The 
belief of the believer in Christianity is in three gods. This is against 
the teachings of Allah (God), The One God. 
12 I am your God, warns Allah (God), I and I Alone. But you have 
set up some other I’s with Allah, The One God. Allah (God) warned 
all prophets of the past, "Tell the people, do not set up any other god 
with me as My Equal. I Am Your God." 
13 The true religion, Islam, is the Beginning of God Himself. That is 
the age of Islam. The age of Christianity is only 2,000 years. It’s 
impossible to reconcile Christianity as being the true religion of God 
with a few words of Christianity used as proof. 
14 You are the losers...those of you who hold on the religion of 
Christianity. This is the threatened day against you. You want to put 
aside Allah (God) and His true Religion, Islam, His Messenger and 
his Message, and accept that which you hope to put in its place, 
Christianity. This will not be accepted by Allah (God). 
15 The heavens are full of stars. Maulana Muhammad Ali’s 
translation of the Holy Qur’an, in his footnote in that Chapter, says 
this represents a prosperous people and behind this prosperous 
people is a threatened destruction. They are in high places and 
authority of the earth. 
16 The enemies of Allah (God) are working to reduce the population 
of the Planet Earth by means of poisoning the human beings and by 
setting up birth control laws under very wicked devices in order to 
rid the earth of people according to their idea of controlling the 
increase of the races and nations of the earth. This is a wicked thing. 
17 Few people recognize the fact that we are living in the Day of 
Judgment of the wicked. You would like to ignore it. Why? It is


--- PAGE 144 ---
because they love this wicked world which the wicked have built. 
They do not want to depart from it. 
18 Allah (God) has given me the truth for the people. But in every 
city and town, and on every street, little would-be leaders snatch a 
few words of what Allah (God) has given to me for you, and they try 
to build an independent organization for self. Not for you...but for 
themselves. 
  
REBELLIOUS LEADERSHIP  
19 This independent leadership is for self-exaltation. It is written in 
both the Bible and the Holy Qur’an that all want to be their own 
leader, all want to be shepherds of the people. They want honor for 
themselves regardless of Allah’s (God’s) warning to  them to follow 
His Shepherd Whom He has Chosen...me. They depend upon 
themselves and they have nothing and they will never be successful. 
I do not worry about these little self-guides, self-leaders and self-
organizations: 
20 I warn the public. You are headed to be burned if you follow 
these self-styled leaders. You may say to me, Muhammad, we think 
you are self-styled. I say to you, calculate on my work. Allah (God) 
is with me to enable me to do it. If you do not believe that He Is, I 
still say, you should follow a man who is doing what I am doing 
since you are not able to do it. 
21 Stop splitting up the Black people throughout America and 
setting up opposition to the work which Allah (God) has appointed 
for me to do which is the salvation of the Black People and your 
salvation. 
22 This sitting around waiting to see will get you hell like it did the 
people of Noah, Lot, and Pharaoh. The Holy Qur’an warns you 
against this, "Wait if want to. We too are waiting." It gives a very 
stern theological answer, "We know that you are on the wrong 
base." The Bible teaches you of the Muslims: "We know what we 
worship, you worship ye know not what." 
23 You are so far from understanding the prophecies of 
Jesus...making him something coming back from the grave in the 
Judgment to Judge the people with God. The Bible plainly tells you 
that he died "I go away..." then he prophesied that "God will send 
you one." You do not want that to be the present Messenger of Allah


--- PAGE 145 ---
(God) whom you are opposed to. But you keep trying to preach the 
dead prophet, Jesus, back to life. Jesus was nothing but a prophet 
and he did not deny it. I have contended with you on this. 
24 Let the Pope of Rome contend with me, for you are not able to 
attempt to do so. You are blind to the theology of Christianity. You 
do not have enough knoweldge of theology and scripture to contend 
with me. 
25 The white man would not teach you the right understanding of 
the scripture of the Bible. Many times, I have invited any one of 
them to prove the claim that the Jesus of 2,000 years ago is coming 
back. 
26 We know what happened to him 2,000 years ago. He cannot 
come back from the grave. He is not in heaven. This is a lack of 
knowledge of the theology of the scriptures, but you can believe it 
any way that you want to. I would not give 2 cents for all your 
praying to a dead Jesus to hear you. He does not hear you. He is 
dead and buried as all others before him and since who have died. 
  
WORLD-WIDE MISSION  
27 You ‘little leaders’ you think that because few ignorant people 
follow you you think that you have advantage with the people. 
28 Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of Master Fard 
Muhammad, To Whom Praises are due forever, is Independent and 
I, His Messenger, am an independent, Proud, Black Man. There are 
millions of people on this earth besides you. I can teach them in six 
(6) hours and they will believe more than you do in six (6) years of 
my teaching you. 
29 Allah (God) will whip you into submission. That is what He Will 
Do...The Heavens are Full of Stars...The Threatened Day.


--- PAGE 146 ---
Our Saviour Our Saviour Our Saviour Our Saviour     Has Arrived  Has Arrived  Has Arrived  Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43 CHAPTER 43  
Old World Going Out; Old World Going Out; Old World Going Out; Old World Going Out;     
New World Come In New World Come In New World Come In New World Come In  
 
1 the Old World of mischiefmaking and bloodshed is now on its way 
out in order to make room for the new world of Righteousness and 
Peace. 
2 For the past 6,000 years we have had to live in an evil world that 
was designed to destroy the peace of man and to shed his blood. 
3 All around the earth, there has not been one section of the world in 
which the Original Man has been or where he now lives that has not 
been touched or ruled by the evil of gods of the old world. 
4 The God of Righteousness and peace, today, has Made His 
Appearance to Take to Himself the Rule of the Nations under the 
government of Peace, Freedom, Justice, and Equality. 
5 Allah (God) Seeks to separate the evil from the good and the good 
from the evil. He Declared Himself as Coming to Seek and to Save 
the Black Man (so-called Negro) from his kidnappers (the white 
race). 
6 Allah (God) Came to unite and Restore the Black Man again to his 
Own and Bless Him with the rule of the Nations of earth, as declared 
by the prophets, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus. 
  
Fall of Ancient Babylon  
7 In the Fall of Ancient Babylon Jer. 50:46, "At the noise of the 
taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the 
nations." here the Bible teaches us and we see today, at the fall of the 
old world, there is a great noise of war, the fighting of war, the 
destruction of nations, towns, and cities and the killing of their 
citizens. There is disagreement and confusion of the heads of nations. 
 
8 It is a very dreadful time that the populations of the earth are now


--- PAGE 147 ---
living in. This is the time of the destruction of a world. It is not to be 
compared with the destruction of an organization or a few towns as it 
was in the days of Noah. The destruction today is the destruction of a 
whole world. The prophets could not have given us a better picture of 
what we may expect today than the picture of what took place in the 
fall of ancient Babylon. 
9 The Earth, land, and sea are set in battle array. Every type of deadly 
weapon is fashioned and is now being used against man and man. See 
Holy Qur’an Chap. 30:41. There cannot be any peace for man under 
these conditions. 
 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44 CHAPTER 44  
The Great Day The Great Day The Great Day The Great Day  
 
1 We are living in a Great Day of God and Man. Allah (God) now 
Desires to take for Himself to Reign over the nations of the earth. 
2 There are two Gods. One god is the god of the evil and the Other is 
the God of Righteousness and Justice. The nature of the two Gods is 
so much different from the other that it makes it impossible for one 
God to yield to the other God because of their nature. 
3 Unrighteousness and injustice have triumphed over the people for 
the past six thousand (6,000) years. The unjust god was not one to 
give up his place for the God of Justice. Well, we cannot blame him 
since by nature he was made a god; a ruler. But his time is out and his 
rule is up. He is now in the time of the other God -- the God of 
Righteousness, Freedom, Justice, and Equality. 
4 So this is a Great Day -- the passing away of one world and the 
coming in of another world. We have suffered under the evil that the 
devil was made for. Up until this very minute he wants to do all the 
evil that he can do regardless to the Bible and the Holy Qur’an 
teaching that Allah (God) Will Reward him and me for every good 
act or good work.


--- PAGE 148 ---
5 Everything is being changed from the old to a new thing. 
6 We Must Qualify For The New. 
 
 
Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived Our Saviour Has Arrived  
CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45 CHAPTER 45  
Revelation Guide All Right Revelation Guide All Right Revelation Guide All Right Revelation Guide All Right  
 
1 Holy Qur’an Chapter 42:46-49 
2 46 And they will have no friends to help them beside Allah. And he 
whom Allah leaves in error cannot find a way. 
3 47 Hearken to your Lord before there comes from Allah the day 
which there is no averting. You will have no refuge on that day, nor 
will it be yours to make a denial. 
4 48 But if they turn away, We have not sent thee as a watcher over 
them. Thy duty is only to deliver (the message). And surely when we 
make man taste mercy from us, he rejoices thereat; and if as evil 
afflicts them on account of what their hands have sent before, then 
surely man is ungrateful. 
5 49 Allah’s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates 
what He pleases. He grants females to whom He pleases and grants 
males to whom He pleases. 
6 The above four verses of the 42nd Chapter of the Holy Qur’an 
warns a disbeliever and a hypocrite that on that Day of the 
Resurrection and Judgment of this world, our people will not find a 
friend to help them besides Allah (God) Who Came in the Person of 
Master Fard Muhammad to Whom praises are due forever. It also 
warns us that if we do not accept Him, if we are in an error, He will 
leave us in that error and we cannot benefit with right guidance from 
ourselves. 
7 This right guidance must come from Allah through a Messenger 
that He sends to you in the time of the Resurrection and Judgment of 
the world who has a heart and mind like God’s Himself; the executor 
of the wicked. This Messenger that He has in that day and time will


--- PAGE 149 ---
only love and do that which God Himself loves and does. And the 
47th verse says that you should hear the teachings of the truth in the 
words that it gives you before that day comes. For in that time, you 
cannot get extra time to think it over. You must think it over before 
that day comes. The 47th verse warns us thoroughly that on that day, 
we will have no way of seeking refuge from  
the evil destruction of that day...only with God alone (in the Person 
of Master Fard Muhammad). And you will not have the power on 
that day to make a denial. 
8 Verse 48 clears the Messenger of the people going astray after 
hearing this Truth, ignoring it, and not accepting it, by telling him 
that he was not set as a watcher over them to see whether they did 
right or wrong. He was only to deliver the message. He was not to set 
around and watch and see if they did right; that is up to them. And He 
Does Not Punish us; only according to that which we do of evil with 
knowledge of that thing. 
9 Verse 49 teaches us that the Kingdom is Allah’s...the heavens and 
the earth. And, this is true as I teach you plainly from His Mouth, that 
the heavens and the earth belong to the Black Man and what is in 
them and what comes out of them and comes down to them, it all 
belongs to Allah, The Black Nation. So let us fly to Allah before we 
are forced to do it, and then get turned down. 
Truth Shall Be Established 
Holy Qur’an Chapter 57:20 & 22 
10 20 Know that this world’s life is only sport and play gaiety and 
boasting among yourselves and a vying in the multiplication of 
wealth and children. It is as rain, whose causing the vegetation to 
grow please the husbandmen, then it withers away so that thou seest 
it turning yellow, then it becomes chaff. And in the Hereafter is a 
severe chastisement, and (also) forgiveness from Allah and (His) 
pleasure. And this world’s life is naught but a source of vanity. 
11 22 No disaster befalls in the earth, or in yourselves, but it is in a 
book before We bring it into existence -- surely that is easy to Allah -
- 
Commentary


--- PAGE 150 ---
12 This is a sign of how the people are now...that after the world (of 
the wicked) seemingly has been successful with wasting their time in 
sport and play, it is classified as vegetation when it is getting rain on 
it and it grows and flourishes. But when the rain ceases to come, and 
the vegetation is exposed to sun’s heat, it withers away. So it is with 
the wicked after living a life of wickedness and carelessness and 
wasting his time in sport and play. Then the time of truth comes 
demanding him not to waste him time in sport and play but to do 
service to Allah and to self...for the Holy Qur’an teaches us again and 
again that the heavens and the earth were not made for sport and 
play. 
13 You notice that our Black People...especially here in 
America...have become sold to nothing in the world but sport and 
play. This is the way the people were of Lot and Noah; they were 
sold to sport and play and they hated the teachings of those righteous 
Prophets. And the day of their doom came, unexpected to them 
because they did not heed their warnings. So it is here today...24 
hours a day...they are trying to have sport and play and talking over 
foolish things, spending their time in foolishness. I fear of an evil day 
overtaking my people here in America soon. 
14 True...the world is warning you now, and you act as though the 
white people can help it. But they are telling you now that 
unemployment keeps mounting and they can do nothing about it. 
They are warning you that you are going to get hungry too, but you 
are not trying to take it with sincerity that they are telling you the 
truth. You are like a child who cries to its mother for bread and milk, 
whether there is any in the kitchen or not. 
15 So this is you...a big, old, grown child, who has been nursed and 
fed by the white people and sheltered by them and you think you will 
always have this from them. But No Sir...remember the parable of 
Lazarus and the rich man. At last, the rich man died and in his death 
of poverty, he came to suffer the same thing that Lazarus 
suffered...being deprived of good homes, and luxury of all kinds. 
This will be taken in this day and time. But the righteous will flourish 
with whatever they please with God. 
16 Study the Holy Qur’an; it is full of wisdom.

