=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Energy.Connection.for.Indigo.Crystal.Children.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:02:16.098204
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
1
The Energy Connection for Sensitive Indigo and Crystal Children 
Written by Jan Yordy, MEd., MSW, Certified Play Therapist  
 
Indigo and Crystal children are special beings whose energy systems are 
extremely sensitive and may be affected by the energy around them in negative and/or 
harmful ways.  With enhanced awareness, their highly tuned system picks up the negative 
emotional and environmental energy from their surroundings like a sponge.  This causes 
Indigos or Crystals to become ungrounded, scrambled and often energetically reversed 
leading them to make poor choices and to self sabotage.  Not only does this make their 
lives more difficult, it also makes the job of parenting more challenging! 
 
 I have found many parents of Indigo children are not yet aware of their child’s 
special sensitivity to energy but bring their child to counseling out of concerns for their 
child’s emotional well being.  They may have a highly anxious child who worries about 
many things or even develops obsessive-compulsive behaviors as a way of coping.  Other 
parents have children/teens who appear depressed and may even be self harming or 
suicidal.  Another difficult behavior some parents deal with is the oppositional child 
whose anger seems huge in comparison to the situation.  These children easily turn a 
household upside down with their temper tantrums and reactive, noncompliant behaviors.  
It may be helpful to realize that these behaviors in Indigos and Crystals can be seen as 
symptoms of the energetic imbalance in their bodies due to personal and environmental 
factors and are not simply attitudinal problems.  The fundamental causes underlying the 
behavior must be addressed if the child is to function and thrive.         
 
 Many of these sensitive children also struggle within traditional school systems 
that reward compliant children conditioned not to think for themselves.  This is because 
Indigos and Crystals often rebel against authoritative figures who exude a “power over 
others” attitude.  They are bright, creative, “think outside of the box” kids who operate 
with a different brain organization and learning style and have difficulty conforming 
unless given reasons it is in their interest to do so.  Unfortunately many Indigos need 
movement to keep their brains switched on, and their ability to process quickly while 
milti-tasking often mistakenly earns them the label of ADD/ADHD and a prescription for 
Ritalin.  Although Ritalin is a stimulant drug, it may actually have a sedating effect on 
active Indigo children who are stressed from rigid school environments which fail to 
meet their learning needs.  Ritalin may give the appearance of increasing an Indigo 
child’s ability to sit still and pay attention, however it will not correct the chronic 
reversed polarity and scrambled energy state, leading to energetic patterns which will 
cause long term problems for Indigos.  Over time, energetically scrambled Indigos may 
become numb to their true potential and lose their enhanced thinking capabilities as they 
struggle to fit into an adult dominated, and left brained oriented world.   
 
 The key to raising healthy, positive Indigo or Crystal children is to help them 
become aware of their energy functioning and to recognize when their finely tuned 
system is ungrounded and disorganized.  Indigo and Crystal children who are “spaced 
out” and totally in their head instead of tuned into information from their body will more 
easily pick up negative energy in their auric field and physical body.  If they live for a


--- PAGE 2 ---
2
long time in a disconnected state, they will feel emotionally numb or highly reactive with 
no clue as to why their emotions are so overwhelming.  Eating an unhealthy “junk food” 
diet, spending hours in front of a TV or playing mindless video or computer games may 
be a way your child maintains their disconnection from uncomfortable feelings. 
 
As a parent of sensitive Indigo or Crystal children, there are many things you can 
do to help your child become more grounded and energetically balanced.  Since Indigo 
and Crystal children often mirror your energetic state, staying calm and emotionally 
balanced yourself helps your child remain energetically present and in control of their 
emotions.  Helping them to take time every day to tune into their body’s energy and to 
release any negative energy they may have picked up while at school or from others they 
may have come in contact with is essential.  Practicing energy balancing techniques every 
day with your child will help them to be more in tune with their body and to recognize 
when they need an energy clearing.  Some simple Brain Gym exercises also help to 
balance energy and switch out of the stress mode allowing them to think with their whole 
brain.   
 
Finally, their physical health is an important component of their overall well-
being and developing healthy eating patterns is critical particularly because they have 
such sensitive systems.  Many Indigos and Crystals suffer from food and chemical 
allergies, and it is especially important to help them recognize what sugar, chemical, 
preservatives, trans fats and other forms of food toxins do to their physical and energetic 
system. Checking for hidden food and chemical allergies is also important in helping 
your child achieve a balanced energetic state.  Common foods such as wheat, dairy or 
corn because they are more difficult to digest may create toxins in your child’s body and 
brain that can lead to behavioral difficulties and reduced ability to think and learn.  
  
10 techniques to Ground and Balance Your Child’s Energy: 
 
1) The way we breathe has a huge impact on how grounded we feel.  Shallow chest 
breathing throws our nervous system into the stress mode.  Make a game out of having 
your child take slow, deep breaths as they focus on different parts of their body.  Can 
they imagine breathing through the bottom of their feet, their heart center, top of their 
head or their stomach?  As they focus on different areas of the body can they visualize 
any stress or negative energy leaving their body as they exhale? (Our breath moves 
energy!) 
 
2)  The energy in our body is electromagnetic.  To help children sense something which 
usually can’t be seen, have them rub their hands together rapidly.  Then gently bring the 
hands almost together and apart several times to see if they can sense the energetic force 
between their hands.  If they can easily feel the energy in their palms, have them 
playfully stretch it out and squeeze it together again or toss it to someone else to catch. 
Take time to help them understand how important it is to keep this energy balanced in 
their body and connected to the earth’s energy.


--- PAGE 3 ---
3
3) While your child is sitting in a chair or cross legged on the floor have them imagine 
that they have a tail just like a monkey touching the floor/earth.  This is their grounding 
cord which is good for releasing negative energy and taking on positive energy.  See if 
they can set an intention to let go of negative energy down their tail releasing it into the 
earth.  When all their negative energy has been released, ask them to bring up some of the 
life giving earth energy.  Do they notice the difference in the quality of energy flowing up 
from the earth?  Conducting this exercise while seated outdoors can be a very positive 
experience! 
 
4) While your child is standing up have them imagine they are a strong, sturdy tree with 
roots which grow out of the bottom of their feet growing deep into the earth.  Feel how 
solid and strong they feel when their roots connect them into the earth’s energy.  Can 
they bring up the earth’s positive energy through the bottom of their feet and up through 
their body until it spills out the top of their head like a fountain?  What are some words 
they can use to describe how this positive energy feels when it is moving through their 
body? 
 
5) Here is a fun activity to try with your child using a metal spoon to attract the excessive 
electromagnetic energy of the body and release it.  Rub the bottom of your child’s foot 
with a metal spoon in a counter-clockwise direction.  (It should be a firm pressure rather 
than light.)  The counter-clockwise circles release over-energy helping the child to calm 
down and relax.  This is an especially good exercise to do if your child is having trouble 
relaxing and falling asleep at night!  They may like it so much that they ask for it over 
and over. 
 
6) When children become energetically reversed, they will self sabotage or make choices 
which brings them harm instead of positive things.  A quick way to balance their polarity 
is to do the Karate Chop with the side of one hand tapping the open palm of the other 
hand.  If combined with a positive affirmation and a deep breath it helps to shift their 
reversed polarity.  Often the child is feeling frustrated so have them say something like 
this, “Even though I am mad about ___________, I like myself and I am still a good kid.”  
Any words which state the problem and some form of acceptance in spite of the problem 
while tapping the side of their hand appears to work in correcting reversed energy.  This 
acceptance statement should be repeated out loud at least 3 times with the cleansing 
breath.  (The Karate Chop comes from the Emotional Freedom Technique.)   
 
7) Another way of correcting reversed polarity is by rubbing the Brain Buttons (K-27) 
under the collar bone.  This Brain Gym® exercise starts by placing the thumb and fingers 
from one hand on the collar bone.  Slide the hand down one inch so that your fingers find 
the hollow just under the collarbone.  Gently massage this key energy spot while placing 
the other hand over the belly button.  After about 25 seconds reverse the hands and rub 
the Brain Buttons with your opposite hand while the other hand covers the belly button.    
It is good to repeat this exercise several times a day especially if you suspect your child is 
having trouble with energetic reversals!  It also provides good stimulation for the brain.


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
8) Walking barefooted outdoors (weather permitting) is another good way of increasing 
your child’s groundedness.  Have your child notice the different sensations of grass, 
earth, pavement, sand, rocks, and water as they walk.  Stimulating the bottom of your 
child’s foot through massage or reflexology is another way to get them to tune into their 
feet and get them back into their body energetically.         
 
9)  The Hook Up from Brain Gym® is a lovely way of balancing energy while you calm 
down over-energy and switch on both hemispheres of the brain.  This is a good exercise 
to do several times a day with your child!  This exercise can be done sitting, standing or 
lying down in bed.  Start by crossing your feet at the ankles.  Extending your hands out     
in front of your body turn the thumbs down so they are pointing at the ground.  (Your 
hands should have the backs almost touching.)  Now lift up one hand and cross it over the 
other hand so palms touch and fingers can interlock.  Allowing the elbows to bend, rotate 
the clasped hands down and then back up so your hands end up resting comfortably on 
your chest.  Finally take a deep breath in while placing your tongue up in the center, 
inside your mouth.   When you exhale, relax the tongue allowing it to go back into place 
in the mouth.  Keep taking slow deep breaths while placing the tongue up on the in breath 
and relaxing it as your breath out.  When the Hook Up is held for at least a minute, a 
calming, peaceful sensation is often felt.  The Hook Up is ended by uncrossing 
everything and gently placing the finger tips together.  I encourage the child to notice 
what sensations they feel at their finger tips.  The tingling, warmth, or pulsing they 
usually feel in their finger tips is the vibration of their body’s energy.  Touching finger 
tips together is another way of balancing the body’s polarity. 
 
10) Having your child create a bubble of protection around themselves every morning is 
another helpful technique to keep them from picking up negative energy.  First have your 
child imagine positive light all around their body like a bubble.  Have them imagine that 
this bubble can let in positive energy but will repel any negative energy which is around 
them.  Next have them think about the happy activities and positive interactions they will 
be experiencing that day.  Their angels and guides are ready to bring these thoughts and 
ideas into reality.  The child ends this visualization by tying shut their bubble at their feet 
so no negative energy can sneak in.   
 
11) Since the front of the body (charka system) is often a place where you can lose 
positive energy or take on negative energy, doing a Zip Up when you are going to be 
around a lot of other people my be helpful for your sensitive Indigo/Crystal.  After 
rubbing the hands together vigorously, sweep up the central meridian with the palm of 
the hand from the pubic bone to the bottom of the lips and then out to the side before 
dropping the hand back down.  This process allows the hand to work like a magnet with 
the electromagnet energy of the body and is more powerful when it is combined with a 
positive affirmation.  Something like, “I am calm, strong and loving” or “I am smart, 
brave and confident” are just some examples that could be used.  Any words that feel 
comfortable to the child/teenager will work since it is the intention with which it is 
completed that is most important.  Taking a deep breath each time your hand sweeps up 
will help the process to work better.  Pretending to place a lock at the bottom of the lips 
so no one can unzip the energy field during the day is also helpful.


--- PAGE 5 ---
5
  
Practicing some of these energy exercises every day will help to grow their 
awareness and to stabilize your child’s energy field.  This will allow them to be more 
comfortable to be their authentic, beautiful self! 
 
Jan Yordy MEd., MSW, Certified Play Therapist is a former teacher and a child therapist 
working primarily with Indigo children and teens.  Creator of the Energy Connection 
game and a video about the Indigo phenomenon called Indigo Child, The Next Step in 
Evolution, Jan is passionate about helping Indigo children lead positive and fulfilling 
lives.  Jan has trained as a Spiritual Facilitator with Dr. Wayne Dosick, author of 
Spiritually Healing the Indigo Child (and Adult Too) and is happy to be using his 
techniques at her new Integrated Center for Optimal Learning in Waterloo, Ontario. 
To learn more about Jan or her innovative resources you can visit 
www.energyconnectiontherapies.com

