=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Eric Wiiliams & the making of the modern CARIBBEAN.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 367
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:56:07.508938
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
ERIC WILLIAMS
& the Making of the Modern Caribbean


--- PAGE 3 ---
COLIN A. PALMER
RIC
The
 University of North Carolina Press * Chapel Hill
E


--- PAGE 4 ---
LLIAMS
the Making of the Modern Caribbean
W


--- PAGE 5 ---
© 2006 The University of North Carolina Press
All rights reserved
Publicotion of this book was assisted by a grant from
Princeton University.
Designed by Eric M. Brooks
Set in Quadraat & Othello by Keystone Typesetting, Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America
The paper in this book meets the guidelines
for permanence and durability of the Committee
on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity
of the Council on Library Resources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Palmer, Colin A., 1942-
Eric Williams and the making of the modern Caribbean /
Colin A. Palmer.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-IO: 0-8078-2987-0 (cloth: alk. paper)
I. Williams, Eric Eustace, 1911- 2. Trinidad and
Tobago—Politics and government—2oth century.
3. West Indies, British—Politics and government—
20th century. I. Tide.
F2I22.W5P35 2OO6
972.98304'092—dc22 2005022334
10 09 08 07 06 54321


--- PAGE 6 ---
To the
ERIC WILLIAMS
MEMORIAL COLLECTION
and the
PEOPLES OF
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments * xi
Introduction * 5
CHAPTER I Intellectual Decolonization * 15
CHAPTER 2 The Challenge of Political and Economic Integration * 40
CHAPTER 3 The Struggle for Chaguaramas * 76
CHAPTER 4 Eric Williams and the Golden Handshake * 138
CHAPTER 5 Courting Grenada * 179
CHAPTER 6 Bleeding Guiana * 198
CHAPTER 7 Eric Williams, Africa, and Africans * 235
CHAPTER 8 The Economics and Politics of Race * 255
Epilogue * 304
Notes * 309
Bibliography * 335
Index * 339


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Eric Williams, 1935 * 8
Eric Williams, n.d. * 32
Eric Williams and other Caribbean leaders, ca. 1957 * 45
Sir Grantley Adams, Eric Williams, and Norman Manley, ca. 1957 * 46
Eric Williams speaking at the "march in the rain," April 22,1960 * 78
Eric Williams and Cheddi Jagan, 1963 * 200


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
***** My scholarly interest in Eric Williams began in 1994, when the
University of North Carolina Press invited me to write a new introduction to
Capitalism and Slavery on the occasion of its republication. In subsequent
years I conducted research in the Public Record Office in London, the Eric
Williams Memorial Collection (EWMC) in St. Augustine, Trinidad, and the
National Archives in College Park, Maryland. Erica Williams Connel must be
commended for establishing the EWMC and for working indefatigably to
make it a model for similar archival collections in the Caribbean. It is a
national treasure. I owe a special debt of gratitude to the staff of these fine
archives, especially Dr. Glenroy Taitt, Kathleen Helenese-Paul, and Sylvie
Pollard of the EWMC and Walter Hill of the National Archives. During my
frequent visits to these collections I enjoyed the hospitality of various indi-
viduals and wish to thank them all, especially Keith Benjamin in London.
The Research Foundation of the City University of New York and Prince-
ton University provided very generous financial assistance for the research
and writing of the manuscript. I tender my sincere thanks to these fine
academic institutions.
I also appreciate the invaluable help I received in preparing the manu-
script from a number of other persons. Jean Washington had the unenviable
task of typing the first draft of the manuscript and deciphering my hand-
writing, doing so with commendable ingenuity. Naela El-Hinnawy typed
subsequent drafts with considerable speed, efficiency, and good humor. Gen
Gillespie, Azaria Mbughuni, and Allison Palmer provided technical assis-
tance at important moments in the manuscript's evolution.
A number of colleagues and friends read the manuscript, including Brid-
get Brereton, Selwyn Carrington, Sean Greene, Franklin Knight, Robert Tig-
nor, and Maurice St. Pierre. In addition, the class of 2003-4 of The Scholars
in Residence Program at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Cul-
ture, as well as Miriam Jimenez Moran, then assistant director of the pro-
gram, read two chapters of the manuscript. I thank all of these selfless


--- PAGE 13 ---
AC KNOWLEDG M ENTS
individuals for their careful reading of my work, their valuable criticisms,
and their identification of the errors that it contained. Needless to say, I am
entirely responsible for the final product. The manuscript also profited from
the comments of the two scholars who read it for the University of North
Carolina Press, and I thank them for their role in making this a better book.


--- PAGE 14 ---
ERIC WILLIAMS
& the Making of the Modern Caribbean


--- PAGE 15 ---



--- PAGE 16 ---



--- PAGE 17 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 18 ---
INTRODUCTION
* * * * * "The circumstances of my birth were quite unremarkable," Eric
Eustace Williams wrote in the unpublished version of his memoir. "They,"
asserted Williams, "in no way differed from those of other West Indian
children of the lower middle class." The year was 1911, the month was
September. Delivered with the assistance of a midwife, Eric was the first
child of his parents. His birth was not reported immediately because it
"coincided with a smallpox epidemic and stern government measures to
enforce vaccination." Since he was "supposed to be quite ill" when he
was born, Williams surmised that "no doubt there was a desire to spare
me the pain of vaccination until it was absolutely necessary." Consequently,
his birth was not registered until October 12, eighteen days after he was
delivered.1
The child of economically challenged parents, Williams was born in a
small house on Oxford Street in Port of Spain, Trinidad. He recalled that the
house "reminds one of a square wooden box placed right on the street
pavement." His father—thirty-three years old at Williams's birth—was "a
strong, silent man, reserved except in the company of close friends, some-
what inclined to asceticism." He was "a son of his class, partial to a good
Sunday table and the usual delicacies at Christmas and other festive sea-
sons." His mother, ten years younger than his father, "was much lighter in
color than he was." She had a French name, "of which both she and my
father were quite proud."2
Williams's father, by dint of his class background, received only a pri-
mary school education. He entered the civil service as a junior clerk at age
seventeen. As Williams would later observe, "My father was a superior soul,
a superior soul was he, cut out to play a superior role in the god damn
bourgeoisie." But "the only difficulties were that the bourgeoisie wouldn't
allow him . . . because he lacked social qualifications. The necessary social


--- PAGE 19 ---
INTRODUCTION
qualifications in Trinidad were colour, money and education, in that order of
importance. My father lacked all three."3
Trapped in a low-paying job with a family that increased in size every two
years, his economic situation was precarious. As Williams expressed it, "The
family followed the basic West Indian pattern, a growing disproportion be-
tween population and resources, between birth rate and purchasing power."
He thought that his father's "reputation for independence of outlook and
speaking his own mind" was a disadvantage in dealing with his white supe-
riors and impeded his chances for promotion. His father "found himself
passed over in favour of men who were younger, more pliant, more malle-
able." The inevitable consequence of his economic plight was "the increas-
ing load of debt and judgment summonses, which afforded the authorities
the excuse they needed for bypassing my father." In the twenty years before
Williams left Trinidad for England, his family had changed houses "no
fewer than eight times."4
Having won a scholarship at age eleven, young Eric entered Queens Royal
College, in Port of Spain, "an imposing structure" designed "to produce
coloured Englishmen in the West Indies."5 A disciplined and outstanding
student, he eventually won the prestigious Island Scholarship in 1931. Over
his father's objections, he eschewed medicine in favor of reading for a
degree in history at Oxford University.
The Trinidad and Tobago into which Eric Williams was born was a colo-
nial society par excellence. The two islands, of some 1,980 square miles, had
a population of about three hundred thousand. A majority of the residents
were of African descent, their ancestors having been brought there as slaves.
Indians, who were imported as indentured servants after slavery ended, con-
stituted a smaller but growing minority. Individuals of European descent—
the English, the French, the Spanish, and the Portuguese—made up a third
group. Because of their racial ancestry, the latter exercised economic, social,
and political power disproportionate to their numbers. As in other West
Indian communities, whites occupied the pinnacle of the racial hierarchy,
setting social standards and behaving as if it was their divine right to rule the
islands to serve their own interests. This society made no pretense about
being egalitarian. It was never based on the consent of the governed, and its
survival depended on various coercive mechanisms. The Habitual Idlers
Ordinance, for example, allowed the authorities to require those who could
not prove they had a job to work on private estates.6
6


--- PAGE 20 ---
INTRODUCTION
Eric Williams's childhood coincided with the development of a nascent
black working-class consciousness in Trinidad and Tobago. In 1914 Marcus
Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) in
Jamaica, promoting an aggressive black nationalism. Embracing a "race
first" ideology, the UNIA had an impact on the racial consciousness of
Trinidadians as it did elsewhere in the diaspora. Soldiers who served in the
British West Indies Regiment during World War I returned home full of
complaints about racial mistreatment and unwilling to accept the status
quo. Although their demand for the same compensation as their English
counterparts was rejected, it was an indication of changing times. More
ominous were the strikes—particularly by dockworkers—that occurred in
1919 and 1920. These were clear signs of a working-class consciousness that
threatened the colonial elite.
Young Eric would have been aware of these stirrings by the working class,
even if he did not yet understand their significance. An avid reader, he would
have seen reports of the strikes in the newspapers his father purchased or
more frequently obtained from friends and neighbors. His godfather was
T. Albert Marryshow, a noted Grenadian politician and one of the acknowl-
edged fathers of the West Indies Federation. It may be surmised that the boy
would have listened intently to Marryshow's discussion of the issues of the
moment when he came to visit. He recalled that "T. A. as he was affection-
ately called by my father" was "addicted" to "high flown phrases and literary
allusions."7
The beginnings of a working-class consciousness were accompanied by
new demands for constitutional reform, articulated primarily by the middle
class. Not only were West Indians aware of the principles of national self-
determination that helped to animate World War I, but a growing middle
class and the presence of a group of intellectuals ensured that demands for
representative government would acquire some urgency. As a student at
Queens Royal College, Williams must have followed the debates on constitu-
tional reform in the press. But clearly, he spent his formative years in a
colonial society where the subordinate groups were beginning to imagine a
new definition of themselves, portending a different future.
During the years 1931-48 Williams lived outside of Trinidad and Tobago.
Between 1931 and 1938 he completed his undergraduate and postgraduate
studies at Oxford, and between 1939 and 1948 he served on the faculty of
Howard University in Washington, D.C. After 1942 he also was employed by
7


--- PAGE 21 ---
INTRODUCTION
Eric Williamson receiving the bachelor's degree at Oxford University, 1935. Photograph
courtesy of Eric Williams Memorial Collection, University of the West Indies (Trinidad
and Tobago). © Eric Williams Memorial Collection and used by permission.
the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission and its successor, the Carib-
bean Commission, both created to develop and implement economic and
social programs in the Caribbean. In 1948 Williams became deputy chair-
man of the Caribbean Commission, a position he held until 1955. Although
the job involved a good deal of travel, Trinidad was his base.
The years spanning the thirties and fifties were significant ones in the
social and political life of the Caribbean. Beginning in 1934, some territo-
ries, including Puerto Rico, St. Vincent, St. Kitts, and British Honduras,
experienced labor unrest as employees demanded improvements in their
working conditions. Led by Grenadian-born Tubal Uriah Butler, Trinidad's
oil field workers struck in 1937, an act that became the catalyst for other
strikes and serious industrial disputes. Jamaican dockworkers and workers
8


--- PAGE 22 ---
INTRODUCTION
in the sugar industry, led by Alexander Bustamante, walked off their jobs the
following year. In the wake of these disturbances, labor unions and political
parties emerged throughout the region.
In response to the social unrest, rising nationalism, and political de-
mands, colonial authorities modified the Crown colony system and intro-
duced universal adult suffrage in the 1940s. Recognizing that colonialism
was being assaulted everywhere, the United Kingdom began to prepare the
larger territories for internal self-government. In addition, in 1947 it spon-
sored a conference in Montego Bay to explore the potential creation of a
West Indies Federation.
Eric Williams's entry into politics was hardly a surprising development
after his ties with the Caribbean Commission were severed in June 1955. In
the previous year he had begun to give a series of lectures at the Trinidad
Public Library in Port of Spain to educate the people about their history and
to promote a sense of West Indian nationalism. He continued his lectures in
1955 on a range of subjects—among them, "The Educational Problems of
the Caribbean in Historical Perspective," "The British West Indian Federa-
tion," "Lands, Peoples, Problems," "John Locke," and "The Democratic
Tradition in Western Civilization and Its Relevance for the West Indies."8
The scholar dazzled his listeners with the depth of his learning and his
oratory, while simultaneously building up a reservoir of respect and good-
will, particularly among African Trinidadians.
Williams did not restrict his scholarly expositions to the literati who
flocked to hear him at the public library. To reach a larger audience, he
renamed Woodford Square in Port of Spain the University of Woodford
Square, creating a large open-air lecture room for the "students" who came
in the thousands to hear him speak. Explaining the rationale for the "univer-
sity," Williams stated: "Somebody once said that all that was needed for a
university was a book and the branch of a tree; someone else went further
and said that a university should be a university in overalls. With a band-
stand, a microphone, a large audience and slacks and hot shirts, a topical
subject for discussion, the open air and a beautiful tropical night, we have all
the essentials of a university."9 This was an extraordinary experiment in
public education. Williams's mission was to create a citizenry that was well
informed about its history, conversant with topical matters, and politically
conscious. He never avoided complex issues but spoke from the perspective
of a West Indian nationalist who was seeking to destroy all vestiges of colo-
9


--- PAGE 23 ---
INTRODUCTION
nialism. Under his tutelage, the citizens of Trinidad and Tobago became,
arguably, the most politically sophisticated in the Anglophone Caribbean.
Recognizing that Trinidad and Tobago was not then blessed with an
abundance of leadership talent, Williams saw his opportunity and took it.
On January 15,1956, he and his supporters formally established the People's
National Movement (PNM) in preparation for the general elections sched-
uled for later that year. The party's leaders were primarily middle-class
professional men. Most of them were African Trinidadians, although there
was a sprinkling of Indo-Trinidadians, chiefly Muslims and Christians. The
Hindus, suspicious of black leadership, generally stood apart until they
eventually found a home in the Democratic Labour Party (DLP), which later
became the principal opposition to the PNM.
The PNM was Trinidad and Tobago's first modern political party. Mod-
eled somewhat after Norman Manley's People's National Party in Jamaica, it
was highly structured. At the base was the party group, which could consist
of as few as twenty members. The constituency group, comprised of two
representatives from each party group, coordinated all of the party's ac-
tivities at that level. At the apex of the structure was the General Council,
composed of a variety of party elected officials. The PNM'S leader was
chosen every five years at an islandwide convention.
Although the founders of the PNM employed a stridently nationalist
rhetoric, the party was reformist in its animating ideology. It adopted a firm
anticolonial stance, supported a Federation of the West Indies, a reorganiza-
tion of the territory's economy with special emphasis on the development of
agriculture, and industrialization. Its vision was that of a harmonious multi-
racial society. Eschewing socialism, the party also avoided any formal asso-
ciation with trade unions, unlike the British Labour Party and the People's
National Party in Jamaica. Running on this platform, and led by Eric Wil-
liams, the PNM candidates won thirteen of twenty-five seats in the general
election held on September 24, 1956. Coming less than a year after the
PNM'S formation, this was a remarkable achievement. The governor of
Trinidad and Tobago, Edward B. Beetham, invited Williams to form a gov-
ernment the following day, and he was sworn in as chief minister on October
26 after some constitutional issues had been resolved.
For the next twenty-five years Eric Williams dominated the PNM and the
political life of Trinidad and Tobago. His control of the party was almost
absolute, but he commanded the loyalty and adulation of thousands of
IO


--- PAGE 24 ---
INTRODUCTION
people. On the other hand, Williams displayed an incapacity to deal with
dissent in the PNM, removing those who had fallen out of favor without a
backward glance.10 His relationships with other Caribbean leaders were
frequently rocky, but none doubted his considerable intellectual gifts. In
1961 the U.S. consul general, Edwin Moline, described Williams's role and
standing in his party:
He is the subject of adoration in photos, articles, letters, studding the
pages of The Nation. He is a member of every important committee in the
upper reaches of the party, and no one wants to make a decision without
direct or indirect evidence of his approval. The rank and file look to him
for education, inspiration, and authority. He formed the party, led it to un-
expected victory in its first political effort, and speaks for it in government
and in international affairs. More effectively than any other single member
he articulates its tactics and strategy, its practical objectives and its philos-
ophy. As a professional historian he gives the members an understanding
of their origins and a view of their future. He is their Leader and he can tell
them almost anything he wants them to hear. He can scold, exalt, lead
marches, burn documents, turn himself around 180 degrees. In the view of
the rank and file there is almost only one thing even Williams cannot do:
he cannot do wrong. There is no one in the party with this mystique,
charisma, or image. Without him, the party would break into a number of
pieces; Williams knows it, the lesser lights know it.11
An indefatigable worker, Williams brought much energy and passion to
contemporary issues, sometimes arrogating too much responsibility to him-
self. In 1970, for example, he would head four ministries in addition to
serving as prime minister. Sir Stephen Luke, the British official who led
the committee responsible for handling matters relating to the inauguration
of the West Indies Federation scheduled for 1958, observed in January 1957
that Williams had "extraordinary personal qualities." His energy "is inex-
haustible; he is one of the most remarkable public speakers I have ever
heard; he is, of course, exceptionally intelligent." Luke "clearly perceived
why the PNM is a movement and not a party, why so many people feel, since
the [1956] general election, some sense of national revival." He had de-
tected "none of the weaknesses and prejudices" for which Williams "has
been criticized."12
Williams's critics accused him of harboring dictatorial tendencies, but he
II


--- PAGE 25 ---
INTRODUCTION
was, for the most part, committed to democratic principles. Reviewing Wil-
liams's early months as chief minister, Stephen Luke observed that his "spe-
cial concern is to keep the Governor, his Ministers, the Legislative Council
and his party and the public generally fully in the picture. In his dealings
with me, he has been consistently courteous, accessible, ready to accept
advice, willing to consider suggestions, and anxious for help."13 This favor-
able assessment of the young chief minister was not shared by the opposi-
tion and by colonial officials as the years wore on. Williams, British high
commissioner Richard C. C. Hunt reported in 1970, was fortified "in the
belief that he is indispensable, his answer to difficulties is to try to do even
more himself and immure himself in his office behind a mounting pile of
files, creating the material for a new and updated history of Trinidad and
Tobago."14
Williams was an ardent foe of colonialism, a political stance that drove
his historical scholarship and political behavior. Maintaining that colonial-
ism was the source of the Caribbean's problems, he used all the rhetorical
power at his command to assault its historical, contemporary, and systemic
expressions. Convinced that the islands were individually too small and
impoverished to transform their condition and to play significant inter-
national roles, Williams was an articulate and persistent advocate of their
political federation and economic integration. His vision of a political and
economic union of the region was sufficiently elastic to include some of
the non-English-speaking territories. None of this could be accomplished,
however, without the willingness of the other territories to abandon their
endemic insularity for a collective good.
***** This study is not intended to be a full-scale biography of Eric
Williams. It does have biographical attributes, however, since I address
crucial moments in Williams's life up to 1970, when the February Revolution
threatened his continuation in office and marked a watershed in his political
career. At another level, this work is a political history because it examines
Williams's role in shaping the political development of the Anglophone
Caribbean between 1956, when he became the chief minister of Trinidad and
Tobago, and 1970, when he fell on difficult times. Williams was at the center
of most of the conflicts, struggles, and challenges that defined the Anglo-
phone Caribbean during those fourteen years. Finally, the book is also con-
ceived as an intellectual history. More than any other British West Indian
12


--- PAGE 26 ---
INTRODUCTION 13
politician of his times, Williams was committed to the life of the mind and
the world of books. A prolific scholar, he wrote seven books, edited an
eighth, and coedited a ninth. His most distinguished work, Capitalism and
Slavery (1944), helped to shape and redefine the historiography of the Carib-
bean. Williams's intellectual positions were not divorced from the real world
of politics. In fact, the ideas he espoused in Capitalism and Slavery and in his
other works informed his practice of the art of politics, not always with
satisfactory consequences.
This work, I should emphasize, is not a history of Trinidad and Tobago
between the years 1956 and 1970, narrowly conceived. Selwyn Ryan has
already written an admirable book on aspects of those years.151 am primarily
interested in elucidating Williams's activities on the larger Caribbean stage
and the dialectical relationship between the domestic imperatives in Trini-
dad and Tobago and Williams's positions vis-a-vis the region as a whole.
Chapter 8, "The Economics and Politics of Race," may be somewhat of an
exception, but Williams was so proud of the racial diversity of his nation that
its internal dynamics command attention. The developing racial cancer in
Trinidad in the 1950s and 1960s, however, had threatening implications for
the body politic in Jamaica and British Guiana (later Guyana), among other
countries. Chapter 8 is not so much a history of the 1970 racially inspired
revolt against Williams as it is an examination of the seeds of the crisis and
Williams's management of it.
In writing this book, I made the decision to avoid interviews with Wil-
liams's contemporaries. He remains such a dominant, haunting, and polar-
izing presence in the life of Trinidad and Tobago that my search for the
proverbial "truth" would have been made much more difficult by highly
partisan accounts of his career. Consequently, I relied almost entirely on
archival sources and on the voices of the major political actors of the period.
Because Williams is, and was, a controversial figure, I tried to document my
conclusions as carefully as I could, perhaps overburdening the reader with
lengthy quotations. But this needed to be done since, in many respects, this
is a pioneering work. I had few road maps to follow.
The book begins with an analysis of Williams's ideas on colonialism.
Chapter I sets the context for understanding Williams's positions and ac-
tions regarding the West Indies Federation (Chapter 2), the Chaguaramas
dispute (Chapter 3), and the imbroglio with the United Kingdom over the
"golden handshake"—that is, the parting gift on the occasion of the nation's


--- PAGE 27 ---
14 INTRODUCTION
independence (Chapter 4). The fourth chapter also discusses Eric Williams
the human being and enters the partisan debate on the ingredients of his
personality, an intriguing issue that a scholar could hardly avoid. I decided to
discuss Eric Williams the man in the middle of the book, rather than earlier,
so as not to prejudice the readers' perceptions of and responses to him. It is
my hope that by Chapter 4 readers will have been exposed to enough infor-
mation about Williams to form an independent judgment of his personality
and how it may have shaped his worldview and his statecraft.
Chapters 5 and 6 observe Williams as he undertakes the futile tasks of
integrating Grenada into a unitary statehood with Trinidad and Tobago and
mediating the racially inspired internecine warfare in British Guiana. Chap-
ter 7 places him on an even broader stage as it examines his attitudes toward
Africa and Africans and the place he ascribed to the peoples of that continent
in the construction of a West Indian identity. Finally, Chapter 8 addresses the
racial question in Trinidad and Tobago and shows how the language of race
became a metaphor for the society's ills.
For the sake of convenience, the designation "Trinidad" refers to "Trini-
dad and Tobago." Similarly, "African Trinidadian" and "African Guianese"
are used interchangeably with "black Trinidadian" and "black Guianese."
The nomenclatures "Indo-Trinidadian" and "Indo-Guianese" are also used
interchangeably with Indians in both the Trinidadian and Guianese contexts.
Although I am aware that many scientists now maintain that "race" is a
social construct and that it lacks any biological basis, I use the term in the
way in which it would have been understood in the Caribbean and elsewhere
during the period covered by this book.
My study ends in 1970, with the suppression of the Black Power-inspired
February Revolution. A chastened Eric Williams promised to implement
reforms and sacked some of his ministers. But this was a horrible personal
and political crisis for him, and he seems never to have regained his con-
fident stride, at least not entirely. In 1973, after seventeen years in office,
Williams announced his resignation as political leader of the PNM and
hence as prime minister. The party and a large number of his supporters
persuaded him to withdraw this act of self-abnegation. His bestyears behind
him, Williams would remain head of the government until his death in 1981.


--- PAGE 28 ---
CHAPTER I
INTELLECTUAL
DECOLONIZATION
* * * * * "The history of our West Indian islands can be expressed in two
simple words: Columbus and Sugar," Eric Williams proclaimed in a lecture
he delivered at the Trinidad Public Library on April 19,1944. As he awaited
the publication of Capitalism and Slavery later that year, the young historian
was preparing the ground for the reception of its bitter assault on colonial-
ism. His audience on that April day was comprised mainly of the local
intelligentsia, many of whom were English and therefore white. Entitled
"The British West Indies in World History," the talk must have made some
of his listeners uncomfortable as Williams underscored many unpleasant
truths about the region's history. "The West Indian islands were discov-
ered," he said, "to assist in the solution of Europe's problems. Thus they
were from the very beginning, an extension of Europe overseas."1
In this speech Williams was focusing on the themes that he had ad-
dressed on previous occasions and that would be the signifiers of his career.
His preoccupation with colonialism—its impact on the colonizers and the
colonized—was not an empty intellectual exercise to advance his reputation
or to score academic points. Rather, it was a consequence of his familiarity
with imperial power as a citizen of colonial Trinidad and Tobago, his racially
unpalatable experiences in England as a student, his deep understanding of
the nature of colonialism, and his vision of a world free from the excesses of
the past. Williams's condemnation of colonialism was not restricted to its
expression in the Caribbean. He was consistent in his criticism of colonial
rule in Asia and Africa. The colonized peoples, regardless of their ethnicity
or location, were his brethren, his partners in suffering, and brothers and
sisters in the struggle for justice and independence.
Eric Williams was born and came to maturity at a time when Liberia,
Ethiopia, and Haiti were the only predominantly black African and Carib-


--- PAGE 29 ---
l6 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
bean nations free from colonial rule. He was knowledgeable about the inva-
sion of Ethiopia by Benito Mussolini in the 1930s, the occupation of Haiti by
the Americans, and the denigration of peoples of African descent every-
where. Years later, Williams recalled the ways in which he and his contempo-
raries were socialized as colonial subjects. "The intellectual equipment with
which I was endowed by The Trinidad school system," Williams wrote in
his autobiography, "had two principal characteristics—quantitatively it was
rich; qualitatively, it was British. 'Be British' was the slogan not only of the
Legislature but also of the school."2
Williams was harshly critical of the other deleterious effects of the colo-
nial education he received. He considered his schooling "un-West Indian."
"My training," he added, "was divorced from any thing remotely suggestive
of Trinidad and the West Indies." Only the academically weaker students
were expected to study West Indian history. "What the school disparaged,"
Williams wrote, "the society despised."3
Having won a highly coveted island scholarship, Williams left for Oxford
University in 1932 to read for a degree in history. Specializing in British
colonial history, he confessed that he took "a very independent line" with his
tutor, R. Trevor Davies.4 Williams distinguished himself academically and
was awarded the Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1939; his dissertation was
entitled "The Economic Aspect of the Abolition of the West Indian Slave
Trade and Slavery." This work was later revised and published as Capitalism
and Slavery (1944). Williams's confrontation in England with a crude British
racism left an indelible impression on him. White students doubted his
intellectual capacity and some even ridiculed him. Williams believed that his
race also placed him at a disadvantage when he applied for a fellowship at
All Souls College, Oxford, in 1935.5
Although he had a profound appreciation for the achievements of the
English over time, Williams rejected the racism that characterized their rela-
tionship with the black and brown peoples they colonized. Thus, his unre-
lenting assault on colonialism had multifaceted underpinnings. As a histo-
rian, he was deeply cognizant of the ways in which colonialism was justified
intellectually by metropolitan scholars and of the necessity for the colonized
to confront and undermine such claims. As a scholar, he understood the
structural relationship between the imperial powers and their colonies and
the ways in which colonialism fostered the exploitation of its victims. As a
child of colonialism, Williams knew firsthand the psychological damage


--- PAGE 30 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 17
experienced by colonized peoples, forcing him to assume the burden of
helping to make the people of Trinidad and Tobago whole again. As a
politician, his mission was to free his society from all vestiges of colo-
nial rule.
Williams was highly conversant with the works of such imperial schol-
ars and writers as Thomas Carlyle, Edward Long, Lord Macaulay, Reginald
Coupland, and Arnold Toynbee. None of these intellectuals doubted the
essential superiority of Europeans, although twentieth-century writers like
Coupland and Toynbee never defended slavery or supported its reintroduc-
tion. But their descriptions of African peoples were suffused with a distress-
ing cultural chauvinism at best and a barely disguised racism at its worst. To
Toynbee, Africans arrived in the Americas "spiritually as well as physically
naked" but possessing a "childlike spiritual intuition." Coupland extolled
the virtues of British colonial rule and praised the humanitarian impulses of
the British, especially in regard to the emancipation of enslaved people.6
Such nationally self-serving scholarship led Williams to observe that "the
British historians wrote almost as if Britain had introduced Negro slavery
solely for the satisfaction of abolishing it."7
As a descendant of enslaved Africans and as a scholar, Williams was on
secure ground when he claimed that "the most offensive statements ever
made in terms of the capacity or the incapacity of certain peoples have been
made by historians in the universities." "Imperialist historians," he argued,
"openly set out to despise the West Indian capacity, and today you are inde-
pendent."8 The influence of these scholars, he maintained, permeated all
sectors of British society, affecting attitudes and governmental policies. Re-
ferring to historians at universities, Williams charged: "It is they who[,] in
the British circles in particular, were able to penetrate the ranks of the people
who became the members of Parliament, the members of the Cabinet run-
ning the government, the members of Parliament making the laws for the
colonies, the administrators and governors governing the colonies, creating
a climate in the public mind which is responsible for the attitude ... to West
Indian areas and West Indian people today.9
Familiar with the disparaging ways in which colonized people had been
depicted by imperial scholars, Williams called upon them to reject the histo-
ries written by those who "sought only to justify the indefensible and to seek
support for preconceived and outmoded prejudices."10 To him, the newly
independent people of Trinidad and Tobago must reject "the intellectual


--- PAGE 31 ---
l8 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
concepts and attitudes worked out by metropolitan scholars in the age of
colonialism." He proclaimed the "old intellectual world" dead, "strangled
by the noose that it put around its own neck."11
The men who inhabited that old intellectual world had a particular pen-
chant for denigrating those upon whose backs British power partially rested.
Thomas Carlyle dismissed the notion that blacks had any rights, ranked "the
Demarara Nigger" just ahead of horses, and doubted the wisdom of eman-
cipation in the West Indies. Slavery's demise, he said, had reduced blacks to
a state of idleness, "each one carrying a rum bottle in his hand, no breeches
on his body, pumpkin at discretion, and the fruitful region of the earth going
back to jungle round him."12
Although Carlyle was especially vituperative in his assault on blacks, his
ideas were broadly representative of British intellectual opinion on peoples
of African descent and their capacities. Their pernicious assertions about
these peoples undoubtedly reflected and shaped British popular opinion.
Williams described such ideas and representations of West Indians as "the
great lie of history," adding: "It is being exposed with all the ruthlessness
that it deserves."13 He had dedicated his life "to the exposure of this lie, to
the repudiation of the many calumnies and detractions with which we have
been afflicted and to the filling of the gap caused by our long period of
amnesia."14 But Williams did not see himself fighting this battle alone. Such
calumnies, he contended, should be addressed by universities in newly inde-
pendent countries. It was their task "to challenge, deliberately, all that has
been written in respect of the national history. I mean the West Indies,
Africa, Ghana, Tanganyika, etc., all that has been written in the imperialist
period."15
Aware that the colonial experience shaped the colonized in psychologi-
cally damaging ways, Williams knew that the task of intellectual decoloniza-
tion would be difficult to accomplish. "It is one thing to get rid of colonial-
ism," he said. "There will be joy before the angels of heaven for every
imperialist sinner that repents but if you colonial nationalists think that it is
as easy as that, I am afraid they have another thought coming to them. I go a
little further than that. A lot of the colonial attitudes are not dead at all."16
In the context of mental decolonization, Williams emphasized the need
for writing national histories. To him, the imperial powers had treated the
West Indian islands as producers of sugar, ignoring them once that eco-
nomic need became less compelling. The West Indies now formed in the


--- PAGE 32 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 19
popular imagination "a picture of fun-loving people, West Indians have been
responsible for this picture, a place for tourists, a place where you could
leave the United States with several inches of snow in the month of February
or March, and get down and walk half-naked on the beaches, a place where
you do nothing but drink rum punches and forget."17 To counteract this
frivolous image, the islands needed to have their own national histories. It
was "nonsense," however, to think that only West Indians could write their
history, since "some of the most reactionary people in respect of colo-
nialism ... are West Indians themselves."18 The colonial experience had left
its imprint on these people, and embracing a different construction of them-
selves would be a slow, arduous process.
***** Ideas such as these were staples of Williams's rhetoric as scholar,
teacher, and politician. The political education of the citizens of Trinidad
and Tobago, and by extension those of the West Indies as a whole, became
his passion. An orator of considerable gifts and one given to a brilliant turn
of the phrase, Williams used these talents to educate, cajole, chastise, and
challenge his people. Employing all of his oratorical and intellectual gifts,
Williams delivered his most famous and contentious speech on intellectual
decolonization at the University of Woodford Square on March 22, 1961.
Strident and combative in tone, brimming with the insight of the trained
historian, Williams used the occasion to explain to his listeners why they had
to destroy the shackles of the colonial past and command their future.
Williams's "Massa Day Done" speech, as this particular oration came to
be known, was delivered at a time when nationalist movements were grow-
ing in strength in the colonial societies of Africa and Asia. India had won its
independence in 1947 after a protracted struggle with the British. Ghana re-
ceived its independence in 1957, thereby energizing nationalist movements
in other parts of Africa. The Algerians contested French colonial authority by
employing violence, and so did the Kenyans against the British. Although
there was some nationalist fervor in the West Indies, it never attained the
passion that characterized its counterpart in many African and Asian so-
cieties. The style of nationalist expression was more genteel, more muted,
less confrontational, and less vituperative.
Williams was certainly aware of these nationalist sentiments in the Carib-
bean region; indeed, he had played a part in creating and shaping them. His
first book, The Negro in the Caribbean (1942), was an overt assault on colonial


--- PAGE 33 ---
20 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
rule in the Caribbean as a whole. His second book, Capitalism and Slavery
(1944), provided the historical roots for his arguments and was a sustained
attack on the extant scholarship on slavery's role in the construction of the
British economy and on the humanitarian impulse in the abolition of slavery.
Williams, who had accepted a post with the British- and American-
financed and controlled Anglo-American Caribbean Commission in 1945,
had an uneasy and acrimonious relationship with his superiors. Emotionally
committed to improving the condition of the Caribbean peoples, sensitive to
their need to assume responsibility for their own destiny, and conscious of
his intellectual superiority over his white bosses, Williams refused to be
silenced or to modify his critique of colonial rule in accordance with their
wishes. His personality prevented him from a supine acceptance of their
orders and his high degree of political consciousness made such a response
wholly impossible. When his superiors suggested that he withdraw an arti-
cle that he had submitted for publication on race relations in Puerto Rico and
the Virgin Islands on the ground that "the timing was not right," Williams
declined: "It struck me that if West Indians are to think only when Britain
and the United States consider it is the right time for them to do so, we will
never think at all. ... I consider that each and every moment of each day
and every day is a fit and proper time to attack racial discrimination and
I said so."19
Williams was equally adamant in defending his Negro in the Caribbean from
its detractors. Standing up to one of his superiors who thought that the book
was not "objective,"20 and who implied that he should repudiate it to save the
Caribbean Commission embarrassment, Williams was "prepared to give no
quarter and ask for none. I knew that if I yielded, they would wipe the floor
with me forever after that."21 Williams, who prided himself on his histori-
cal skills to a fault, would brook no criticism of his work and certainly not
from those who were the acknowledged defenders of the horrendous status
quo. As he declared: "I was not prepared to listen to any criticism about my
vested interests in the West Indies. I would not capitulate for one moment to
those interests. No question of unfavorable reaction to my book could be
maintained."22
Eric Williams was relieved of his duties with the Commission in June
1955, his political and intellectual stands having become increasingly unpal-
atable to his superiors. As he explained, "I endured tortures at the Caribbean
Commission, where I had to tolerate all sorts of metropolitan upstarts who


--- PAGE 34 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 21
thought my ideas for the future of the West Indies too extreme. Everywhere I
went I met suppression." To Williams, the issues that led to his dismissal
were "not personal but political; they involve not a single individual but the
West Indian people."23 This assertion, made within four hours of his dis-
missal to an audience of about twenty thousand people in Port of Spain, was
not rhetorically empty, as subsequent developments would amply demon-
strate. Williams was consciously seeking to depersonalize his conflict with
the Caribbean Commission and to make it into a cause with which all
colonized West Indians could identify. He was the black and gifted colonial
whose efforts to enhance the lives of his people had been stymied at every
turn. He had been crucified on the altar of colonial interests by men who
defended an unjust status quo and who were the enemies of the people,
inasmuch as they were his. By dismissing him so callously, the Commission
had unintentionally liberated Williams to find his own voice and to put his
talents at the disposal of the people of Trinidad and Tobago and their breth-
ren elsewhere. "I was born here," Williams told his audience on that warm
June night, "and here I stay with the people of Trinidad, who educated me
free of charge for nine years at Queens Royal College, who have made me
whatever I am, and who might be at any time the victims of the very pres-
sures I have been fighting against for twelve years."24 In language reminis-
cent of that used by Booker T. Washington in his speech at the Cotton States
and International Exposition held in Atlanta in 1895, Williams vowed "to
let down my bucket where I am, now, right here with you in the British
West Indies."25
The animating ideological thrust of Williams's vow was, to be sure, quite
different from the one that guided Booker T. Washington. In his so-called
Atlanta Compromise, Washington had urged blacks in the American South
to accept racial segregation, cooperate with whites, and use their energies to
build a prosperous region. Williams, on the other hand, was not interested
in any compromise with the status quo in the West Indies. His pledge "to let
down my bucket" in the West Indies, as his audience that night undoubtedly
understood, was fraught with tantalizing implications. Williams's expe-
riences with the Caribbean Commission had enhanced his political con-
sciousness, pushed him in the direction of a more overtly political career,
and in time gave him a larger stage to test and implement his ideas, for good
or for ill.
Not everyone who heard it was impressed by Williams's speech. U.S.


--- PAGE 35 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
consul general William P. Maddox felt that Williams was seeking to exploit
his dismissal "to his own personal, and political advantage." According to
Maddox, Williams displayed an "inordinate vanity, delusions of intellectual
superiority, and acute sense of racialism." His "racialism," charged Maddox,
"turns into vindictiveness against the representatives of the metropolitan
governments which form the Commission, and establishes him in the eyes
of his public as a champion of the Negro masses of the West Indies."
Williams had said nothing that night that deserved such a harsh condemna-
tion, but Maddox was right in noting his appeal to people of African descent
as a whole, not just the "masses." "It is a safe guess that he has launched a
new phase of his political career in Trinidad and the British West Indies,"
Maddox concluded.26
It is in the context of Williams's developing political consciousness, his
understanding of the deleterious effects of colonialism on the West In-
dies, and his unhappy experiences with the Caribbean Commission that his
"Massa Day Done" speech of March 1961 should be placed. He delivered it
approximately four years after he had become chief minister of Trinidad and
Tobago. As head of government, he experienced firsthand how the colonial
system operated and how the structural mechanisms it created impeded
change. Williams gave the speech in the midst of a difficult battle with the
United States over the return of the land on which the Chaguaramas Naval
Station had been constructed to the people of Trinidad and Tobago. He was
also troubled by the fact that many of his fellow citizens did not share his
view of colonial rule on the one hand or understood the consequences of its
demise on the other. In response to a recent story in the Trinidad Guardian, a
frequently harsh critic of the chief minister, Williams had publicly chastised
the newspaper on December 22, 1960, when he first declared that "Massa
Day Done." This emotionally charged pronouncement was inflammatory
and abusive, but Williams wanted to hit his target with all the rhetorical
venom he could muster.
As the politically astute Eric Williams must have expected, some people
greeted his pejorative "Massa Day Done" with approval while others were
outraged. Calling Williams's use of the expression "wicked," the opposition
Democratic Labour Party formally asked him on March 5,1961, to apologize
for his intemperate language. Not one to be silenced, especially when he
knew that history was on his side, Williams used the imbroglio to give his
22


--- PAGE 36 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 23
compatriots another history lesson on March 22 and embarrass his critics in
the process.
The March 22 "Massa Day Done" speech will go down in the historical
annals as one of the strongest indictments of the psychological impact of
colonial rule made by a head of government anywhere. Williams began his
extraordinary address by assaulting his critics in the opposition party with
unusual vehemence, even for him: "I accuse the DLP of deliberately being
the stooge of the Massas who still exist in our society. I accuse the DLP of
deliberately trying to keep back social progress. I accuse the DLP of wanting
to bring back Massa Day.... I say Massa Day Done."27
Such strong criticism of the DLP membership was, of course, rhetorically
excessive. Williams had gone too far in accusing the party of "wanting to
bring back Massa Day." But the DLP, whose members were primarily Indo-
Trinidadian, had committed a serious misjudgment by demanding that the
chief minister—who was on solid intellectual ground in his use of the ap-
pellation "Massa"—retract it. The party leaders may have been unfamiliar
with the historical trajectory of the term and its continuing symbolic and
pejorative meanings in the West Indies, particularly for peoples of Afri-
can descent. Williams seized upon this apparent historical gaffe, claiming:
"They have not the slightest idea as to the constituents of progress in our
society and the elements of our historical evolution. All that they can see in
the slogan, Massa Day Done, is racial antagonism. This [is] characteris-
tically stupid. Massa is not a racial term. Massa is the symbol of a bygone
age. Massa Day is a social phenomenon. Massa Day Done connotes a politi-
cal awakening and a social revolution."28
Williams clearly relished the opportunity to denounce his opponents
before a friendly audience in Woodford Square. He dismissed them as "this
pack of benighted idiots, this band of obscurantist politicians, this unholy
alliance of egregious individualists who have nothing constructive to say."29
To some extent, this was good theater in a political culture where rhetorical
abuse had an honored place, and Williams was its best practitioner. Still,
there was much to be gained politically by linking the DLP to an ignoble past
and accusing it of intellectual bankruptcy.
In explaining what the term "Massa" connoted, Williams described a
West Indian past dominated by whites who exploited enslaved blacks and
contract workers from Portugal, India, and China for their own advantage.


--- PAGE 37 ---
24 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
Living in opulence, usually in England, Massa monopolized political power
as well. "Massa," Williams declared, "constituted the most backward ruling
class history has ever known." Massa's rule had outlived the emancipation of
slaves: "The period of Massa's ascendancy, the period of Massa'a domina-
tion over workers who had no rights under the law, the period of Massa's
enforcement of a barbarous code of industrial relations long after it was
repudiated by the conscience of the civilized world, lasted in our society for
almost 300 years."30
Massa's domination of West Indian society produced a slavish mentality
that Williams said had ended. "Massa Day Done, Sahib Day Done, yes suh
Boss Day Done," he proclaimed. Massa still lived, however, "with his back-
ward ideas of the aristocracy of the skin." Speaking of his opponents in
Trinidad and Tobago, Williams observed that "Massa still has his stooges,
who prefer to crawl on their bellies to Massa, absentee or resident, Massa
this, Massa that, Massa the other, instead of holding their heads high and
erect."31 By asking him to repudiate the term "Massa," Williams charged,
the DLP was "telling the people of the West Indies, that they want Massa to
continue the social control, monopolizing the political power, stultifying
economic development, disciplining the workers. They are in fact telling us
that they are as much the stooges of the Massa of the 20th century as the
house slaves were of Massa's eighteenth century counterpart."32
To innoculate himself against charges that his speech would exacerbate
racial tensions, Williams was careful to underscore the point that "if Massa
was generally White .. . not all Whites were Massa, at the same time not all
Massas were white."33 The chief minister was reminding his audience that
"Massa" represented a class of persons, an orientation that transcended
phenotype or ethnicity. He used the speech to affirm the People's National
Movement's embrace "of all races and colors and from all walks of life . . .
dedicated to the pursuit of national ends, without any special privilege being
granted to race, color, class, creed, national origin."34
The U.S. consul general doubted Williams's claim that his use of "Massa"
was not intended to exacerbate racial tensions: "To conclude that there is not
a strain of racialism, in the 'Massa Day Done' expression would be as naive
as to assume that there is no feeling on this issue in the heart of almost every
non-white." On the other hand, he found Williams's "theory of peaceful
social revolution" a more satisfactory description of contemporary develop-


--- PAGE 38 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 25
ments than the conclusion that his statements were deliberately "wicked"
and "provocatively anti-white."35
Williams's speech demolished the arguments of his detractors and si-
lenced them. But silence did not mean a universal acceptance of his line of
reasoning, since many European Creoles felt that the pejorative comments
were directed specifically at them. There could not be, however, a persuasive
critique of his historical analysis of the prototypical Massa and the economic
and political system that he had created and shaped. Once again, Williams's
historical training had served him well, giving him the opportunity to pro-
vide an intellectually unassailable perspective to contemporary debates. The
University of Woodford Square was the forum for these exercises in political
education and theater. No other politician of his times had such a stage in
the Caribbean, and none employed the lessons of history to serve contempo-
rary needs as effectively as did Eric Williams.
***** Williams, of course, was not the only West Indian leader or
intellectual to adopt an anticolonial stance. George Padmore, his compatriot,
had already articulated his criticisms, and C. L. R. James, another son of
Trinidad and Tobago, was renowned for championing the cause of colonial
peoples. Jamaican barrister and politician Norman Manley was also a leading
critic of colonialism, as were Cheddi Jagan and Forbes Burnham of British
Guiana. But not every West Indian politician advocated self-government.
Alexander Bustamante, the Jamaican trade unionist and politician, once said
that "self-government means slavery," though he later changed his position
and led Jamaica to political independence in 1962.36
Eric Williams never publicly acknowledged the influence of his contem-
poraries on the evolution of his political consciousness. In any event, the
nature and extent of such influence are always difficult to identify, measure,
and assess. Williams was most famously an independent thinker, and his
chronic intellectual arrogance would not have permitted him to identify any
ideological godfathers. Still, he grew to adulthood at a time of enormous
intellectual ferment in the Caribbean and elsewhere in the colonial world. He
was also the son of a society with a proud tradition of producing gifted, noisy,
and pugnacious intellectuals, including J. J. Thomas, a nineteenth-century
nationalist; Henry Sylvester Williams, an ardent twentieth-century pan-
Africanist; George Padmore, another anticolonialist and pan-Africanist; and


--- PAGE 39 ---
26 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
C. L. R. James, Williams's high school teacher and later his mentor. James
was also an outstanding political theorist, indefatigable writer, and formi-
dable intellectual. Although Williams became a member of this extraordinary
pantheon of intellectuals, he stood apart from them in the sense that he was
the only one who achieved significant success in electoral politics.
As a student in England during the 1930s, Williams would have heard the
anticolonial sentiments being voiced by Africans, Asians, and West Indians.
Whether he participated in the activities organized by the emerging anti-
colonial and nationalist organizations in England, such as the West African
Students' Union and the League of Coloured Peoples, is uncertain. Neverthe-
less, it can be argued that Williams's ferocious anticolonialism was honed
during his sojourn in the metropolitan country.
When he accepted a teaching position at Washington, D.C.'s Howard
University in 1939, Williams joined a very distinguished faculty; many of its
members were prominent leaders of the African American struggle for so-
cial justice. Alain Locke, a philosopher and a major figure in the Harlem
Renaissance, was a close associate. In his foreword to Williams's first book,
The Negro in the Caribbean, Locke described the author as "a citizen of the
Americas in the larger sense."37 Williams's other colleagues at Howard in-
cluded Charles S. Johnson, a prominent sociologist; Ralph Bunche, a politi-
cal scientist who later won the Nobel Prize; and E. Franklin Frazier, another
sociologist and outstanding scholar. Williams also had some interaction
with W E. B. Du Bois, the distinguished intellectual and activist, as well as
with Rayford Logan, a highly respected historian. The young Trinidadian
historian would have been profoundly influenced by the ideas of these and
other associates, as much as by the arguments that legitimized the develop-
ing assaults on racism in the United States. Williams distanced himself from
any overt political activity in his host country, however. He recalled that he
"concentrated on my work, and I soon came to be regarded as a worker
doing his own work and minding his own business."38
Williams, on the other hand, did not manifest such ostrichlike disinterest
in political activity on his return to Trinidad and Tobago. There he led the
charge against colonialism with an energy and a pugnacity that the territory
had never before witnessed. But although he proclaimed Massa Day Done,
this was more a rhetorical flourish than an accurate representation of the
moment. Williams had denounced those in Trinidad and Tobago who clung


--- PAGE 40 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 27
to colonial habits of thought and behavior, but he knew that the attitudes of
those who occupied the centers of colonial power either in Trinidad and
Tobago or in London could not be so easily exorcised. The officials in
London were, for the most part, men given to extreme condescension in
their relationship with the political leaders in the colonies and independent
nations. They had come of age at a time when nationalist stirrings in the
colonies had begun to challenge the foundations of the British Empire, and
metropolitan responses were, at first, oppositional, confused, and contra-
dictory. As colonial officials struggled to accept an emerging new order, they
also had to adjust to the personalities of the leaders and the frequently
strident language of nationalism. Williams, a brash and impatient intellec-
tual, had the unsettling capacity to rankle these officials in a way that at times
could be counterproductive.
***** Williams's verbal assaults on colonialism were bitingly effec-
tive, but his scholarship was even more significant. The Negro in the Caribbean,
a penetrating examination of contemporary conditions of the region's inhab-
itants, was the culmination of a study supported by a fellowship from the
Julius Rosenwald Fund. To complete the work, Williams spent two years
visiting the islands. In his foreword to the book, Alain Locke observed: "It is
hoped that this study will furnish a closer and sounder bond of understand-
ing between the Negro-American and his brother West Indian, known all too
limitedly merely as a migrant rather than with regard either to his home
background or with reference to our common racial history and problems. "39
Divided into nine brief chapters, the book provides a survey of the history
of the islands, their economic structures, the life of contemporary inhabi-
tants, and a vision for the future. Williams identifies foreign domination as
the principal villain; it is primarily responsible for the appalling social condi-
tions of the majority of the people, the inequality of incomes, and the political
weakness of the masses. He concludes that "the Caribbean lives under a
government of sugar, for sugar, by sugar," an assessment that won him no
friends among the colonial elites. Moreover, he asserts, "the Negro's right to
decide his own affairs and own life is not a question for argument." The
author proposes that the various territories comprising the region should
form a political and economic federation, a development that made "com-
mon sense."40 To Williams, the islands had "a common heritage of slavery, a


--- PAGE 41 ---
28 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
labor base essentially the same." They were "burdened by the same curse,
sugar, the dynamics of the different areas are the same, and it is time to pay
more heed to the fundamental identities than to the incidental differences."41
This somber analysis of the Caribbean region provided the necessary
ammunition for those who would contest colonial rule. Its publication pre-
ceded by a mere two years the appearance of Capitalism and Slavery, which
represented a watershed in the historiography of slavery. This work attempts
"to place in historical perspective the relationships between early capitalism
as exemplified by Great Britain, and the Negro slave trade, Negro slavery and
the general colonial trade of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries."42
Williams did not conceive the book as "a study of the institution of slavery"
but as an analysis "of the contribution of slavery to the development of
British capitalism."43 His book, he asserted, was an investigation "of the role
of Negro slavery and the slave trade in providing the capital which financed
the Industrial Revolution in England and of mature industrial capitalism in
destroying the slave system."44
This was a strikingly original thesis—bold, imaginative, and certain to be
controversial. Williams had set himself the task of challenging assumptions
and conclusions that had been the staples of British historians whose focus
was slavery and emancipation. By examining a great deal of evidence and
using the optic of a talented product of the colonies, Williams turned some
of the accepted conclusions on their head. He demonstrated the organic
relationship between the slave trade, the manufacturing industries in En-
gland, the plantation system in the West Indies, and the growth of British
capitalism during the eighteenth century. As he expressed it, "The commer-
cial capitalism of the eighteenth century developed the wealth of Europe by
means of slavery and monopoly."45 This finding, based as it was on much
statistical evidence, emphasized the centrality of African slaves to the eco-
nomic development of England and by extension continental Europe. British
historians, some of whose works were marred by racist assumptions, had
been more concerned with telling the story of British emancipation and less
with the ramifications of the human commerce and the institution of slavery
for the economies of the imperial nations.
Taking issue with the conclusions of British scholars like Reginald Coup-
land, Williams maintained that emancipation was driven primarily by eco-
nomic considerations.46 Although he believed that "the humanitarians were
the spearhead of the onslaught which destroyed the West Indian system and


--- PAGE 42 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 29
freed the Negro," he nevertheless felt that their role had been "grossly
exaggerated by men who have sacrificed scholarship to sentimentality."47
When slavery in the West Indies began its economic decline in the aftermath
of the American War of Independence, according to Williams, British capi-
talists were prepared to abandon the institution. Thus "the Capitalists had
first encouraged West Indian slavery and then helped to destroy it. When
British capitalism depended on the West Indies, they ignored slavery or
defended it. When British capitalism found the West Indian monopoly a
nuisance, they destroyed West Indian slavery as the first step in the destruc-
tion of West Indian monopoly."48
Moreover, slavery could not coexist with the industrial capitalism of the
nineteenth century that it had created. The institution had become anach-
ronistic in an economic world where machines were being given pride of
place in contradistinction to coerced black labor. Williams's argument com-
plicated the reasons for emancipation, showing that economic self-interest
trumped the humanitarian impulse as the motive force for liberation.
Capitalism and Slavery, although a work of serious scholarship, was suf-
fused with an angry, condemnatory tone. The British were clearly in the
wrong on the slavery question, and Williams said so repeatedly. He could not
be neutral on such a moral issue. Nor could he, as a descendant of enslaved
people, distance himself from their history and adopt a pose of lofty dis-
passion. Imperial historians whose conclusions Williams contested were
certainly not neutral in their discussions of slavery and emancipation or
even, in some instances, of the rights of peoples of African descent in
society. Williams candidly admitted: "I have taken a political line in the
book, which West Indians more than anyone else need to understand."49
When it was published, Capitalism and Slavery received much more at-
tention than did The Negro in the Caribbean. This was understandable given
the highly controversial issues it addressed and conclusions it reached. By
underscoring the centrality of black slavery to the European economies,
Williams had hit an imperial nerve, opening historical and historiographical
wounds that still show no signs of healing. Some imperial historians were
quite dismissive of the book, preferring to attack the presumed motives of
the author rather than engaging his arguments seriously. D. A. Farnie, a
prominent British economic historian, charged that Capitalism and Slavery
presented Williams's "own community with the sustaining myth that 'capi-
talism' was responsible for their conditionf,] a view that has not found favor


--- PAGE 43 ---
30 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
in Western Europe, where history has been separated from its tap-root in
myth, but has been found highly acceptable to the educated elites of Africa
and Asia."50 Noted American historian Frank Tannenbaum described the
book as being tarnished by "a strongly flavored faith in the economic inter-
pretation of history, given strident enthusiasm by a visible notion of Negro
Nationalism."51
Reviewers of African descent were uniformly favorable in their assess-
ment of Capitalism and Slavery. Located mostly in the historically black univer-
sities in the United States, they greeted the work as a major achievement by a
black scholar. The book, to be sure, was not a study of slavery, as Williams
himself stated, but it did address the role of black labor in the construction
of the European economies. The study of the black presence in the Americas
was still in its historiographical infancy, and African American scholars
welcomed any addition to the literature, particularly one as erudite as Wil-
liams's work. Carter J. Woodson, a pioneering black historian, thought that
the book represented "the beginning of the scientific study of slavery from
the international point of view."52 Lorenzo Greene, another distinguished
scholar, observed that "a work of this kind has been long overdue and
Dr. Williams has filled the need in brilliant fashion."53
Capitalism and Slavery has become a classic, joining The Black Jacobins
(1938), the major study of the St. Domingue slave revolution by C. L. R.
James, as one of the two best-known works by a West Indian-born histo-
rian. The book remains at the core of scholarly disputations on the two
central issues it addresses. It is a measure of the author's accomplishment
that Capital ism and Slavery continues to generate such debates more than half
a century after its appearance. In light of the enormous amount of research
on slavery, the slave trade, and the European economies since 1944, it is not
surprising that some of Williams's conclusions have been refined.54 But his
signal achievement resides in his having understood that British capitalism
was inextricably bound to African labor and that the nature of the imperial
connection with the West Indies had to be rescued from the nationalist
excesses of British historians.
Capitalism and Slavery was Williams's most important and enduring his-
torical work. He would return to its thesis in later volumes such as his History
of the Peoples of Trinidad and Tobago (1962) and From Columbus to Castro: The His-
tory of the Caribbean, 1492-1969, (1970). More importantly, perhaps, Williams
had used the argument that Britain had exploited black labor and despoiled


--- PAGE 44 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 31
the West Indies to promote its own economic well-being as a weapon to
demand more British aid when he became prime minister of Trinidad and
Tobago. Colonial officials found this formulation of the problem deeply
irritating, although they lacked the intellectual equipment to refute this
charge. Williams the politician thus used the lessons of history, as he saw
them, to redress contemporary wrongs in the new West Indian nations that
he was helping to create.
***** Eric Williams, who visited eleven African countries in 1964,
always stressed the similarities in the colonial experiences of Africans and
West Indians. Breaking with the view of some of his contemporaries, he saw
this connection as being primarily an economic one. The trade in African
slaves established the link and the European partitioning of Africa at the
Conference of Berlin, held between November 1884 and February 1885, and
gave legitimacy to the scramble for African soil. As Williams told students at
the University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago, in
1964: "The European countries sat down just 80 years ago at the Conference
in Berlin and carved up Africa as if it was an African chicken and they were at
their Sunday dinner, and this one would take that, and that one would take
that etc."55
Although Williams emphasized the economic relationship between Africa
and the West Indies, it did not mean that he was blind to its racial dimen-
sions. Rather, he thought that if he framed the nature of the association in
economic terms, emphasizing its unquestionably exploitative character, he
could use it more effectively to denounce the imperial villains. "The connec-
tion is principally an economic one, taking the form, fairly well established
at the time, of compulsory labour, slavery," he said. Returning in 1964 to the
argument that he first advanced in Capitalism and Slavery, Williams stressed
that that connection promoted "a tremendous capital accumulation that
went to build up the industrial revolution in Britain, in France, parts of
Holland, the Eastern Seaboard of the United States of America."56
According to Williams, "West African labour and West Indian soil and
climate were very largely responsible for the fact that country X, or country Y,
or country Z in the world is to be regarded as developed." Accordingly, there
was a "community of interest between Africa and the Caribbean on this
question of anti colonialism. "57 The West Indies, Williams repeated over and
over again, existed to meet the needs of the imperial countries. As the major


--- PAGE 45 ---
32 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
A rare photograph of Eric Williams wearing clear eyeglasses, rather than his
customary dark-tinted ones, and his ever-present hearing aid. Date unknown.
Photograph courtesy of Eric Williams Memorial Collection, University of the
West Indies (Trinidad and Tobago). © Eric Williams Memorial Collection and
used by permission.
producers of sugar, the islands were led to believe that they were important.
That view had continued to prevail in the West Indies, but, in his opinion, the
contemporary West Indies formed "the most insignificant of all the regions
of the world. The West Indies has to fight a persistent and desperate battle
for recognition in the world."58
He warned that colonialism was being replaced by "neo-colonialism," a


--- PAGE 46 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 33
concept to which he had been introduced on his African trip, especially in
Ghana. He condemned the unequal nature of the trading relationships be-
tween the developed and the developing countries. He was also highly criti-
cal of economic assistance whereby the recipient was required to use the
funds to purchase goods only from the grantor. As he noted: "There is a lot
of economic aid going on in the world over the years but it has not been—
contrary to what people say—economic aid from developed countries to
developing countries, it is the developing countries that have been giving
substantial economic aid to the developed countries by providing a market
for their capital goods and so on."59
"Tremendous and gigantic projects" like Russian aid to Egypt for the
Aswan Dam could be defended, but "in respect of minor projects and minor
countries ... it is a rope around your neck."60 Williams's forceful articula-
tion of this point would earn him much disfavor from British officials in
particular.
Williams was acutely aware of the challenges that new nations faced in
order to break with "the old procedures inherited from the old world."61 To
him, "decolonization was not only economic and political, it is not only an
attack on the economics of neo-colonialism and an attack on colonialism
and getting rid of colonies in Africa, it is also an intellectual process." He
added: "Imperialism has produced over generations a cultural imperialism
which continues to dominate, which persists long after the political and
economic conditions which gave rise to it have disappeared."62
The independent countries, then, had to assert their cultural autonomy,
drawing on their indigenous heritage. They had to develop new educational
strategies to cleanse themselves of old habits of thinking born of the colo-
nial experience. Consequently, as Williams wrote in his third book, Education
in the British West Indies (1950), the educational system should play the role "of
a midwife to the emerging social order."63 History should be the start of this
intellectual exorcism. Its teaching "should not, as heretofore, present the
British West Indies through British spectacles as so many annexations and
by-products of European power politics. Rather, it should emphasize the
history and development of the islands and people themselves."64 At every
level of the educational process, Williams emphasized, the content of the
instruction should be related to the lived experiences of the students.
Under the circumstances, Williams urged the abolition of the colonial
practice of external examinations for students in the secondary schools.


--- PAGE 47 ---
34 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
Since these examinations were prepared in England, "their content deter-
mines automatically the curricula of the British West Indian schools."65 The
external examinations "reflect the interests, environment and knowledge of
the examiners." He ridiculed, for example, a test question that asked stu-
dents in the tropical West Indies to write an essay on "a day in winter."66
A strong advocate of a state-controlled university, Williams maintained
that such an institution "should constitute a source of inspiration that will
contribute to the well being of a people as a whole, and to the material
welfare of individuals of every calling, employment and occupation."67 The
university should reflect local conditions and "take into account the social
and economic needs of the islands." But he saw another imperative for the
creation of a British West Indian university: "An independent university will
give the people of the British West Indies a confidence in themselves, their
own roots, and their own potentialities. It will be a symbol of their as-
pirations to nationhood, in harmony with their current demands for self-
government, and concrete testimony of the growth of independence in intel-
lectual as well as in other fields."68
The British West Indian university that Williams envisaged had opened its
doors in 1948, not as an independent institution, but as a college of London
University. Its curriculum was, for the most part, determined by London
University, although in time it became more sensitive to the needs of the
Caribbean region by introducing courses with that emphasis. The University
College of the West Indies, at it was called, was located in Jamaica, as
Williams had suggested in Education in the British West Indies; later sister
campuses were established in Trinidad and Tobago and in Barbados.
Eric Williams, understandably, took a great deal of interest in the curricu-
lum of the University College. As the elected head of government of Trinidad
and Tobago, he sat on the Council, the institution's governing body, which
included representatives from all the islands that were supporting it. Still a
practicing scholar, Williams could not resist the opportunity to help shape
the fledgling college in accordance with the ideas he had advanced in his
book. The faculty sometimes resented his interference, but Williams was
undoubtedly responsible for the requirement that all students take courses
in the history and culture of the Caribbean. As he explained in a 1964 address
at Howard University: "Our first job is to see today that whilst we need
agronomists and whilst we need teachers and whilst we need all these peo-
ple, we don't give them the training that they would have got in the nine-


--- PAGE 48 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 35
teenth century in Europe or in America, we don't divorce their training from
the culture of their country. We don't divorce it from the people they are
called upon to serve; we link from the start with the nationalist and indepen-
dence movement, which has put them in the University in the first place. The
colonial regime never put them in the university."69
Williams was very proud of his position as pro chancellor of the newly
autonomous University of the West Indies during 1963-71. This gave him a
stronger voice in its academic affairs, something he had always desired. In
1961, seemingly acting on his own volition, he asked the government of
India to endow a chair in "Indian Culture and Civilization," to be located in
the College of Arts and Sciences at the Trinidad and Tobago campus. The
Indians accepted the request "in principle" and agreed to donate a represen-
tative collection of books on India and Indian culture to the campus library.70
The endowment eventually materialized. Williams's request for the aca-
demic chair demonstrated his keen sensitivity to its intellectual, racial, and
political ramifications in Trinidad and Tobago. Indo-Trinidadians, in par-
ticular, welcomed its establishment, which enhanced the university's pres-
tige as well.
Inasmuch as Williams was thoroughly committed to the intellectual de-
colonization of the Caribbean region, he was a child of the times. He chal-
lenged the assumptions that permeated the colonial educational system as
vigorously as he could, but he was never able to completely exorcise those
colonial demons from his soul. Williams was psychologically tied to the
British, though much less so than many of his contemporaries, to be sure,
but at times those chains were very discernible. Perhaps it is fairer to say that
he had ambivalent feelings about the former mother country and the British
Commonwealth. In October 1964, for example, he observed—probably in a
fit of anger—that "the truth is there is really no such thing as the Common-
wealth: it is largely sentimental."71 Barely a month later, Williams wrote
to Prime Minister Harold Wilson proposing "a strengthening as early as
possible [of] the Commonwealth presence in the Caribbean."72
His letter to Wilson was an open invitation to Britain to enhance its
influence in the Caribbean, especially in intellectual circles. Williams main-
tained that an increased British presence would "serve as a sort of insurance
against Western hemispheric pressures and the Organization of American
States in particular." This was a veiled reference to the expanding role of the
United States in the Caribbean region. He told Prime Minister Wilson that he


--- PAGE 49 ---
36 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
had "been giving serious thought to the problem imposed by this presence
in the University field, where the almost total lack of Commonwealth and
particularly British interest in exposing us to the attentions of such agencies
as the Ford Foundation, with the infiltration of influences and practices that
I am not too happy about."73
Williams did not identify the "influences and practices" that troubled
him, but clearly he preferred to embrace the British he knew over the Ameri-
cans for whom he had an abiding distrust. To counteract these U.S. influ-
ences, he proposed to visit several universities in the United Kingdom to
establish contacts between them and the University of the West Indies.
Specifically, he wanted to promote faculty exchanges involving a senior
"Britisher" in exchange for a junior West Indian. He also hoped to study the
structure of British universities such as Oxford and Cambridge in order to
see whether they were applicable to the University of the West Indies and its
three campuses. He had a special interest in the degree of autonomy that the
Constituent Colleges of the United Kingdom's universities possessed at the
undergraduate level and whether these could serve as a guide to the Univer-
sity of the West Indies and the "impending revision of the statutes of the
university." Further, the West Indian prime minister wanted to discuss a
proposal he had previously made that the University of the West Indies
should be selected as a Commonwealth training center principally for Afri-
can students. The program would be supported by an expanded Common-
wealth technical assistance scheme.
Williams would later report to the legislature in Trinidad and Tobago that
one of the aims of his mission was to explore the feasibility of joint research
projects in specific fields between the University of the West Indies, British
universities, and Commonwealth universities in Canada, Africa, Asia, Aus-
tralia, and New Zealand. The projects that he proposed for collaborative
research reflected his own priorities; if adopted, their findings would have
enormous implications for the relationships between the developed and
developing members of the Commonwealth. Williams thought that such
projects should undertake a critical evaluation of economic aid by developed
countries to developing countries, as well as an appraisal of the development
plans of the developing countries including planning techniques and orga-
nization. He also wanted a study of the comparative costs of production in
the sugar industry and a critical survey of the nature of trade in the Common-
wealth. This was an exercise in wishful thinking, since such a politically


--- PAGE 50 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 37
driven research agenda would probably have met with little enthusiasm from
British politicians and scholars.
Williams sought to reassure Harold Wilson that his university mission
did not necessarily carry a price tag. He was interested in "giving life and
vitality to our Commonwealth relationship." He elaborated: "What we are so
concerned with is that in many respects the Commonwealth does not neces-
sarily, and in some cases does not immediately involve, any question of
money. It is a question of attitude and approach and frank discussion, about
all of which we have had many and serious grounds for complaint in past
years. It is in this new spirit that I have raised the question of collaboration
and consultation at university level."74
In the summer of 1965 Williams, accompanied by Philip Sherlock, vice
chancellor of the University of the West Indies, visited a dozen British uni-
versities. Their mission, although well received by the host institutions,
commanded little attention in the Caribbean. Nothing of major significance
came of it in terms of sustained collaborative efforts with the universities,
but the idea was unquestionably a good one. Ironically, Williams had sought
the help of those whom he had denounced as intellectual colonizers, dem-
onstrating the tenacity of the colonial past and a present that was still bound
to it. Williams realized the strength of these umbilical ties all too well, and
he anticipated the tensions that would arise once the colonial child became
an adult and therefore independent.
***** Shortly after Trinidad and Tobago became self-governing in
1962, Williams told British high commissioner Norman Costar that some
things had changed in his country's relationship with Britain. To begin with,
Trinidad would no longer put up with interference from any outside power.
This did not mean that his government wanted Britain to decrease its inter-
est in Trinidad and Tobago, though Costar would undoubtedly find that
Williams would be giving Britain a few "knocks" from time to time. Accord-
ing to Costar, the new prime minister feared that Britain would abandon
Trinidad and Tobago to the Americans, either politically or economically.
Were this to occur, Williams could not tolerate any U.S. attempt to interfere
in his nation's affairs. He wanted a British presence as a counterpoise to U.S.
efforts to dominate the islands, which, wrote Costar, Williams "professes to
fear."75 In light of these statements, Williams's letter to Harold Wilson
seems perfectly understandable, if not predictable.


--- PAGE 51 ---
38 INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION
Eric Williams demonstrated a similar ambivalence in the economic poli-
cies he pursued. Short of investment capital yet committed to a bold and
costly economic development program, he sought outside sources of sup-
port to achieve his objectives. Costar reported that Williams also told him
that Britain's help was essential for his nation's economic growth. Indepen-
dence, he said, was the time for more, not less, investment and loans. He
needed the money to give his nation a good start to self-determination.76
Thus, while on the one hand the author of Capitalism and Slavery denounced
neocolonialism, on the other hand he was forced by financial exigencies to
provide a hospitable environment for foreign capital. This dilemma was
never resolved, and in 1970 Prime Minister Williams would face a dramatic
revolt against his policies. The inevitable tensions between political ideology
and the realities of government came into sharp relief.
But there were other uncomfortable realities as well. Williams and the
other leaders of predominantly black countries operated in a Common-
wealth that was not particularly friendly to their aspirations. South Africa
practiced a vicious form of racial segregation, and both Canada and Aus-
tralia had instituted racially restrictive immigration policies. Prime Minister
R. G. Menzies of Australia, for one, was unhappy with the increasing num-
ber of Commonwealth members from black countries, "some of whom have
no real independence except political, and quite a few of them are strangers
to our notions of self government and civilized administration." Many of his
colleagues, he asserted, had "great anxiety about the Commonwealth and
the disappearance of so many of its old characteristics," an unmistakable
allusion to the presence of the African countries. Menzies was saddened by
the fact that the Commonwealth "has nothing like the appeal for us that the
old one had." He despaired of the "benefit" that was derived from "having a
somewhat tenuous association with a cluster of Republics, some of which
like Ghana are more spiritually akin to Moscow than to London."77 Such
attitudes, by no means unique, made the work of the leaders of the newly
independent countries more difficult. Not only did they have to confront the
consequences of economic neglect and the challenge of redefining them-
selves, but they had to deal with the sneers and sometimes the obstruction-
ism of those who wished to maintain or return to the old order.
"When Dr. Williams speaks of West Indian nationalism, independence, it
comes from the very roots of his being," wrote the editor of the Nation,
C. L. R. James, in 1960.78 This was not an exaggeration, and it captured the


--- PAGE 52 ---
INTELLECTUAL DECOLONIZATION 39
essence of the man and his commitment to ending colonialism. Williams
did not have to engage in a war to advance that cause in Trinidad and
Tobago, as some other leaders in Africa had to do. His weapons were his pen
and his acerbic rhetoric. But as Williams understood only too well, political
independence invited more battles. An intellectual and mental decoloniza-
tion had to follow in its wake, and the newly independent nation had to
guard against the demon of neocolonialism. Williams discovered that the
old order could not and would not be easily vanquished. As he put it in 1962,
"The power and influence of colonialism were never greater than on its
death bed."79 Here Williams was referring to the psychological chains that
bound former colonists to the colonizers. Although his comment was an
exaggeration, he would confront elements of this harsh truth in his capacity
as head of the government of Trinidad and Tobago.


--- PAGE 53 ---
CHAPTER 2
THE CHALLENGE OF
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC
INTEGRATION
***** Norman Manley, the premier of Jamaica, delivered a major
broadcast to the people of Trinidad and Tobago on June 17,1960. The newly
inaugurated West Indies Federation was experiencing difficult times, and
Manley was assuring his audience and the rest of the region that the federa-
tion would prevail and that it was in the best interest of the islands to remain
united. "Each of us alone is small in the world today," Manley said. "Because
we are small, it is the simple truth that for us unity is strength," he added.
"The West Indian nation has a manifest duty to go forth as a free people, as
an example of unity accomplished, of prejudice overcome, of brotherhood
realized."1
Manley's call for unity among the Anglophone islands was the politi-
cal mantra of many leaders, particularly in the Eastern Caribbean after
World War I. Among the most prominent advocates of the Federal idea were
T. Albert Marryshow of Grenada, Arthur A. Cipriani of Trinidad, Grantley
Adams of Barbados, and Norman Manley of Jamaica. Arguing that the small
size of the islands imposed limits on their potential for economic develop-
ment and their international stature, these and other leaders promoted fed-
eration as the panacea. Concerned about the future of these colonies, and
increasingly anxious to abandon them, the British government also strongly
encouraged federation.
The first major step toward the creation of the West Indies Federation
occurred in September 1947, when, at the invitation of Arthur Creech Jones,
the secretary of state for the colonies, all of the West Indian governments,
including British Guiana, met in Montego Bay to lay the foundation for a
federation. There was considerable enthusiasm for such a gathering, and the
delegates approached their task with seriousness. Delegate Alexander Busta-
mante, the chief minister of Jamaica, was the most skeptical about the


--- PAGE 54 ---
THE CHALLENGE 41
creation of a viable federation. Bustamante admitted, however, that he could
see no reason "why one day, whether that day is tomorrow, or next year, or
another year, there should not be federation of all the British West Indies."
He acknowledged that "the time has come not just for Federation but for self
government." Still, he doubted whether a federation could succeed because
the islands were at different stages in their constitutional development. As
the chief minister said in his colorful metaphorical style: "Jamaica can walk,
Trinidad is creeping. Barbados and British Guiana are right behind Trinidad
or almost the same. St. Kitts and St. Vincent are attempting to creep and only
attempting. Antigua is creeping, and of all the other small islands, some can
barely creep on the palm of their hands, and others on hands and feet, and
others not at all, yet you say to us 'We want you to federate.' How can the
walking and the creeping and the babe who has not begun to creep yet, how
can they walk on the same avenue?"
These were politically ominous observations. The "pauperized" state of
most of the islands also worried Bustamante. "I have never heard," he said,
"that in joining with bankrupts one can become successful or prosperous."
Bustamante was fearful that Jamaica would have to spend its resources to
support the proposed federation: "Whilst we want to be very liberal to our
brothers and sisters across the sea and take them out of their difficulties,
whether it be Grenada, St. Kitts, or another, whilst we want to be very
generous to them and whilst some people say we of the West Indies are all
alike, to me Jamaica and Jamaica's interests come first. It must be so."
Norman Manley, the leader of the People's National Party in Jamaica,
contested Bustamante's arguments. Manley was not a member of the legisla-
ture but attended the 1947 conference in Montego Bay as a representative of
the Caribbean Commission. In a direct response to Bustamante's use of the
"creeping" analogy, Manley observed: "When people talk about the un-
seemly and slow process that is involved in creeping, I can't help but feel
that, slow it may be, you may get somewhere by creeping if you know where
you wish to go."
Manley rejected Bustamante's concerns about the economic condition of
the potential federation. He believed that "so far from feeling that we would
be financially weaker, we should realize that there would be a gain in our
credit potentiality and our ability to organize our whole financial machinery
if we are united together." Whereas Bustamante was more focused on the
practical aspects of federation, Manley expressed a larger vision. He passion-


--- PAGE 55 ---
42 THE CHALLENGE
ately believed that "our areas are destined for nationhood and destined to
make a real contribution to the civilization of the world." Manley was certain
that "if we won't leave our little boat and get into that larger vessel which is
able to carry us to the goal of our ambitions, then ... we are doomed and
purblind and history will condemn us."2
Bustamante's concerns notwithstanding, the conferees made some im-
portant decisions. Perhaps the most significant was the creation of a com-
mittee—the Standing Closer Association Committee—to write a Federal con-
stitution. The delegates urged constitutional changes in the territories that
lagged behind Jamaica, Barbados, Trinidad, and British Guiana. It also au-
thorized studies on issues crucial to the operation of the proposed federa-
tion. These included the implications of introducing a Federal civil service
and a customs union. Bustamante echoed the concluding spirit of the meet-
ing when he declared before its adjournment: "Everyone realizes that there
are obstacles in the way of our final goal, ... we should be big enough to
blast away the obstacles."3
The planning for federation continued over the next decade. Bustamante
became an advocate, insisting in 1954 that "we must federate and we are
going to federate."4 Additional conferences held in London in 1953 and 1956
hammered out the terms of the union as well as the level of Britain's finan-
cial support. The 1956 conference, in particular, revealed disagreements over
the structure of the federation, the site of the Federal capital, a customs
union, internal free trade, and the powers of the central government. Eric
Williams was not present at these meetings since he held no elected or
legislative position. But his role in the politics of federation would change
with his assumption of the post of chief minister of Trinidad and Tobago in
October 1956.
Williams was an early and committed federalist. In a lecture at Howard
University, Washington, D.C., in May 1940, he endorsed the idea of fed-
eration in the West Indies. The following year he predicted that "with
true democracy and internal self-government these British islands could set
about abolishing the present absurdity of a congeries of tiny isolated govern-
ments duplicating each other at tremendous cost. . . . Some form of a
federation is demanded at least by common sense." Williams developed this
argument in his first book, The Negro in the Caribbean (1942). He advocated "a
political federation of the various units according to nationality," as well as
"an economic federation of all the Caribbean areas." As someone who had


--- PAGE 56 ---
THE CHALLENGE 43
become thoroughly familiar with the problems of the region by virtue of
his scholarly training and travels, Williams was thinking in Pan-Caribbean
terms, especially in relationship to economic integration and development.
Williams repeated these ideas with admirable consistency. In 1943 he
maintained: "We who have the interests of the West Indies at heart must
therefore realise that in the world of the future, the West Indian islands, if
they are to play any part, must cease to think of themselves as island units
and must begin to think and plan in terms of a federated West Indian group.
Jamaica, by itself, Trinidad by itself, Barbados by itself, and I may say Cuba
and Puerto Rico by themselves, will always be entirely at the economic mercy
of the more advanced and more powerful countries of the world."5
Williams probably never guessed that he would play a central role in the
construction of the federation and its brief history. During his tenure at the
Caribbean Commission, he declined to comment on specific proposals for
federation advanced by the Caribbean governments because they "were as-
sociated with the work of the Commission."6 Freed of those constraints in
1955, when he left the Commission, and in his new post as chief minister of
Trinidad and Tobago in 1956, Williams was finally in a position to help
shape the federation he had promoted in his speeches and writings.
Although a strong advocate of federation, Williams was a severe critic of
the structure that had been proposed at various times since the 1947 con-
ference in Montego Bay. Outlining his own vision of a West Indies Federa-
tion in February 1955, he asserted that "the hope of economic advantage
from federation comes first, followed by the desire to be independent of
foreign control." He believed that "military insecurity" was "relatively unim-
portant" because of "our strategic position in respect of the Panama Canal."
The separation of the islands by sea weakened "the factor of geographical
neighborhood" but strengthened the case for "co-ordinate government."
Williams supported the transfer "of the power of borrowing" from the
state governments to the Federal government, thereby reducing the competi-
tion among them for loans. In view of what he saw as a "growing duplica-
tion" in the islands in the area of economic development, he wondered
whether the Federal government should not have the power to integrate
territorial development plans. Similarly, he questioned whether the financial
needs of the central government might not require the transfer of the income
tax from territorial to Federal control. Although Williams did not answer
these two questions at the time, subsequent developments would show that


--- PAGE 57 ---
44 THE CHALLENGE
he supported a strong Federal center with the ability to impose taxes and
regulate economic development in the territorial units.
Given his antipathy to colonialism, it is not surprising that Williams
advocated immediate dominion status for the federation. He welcomed "an
autonomous British Caribbean community equal in status to the other mem-
bers of the British Commonwealth, in no way subordinate to any of the
others in any aspect of its domestic or external affairs." On the other hand,
he strongly endorsed substantial British economic assistance: "The British
Caribbean Federation has a claim on the United Kingdom government,
which no other part of the British Empire has. That is that the very presence
of the two largest racial stocks, the African and the Indian, is the result of
deliberate British policies designed to produce sugar and other products in
the West Indies to meet British needs. . . . We can get grants from Britain for
past services rendered which need not be regarded as charity or need not
afford a basis for continued political control."
To Williams, the political and economic imperatives suggested that "what
we need in the British Caribbean is Federation, any federation, and ... the
cardinal mistake made in this whole business was made years ago by the
British government which should have written a federal constitution and
simply put it into effect. When we were all crown colonies or even in 1947,
that would have been progress." Williams noted that the United Kingdom
had imposed a confederation on the Canadians, so there was a precedent for
such imperial action. There is no doubt, however, that Williams would have
criticized the British most severely had they done what he was proposing
Williams attended his first official meeting concerned with federation in
January 1957. The 1956 London conference had created a Standing Federa-
tion Committee (SFC) to plan and oversee the transition to Federal status.
Consisting of sixteen individuals chosen from the federating territories, the
SFC was chaired by Sir Stephen Luke, a respected British civil servant. The
London conference had also authorized the formation of a Federal Capital
Commission to study and recommend a site for the Federal capital. Led by
Sir Francis Mudie, this commission was asked to submit a list of three sites
in ranked order. Its report, commonly known as the "Mudie Report," would
be considered at the January 1957 meeting of the SFC, scheduled to take
place in Jamaica.
In making its recommendation, the Federal Capital Commission con-
in 1955.7


--- PAGE 58 ---
THE CHALLENGE 45
Eric Williams (first row at far right), other Caribbean leaders, and the West Indies
Stand ing Federation Committee, Senate House, University College of the West Indies,
1957. Photograph courtesy of Eric Williams Memorial Collection, University of the West
Indies (Trinidad and Tobago). © Eric Williams Memorial Collection and used by
permission.
sidered several factors: "the political and social sentiment throughout the
area," the "convenience of the site in relation to the Federal area," and the
"availability of land both for immediate buildings and for future expan-
sion." In addition, it examined the "suitability of communications by sea,
air, cable, telephones and road," as well as the availability of support services
such as hotels, educational facilities, and water supplies. Based on these
criteria, the commission selected Barbados as the preferred site, followed by
Jamaica and Trinidad. Its reasons for ranking Trinidad third were particu-
larly scathing. The commission was troubled by "the instability of that
island's politics and the low standard accepted in its public life." It found
credible "the widespread reports of corruption in the public life of Trinidad"
and that "these practices appear to be tolerated." Such tolerance "would be a
disquieting augury for the future of a capital located there." Furthermore,
the Indians in Trinidad allegedly "have ideals and loyalties differing from
those to be found elsewhere in the Federation and they exercise a disruptive
influence on the social and political life in Trinidad which would vitiate the
social and political life of the capital if it were placed on that island."8


--- PAGE 59 ---
THE CHALLENGE
From left to right, Sir Grantley Adams of Barbados, Eric Williams of Trinidad and
Tobago, and Norman Manley of Jamaica, ca. 1957. Photograph courtesy of Eric Williams
Memorial Collection, University of the West Indies (Trinidad and Tobago). © Eric
Williams Memorial Collection and used by permission.
These pejorative comments about Trinidad and Tobago understandably
pleased no one, least of all Chief Minister Eric Williams. Rejecting the com-
mission's recommendations and succumbing to intense lobbying, the SFC
voted to award the capital site to Trinidad. Williams was undoubtedly
pleased by having won a highly coveted trophy. No one who supported
Trinidad on the fateful day of the vote could have predicted the terrible
problems that would ensue when the SFC chose the American-leased Cha-
guaramas Naval Station as the specific site of the capital.
Williams did not stand for election to the Federal Parliament, although
the People's National Movement became an "associate" of the West Indies
Federal Labour Party (WIFLP). Led by Norman Manley, the WIFLP pro-
claimed itself socialist, a self-identification that prevented the "nationalist"
46


--- PAGE 60 ---
THE CHALLENGE 47
PNM from becoming a formal member. With Manley also deciding not to
enter Federal politics, Grantley Adams of Barbados became the obvious
choice for prime minister when the WIFLP won the election in March 1958.
It did not bode well for the future of the federation that there was no love lost
between Adams and Eric Williams. Nor did Adams have better relations with
Alexander Bustamante, who would become a virtual thorn in his side. A few
days before Adams took the oath of office, Bustamante attacked him mer-
cilessly: "Adams has ruled over abject poverty for long years in Barbados,
without visible improvement. How can this insular Adams who lacks suffi-
cient imagination, do any good for the ten federated states, having ruled
over pauperized Barbados for so long, obviously without realizing the state
of poverty there?"9
***** Eric Williams began to play a very active role in the life of the
federation by virtue of Trinidad's selection as its capital. When the SFC
chose the Chaguaramas Naval Station as the site of the capital in Trinidad,
Williams, after some initial reluctance, undertook an aggressive campaign
to oust the Americans, who held a ninety-nine-year lease that they had
signed with the British in 1941. On becoming prime minister in May 1958,
Adams looked askance at Williams's aggressive involvement in a matter that
he thought fell under the jurisdiction of the Federal government, namely
relations with a foreign power. Williams was angered by what he perceived
as the Federal government's passivity in the struggle for Chaguaramas and
was deeply offended when Adams, without consulting him, accepted an
Anglo-American proposal to review the lease agreement in ten years.
The tensions between some of the top leaders of the region exacerbated
the problems confronted by the infant federation, including the islands'
small size, their physical separation from one another, and their economic
deprivation. In 1953 these islands had a total population of 2.8 million.
Jamaica, the largest island, had about 1.5 million inhabitants, whereas
Montserrat had only 13,000 (less than I percent of Jamaica's population). In
terms of land area, the ten islands comprised approximately 8,000 square
miles, of which 4,700 were in Jamaica, 2,000 in Trinidad, and 1,300 divided
among the other eight territories. To make matters worse, miles of sea
separated them. Situated in the west, Jamaica was about 1,000 miles from
the nearest island located in the east.
The ten federating territories were also characterized by their poverty. In


--- PAGE 61 ---
48 THE CHALLENGE
1953 their gross national product amounted to £230 million, with Jamaica
making up about 50 percent of it. The average per capita income of the
islands was £69. Trinidad, the richest island, had a per capita income of
£121, Barbados £79, Jamaica £73, and the remaining islands less than £50.
In contrast, the United Kingdom had a per capita income of £312 and the
United States £846. Excluding grants, the total revenue of the ten islands
amounted to £30 million in 1953. Trinidad and Jamaica accounted for
£25 million of this amount. The Federal government was not much better
funded, starting out with an annual budget of only £2 million. The problems
created by insularity, distance, and poverty required imaginative leadership
to confront and resolve them. Grantley Adams, by most accounts, was not
up to the task. The bickering between some of the island leaders on the one
hand, and with Adams on the other, only made matters worse.
Adams commanded much respect and even affection in his native Bar-
bados, but his standing elsewhere was considerably less favorable. As the
prime minister of the West Indies Federation, he quickly developed a reputa-
tion for making political gaffes and for incompetence. Lord Hailes, the
governor general of the federation, confided to Alan Lennox-Boyd, the secre-
tary of state for the colonies, that "Adams is not quite a big enough man for
the job, apart from his laziness and lack of drive and leadership. There is a
considerable amount of vanity."10
This unflattering assessment was amplified in a memorandum that the
Colonial Office prepared for Lennox-Boyd a few months later. It asserted
that Adams "has completely failed to arouse the necessary degree of positive
or enthusiastic response to the federal experiment or show the dynamic
leadership required to enable the newly formed Federation to rise to its
possibilities." The memorandum accused Adams of "antagonizing many of
the leaders of the units." The prime minister had also angered his ministers
by "his high handedness and discourtesy" to them. These failings had not
"been counterbalanced by any real ability or grasp of problems." The only
"merit" detected in Adams was "his moderating influence on the more hot
headed of his team." His shortcomings could be "partly due to failing
health, and his mental powers certainly appear to have deteriorated."
According to the memorandum, Adams's ministers were "not a very
impressive collection," either. The only exception was the finance minister,
Robert Bradshaw: "Though formerly a well known rabble rouser and anti-


--- PAGE 62 ---
THE CHALLENGE 49
European[,] he has proved a fearless and (within limits set by inexperience) a
competent Minister of Finance and has shed much of his earlier extremism.
He is the only Federal Minister who has gained the confidence and affection
of the officials and were it not for his arrogant, tactless behavior, [which]
has alienated many small island politicians [,] he might otherwise have been
acceptable as a successor to Sir Grantley."
On the other hand, Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Carl LaCorbiniere "has not
been a success." The memorandum also accused him of disclosing govern-
ment secrets to the press and of engaging in "underhand intrigues." Minis-
ter of Communications and Works Andrew Rose had "ability," but "as a
Trinidadian has been the Trojan Horse of Dr. Williams in the Federal Council
of State and reports all Council of State Secrets to Dr. Williams." Minister of
Labour and Social Affairs Phyllis Allfrey, the lone white and only female in
the Cabinet, was "an artistic Fabian intellectual with a fey Kittenish manner
and a good heart but she does not seem to have a very clear idea of what she
is about." Concluding its assessment, the memorandum declared that the
minister of agriculture and national resources, Frank Ricketts, and the five
ministers without portfolio "are nonentities."11
Statements such as these reveal the Colonial Office's contemptuous and
patronizing attitude toward the leaders of the federation. But however nega-
tive and harsh the appraisal was, it contained elements of truth. Many of the
most experienced and competent politicians in the territories had chosen
not to seek Federal office. Others had been defeated at the polls. Using
an analogy borrowed from the game of cricket, Sir Kenneth Blackburne,
the governor of Jamaica, thought that "the politicians decided (probably
wrongly) to put their 2nd xi in to bat."12
The Daily Gleaner echoed Blackburne's conclusions. It noted that Jamaica
had "sent on the majority side both as senators and as members, a most
unimpressive and inconsequential set of representatives. So Jamaica became
something of a laughing stock in Port of Spain. Small wonder that Sir
Grantley Adams, never methodical, never an administrator, sniggered and
snapped his fingers at Jamaica and did what he liked with the Council
of State."13
Grantley Adams, it must be said, manifested few of the leadership quali-
ties required in a prime minister of a fledgling political federation. Adams,
as Lord Hailes suggested, by temperament and political style, was given to


--- PAGE 63 ---
50 THE CHALLENGE
lethargy. The British high commissioner in Canada found him to be "sur-
prisingly complacent" about the "prospects for the future." Hailes also
thought that Adams was not up to the job physically. In November 1959, for
example, Hailes wrote that Adams "strikes me as far from well and I am not
at all sure how long he can last either politically or physically." The governor
of Jamaica similarly concluded that the federation "has not been given the
needed leadership by its Prime Minister."14
Writing in October 1959, Philip Rogers of the Colonial Office also at-
tributed the federation's problems to the "inefficiency of the Federal Govern-
ment" and the "appalling inadequacy of Sir Grantley Adams." He maintained
that "the relative weakness of the administrative machine of the Federal
Government" was another problem. This was due to Adams's "lack of leader-
ship" and to "certain weaknesses" among the civil servants. He singled out
the Federal secretary, John Mordecai, for particular blame: Mordecai was not
"a clear headed or incisive administrator." The financial secretary, Blache
Fraser, was "a more marked weakness." Under the circumstances, Rogers
wondered whether the governor general might not wish to seek a dissolution
of the Parliament, thereby forcing new elections. Nothing came of this
suggestion.15
If British officials showed little respect for Grantley Adams as a person,
they demonstrated even less regard for the office he held. When Adams was
planning to make an official visit to London in April 1959, J. O. Moreton
of the Colonial Office wrote to Prime Minister Harold MacMillan's office
to arrange a meeting with him. "The Colonial Secretary," Moreton wrote,
"thought the Prime Minister might find it worthwhile to see him for ten
minutes or so." In a similar vein, when Adams visited the United Kingdom
two years later, the colonial secretary sent a profile of Adams to MacMillan
reminding him that he had agreed to meet with Adams "as a sop for our
having (a second time) refused to support the West Indies suggestion that he
should attend the Commonwealth Prime Minister's Conference." Adams
was denied admission to the conferences because the West Indies Federation
was not yet independent, and the gathering was restricted to nations that
enjoyed that status.16
The cavalier way in which the Colonial Office treated these visits by Adams
to London is simply astonishing. That the British prime minister was asked
to grant the prime minister of the West Indies an audience often minutes, or


--- PAGE 64 ---
THE CHALLENGE 51
to meet with him as a "sop," was a clear indication of the way in which
Adams was perceived as well as the people he represented. Eric Williams's
constant complaint was that Britain saw the West Indies as insignificant,
since the islands had outlasted their value to the United Kingdom. His rheto-
ric may have been harsh, but the truth of his accusations was undeniable.
The profile of Adams that the Colonial Office prepared for his meeting
with MacMillan in 1961 was interesting for its negative portrait of the visiting
leader. The assessment of Adams was important since the perception of him
helped to shape Colonial Office policy for his administration. Adams's posi-
tion, the profile began, was "not wholly secure." Personally, he "has a some-
what sleepy exterior and is in fact lazy, though he has an agile mind par-
ticularly in a political tight corner." He also had a reputation for "polished
urbanity and a rather old-world charm." After he had received the red-carpet
treatment in Canada, "there have been reports of [his] growing irritability,
swollen-headedness and a readiness to take offense."17
The Jamaican Daily Gleaner, never an admirer of Adams, was also unhappy
with his leadership. Unlike the British officials, however, the paper believed
that Governor General Hailes also displayed mediocre leadership qualities:
"Federation, as is, has sunk to depressing and (to patriots) nauseating levels
of desuetude, decadence, and leadership. The joint career at the top of Lord
Hailes and Sir Grantley Adams, despite their personal charm and pleasant
intentions, will go down in history as a regime so dopey that it were better
had it truly slept."18
Adams bristled at the criticism of his leadership that came from his
colleagues. Unsparing in his rhetoric, Alexander Bustamante delighted in
taunting the prime minister about his failure to eliminate poverty in Bar-
bados. As he charged: "From Jamaica's point of view the only supposed
cause for our entering into Federation is that we would become a nation by
joining the other West Indian islands, most of them impoverished including
Barbados, a country with fine people but poor, with nothing much to show
from the regime of Adams for near upon 30 years—the same 'genius' who
may now guide us to ruin."19
The two men had little to do with another, preferring to engage in a war
of words from a distance. Adams's relationship with Norman Manley and
Eric Williams was frigid at best. He harbored a deep suspicion that both
leaders were conspiring to remove him from office. Adams never felt secure


--- PAGE 65 ---
52 THE CHALLENGE
in his position as prime minister and worried that Manley had enough
support among the other leaders to replace him at any time. Manley never
disabused him of this notion. When Adams wrote Manley on September 14,
1960, that he could not pretend "that I am not convinced that there is a
movement a foot—conspiracy is not too strong a word if you consider how it
is being done to get me to resign or to oust me from the Prime Minister-
ship," Manley did little to reassure him. He merely told Adams that when
new Federal elections were held, "there will be a completely new situation
and what happened then would be worked out in the light of the results of
the election under normal Parliamentary and Party procedures."20
Manley never plotted to remove Adams, but as he was the most distin-
guished and popular statesman in the West Indies at the time, the job of
prime minister was his for the taking. The Colonial Office was deeply disap-
pointed when the highly respected Manley declined to run for Federal office,
believing that he had the requisite stature, vision, and experience to lead the
new federation. Less than a year after the federation was inaugurated, Philip
Rogers of the Colonial Office admitted: "Two years ago I felt that the fail-
ure of Mr. Manley to become Federal Prime Minister had ruined the prospect
of the Federation being effective in its early years, and conceivably ruin-
ing its prospects for surviving. Events since then have certainly borne out
that view."21
Rogers made his comments at a time when the future of the federation
was in great doubt. The Jamaican government, led by Manley, had begun to
entertain the prospect of withdrawing from the alliance if certain consti-
tutional changes were not implemented. In October 1958 Prime Minister
Grantley Adams had threatened to impose an income tax retroactively on the
ten federating states, a most politically in judicious declaration that gener-
ated a firestorm of protest in Jamaica. It embarrassed Manley and gave
Bustamante an opportunity to remind Jamaicans that the federation was not
in their best interest: "There are already tears in the eyes of some over
Federation. I say if Federation continues under the existing terms, one day
not only will most of us mourn, but the day will come when our children's
children will curse those who thoughtlessly embroiled us in it."22 On the
other hand, the prime minister's comments pleased Eric Williams, the fer-
vent advocate of a strong Federal government. In a dramatic gesture of
support, he was at the airport to greet Adams on his return to Port of Spain.23
Williams, however, was not so delighted with Adams's position on Ja-


--- PAGE 66 ---
THE CHALLENGE 53
maica's decision to build an oil refinery. Although Norman Manley strongly
supported internal free trade, he opposed the immediate introduction of a
customs union. Manley appeared to be contradicting himself on the princi-
ple of free trade when he decided to build an oil refinery in Jamaica, granting
the Esso Oil Company tax incentives and protection against competition. As
the chief minister of oil-producing Trinidad and Tobago, Williams regarded
this move as contrary to the economic interest of his country, and it soured
his relationship with the Jamaican premier. When Grantley Adams did not
denounce Manley's behavior in strong terms and when his government
ultimately approved the construction of the refinery, Williams was furious.
Recognizing that Jamaica's refinery would mean a loss to Trinidad of its
sister island as a market for its petroleum products, Williams accused the
Federal government of deliberately endorsing "a policy which it ought to
recognize as leading to the Federation's destruction."24
The issue that ultimately produced the most difficulty for Williams, Man-
ley, and Adams was the degree of power that the Federal government should
exercise over the individual territories. Under Manley, who took office in
1955, Jamaica had experienced remarkable economic growth. Consequently,
he opposed any interference, or any appearance of interference, by the Fed-
eral government in Jamaica's right to pursue its own economic path, includ-
ing its industrial developmental program. Manley was adamant in his rejec-
tion of a strong Federal government. Eric Williams, on the other hand, was
equally insistent on the opposite approach.
Williams articulated his position on the power of the Federal government
in a pamphlet entitled The Economics of Nationhood, published in the fall of
1959. He advocated a strong Federal center, with the West Indies Federation
possessing—among other powers—sole control of external affairs, defense,
immigration and emigration, customs, the raising of loans, and exchange
control.
The federation should be empowered to set income tax rates and impose
excise duties, death duties, and so on. As he explained in The Economics of
Nationhood:
These islands have a long history of insularity, even of isolation, rooted in
the historical development of their economy and trade and the difficulties
of communication for centuries. No amount of subjective, that is to say
historical, cultural or other activity of the time can be expected to over-


--- PAGE 67 ---
54 THE CHALLENGE
come this heritage. Only a powerful and centrally directed economic
coordination and interdependence can create the true foundations of a
nation. Barbados will not unify with St. Kitts, or Trinidad with British
Guiana, or Jamaica with Antigua. They will be knit together only through
their common allegiance to a Central Government. Anything else will
discredit the conception of Federation, and in the end leave the islands
more divided than before.25
The Federal government, however, would share with the units the respon-
sibility for industrial development and economic planning. Overall, a strong
Federal center meant a diminution in the power of the individual territories
and their leaders. The Economics of Nationhood further proposed that the feder-
ation become independent on April 22,1960.
***** Capitalizing on the differences between the views of the two
leaders and seeking to undermine local support for Manley, Bustamante
raised the specter of Jamaica's secession from the federation if three de-
mands were not met. First, the constitution should be changed to divest the
Federal government of any right to tax the individual federating units; sec-
ond, representation in the Federal Parliament should be proportional to the
population of each unit; and third, any customs union should contain pro-
tections for Jamaica's economy and its workers.26 The politically pragmatic
Manley embraced all three positions.
The issue of representation by population was the easiest to resolve.
Bustamante's proposal made sense theoretically, but it ignited fears in the
rest of the Caribbean that it was a ploy to dominate the federation. Manley
supported the proposal, however, and vigorously fought for its approval at
an Inter-Governmental Conference held in 1959. Williams was not enthusi-
astic about this idea, but, if it were accepted, he wanted representation
linked to per capita contribution to the federation as well. Trinidad, as the
wealthiest of the ten islands, contributed the most to the federation on a per
capita basis. "If we are to count heads," Williams opined, "I see no reason
why we can't count pockets as well." Then he added, tongue in cheek: "I
suppose we will have to count flying fish in Barbados."27 In the long run,
however, Williams did not press his point, and a formula was agreed upon
that increased the number of seats in the Federal House of Representatives
from 45 to 64. The formula allocated one basic seat to each unit and addi-


--- PAGE 68 ---
THE CHALLENGE 55
tional seats for each 55,000 residents. As a result, Jamaica obtained 48.5
percent of the seats, a sizable increase from the 37.8 percent that it had
previously enjoyed.28 The twin issues of Federal power to tax the territories
and the creation of a customs union proved more contentious and would
remain divisive throughout the brief life of the federation.
Through his impassioned advocacy of representation by population and
other issues, the wily Bustamante assumed the upper hand in dictating
federation policy that coincided with his Jamaican policies, outwitting Man-
ley time and time again. Taking advantage of the ambivalence of many
Jamaicans to the federation, Bustamante played on their fears and forced
Manley to assume positions on Federal issues to which he was evidently not
passionately committed. The two men had their optic on the pulse of the
electorate, manipulating Federal difficulties to suit their domestic political
imperatives.
Although Manley fully understood the federation's long-term advantages
to Jamaica's future, the same could not be said about Bustamante. He never
embraced the principle of the economies of scale, at least not at the Federal
level, preferring to regard the union as a drain on Jamaica's resources. On
the other hand, Bustamante correctly insisted that the federation needed
substantial economic assistance from the United Kingdom if it were to
succeed, a position from which he never wavered. His description of the
other islands and their leaders was often pejorative and insulting. For exam-
ple, he disagreed with Eric Williams's positions on the federation and thus
dismissed him as an "intellectual fool."29
Bustamante was never entirely consistent in his attitude toward the West
Indies Federation either in his public or private statements. Theodore Sealey,
editor of the Daily Gleaner, the lone morning newspaper, informed Lord
Hailes in January 1959 that Bustamante had confided to him that if Jamaica
seceded from the federation and tried to go it alone, the island would have
a dictatorship in a decade. Evidently, he viewed the alliance as a safety
valve against such an eventuality. But Bustamante confused his colleagues
with his shifting positions. Donald Sangster, his competent, respected, and
trusted deputy, told Governor Blackburne a few months later that "you never
know when Bustamante will get out of bed in the morning and say either
that Federation is dead or that Federation is a good thing." Hailes, who
called upon the aging Bustamante at his residence in November 1959, noted
that he expressed guarded support for the federation. "During our 11/2 hours


--- PAGE 69 ---
56 THE CHALLENGE
of champagne conversation," the governor general reported, "he inter-
rupted the story of his life more than once to revert to the topic of Federation,
each time ending up by saying, 'It may work now' in 'serious tones.' "30
Neither Bustamante nor his Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) offered a co-
herent plan for the future of the federation. On June 4, 1960, he and six
senior members of the JLP met with the secretary of state for the colonies to
share their views with him. Bustamante repeated his claims that the eco-
nomic condition of the islands was the federation's major problem and that
"Jamaica and Trinidad, already poor, could not finance the development of
the smaller islands." According to the minutes of the meeting, when the
secretary of state asked whether the JLP would support the federation "po-
litically" if sufficient funds were available, "Sir Alexander and Mr. [Rob-
ert] Lightbourne, in consultation and after some hesitation, said that their
thought on this was not settled; but that the availability of the funds might
affect their view." This was an extraordinary admission, coming two years
after the federation had been inaugurated. It showed that the JLP'S harden-
ing approach to the Federal union was based less on principle and careful
analysis and more on the exigencies of Jamaican domestic politics.31
As premier, Norman Manley was never able to deal effectively with the
twists and turns of the JLP'S Federal policy. On October 25, 1959, he de-
clared that "all the Jamaica Labour Party had was great irresponsibility which
masquerades as policy." He accused the party of endorsing a bipartisan
policy on federation and of taking part in Federal conferences and agreeing
with the decisions, only to renounce them later. "What a pity," Manley
proclaimed, "that we have such a contemptible opposition. What a blessing
it would be for Jamaica if we had an Opposition that knew where to draw the
line between national interest and political nastiness." In a clear allusion to
Grantley Adams and his unpopularity in Jamaica, Manley cautioned: "Well,
men come and men go. And to argue that federation is wrong because the
leadership is misguided is to put the cart before the horse. If the horse won't
pull, don't throw away the cart."32
The Daily Gleaner also noticed the sharp inconsistencies in Bustamante's
position. Referring to his anti-Federal stance, it chastised him in late 1960 as
a "quick-silver politician" who was blaming the "federal decline" on Manley
and his party. Consequently, "we have the strange anancy spectacle of the
man who first put Jamaica into Federation, now on the outside, a leader for
secession."33


--- PAGE 70 ---
THE CHALLENGE 57
Colonial authorities were irritated by the divisions among the four lead-
ers, but they were also unhappy with the white elite of some islands that
opposed federation. Governor Blackburne of Jamaica, for example, reported
that Manley agreed with him that "the more prosperous members of the
community" rejected federation not only because they feared higher taxes
but also because of "a desire to retain the present position in Jamaica with
internal self government under the umbrella of the U.K. rather than to see
Jamaica as part of a completely self governing Federation subject only to
control by West Indian politicians." Blackburne admitted that he was very
familiar with such people, having encountered them in the Leeward Islands,
where he had served as governor.
Seeking to temper the opposition of these citizens, the Colonial Office
considered strategies to win their support. Philip Rogers recommended that
Neville Ashenheim, a wealthy businessman in Kingston and chairman of the
board of the Gleaner Company, be targeted for special attention. Ashen-
heim, a close adviser of Alexander Bustamante, was "the real villain," since
he was one of the leaders of the Kingston group of merchants "who look at
their narrow interests and think that they are best served by Jamaican isola-
tion." Rogers suggested that Ashenheim be shown that if the federation
obtained concessions in foreign markets for the rum and cigars that he
produced, it would redound to his economic benefit. He needed to be edu-
cated on "which side his rum and cigars were buttered on." Similarly, Rog-
ers believed that if Bustamante visited the United Kingdom, "it is just possi-
ble that we might get Members of Parliament of both parties to urge on him
a change in his political line, and to work on his vanity for that purpose."34
Governor General Lord Hailes doubted whether such blandishments
would serve their purpose and thought that it would be politically injudi-
cious for London to be involved in such lobbying. "I do not think these
operations by remote control mostly by expatriates will bear good fruit," he
ventured. In his opinion, West Indians were "too far advanced to be greatly
influenced in the last resort by outside advice." Sensing the mood of the
people, Hailes stressed that it was West Indians alone "who will make or
mar Federation and their future."35
***** Unlike Bustamante, Eric Williams was never ambivalent about
the necessity for a Federal union. His active involvement in the politics of the
West Indies Federation began with his assumption of the office of chief


--- PAGE 71 ---
58 THE CHALLENGE
minister of Trinidad and Tobago in October 1956. Adams, Manley, and
Bustamante could all claim a Federal record that spanned a decade or more.
Fresh from his victory in the elections, and fortified by an astonishing un-
derstanding of the history of federations around the world, Williams began
to energetically promote the Federal idea. Less politically experienced than
the other men, he wanted to move more quickly in resolving the terms of the
union. It was his naive belief that his colleagues would be guided by the
vision of a stronger, more economically viable, and politically influential
West Indies and would be willing to make short-term sacrifices for the
future greater good.
As early as 1955 the committed anticolonialist advocated that the federa-
tion start with full dominion status. Speaking in Jamaica, Williams main-
tained that Governor General Lord Hailes should hold reserved powers only
in areas of defense and external affairs, and only for a five-year period. He
adamantly opposed any appointees of the British government sitting in the
Executive Council, as that was "totally incompatible with the ideas I have for
the development of the West Indies." Williams repeated his demand for
dominion status with regularity, and in 1957 the PNM unilaterally set the
date for West Indian independence as April 22,1960, at 11:00 A.M.36
Williams encountered criticisms from colleagues regarding his haste to
independence. In 1959 he answered such objections by saying that "every
hour, every minute that we delay, we are giving play to [the] disintegrating
forces and ideas that should have been put in their place long ago." But, he
assured his critics, "we are not nationalists for the sake of being national-
ists, though nationalism is no crime. We are not for independence for the
sake of independence, though independence per 5e is worth having." Then
the West Indian nationalist contended: "Our militant nationalism, our deter-
mination to establish immediate independence, our search to develop self-
government in every shape and form, have their roots in our need to estab-
lish nationhood, to take our place in the world, and to lay the foundations of
a national economy in which all our potentialities and aspirations can be
realized. The problem is not that we may go too fast, but that we have been
moving too slowly."37
Grantley Adams, in contrast to Williams, was never an advocate of early
independence. In April 1959 he told the secretary of state for the colonies
that there was entirely too much talk about that prospect. He preferred to
discuss the criteria for independence, rather than setting a date. Accord-


--- PAGE 72 ---
THE CHALLENGE 59
ingly, Adams was never in the forefront of the demand for independence.
His seeming indifference to its timing led the Colonial Office to observe in
March 1961 that "Adams's principal purpose these days appears to be to
delay [independence] largely because he fears this will bring closer the point
when he will be dropped" as prime minister.38
Williams's strident advocacy of his positions—whether on Chaguaramas,
dominion status, or a strong Federal center—prompted some West Indian
leaders to question his motives. Governor Blackburne reported that Norman
Manley "intimated to me, though it was a somewhat unworthy thought, he
was forced to conclude that Williams was now engaged in paving the way for
succession to the post of prime minister so he could run both the Federation
and also Trinidad."39 Williams never acknowledged that ambition, but given
his strong federalist stance and his Pan-Caribbean visions, he would have
welcomed a larger political stage than Trinidad afforded.
Yet, in moments of disappointment and pique, Williams harbored
thoughts of secession from the alliance. Worried that his ideas on the struc-
ture of the West Indies Federation would not prevail at the intergovernmen-
tal conference scheduled for September 1959, he told British attache Doug-
las Williams that if his proposal was not adopted he would "quickly" lead
Trinidad out of the federation and request independence. But he was con-
cerned about whether the British government would permit such a course of
action. So frustrated had Williams become with Manley on Federal issues
that he informed Lord Hailes in August 1959 that his party was considering a
revocation of its associate status with the WIFLP. Such an action, had it
occurred, would have jeopardized the survival of the Adams administration.
His threat not withstanding, Williams assured Hailes that he would do
nothing to damage the federation, though he would not allow Jamaica to
have its own way. Williams said that "he will make certain that any blame for
the failure of the Federation, if this were to come to pass, will be laid
squarely at Manley's door."40
Williams, according to Hailes, accused Manley and Adams of being un-
prepared to subordinate their territorial interests to those of the federation.
This charge was justified, but Williams was himself a Trinidadian nationalist
and his optic was focused squarely and unapologetically on his country's
best interests. It was to his advantage that a weak and divided opposition in
Trinidad and Tobago was not snapping so fiercely and persistently at his
heels on Federal issues as Bustamante and his party were doing to Manley in


--- PAGE 73 ---
60 THE CHALLENGE
Jamaica. A befuddled Adams tried, within his limitations, to balance the
competing interests of the islands and seemed not to unduly privilege one
above the others.
As Bustamante continued his assaults on federation and tensions with
Trinidad grew, a beleaguered Manley visited London from January 9 to 16,
1960, to discuss with the secretary of state for the colonies the conditions
under which Jamaica would remain in the West Indies Federation. Manley's
minister of finance, Vernon Arnett, and a number of civil servants accom-
panied him. The delegation asked the secretary of state to answer two ques-
tions. First, what were "the minimum powers and capabilities which the
Federal Government of the West Indies should have in order to satisfy the
requirements of effective sovereignty and achieve membership in the Com-
monwealth"? And second, what would be Britain's attitude if Jamaica "de-
cided to leave the federation and seek separate independence"?
In response to the first question, the secretary of state outlined the mini-
mum conditions necessary for the federation to achieve independence. These
included the possession of a defense force capable of maintaining the peace
and deterring "any minor incursion by an outside aggressor," a diplomatic
organization to conduct the federation's external relations, an effective cen-
tral administration capable of executing the government's policies, and ade-
quate financial resources to underwrite its responsibilities. In addition, the
federation would need to ensure that inhabitants of one unit-territory were
free to move to any other unit (that is, to immigrate within the federation's
boundaries), central control of the currency, the initiation of a customs
union, and the constitutional right and ability to negotiate and implement
international treaties.
In answer to the second question, whose implications were more threat-
ening, the secretary of state said that Jamaica's secession would be a dis-
appointment to those who had hoped that the federation would survive,
achieve independence, and assume its place as a member of the Common-
wealth. In a guarded statement, he assured the delegation that Jamaica was
in a "marginal position" for sovereignty in terms of its size, population,
and resources. On returning home, Manley interpreted this to mean that
"Britain will not attempt to force Jamaica to remain in the Federation against
her will."41
The conference and the implied permission given to Jamaica to secede
and proceed to independence if the circumstances warranted it represented a


--- PAGE 74 ---
THE CHALLENGE 61
new stage in the Federal odyssey. Manley, in principle, could now use the
threat of secession to obtain the concessions Jamaica needed, but this ma-
neuver alienated the other federated islands and generated further suspi-
cions as to Jamaica's real intentions. Ironically, the results of the conference
energized Alexander Bustamante, because the way was now cleared for him
to demand Jamaica's secession since Britain would not stand in the way of
independence for the island. Manley won a pyrrhic victory, for he could
claim that the conference gave him options insofar as Jamaica's future was
concerned. But, on the other hand, Manley was riding the proverbial horse
going simultaneously in two directions. Hamlet-like, his rhetoric was both
federalist and sympathetic to Jamaican independence. Manley's failure to
take a position and articulate it vigorously was a major source of weakness
for the Federal cause in Jamaica.
Seizing the initiative once again, Bustamante declined in May 1961 to have
his party contest a by-election to fill a vacant Federal seat. Realizing that this
was a frontal assault on Jamaica's remaining in the federation, Manley de-
cided to take the issue directly to the people. He announced that he would
hold a referendum on Jamaica's future in the federation, confident that the
country would vote to remain a part of the union. The election would not
take place for another sixteen months, giving the protagonists ample time to
take their message to the voters. Manley had not consulted the Colonial
Office or Grantley Adams before he announced his decision, but the secre-
tary of state for the colonies lent his support when he learned about it.
Adams, however, was critical of the move, prompting an angry and pointed
letter from Manley: "I cannot pretend to be surprised . . . because I have
given up hoping that anybody in the Federal Government will try to under-
stand the realities of my position or will appreciate the fight I am making to
save Federation. . . . Bustamante has made a challenge which had to be
accepted. ... I have done it and it is an irrevocable act.... I beg you to keep
your hands and the hands of your colleagues off this matter."42
With a referendum in Jamaica imminent, Williams, Manley, and Adams
all realized that Jamaica and Trinidad had to resolve their differences if the
federation were to survive. As the largest territories, they had to reach a
modus vivendi and make the requisite compromises in their positions. Rec-
ognizing the precarious state of the federation, Williams took the initiative
to resolve their differences by inviting Manley to participate in informal
talks. The two men held three such meetings, two in Port of Spain in Febru-


--- PAGE 75 ---
62 THE CHALLENGE
ary and May 1960, and a third in Antigua the following September. A fourth
discussion, which took place in June 1960, was also attended by the colonial
secretary, Iain McLeod.
These meetings were important exercises in statesmanship. Much de-
pended on the ability of the two leaders to transcend their differences and
temper their mutual distrust. Almost twenty years his junior, Eric Williams
had a deep respect for Norman Manley and had sought his advice on his
professional options in the early 1950s. Although their relationship had been
strained by their disagreements over the structure of the federation, their
official lines of communication had not been severed.
The last meeting, in Antigua, was the longest and most important of the
four. Before it occurred, Williams held out an olive branch to Manley: "My
Government has given careful consideration to all possible permutations
and combinations in the event of changes in the composition of the Federa-
tion and has come to the firm conclusion that the only Federation worth
pursuing was that established by agreement between representatives of the
units in 1956."43 This was, by any measure, a stunning retreat by Williams
from his advocacy of a strong Federal center. With Williams disposed to
make significant concessions to Jamaica in order to save the federation, the
future seemed promising.
According to one account of the secret meeting in Antigua, Williams and
Manley reached substantial agreement on the issues that would be the tem-
porary preserve of the units but that would eventually become a Federal
responsibility "either exclusively or concurrently." These issues were placed
on what was called the "Third List"; those that were exclusively the preserve
of the Federal government were placed on the "Federal List." Although this
was later to be a source of contention between the two leaders, Williams
agreed with Manley's proposal that an item could not be transferred from
the Third List to the Federal List unless it had "the support of unit territories
having not less than two-thirds of the population of the Federal area." Since
Jamaica claimed approximately 50 percent of the Federal population, this
amounted, essentially, to a veto power. In a quid pro quo, Manley was will-
ing to support a five-year delay in the implementation of freedom of move-
ment within the federation, an issue of critical importance to Williams, who
feared an influx of inhabitants of the smaller islands to Trinidad. The two
leaders also agreed to modifications in the Federal government's ability to
coordinate the economic development of the islands and to limitations on


--- PAGE 76 ---
THE CHALLENGE 63
its authority to impose a customs union. In explaining these and other con-
cessions to Jamaica, Williams would later say: "We could see no other way
of saving the Federation, because we were convinced that to insist on
our conception would break up the Federation. We disagree with Jamaica's
thinking. ... We believe Jamaica's fears exaggerated. But, if to save the
Federation it was necessary to respect these fears, to respect apprehensions,
which would, at worst, drive Jamaica out of the Federation . . . then we of
Trinidad and Tobago decided that Jamaica was not to be pushed to the wall."
Unfortunately, the "agreement" was stillborn, as Williams and Manley had
different recollections of the understanding on Jamaica's veto power. In any
event, Williams's ministers never formally endorsed it, and without their
approval, voluntary or coerced, his hands were tied.44
Over the next several months the various unit politicians continued their
bickering over the Antigua pact, groping for agreement and direction. Man-
ley and Williams related to one another uneasily at these meetings, and
Adams began to curry favor with the leaders of the Leeward and Windward
Islands. Williams rejected any proposal that would grant Jamaica the veto
power it sought but remained disposed to having a Federal center weaker
than the one that he had advocated so vigorously. Manley reaffirmed his
support for a delay in the implementation of freedom of movement, and the
politicians from the smaller islands endorsed one proposal or another based
on an assessment of their future interests.
Eric Williams, the committed federalist, began to contemplate his na-
tion's withdrawal from the federation if Manley lost the impending referen-
dum. On May 15, 1961, at an intergovernmental conference in Trinidad, he
said that if Manley lost, "Trinidad would consider the 1956 contract to have
been broken and the Federation automatically dissolved. Jamaica and Trini-
dad combined contributed 81.7% of Federal revenues. Under various pro-
posals, these combined contributions would range between 80% and 85%.
Trinidad could not be expected to carry the financial and economic burden of
the Federation without the assistance of Jamaica."45 It is doubtful whether
anyone who heard these words understood their full import.
***** After ironing out some of their disagreements but with many yet
to be settled, the West Indians met at Lancaster House, London, on May 31,
1961, to begin crafting their independence constitution. The conference
would test the political ingenuity of everyone present and their will to keep


--- PAGE 77 ---
64 THE CHALLENGE
the Federal union alive. At first the delegates were guardedly optimistic that
they would be able to resolve their differences, but they soon began to
behave in their customary insular and quarrelsome fashion. The two burn-
ing issues that seemed to elude solution were the Jamaican veto power and
freedom of movement within the federation. Fearing that he might lose the
referendum if Jamaica were not granted the veto power he wanted, Manley
was not open to compromise.
The delegates spent days wrangling on the issue before they finally ac-
cepted a compromise proposed by the secretary of state for the colonies. In
effect, it placed an income tax and industrial development on what was
called the "concurrent list." This meant that the unit territories had the
primary but not the exclusive legislative responsibility for them. The com-
promise gave what amounted to a veto power to each unit if it opposed the
Federal government's attempt to pass legislation on either one of the issues
in question. The provision read: "Any proposal that the Federal Government
should assume powers to legislate on the subjects 'Development of Indus-
tries' and 'Taxes on Income and Profits' will not come into force until the
proposal has been approved by a majority of each House of the Federal
Legislature and by an absolute majority of the Representative House of each
Unit Legislature." This measure would considerably weaken the Federal
center, and a seething Eric Williams refused to support it. He had been
prepared, albeit reluctantly, to grant Jamaica a veto power, reversing his
earlier stand, but he could not endorse its extension to all of the units. In a
later explanation of his position, Williams said that the compromise "trans-
ferred the veto power from Jamaica, which Trinidad and Tobago considered
offensive to any single territory thereby compounding the offense. It effec-
tively suppressed any prospect of the emergence of a movement in Jamaica
itself to bring Jamaica more in line with the thinking in other parts of the
Federal area."46
The proposal for freedom of movement within the federation was equally
contentious. The smaller islands were strongly in favor of it, but Williams
was firm in his opposition. He argued that the population pressures in these
islands should not be managed by facilitating immigration, but by improv-
ing their economic conditions so that the inhabitants would be disinclined
to move. Williams feared, with good reason, that immigrants would flood
Trinidad if freedom of movement were implemented before the economic
conditions of the smaller islands improved. He did not want the new consti-


--- PAGE 78 ---
THE CHALLENGE 65
tution to set a time for its implementation, preferring to leave it open-ended
or indeterminate. Deserting Williams on this issue, Manley joined the major-
ity of the delegates in supporting the proposal that freedom of movement
should be introduced within nine years of the achievement of independence.
From the perspective of his own country, Williams's positions had much
to recommend them. In the years 1958,1959, and 1960, the nearby island of
Grenada had sent 6,046 people to Trinidad and Tobago and 3,083 to the
United Kingdom. During the same period St. Vincent dispatched 4,106 in-
habitants to Trinidad and 1,452 to the United Kingdom. Overall, Williams
estimated that Trinidad admitted 7,500 other West Indians annually in the
years immediately preceding 1960. If such a movement to Trinidad con-
tinued, not only would it exacerbate population pressures on the island,
Williams maintained, but also the cost of placing migrants in jobs would
amount to about $422 million in ten years. Over the same period, the cost of
providing modest housing for them would be $70 million, a water supply
$11 million, and education approximately $25 million.
In addition, there was much statistical support for Williams's argument
that the islands were neglected by the mother country. The best way to keep
the migrants at home, he said, was to increase capital expenditures, thereby
making more jobs available. The United Kingdom was extremely parsimoni-
ous in its capital grants to their economies. According to Williams, the
islands received the following capital grants in 1960:
Antigua
Dominica
Grenada
Montserrat
St. Kitts
St. Lucia
$657,000
1,100,000
241,000
388,000
1,100,000
172,000
Such dramatically spartan financial assistance from the imperial country
prompted Williams to declare: "Development is absolutely unthinkable in
such terms, and migration is inevitable . .. the only answer is economic aid
for development."47
With Manley's support for the freedom of movement proposal, his long-
standing tensions with Williams became an open breach. The two old
friends left the meeting without saying good-bye, and their wounds bled for
years. Williams found the delegates' decisions on the two divisive issues so


--- PAGE 79 ---
66 THE CHALLENGE
repugnant that he disassociated his country from them. So ended another
unhappy chapter in the history of the West Indies Federation. It was the last
time that representatives of all ten islands met on the Federal question.
Norman Manley got his way at the Lancaster House Conference but at the
expense of much goodwill from the other islands. Francis Galbraith of the
U.S. Embassy confessed that "it would take more insight and expertise than
is possible to bear here into the personalities, personal jealousies, ambi-
tions, inter-island rivalries and political intrigues in the West Indies to ade-
quately assess [its] outcome." Few observers argued with this assessment.
Colonial officials, according to Galbraith, proclaimed the conference "a
success only in that it was not a failure." They thought that Norman Manley
had played "a stellar role in helping the conference over the various im-
passes." Eric Williams was, by contrast, "negative and antagonistic in his
manner and actions." Grantley Adams was also "less than helpful and en-
couraged Barbadian recalcitrance, among other things."48
A jubilant Norman Manley returned home to the cheers of his worshipful
supporters. Eric Williams, smarting from his reverses, maintained a gloomy
silence and left for South Asia. Trinidad's Governor Solomon Hochoy ad-
mitted that he and Ellis Clarke, a trusted Williams associate and later ambas-
sador to the United Nations, worked to calm his leader's anger. In a handwrit-
ten letter to Hugh Fraser, under secretary of state for the colonies, Hochoy
noted: "At first Dr. Eric was inclined to give a very full account of the London
talks to the House adding his disappointments etc. Indeed, his report would
have done everything which you and I feared. He would have added fuel to the
fire.... I was able with Ellis Clarke's help, to steer him off that."
Adhering to a gallant and statesmanlike silence, Williams declined to
make any critical comment on the conference until long after Manley lost the
referendum in September. Privately, however, he confided to William Chris-
tensen, the deputy chief of the U.S. Mission, that once the conference was
over "he was determined then that he would not attempt to take Trinidad
into Federation." He said that it "was most fortunate that the Jamaica refer-
endum had failed," and that it would have been a "tragedy" if Manley had
prevailed.49
Williams broke his public silence on the Lancaster House Conference on
November 4. In an interview that he gave to C. S. Espinet, the managing
editor of the Trinidad Guardian, he said that his policy up to the time of the
meeting was to make "every conceivable effort" to "accommodate the diffi-


--- PAGE 80 ---
THE CHALLENGE 67
culties that had been raised by Jamaica." But to him, the conference repre-
sented "a total sellout to Jamaica, the price paid being the antagonizing of
Trinidad and Tobago"; he was not prepared to go "along with the Lancaster
House mess." The decisions it reached "violated every concept of Federa-
tion. They would have been totally disadvantageous to Trinidad and Tobago
and they would have made the West Indies Federation the laughing stock of
the entire world." Williams admitted that he had intended to take the whole
matter to the people, with a recommendation that they reject the Lancaster
House decisions. If the people failed to accept his recommendation, he
would "sever his connections with Trinidad and Tobago and retire into
obscurity from which I would plan never to emerge. I did not intend to be a
part to any bastardization of Federation."50
Williams continued his assault on the conference in an address to the
Trinidad Legislature in January 1962. He told the lawmakers that the meeting
"marked the disintegration of the Federation," and he condemned "the total
absurdity of the decisions" that were made there. "We consider," Williams
said, "that the Jamaica Referendum merely dotted the 'I's' and crossed the
'T's' of what would ultimately have been inevitable, if not with Jamaica with
some other territory." Williams may have spoken more in sorrow than in
anger given his strong commitment to the Federal concept. It could hardly
have been easy to witness the demise of a union that he had tried, in his own
way, to save. Lionel Seukeran of the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) was not
at all sympathetic to the premier's position. "The man that killed federation
sits before me," he said. "I charge Dr. Williams as being the destroyer of
federation," Seukeran added.51
Still, Jamaica's decision to secede did not automatically sound the death
knell for federation. Despite his bellicose comments about the Lancaster
House decision, Williams had not made up his mind regarding Trinidad and
Tobago's political future. His comments on November 4 suggest that he had
been so displeased by the conference that he was going to lead a secessionist
movement in his homeland. This could have been an exercise in hyperbole
or the ill-considered remarks of a man still seething from his disappoint-
ments at Lancaster House.
***** Eric Williams did not make his country's future an issue in the
general elections scheduled for December 1961. The opposition DLP de-
clared its support for Trinidad remaining in the federation, provided that it


--- PAGE 81 ---
68 THE CHALLENGE
received substantial external aid, increased quotas for immigration to the
United States and Canada, and guarantees that its products would have
markets in the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada, among
other conditions. The DLP called Williams's decision not to make the feder-
ation an issue in the election campaign "undemocratic, dictatorial, and a
direct negation of democracy."52
As he contemplated the direction in which he would take the country,
Williams received the advice of Professor Arthur Lewis, a distinguished
economist and vice chancellor of the University of the West Indies. Lewis
was on a leave of absence from the university to help the remaining nine
units develop a strategy for the survival of the West Indies Federation. Wil-
liams had indicated on several occasions that Trinidad was unprepared to
undertake the financial burdens of the federation if Jamaica seceded; if
Jamaica did so, Trinidad would follow suit. This threat was not taken very
seriously, and there was still hope in London and in the Windward and
Leeward Islands that Williams could be persuaded to keep Trinidad and
Tobago in the union. Grantley Adams was ambivalent, however. He and
Williams were not on speaking terms, and he would have been pleased if
Williams followed Jamaica's lead. On the other hand, Adams knew that
Trinidad's inclusion was crucial to the federation's preservation.
Williams had three options: first, he could keep Trinidad in the federation
and become its dominant leader; second, he could ask for political indepen-
dence as Jamaica had; or third, he could invite the eight smaller islands or, at
least some of them, to join Trinidad in a unitary statehood. Each option had
its own appeal. Federation would enhance Williams's stature in the Eastern
Caribbean, and his country would be the first among equals. But, as Wil-
liams was acutely aware, Trinidad would pay dearly for the privilege. Inde-
pendence, though also costly, meant that Trinidad could begin to chart its
own destiny, unfettered by any obligations to the smaller islands. With
unitary statehood, Trinidad's size and independence would be enhanced by
the absorption of its neighbors, but it would inherit their economic prob-
lems as well.
Arthur Lewis, when he met with Williams in the fall of 1961, found him
attracted to the idea of unitary statehood with the other islands. Williams
had probably not given much attention to its implications since he was in
the throes of a general election campaign. But the prospect of increasing


--- PAGE 82 ---
THE CHALLENGE 69
the size and stature of Trinidad—and his own power and influence in the
Caribbean—must have been rather tantalizing. There were, however, practi-
cal issues that stood in the path of this dream becoming a reality. First, the
Indian population in Trinidad would not have welcomed it, as it feared domi-
nation by what would have been a permanent black majority. Second, the
smaller islands and their leaders looked askance at what they called "Trini-
dadian imperialism" and were not likely to agree to give up their identity for a
union with their larger sister island. There was also the added complication
that Williams would not have won a popularity contest in any of those
territories, and his relationship with their leaders was consistently rocky.
Williams's impressive victory in the December 1961 elections, with his
party winning twenty of the thirty seats, strengthened his hand immeasur-
ably. His triumph was an endorsement of his accomplishments in office
since 1956, and his country's future was his to shape. Williams held the
trump card, and he knew it. He teased and titillated his citizenry during and
after the election campaign as to his preferred course of action. Arthur Lewis
was no more successful in getting Williams to declare his intentions. The
mystery ended on January 14,1962, when the General Council of the PNM —
under Williams's direction—voted to withdraw from the federation and to
seek independence for Trinidad and Tobago. The resolution left the door
open "to the future incorporation in the unitary state of Trinidad and Tobago
of any Territory of the Eastern Caribbean whose people may so desire, and,
on terms to be mutually agreed or to the future establishment of a Common
Economic Community embracing the entire Caribbean area."53
This dramatic decision signaled the end of any hopes to salvage a smaller
West Indies Federation. The pro-federation politicians in the Windward and
Leeward Islands received the news sadly, recognizing that federation had
received a deathblow. For Eric Williams, the decision represented a repudia-
tion of his long-held dream of a political union of the Anglophone Carib-
bean. His critics would later accuse him of destroying the federation, but the
issue was not that simple. In an effort to keep Jamaica in the union, and
hence save it, Williams had compromised his position on the need for a
strong Federal center, as he had outlined in his Economics of Nationhood. The
Lancaster House Conference, and the decisions it had made, led Williams to
reassess his commitment to federation and ultimately made his decision to
opt for independence easier. Had Norman Manley won the referendum,


--- PAGE 83 ---
70 THE CHALLENGE
Williams would have undoubtedly remained committed to federation, swal-
lowing his disagreements for the larger good.
The survival of federation with the nine remaining units posed another
problem for Williams. An Eastern Caribbean Federation led by Trinidad was
certainly a tempting morsel. The leaders were willing to accept a strong
Federal center, endorsing the principles enshrined in the Economics of Nation-
hood. But Williams would not enter into such a union if it imposed a crip-
pling economic burden on his own country. Without the commitment of
significant external economic aid, federation lost its appeal. As an ardent
nationalist, Williams's first loyalty was to Trinidad and Tobago, even if the
Federal pull and promise never died.
Although the political union was dissolved, Williams's commitment
to the economic integration of the Caribbean never waned. In fact, a few
months after Trinidad opted for independence, he told a meeting of the
British Caribbean Association in London that his nation planned to work
"towards the undertaking of some form of Caribbean Economic Commu-
nity, with powers within the economic sphere which might ultimately extend
to political spheres."54 Such an economic entity, Williams contended, would
establish a relationship with the European Economic Community (EEC),
which had just recently been created. And he did not rule out the prospect of
another political union. In August 1962 he told an interviewer of the British
Broadcasting Corporation: "I don't see any future for the West Indian area
that excludes planning in that direction. In so far as we in Trinidad and
Tobago, with independence and a large population majority can influence
things, we have been moving in that direction, not limiting ourselves to our
former colleagues in the Federation, we have begun discussions with Gui-
ana, that are going on now."55
Having just led the fight against federation, Alexander Bustamante's JLP
government had no stomach for such talk. It recognized, however, that if the
United Kingdom joined the European community, Jamaica would lose the
preferential treatment that some of its products enjoyed in British markets.
Consequently, it would be to the nation's advantage to have an alliance with
the EEC in order to protect those concessions. The issue was stillborn,
however, as France vetoed Britain's application for admission to the EEC in
1963. This setback notwithstanding, Williams floated the idea of a loose
association of the Anglophone islands patterned after the Organization of
African Unity. It would also include other countries in the region with the


--- PAGE 84 ---
THE CHALLENGE 71
exception of Cuba, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic, whose antidemocra-
tic forms of government Williams found abhorrent. He would later soften
his stance on the inclusion of these three nations in any potential union.
Jamaica was sympathetic to periodic meetings of the heads of govern-
ment of the independent and self-governing Anglophone countries, but not
to the presence of non-British territories at these gatherings. The first such
meeting with the leaders of Trinidad, Jamaica, Barbados, and British Guiana
took place in Port of Spain in 1963, and additional ones were convened in
1964 and 1965. These conferences, particularly the first two, addressed ques-
tions of regional cooperation, but they resolved nothing of significance.
Frigid relations between Williams and the Jamaican leaders, especially in
1964, made the prospect of cooperation between the units more difficult.
Williams's ideas on a closer economic association in the Caribbean area
found concrete expression in a series of discussions that he held with the
secretary of state for the colonies and with the heads of government of
Puerto Rico and the Netherlands Antilles in the summer of 1964. In his
meeting with Secretary of State Nigel Fisher on July 21, Williams proposed
the creation of a new Caribbean union that would be initiated by a customs
union but that would eventually include a regional airline and a shipping
service. The union would consist of Trinidad, Puerto Rico, Suriname, the
Netherlands Antilles, the French islands, British Guiana, Jamaica, Haiti, and
the Dominican Republic. Williams noted that such a union would be in-
complete without Cuba, but because of its Marxist regime that prospect
"was out of the question for the present." Fisher later noted that his meeting
with Williams was "friendly," and that he had provided "enough ideas to
keep officials busy for a long time to come."56
This latter observation notwithstanding, colonial officials were not enthu-
siastic about Williams's proposals. One internal analysis doubted whether a
customs union would provide "equal advantages" to "countries at widely
different stages of industrial development and with widely different develop-
ment potential." Since "nearly all the countries of the region are members of
trading groups wider than the Caribbean," the analysis noted, "the establish-
ment of a customs union would be inconsistent with at least some of these
arrangements." Puerto Rico, it speculated, would not join a Caribbean cus-
toms union since it already enjoyed a special trading relationship with the
United States, which purchased 97 percent of Puerto Rico's exports. "It
seems improbable," according to the analysis, "that Puerto Rico would be


--- PAGE 85 ---
72 THE CHALLENGE
prepared to lose free entry for her products [into the United States] in
exchange for free entry into the far smaller Caribbean market." It predicted
that without Puerto Rico's support, Eric Williams "may be unable to proceed
further."
Similarly, colonial officials expressed doubts about the feasibility of a
regional airline. The "political and commercial obstacles" were "likely to be
insurmountable" inasmuch as the other countries were not expected "to be
willing to merge their national airlines." Their analysis was no more op-
timistic about a regional shipping service, since the existing one—a holdover
from the defunct West Indies Federation—operated at a deficit.57
Williams was most likely unaware of the misgivings of the colonial au-
thorities. A week after his conversation with Nigel Fisher, he met with Gov-
ernor Luis Munoz Marm of Puerto Rico to confer about the possibility of
cooperation with the other Caribbean territories in such areas as shipping,
aviation, and tourism. The two leaders agreed to create a number of joint
study groups to consider these issues as well as the feasibility of a regional
development bank, an investment company, and a scheme for hurricane
insurance. Williams also visited Paris to discuss with the French foreign
minister, M. Couve de Murville, matters related to the economic integration
of the Caribbean and specifically the inclusion of the French dependencies of
Martinique and Guadalupe in such a union.
Williams also had a series of candid talks with Efraim Jonckheer, minister-
president of the Netherlands Antilles, who visited Trinidad in early August
1964. Williams later told Norman Costar that "these people certainly mean
business." Costar was less impressed, reporting to his supervisors in London
that it was difficult to see any "positive outcome" in the "commercial and
economic field." But Williams's "new scheme," as Costar described it, was
based on a closer economic relationship between Trinidad, Puerto Rico, and
the Netherlands Antilles in the first instance.58
Nothing tangible resulted from these Williams-inspired initiatives. The
prospect of Caribbean economic integration was not enhanced by Williams's
stormy relationships with other Anglophone Caribbean leaders. In 1964 he
was hardly on speaking terms with Alexander Bustamante of Jamaica or his
deputy, Donald Sangster. When Norman Costar advised him in July 1964 that
he should discuss with Jamaica the question of a regional shipping service
for the islands, he, according to Costar, "replied heatedly that I knew very


--- PAGE 86 ---
THE CHALLENGE 73
well that he had no lines with Jamaica." The leaders of the smaller islands
distrusted his motives, describing him as "the threat from the South." Aware
of these attitudes, David Rose, the administrator of Antigua, reminded Wil-
liams that he could not expect "post Federation bitterness" to abate quickly
and the policies for which he wanted the support of those islands frequently
became known to them through the newspapers. Williams could not, Rose
told him, "be altogether surprised if his good intentions were sometimes
misconstrued in these islands." Although Costar admired some of Wil-
liams's ideas on economic integration, he thought they were "fraught with
practical difficulties and it may be doubted, given his personality, whether he
is the man to bring them to fruition." He considered it "a pity" that "a useful
movement to reverse the fragmentation of the Caribbean area is likely to
suffer from the personality of the man who is inspiring it." Williams's
"abrasive personality (to use the phrase of a Trinidad Guardian editorial)"
Costar asserted, "is calculated ultimately to antagonize the very people on
whose cooperation the success of his ideas most depend."59
There was a thaw in the relationship between Jamaica and Trinidad in the
summer of 1965, although one British functionary in Jamaica reported that
Donald Sangster's "feeling of distrust and dislike of Williams had clearly not
abated." Norman Costar believed that Williams was feeling isolated because
he "rotates his friendships and his enmities and at the moment is on poor
terms with most of his neighbours, Commonwealth and Foreign, in the
Eastern Caribbean." Consequently, "it is natural... for him to look to the
fence at the Jamaican end of the garden, and in recent weeks Dr. Williams
has said nothing nasty about Jamaica, which for Dr. Williams is almost a
mark of favour."60
Such unflattering observations about Williams's personality and moods
notwithstanding, his human weaknesses cannot fully explain why his ideas
had little resonance in the islands. Coming so soon after the collapse of the
West Indies Federation, the disposition among several Anglophone leaders
to pursue new avenues of cooperation was either absent at worst or tepid at
best. They were skilled practitioners of the politics of suspicion, and any new
initiative—particularly one associated with Eric Williams—invited skepti-
cism, a crippling form of second-guessing, and ultimate death through
inertia. Williams's Pan-Caribbean vision, however, had much to recommend
it given the region's common history of European exploitation, colonialism,


--- PAGE 87 ---
74 THE CHALLENGE
and economic deprivation. But it could not, at the time, vanquish the coun-
tervailing pulls of insularity, mediocre leadership in some cases, and com-
peting imperial loyalties. The French, the Dutch, the English, and the Span-
iards had imprinted their territories in significant ways, and a few farsighted
leaders like Williams tried to transcend their fratricidal tendencies and forge
a common purpose, albeit with little success.
Disappointed with the failure of any movement toward economic integra-
tion, Williams observed in 1965 that "more than three years after the enunci-
ation of our goal of Caribbean Economic Community, PNM'S policy has
been conspicuous by its lack of success."61 The first tangible step in the
direction of economic integration in the region occurred when Barbados,
Antigua, and British Guiana signed a free trade agreement in 1965. Williams
was never involved in the negotiations and reacted with indifference to its
creation. Although the agreement was not implemented, it laid the founda-
tion for the larger Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) that was
established in 1968. Its members would eventually include all the former
members of the defunct federation as well as Guyana and the Bahamas.
***** Throughout his career, Eric Williams never wavered from his
vision of a politically and economically integrated Anglophone Caribbean.
He imagined a closer association with other countries in the Caribbean but
felt that ideally such arrangements would be restricted to those nations that
embraced democratic ideals. In the early 1960s Williams was deeply sus-
picious of Fidel Castro's motives in the region and had little contact with
him or his government. He enjoyed warm relations with the leaders of
Puerto Rico but had no affection for those in Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. Still, by 1964 he was willing to accept Cuba, Haiti, and the Domini-
can Republic into the larger Caribbean economic union that he was con-
templating. Williams envisaged a Caribbean region free from colonial rule,
responsible for its own destiny, and integrated, if not politically, at least
economically. Small and economically disadvantaged, each island would be
considered insignificant and irrelevant on the international stage, but their
impact would be enhanced if they spoke with one voice.
Williams had articulated the need for a West Indies Federation with greater
passion than any of his contemporaries. Irritated by his criticisms of the
fledgling union and its slow pace toward dominion status, Grantley Adams in
March 1960 bluntly reminded him:


--- PAGE 88 ---
THE CHALLENGE 75
Those who have studied the politics of the West Indies during our lifetime
know that the Premier is not the only person who has fought for the idea
of Federation. I know that people in the West Indies have not forgotten
the work of some of the real federalists like the late Captain Cipriani and
T. Albert Marryshow who were in the forefront of the effort to build up a
strong labour and nationalist movement when Dr. Williams was still a
schoolboy. . . . The post war efforts of the political leaders of the West
Indies from Montego Bay to Lancaster House to achieve self government
and independence were made without any assistance from the Premier of
Trinidad and Tobago, whose desire to interfere has now become greater
than his desire to help.62
Eric Williams possessed the energy and the impatience of one who was
new to the political fray. His elders—Adams, Manley, and Bustamante—
viewed him as an iconoclastic upstart who declined to follow their lead. But
Williams also had the distressing tendency to alienate his colleagues with
his sharp tongue, his difficulty in absorbing criticism or dealing with oppos-
ing points of view, and his marked intellectual arrogance. Given his un-
disputed brilliance and the fact that he presided over the largest and wealthi-
est territory, his leadership of the Eastern Caribbean would have been his for
the taking, had it not been for his human limitations.
In the end, the political integration of the West Indies eluded Williams,
although he had long fervently championed its cause. Jamaica's secession
from the federation gave the coup de grace to such plans, and an angry and
disappointed Williams ultimately expressed disinterest in leading a smaller,
poorer Eastern Caribbean federation. Williams, however, had a lingering
affection for the Federal idea and continued to provide intellectual leader-
ship for the principles of free trade and the economic integration of the re-
gion. These efforts, in time, achieved some success, but the centralized plan-
ning he wished for the area, and worked to achieve, remained unrealized.


--- PAGE 89 ---
CHAPTER 3
THE STRUGGLE FOR
CHAGUARAMAS
***** Nothing could temper the enthusiasm and determination of the
crowd, not even the torrential showers that drenched it on that warm April
morning in 1960. Some sixty thousand strong, it was the largest march that
Trinidad and Tobago had ever seen. The banners held high by some told the
entire story: "Dignity Is Incompatible with Colonialism," read one. "Road to
Independence Passes through Chaguaramas," proclaimed a second, and
"We Want Chaguaramas ... Not Grapefruit" demanded a third. Led by Chief
Minister Eric Williams, the "March for Freedom" began at Woodford Square
and, as it passed Queens Park on its way to the U.S. consulate, a group of
young men broke into a "calypso trot." "Uncle Sam, we want back we Ian,"
they rhymed.1
The proceedings started on April 22 at 11:00 A.M., the day and hour that
Eric Williams had unilaterally set to proclaim the independence of the Brit-
ish West Indies. The crowd went wild as Williams hoisted the flags of
Trinidad and the West Indies, an act that symbolized "freedom in fact, if not
in law," he said. Addressing the crowd, the chief minister declared: "We
have beaten our heads against the forces and agents of colonialism, against
the unswerving and often discourteous hostility of the British and American
governments, on the one hand, and on the other, against the servile mental-
ity and inferiority complex bred among some West Indians by centuries of
colonial rule." But this had been to no avail. "Thus it is," he regretted, "we
find ourselves today, on what should have been our historic Independence
Day, cheated of our rights and frustrated in our aspirations."
The dramatic high point came when Williams identified seven "deadly
sins with which we have been afflicted" and consigned them to the flames.
He identified these sins as the constitutions of Trinidad and the West Indies,
the Mudie Report on the site of the Federal capital, the telephone ordinance


--- PAGE 90 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 77
of 1939, the U.K.-U.S. Chaguaramas Agreement of 1941, a recent statement
on race made in the Trinidad Legislative Council by the DPL, and a copy of
his persistent foreign-owned critic, the Trinidad Guardian. As Williams threw
each offending item into the flames, he intoned, "We consign it to the
flames ... to hell with it."2
The nationalist fervor of the crowd was high and the speakers rose to the
occasion. Patrick Solomon, Williams's principal lieutenant, read a memorial
condemning colonialism and affirming the West Indies' right to indepen-
dence: "In the world of 1960 colonialism had [sic] no place. The political
oppression, economic exploitation, social degradation, cultural inferiority
which it brings in its train have been universally repudiated." The memorial
characterized the British West Indies as "the last remnants and tatters of the
colonialism from which the world has steadily liberated itself." The West
Indies Federation was "a glorified crown colony, a 19th century anachro-
nism." The American base at Chaguaramas constituted "the most deadly
menace that has yet appeared to our national interests and our social and
political aspirations," the memorial maintained. It ended on a defiant note:
We demand an independent Federation.
We demand full internal self-government for Trinidad and Tobago.
We demand the revision of the 1941 agreement between the United
Kingdom and the United States of America in a conference in which
Trinidad and Tobago enjoys direct, separate, equal and independent
representation.
We demand the return of Chaguaramas and other leased areas ceded
without our consent and against our will.
We demand the right, the inalienable and imprescriptible right to decide
our own destiny.
Long live the independence of the West Indies!
This anticolonial rhetoric had no precedent in the British West Indian
islands. It was one measure of Eric Williams's role in shaping the nationalist
mood of his nation as well as an indication of changing times in the Carib-
bean. As Williams told his listeners on that April morning: "Our march in
Port of Spain is the symbol of our march throughout the West Indies. We
march legally and constitutionally in a grand political demonstration—with-
out liquor, without jumping up, without calypsoes, without disturbance,
without molestation of onlookers, or spectators ... we march with disci-


--- PAGE 91 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
Eric Williams speaking at the University of Woodford Square at the start of the famous
"march in the rain" during the fight for Chaguaramas, April 22,1960. A sign stating,
"Uncle Sam, we want back we land," is displayed. Photograph courtesy of Eric Williams
Memorial Collection, University of the West Indies (Trinidad and Tobago). © Eric
Williams Memorial Collection and used by permission.
pline, dignity and decorum, as befit the citizens of a country who have
publicly declared our intention of independence."3
In the days preceding the march, local U.S. and U.K. officials worried that
it would become violent. Writing to Williams on April 9, Governor Edward
B. Beetham suggested that the demonstration be confined to Woodford
Square in Port of Spain and warned that it could make the resolution of the
Chaguaramas dispute more difficult. Outraged by this message, Williams, in
one of his signature letters, told Beetham that "on this matter of Cha-
guaramas you and I, Governor and Premier, are on opposite sides." He
castigated Beetham for appearing to be "ranged against the Government
and People of Trinidad and Tobago on issues which we expected that you
above all were in a position to understand and appreciate our policy." Wil-
liams reminded him that "we have had for nearly three years to fight tooth
and nail, every inch of the way, against American intransigence, British
78


--- PAGE 92 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 79
hostility, and Trinidadian treachery" to obtain separate representation for
his government at the conference to review the U.K.-U.S. Chaguaramas
Agreement. In his report to the Colonial Office, Beetham stated that Wil-
liams reacted "violently" and "hysterically" to his letter, indicating that he
did not take the chief minister's observations seriously.4
The fears expressed by the expatriate officials were misguided. But they
had consistently underestimated the nationalist passions that drove the peo-
ple on the related questions of Chaguaramas and political independence. By
1960, Eric Williams had made Chaguaramas the single most contentious
issue of his then brief tenure as head of government. In the process he
simultaneously alienated the Americans and to some extent the British,
enhanced the nationalist fervor of a large number of his countrymen, and led
others to connive with the Americans against him. The dispute placed on full
display the ugly side of the domestic politics of Trinidad and Tobago, the
haughtiness and intransigence of the Americans in their dealings with a
small country, Williams's considerable strengths as a leader, and the myopia
of some of his opponents.
The controversy over the presence of the U.S. military base at Chaguara-
mas had its origins in the selection of Trinidad as the site of the Federal
capital in 1957. The other main contenders for that honor had been Jamaica
and Barbados. Trinidad had won primarily because of its proximity to the
other Eastern Caribbean islands, an advantage where travel between them
was concerned. Jamaica had lost mainly because of its distance from the
other units, and Barbados never really had strong support from its sister
islands. Eric Williams was delighted with the choice of Trinidad, but little
did he realize that its selection would involve him in one of the most acri-
monious disputes of his political career.
The capital having been chosen, it became the responsibility of the Stand-
ing Federation Committee (SFC)—the body entrusted with the task of plan-
ning for the inauguration of the federation—to select a location in Trinidad.
On May 8,1957, the SFC announced that it had chosen a site on Trinidad's
northwestern peninsula, an area that formed a part of the land that the
United Kingdom had leased to the United States in 1941 for the construction
of the Chaguaramas Naval Station. The site was only seven miles from Port
of Spain on one of the most picturesque parts of the island. The problem
with the choice was that the United States had no wish to surrender Cha-
guaramas or any part of it to the Federal government. When the U.S. State


--- PAGE 93 ---
80 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
Department heard that Chaguaramas had been selected as the site for the
federation, it indicated that it was willing to surrender Waller Field as an
alternative location. Waller Field was a deactivated base in the north central
portion of the island that had been released to the local government under
an agricultural utilization agreement. According to the terms of this agree-
ment, the United States could demand its return if it were needed in an
emergency.
In a discussion with the British colonial attache in Washington, State
Department officials emphasized that they had sent word to the SFC that the
United States would never surrender Chaguaramas. As the attache reported,
the U.S. State Department "was inclined to take the view that the choice of
[the] North Western Peninsula was somewhat provocative, paid little regard
to their role in the defense of the Caribbean area, and did not augur well for
future relations with the West Indian Federation. They stated Chaguaramas
was a key point in the defense of the whole Caribbean area, and they saw no
possibility of their being able to find similar facilities elsewhere."5
The U.S. Departments of State and Defense would cling to this position
for the next several years. Concerned about a potential dispute, the secretary
of state for the colonies informed the governor of Trinidad and the colo-
nial attache in Washington on May 13 that it would be unfortunate if the
Chaguaramas issue were to damage the new federation's relationship with
Washington at the outset. He said that his government believed "that Ameri-
can goodwill may well prove to be worth more to the new Federation than
the North West peninsula of Trinidad." Under the circumstances, he wanted
the governor to ask the SFC to review its decision "in the light of the State
Departments' views ... and accept Waller Field, but telling them that Waller
Field is probable and by no means certain." Should the committee decline to
review its recommendation, Her Majesty's government "would almost cer-
tainly find it most difficult to support a request for a release of the whole of
Chaguaramas." He speculated, however, that some part of it might be a
subject for negotiation.6
It is interesting that within days of the selection of Chaguaramas as the
capital site, the United Kingdom and the United States had taken positions
from which they would not readily budge. The SFC members knew that they
held the weaker hand, but they refused to be bullied. On May II they assured
Governor Beetham that it was not their intention to adopt a "provocative or


--- PAGE 94 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 81
unfriendly" stance toward the United States. Nevertheless, they "expressed
strong resentment at the indefinite perpetuation, whether in Trinidad or else-
where, of the arrangements made by the United Kingdom and United States
Governments in which West Indies [sic] themselves had had no voice."7
To resolve these differences, the SFC requested meetings in London and
Washington with the two governments. Beetham, sensitive to West Indian
nationalism, endorsed this request, suggesting that the U.S. Department of
Defense should be represented in the discussions. But there were signs that
the issue was becoming more complicated. As early as March 25, Eric Wil-
liams had told Douglas Jenkins Jr., the U.S. consul general in Port of Spain,
that the SFC "favored" the naval station at Chaguaramas over other sites but
that it had also been impressed "with the possibilities of the Waller Field
area." Williams admitted that "he was not particularly taken with Cha-
guaramas as a site." He preferred Waller Field and thought that the Ameri-
cans were more likely to release it if they were assured that an alternative
airfield could be provided in the event of a military emergency.8
Even at this early stage, Eric Williams had good reasons for his lukewarm
reception to the potential selection of Chaguaramas as the capital site. He
knew that the Americans occupied the area as a result of the 1941 agreement
with Britain, and that this could not be violated. In fact, during the election
campaign that brought him to office in 1956, the manifesto of the People's
National Movement (PNM) pledged to respect "all international obliga-
tions, financial, economic and military, with special reference to the Agree-
ment on the United States Bases." Williams gave a similar assurance to the
U.S. envoy to Trinidad and Tobago after the selection of Chaguaramas was
announced, a decision that pleased the Americans enormously. The Colonial
Office, gratified by the chief minister's position, believed that it reflected
"his desire to be scrupulously correct about international agreements."9
Understandably, Williams's colleagues in the West Indies were not
pleased by his position. Some grumbled that he wanted the Americans to
remain at Chaguaramas because the naval station employed about eight
hundred to one thousand Trinidadians. When the SFC debated whether to
ask the Americans to release Chaguaramas, Williams and the other delegate
from Trinidad and Tobago abstained from voting. Williams was also unwill-
ing to serve as a member of the delegation to London to settle the problem,
since his government wanted no part of the plan to seek the release of the


--- PAGE 95 ---
82 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
naval base. He would attend the London meeting only as an observer and
would participate in the discussion only if the 1941 agreement were to be
revised or if a new one were to be agreed upon.10
Members of the SFC were aghast, believing that Williams's attitude would
"fatally prejudice the delegation's chance of success." According to the U.S.
consul general, Premier Grantley Adams of Barbados engaged in a "heated
exchange with Williams"; he and others "forcefully argued" that "Williams
had a responsibility to the SFC as well as to Trinidad, and that as a member of
the SFC he was in duty bound to accept the verdict of the majority and to work
for its achievement, rather than acting like a spoiled child and refusing to
play." Williams promised to reconsider his position.11
Williams kept his promise, and on May 22 Governor Beetham was able to
tell the secretary of state for the colonies that the chief minister had decided
to join the delegation. Williams, however, did not want the U.S. authorities to
interpret his participation as a retreat from his election pledge on the sanctity
of international agreements. The next day Beetham reported that the U.S.
State Department had no objection to Williams serving as a delegate and
welcomed his stance on the Chaguaramas issue. Obviously hoping that Wil-
liams's position would prevail in London, the State Department felt that fur-
ther discussion without Trinidad's participation would be "impracticable."12
With the conference scheduled to begin on July 16, the parties involved
started to plan their negotiating strategies. The West Indians were naively
confident that sentiment would prevail and that the Americans would release
Chaguaramas as an expression of goodwill to the new federation. The Amer-
icans were not so disposed and seemed to view the conference as an exercise
in public relations and as a sop to the West Indians. U.S. Department of
Defense representatives were not anxious to discuss the issue with the West
Indians and threatened to boycott the talks if the United Kingdom did not
reveal its position to them.13 The U.S. State Department also sought to know
the line that the British would be taking with the West Indians so that it
could plan its strategy accordingly. In effect, the American officials wanted
the two nations to act in concert against the West Indians, an approach that
the United Kingdom resisted, albeit weakly.
To bolster their case at the forthcoming conference, American officials
sent a memorandum to the British on June 13 outlining their position. The
eight-page document asserted that the Chaguaramas base "is designed to be
the key to United States defense planning for the entire Caribbean and South


--- PAGE 96 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 83
Atlantic area." Without it, "anti-submarine warfare would be dependent
upon long-range aircraft and surface units whose availability, mobility and
striking power would be seriously limited." If the base were abandoned, "no
effective defense against submarines in the area could be mounted." The
memorandum stressed that even if a suitable base were identified elsewhere,
the cost of relocation would run in excess of $100 million. It also rejected as
impractical the partitioning of the base. "It is felt that our long-term rela-
tions with the Federation," the memorandum stated, "which are of high
importance to the United States, would suffer less from a complete rejection
of the request for release than would be the case were we to attempt to
mollify West Indian sentiment by agreeing to partial release."14
The United Kingdom was also interested in determining the importance
of Chaguaramas for the defense of the Western Hemisphere and commis-
sioned the Air Ministry to undertake such a study. Based on its findings, the
Air Council of the Air Ministry concluded that the facilities at Chaguaramas
"could be of significance only during the post-nuclear phase of a global
war." Moreover, "so far as the air component of such facilities is concerned,
and in relation solely to the defense of the United Kingdom and of the West
Indies, the Air Council feel that the disappearance of the United States base
from Trinidad would not be a serious loss." In the council's opinion, "the
problem should be regarded as purely a political conflict between the wishes
of the United States Government, and the aspirations of the countries of the
proposed Caribbean Federation."15
The two governments thus reached quite different conclusions on the
importance of Chaguaramas for the defense of the hemisphere. But the
British were not prepared to take the side of the West Indians against their
North American ally. Although U.K. officials maintained that they were go-
ing to adopt a neutral stance in the conference, this was disingenuous. Prior
to the start of the meeting, they briefed the Americans on how to deal with
the West Indians, advising them to stress the strategic reasons for the reten-
tion of Chaguaramas.16
The U.S. strategy as it evolved was largely an exercise in deception. On
July 13 the American ambassador to the United Kingdom, John Whitney,
cabled the U.S. secretary of state to explain the strategy that the American
delegates would adopt at the conference. Whitney said that from the outset
the Americans would place the onus on the West Indians to defend their
selection of Chaguaramas and their desire to force the United States to


--- PAGE 97 ---
84 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
spend large sums of money to relocate. Since he believed that the West
Indians would "obviously require something to go home with," he hoped
that he would be authorized to offer them "grant assistance in construction
elsewhere" at an "appropriate juncture" in the talks. He would only make
the offer of assistance in the most general terms and probably outside of
regular meetings "unless there appears to be some softening of [the] West
Indies position." Ambassador Whitney emphasized that although the U.S.
delegates would not depart from their "basic position," "we must maintain
[the] impression of having [an] open mind." He indicated that the Ameri-
cans planned to assure the West Indians at the end of the conference that
they would "further study" the issue.17 The United States was clearly just
going through the motions and had no intention of changing its position. It
was a tactic that was unworthy of a powerful nation dealing with a group of
small, relatively weak, and impoverished islands.
When the conference opened on July 16, Norman Manley of Jamaica rose
to present the West Indian case. He emphasized that the decision to select
Trinidad as the Federal capital "was basic and irrevocable." Chaguaramas
was an excellent site because it was close to Port of Spain, thereby saving the
federation the cost of building a new town, as some countries such as
Australia had been forced to do. Unaware that the Americans had come to
the conference with their minds already made up, Manley urged them "to
look at the matter in a broad and generous spirit." He asked them "to
consider that the good relations between them and the West Indies ... is of
supreme importance that... [they] should be preserved and enhanced in the
future."18
In his reply, Ambassador Whitney emphasized that Chaguaramas was the
only viable site for the U.S. naval base and stressed its importance for the
defense of the Western Hemisphere. He said that the United States appreci-
ated the position of the West Indians and supported their journey to state-
hood. Whitney thought that the whole issue could be reduced to a contest
between the political aspirations of the West Indians and the military imper-
atives of the United States.
As the discussions continued, there was no indication that either side
would retreat from its position. The British urged the West Indians to aban-
don their request for Chaguaramas and accept an alternative site in Trinidad.
But the delegates stood firm, showing no divisions in their ranks. Probably
sensing that the West Indians were basing their claims on principle, Ambas-


--- PAGE 98 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 85
sador Whitney did not attempt to mollify them by raising the question of
economic aid as a quid pro quo.
Eric Williams was, at best, a less-than-enthusiastic member of the West
Indian delegation. He was, after all, at odds with the other delegates on the
location of the capital site, but his opinion could not be ignored since he was
the chief minister of the territory in question. Before his departure for En-
gland, Williams had asked to see the still-classified documents relating to
the circumstances under which the 1941 Leased Bases Agreement had been
signed, though he evidently had no time to read them until after his arrival.
The historian-turned-politician immersed himself in these records and addi-
tional ones he received in London, experiencing an epiphany in the process.
On July 17, the second day of the conference, Williams dramatically reversed
his position and announced that he could no longer endorse the 1941 agree-
ment. He now supported the complete evacuation of Chaguaramas by the
Americans, but he left the door open for negotiating an alternative site on
the island. In any event, if the United States declined to accept his request,
the matter would have to be addressed by his party and his government.19
This wholly unexpected development must have delighted the West In-
dian delegates as much as it confused their counterparts from the United
States and the United Kingdom. Two days after Williams dropped his bomb-
shell, Alan Lennox-Boyd, the secretary of state for the colonies, told Philip
Rogers of the Colonial Office that his "instinct is that Williams's speech
jolted them [the Americans] into recognizing the inherent dangers of adopt-
ing a purely negative attitude." Nevertheless, Ambassador Whitney main-
tained that "we can get away with this without a real battle."20
Williams explained his new position to the delegates in a lengthy memo-
randum. He expressed his "wholehearted support" for his colleagues' stand
on the question of Chaguaramas and gave them a history lesson on why he
felt compelled to seek an abrogation of the 1941 agreement, quoting at
length from the correspondence of Sir Hubert Young, governor of Trinidad
and Tobago at the time the agreement was consummated. Not only had
Young strenuously opposed the selection of Chaguaramas as the site of the
U.S. naval base, but he also had believed that the needs of the people should
be paramount in any such decision. In a letter of October 22, 1940, to the
secretary of state for the colonies, Young wrote that he hoped "that it might
be found possible to combine the provision of the necessary facilities for the
United States forces with at least some of the requirements of the Colony in


--- PAGE 99 ---
86 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
which they were to be our welcome guests for such a long time.... It was in
my opinion essential that these arrangements should contain no germs of
future friendship or hostility."
Governor Young had been concerned that if Chaguaramas were leased to
the Americans, Trinidadians would be denied access to one of the most
cherished parts of their island:
I am informed that for the past hundred years this particular area has
been the recognized holiday area not only for all those who have not the
opportunity of going elsewhere but for every class of the community.
There is no other place in the Colony in which anything approaching the
same amenities and facilities could be provided and I should be quite
unable to agree to this suggestion unless it were proved that the require-
ments of the naval and military situations could be met in no other
way.... The cutting off of these amenities from the people who at present
enjoy them and from the increasing number who might potentially enjoy
them in future ... would cause friction which it was desirable to avoid.
Young wanted to see the Americans confined to one area of the island
"and not dotted about in different localities." He suggested that the Caroni
swamp, if reclaimed, would be a suitable site for the naval base. The Ameri-
cans summarily rejected that suggestion, and when Young visited Wash-
ington to press his case, he found no support for it. This proposal having
failed, the governor advocated the appointment of a Joint Commission to
study the issue further, since Chaguaramas had been selected after only a
ten-day exploratory tour of the island. Young argued: "It seems hardly rea-
sonable for a foreign power to expect to find a suitable site for the 99 years
lease ... in a closely populated island like this in ten days."
He thought that the undue haste in the selection of a site was due to the
fact that the Americans "did not regard the object of the Mission as the quest
of a naval and air base for the United States in a part of the British Empire,
for the security of which the British was and would remain responsible, so
much as that of a naval, military and air base in an outlying island of the
South American continent, for the defense of which the United States Gov-
ernment would assume responsibility, and which was to serve if necessary as
a jumping-off ground for operations by the United States Army in South
America."
Governor Young was correct. Unable to obtain a location in South Amer-


--- PAGE 100 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 87
ica, the Americans turned to the British, who were only too willing to make
their colonial territory available. As the British ambassador to Washington
told Young: "It is practically impossible for the United States to get any
equivalent facilities in Venezuela or other parts of the north of South Amer-
ica because of the sensitiveness of all South American Republics to give the
United States permanent facilities on their own territory. That is why [the]
United States Government is so concerned that the work at Trinidad should
be begun and completed as soon as possible."
The British continued to brush aside all of the concerns raised by the
governor and his Executive Council. Young felt that the British government
needed to be sensitive to the fact that the constitutional status of Trinidad
and Tobago could change over the ninety-nine-year period of the lease,
thereby threatening the legitimacy of any agreement. He wrote that "in
making arrangements which were to hold good for a centuryf,] it would be
prudent to bear in mind the degree of self-government that might be at-
tained by the people of the colony before the end of that long period."
In addition, the governor insisted that any agreement with the Americans
should be made with the consent of the legislature.
It seemed to Eric Williams that there was much similarity between the
arguments in these letters and the Americans' present insistence that Cha-
guaramas could not be released. The chief minister mockingly observed: "It
is impossible to give up Chaguaramas because of its deep-water harbor. It is
impossible to find another base. It is impossible to move from Chaguaramas
because it is too costly. It is impossible to surrender Tucker Valley, which has
a beach house, golf course, plantation, hospital, radio station etc. One is
tempted to ask after reading the document, what is possible? The document
disregards entirely the only thing that is really impossible—that is to ask
Trinidad people in 1957 to put the seal of approval on what was done in 1940
in defiance of the Governor's views."
Williams noted that the United States claimed that it would cost $100
million to abandon Chaguaramas for another site. By his calculation, that
sum amounted to thirty-four cents a year per head for the 3.5 million people
of the federation for the unexpired portion of the lease, or eighty-three years.
Williams thought that was "a small price to pay for West Indian goodwill
and the avoidance of friction." But, he added, "no amount of money would
be able to buy that goodwill if the West Indian people learn how the rights of
Trinidad were trampled upon in 1940."


--- PAGE 101 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
The chief minister predicted an intensification of friction between the
Americans and the people of Trinidad and Tobago. "What appears to the
Americans as only a base, what the SFC sees as the only capital, I see as an
explosion of the first order," he warned. Williams was proposing that the
Americans leave Chaguaramas and that the United States, Trinidad, and the
United Kingdom reach "an amicable agreement" on "a footing of equality"
regarding an alternative site for a U.S. base on the island. Although there
was no time for this in 1940, he said, "we have the necessary time in 1957."
Some delegates must have been surprised at the strident tone of Wil-
liams's memorandum. The chief minister had embraced a profoundly na-
tionalist stance on the issue and was going out on a limb from which he
could not possibly retreat. The dye was cast:
The other representatives of SFC are dealing with the question of a site for
the Federal Capital. In my position as representative of Trinidad and
Tobago on the SFC, I am also dealing with the same thing. But I am also
concerned with another question which does not concern them, at least
not directly, and that is the question of the disposition of Trinidad's
territory... as the Chief minister ... I could not possibly put myself in a
position in 1957 of being less concerned and less vigilant in defense of
the fundamental interests of the people of Trinidad than a British Colonial
Governor and the Executive Council of the period of 1941. To do so would
not only be a gross betrayal of the confidence which the people of Trinidad
have so generously placed in me, my Party and my Government. It would
also be political suicide. I intend neither betrayal nor self-destruction.21
Williams's memorandum provided an accurate description of Sir Hubert
Young's very real concerns in 1940-41. But he was probably unaware of
Britain's unhappiness with U.S. behavior in the Caribbean even before the
agreement was signed. On December 24,1940, a Colonial Office memoran-
dum prepared by the secretary of state complained about the incessant
American demands for more land in the Caribbean and their implications
for British sovereignty in the area. The secretary of state for the colonies
acknowledged that "I am gravely disturbed at the apparent implications of
some of these demands, and I feel that my colleagues should be aware of the
dilemma which seems about to face us, either of being false on the one hand
to the reiterated pledges given both to the West Indian Colonies as well as to
the public in this country relative to the maintenance of full British sov-
88


--- PAGE 102 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 89
ereignty in the Islands, or on the other hand of imperiling our good relations
with the United States." Furthermore, West Indians were becoming con-
cerned that the establishment of the bases "will affect British sovereignty
in these ancient Colonies and derogate from their cherished British na-
tionality." Black West Indians feared "that American treatment of the Negro
and coloured population will follow the lines notorious in the Southern
United States."
The Colonial Office was disturbed that the Americans had sent an unau-
thorized "Economic Mission" to the colonies, an act that violated British sov-
ereignty. British officials were also bothered by the fact that the United States
had offered the use of the West Indian bases to other American republics
without seeking their approval. In addition, the United Kingdom was not
amused when U.S. ships and aircraft visited its colonies without permission;
these were "high handed acts," the 1940 memorandum charged. Nor were
British officials pleased when the United States declined to send representa-
tives to London to complete the final arrangements for the Lease Bases
Agreement, demanding instead that the British officials go to Washington.
This conduct was "in keeping with the attitude adopted generally by United
States representatives in discussions with the colonial governments over the
sites based in the West Indies; in some cases local objections to the United
States demands were brushed aside as unworthy even of consideration."22
American "high handed" behavior notwithstanding, the United King-
dom agreed to all of the U.S. requests for land in Trinidad and the other
islands. In the case of Trinidad, the Foreign Office telegraphed the British
ambassador in Washington on January 2, 1941, that all the "United States
needs in matters of site to be leased" had been met. The ambassador was
authorized to tell the U.S. government that the lease agreement "involves the
people of Trinidad in great sacrifices and is taken in many respects contrary
to the views of the local Government. In these circumstances His Majesty's
Government hope that for their part the United States authorities will re-
ciprocate our generosity by doing everything in their power to minimize the
disturbance which is bound to be created by granting to them such extensive
concessions."23
These documents, along with the ones that Williams cited in his memo-
randum, supported his contention that the people of Trinidad and Tobago
had no voice in the appropriation of their land. To give teeth to his claims,
Williams prepared a draft of Trinidad's proposal on Chaguaramas and pre-


--- PAGE 103 ---
90 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
sented it to the conferees. The document urged an immediate evacuation of
those areas of Chaguaramas "least essential to existing operations" and
recommended the creation of a Joint Commission to find "an alternative site
in Trinidad for a combined base embracing naval, air and such military
installations as may be necessary in the event of war." If that proved unfea-
sible, the commission should seek a site on a "nearby" island. It should also
make an "economic appraisal" of the cost of a new base. Williams wanted
the commission to include technical and military representatives of Trini-
dad, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the SFC. Its report should
be submitted by the end of January 1958 at a conference of the aforemen-
tioned countries to be held in Trinidad.24
Williams was easily the dominant personage at the conference. His insis-
tence that the Americans should begin the process of withdrawing from
Chaguaramas had dramatically altered the tenor of the discussions. His
strong support for Chaguaramas as the capital of the West Indies Federation
clearly strengthened the SFC 's case. By the time the conference ended on July
23,1957, the delegates had accepted his proposal to create a Joint Commis-
sion "composed of representative technical experts [from the United States,
the United Kingdom, Trinidad, and the SFC] to investigate all aspects of the
British West Indies request to make Chaguaramas available, taking into full
account military and economic considerations."
The conference on Chaguaramas had failed to resolve the issue, but the
creation of the Joint Commission was an acceptable compromise. All of the
delegates had agreed on the need for a U.S. naval base in the Eastern Carib-
bean, but the West Indians and the Americans disagreed on whether Cha-
guaramas represented the only suitable site for it. Significantly, the Ameri-
cans did not promise to accept the decision of the Joint Commission if it
went against them. However, the American ambassador to the United King-
dom, who led the U.S. delegation, observed: "It is the basic policy of the
United States never to force ourselves into a place where we are not wanted
nor to remain in a place where we are not welcome."25
On returning home, Williams delivered an oral report on the conference
to the Trinidad Legislative Council. In his speech, he reviewed the circum-
stances that led to his volte-face on the question of the Chaguaramas site,
the memorandum that he had delivered to the conferees, and his proposal
for the immediate evacuation of the unused portions of the base. Williams
stressed that "the real issue involved ... was the question of self government


--- PAGE 104 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 91
for Trinidad and Tobago as well as for the Federation." He thought that the
point was best made by a remark at the meeting "that instead of the West
Indies behaving like people who hope to get independence after five years,
they behaved as if they were already independent." Williams felt that "no
apology is necessary for this." As the West Indies was moving toward do-
minion status, Williams advised that "we have to start now doing for our-
selves what was formerly done for us by others."
Knowing that his critics regarded his reversal on Chaguaramas as an
expression of anti-Americanism, the chief minister assured the legislators
that in the discussions at the conference there was never "any suggestion of
hostility to the U.S.A. or of a desire to exclude the U.S.A. from the Federal
area either by the Federal Delegation or myself." Williams skillfully used his
report to the legislature to remind Americans about their own history as
opponents of colonialism. He linked Trinidad's contemporary struggle with
those waged by America against Europe. Invoking the name of former sec-
retary of state and later president John Quincy Adams, Williams noted that
in 1819 Adams had characterized the presence of European colonies in
the Americas as "a physical, moral, and political absurdity." The historian-
scholar went on to acknowledge U.S. Secretary of State Richard Olney's
assertion that any permanent political union between a European and an
American state was unnatural and inexpedient. These and similar anticolo-
nialism statements by Presidents Grover Cleveland and Theodore Roosevelt
led Williams to conclude that the United States was unique in its possession
of "so profound and powerful a tradition, among people and government
alike, of opposition to colonialism and sympathy—more often than not,
practical, for the aspirations of colonial peoples."
His attempt to link Trinidad's present situation with America's anticolo-
nial history was an appeal to sentiment as much as it was an indictment of that
nation's seemingly hypocritical stance on Chaguaramas. He reported that his
West Indian colleagues at the London conference had "stressed the difficulty
inherent in the inheritance for a further period of 83 years of an international
agreement to which the Federation ... was not and is not a party." Williams
pointed out that Thomas Jefferson was one of the earliest advocates of a
federated West Indies, calling it "an enrapturing prospect into futurity." He
predicted that an "amicable solution" would be found, thereby "laying the
foundation of a firm and lasting concord between the great federation of the
north and the infant Federation which will soon be born on its doorstep."26


--- PAGE 105 ---
92 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
For the most part, Williams's report to the council was conciliatory in
tone and optimistic in its expectation of a satisfactory solution to the issue.
He was careful to emphasize that if the Americans vacated the naval base and
demanded compensation, Trinidad would not be responsible for paying it
"directly or indirectly."27
The expectation that the Americans would participate in the work of a
Joint Commission in a spirit of openness and goodwill was soon seriously
undermined. Barely three weeks after the London conference ended, it was
reported that the Americans were beginning to install a guided missile
tracking station at Chaguaramas that they said was part of a network of such
facilities that extended from Patrick Air Base in Florida to Ascension Island
in the South Atlantic Ocean. When he got wind of the construction, Norman
Manley was outraged. He and the other West Indian leaders thought that if
the Americans intended to take the commission's work seriously, they would
not be undertaking new construction before the matter was settled. Manley
said that such activity by the Americans "looks as if they regard the setting
up of a commission as a farce . . . and I think the whole attitude ... is
insultive." He added:
If it is true that they are planning to put more facilities at the Base at a
time when we are about to appoint a Joint Commission to consider it then
I regard that as a positive breach of faith. I am certain America could not
think of doing anything like that except to a colonial territory that it
believes is helpless to protect itself and in that case I hope they will
remember that we will not always be a colonial territory and that it is our
territory. The fact of the matter is that in my opinion if things go on like
this, the thing is going to take on a very bitter character and the friendly
atmosphere that has prevailed so far is going to disappear.28
Eric Williams was also incensed by the news about the tracking station.
His government immediately issued a statement claiming that the new con-
struction constituted:
1. A complete disregard of all that is implied in the agreement to
appoint the Joint Commission;
2. Substantial prejudice to the efforts of the commission to find a fair
and just solution of the problem referred to it;
3. In the minds of the public, an indication of a thorough lack of


--- PAGE 106 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 93
sympathetic understanding on the part of the U.S. government of the
West Indian request for the release of Chaguaramas as the capital of
the West Indies;
4. Reasonable ground for public resentment of what is generally
interpreted as an attitude of domination to a small, friendly
neighbor.29
Shortly thereafter, a Trinidadian delegation presented a memorandum to the
newly formed Joint Commission that registered, according to F. J. Leishman
of the British Embassy in Washington, the government's "strong protest
against continuation of the work" on the station. Faced with such protests,
the U.S. consul general requested British help to calm local opinion "on the
issue of the missile tracking station and to remove it as an issue from the
Commission's deliberations."30
Norman Manley correctly predicted that the tone of the discussions on
the capital site would change; the missile tracking station issue was the first
indication that that would occur. The U.S. Department of State was not
pleased with Manley's comments. In a statement that it sent to the American
consul general in Kingston for dissemination, it explained that the decision
to construct the tracking station had been made in January 1957 and the
contract to build it had been finalized in April. To suspend the construction
on the basis of the London discussions would have been costly and, the
statement added gratuitously, "would have deprived a substantial number of
Trinidad workmen of gainful employment." The U.S. government assured
the public that it was not "attempting to prejudice the findings" of the Joint
Commission.31
But the damage was already done and the credibility of the United States
had been harmed. The new construction intensified West Indian suspicions
of American intentions, and Williams was one of the principal critics. The
West Indians questioned the timing and political intent of the construction
while the Joint Commission was being formed. Williams also seethed over
related matters. When the new U.S. consul general, Walter Orebaugh, called
on him on October 8, 1957 Williams did not greet him "with the normal
exchange of pleasantries"; instead, "in [a] piquant tone" he drew attention
to the harsh line that the American press was using in its discussion of
Chaguaramas. If that continued, he would be forced to make public the
documents that revealed America's "high handed tactics" in the 1940-41


--- PAGE 107 ---
94 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
negotiations. According to Orebaugh, Williams said that Trinidad would
leave the West Indies Federation if it were to lose the capital because Cha-
guaramas was not available as the site. He predicted that the federation
would fail if another island were chosen as the capital, and the Americans
would be blamed for that disaster. Had Chaguaramas been a British base,
Williams boasted, he would have evicted its personnel "in a week."32
Williams's strong endorsement of Trinidad as the capital site contra-
dicted his earlier position. For instance, in late 1954, in a paper entitled "My
Federal Record," Williams stated that he was "frankly not interested" in the
issue. As he explained: "It could be Carriacou, for all I care, so long as it is in
the British West Indies and not in London, Timbuktu or Tierra del Fuego.
One thing I do know, however. The jealousy between large cities in other
federations has resulted in the selection of the smaller and less important
centres as the capital.... The importance of Trinidad would, to my mind, in
the light of the historical record, be in itself a powerful reason for rejecting it
as the Federal capital of the British West Indies."33 Times, of course, had
changed. Williams was now the chief minister of Trinidad and committed to
protecting its interests.
Realizing that his Chaguaramas stance had struck a responsive chord in
many of his countrymen, Williams launched a sustained verbal campaign
against the continued U.S. presence at the site. He depicted a mistreated
colonial Trinidad that had had no say in the alienation of its soil by an
imperial country that showed scant regard for the opinions and desires of
the colonized. Britain had acted insensitively, imperiously, and improperly in
1940-41, and an aggrieved Trinidad on the verge of independence needed to
reclaim its soil and its self-respect. The Americans, accordingly, had no
moral right to remain in Chaguaramas in light of changing times and cir-
cumstances. The demand for their evacuation, Williams asserted, was not
driven by anti-American sentiment—hence his willingness to provide an
alternative site for the U.S. base on Trinidad's soil. Rather, it was based on a
people's right to control their own destinies and their national soil.
***** Williams's position on Chaguaramas was controversial in Trini-
dad and elsewhere in the West Indies. Trinidadian Solomon Hochoy, then
the acting governor, told the U.S. consul general on August 14,1957, that the
view that Chaguaramas was the only satisfactory location for the capital was
"pure political froth." Hochoy said that he told Williams that Waller Field


--- PAGE 108 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 95
was a better site and would contribute much to the development of the
northeastern section of the island. He also reported to the consul general
that Williams's ministers were divided on the issue, and that opposition in
their ranks would increase if he continued on his present course. Gerard
Montano, the minister of labor, had expressed the strongest opposition to
Williams's position. Hochoy promised, according to the consul general, "to
urge upon the wavering members of the Executive Council, the dangers of
the present course, the absurdity of the claim that Chaguaramas is the only
possible site, and the advantages of Waller Field." The American envoy was
pleased that Hochoy gave his assurance that he would be "working behind
the scenes" to promote Waller Field or some other areas as the capital site.34
The Democratic Labour Party (DLP), the principal opposition party, did
not share the chief minister's nationalist fervor and worried about the im-
plications for future relations between the United States, Trinidad, and the
Westlndies Federation. The DLP sensed, as Williams and the PNM did, that
the Chaguaramas issue could be exploited to partisan advantage. According
to the U.S. consul general, Bhadase Maraj, then leader of the DLP, and
Albert Gomes, a prominent member, viewed Williams's position as a func-
tion of "personal antipathy to the United States resulting from his Caribbean
Commission experience and a marital problem which was keeping him from
going to the United States." Thus, Williams's political stance was dispar-
aged as stemming from nothing more than personal pique. The DLP as-
sured the consul general that the Chaguaramas issue would be used against
Williams in the forthcoming Federal elections.35 As the debate intensified, it
revealed serious divisions in Trinidadian society. The issue became racialized
as people of African descent generally supported Williams, whereas Indians
and those of European descent tended to endorse the position of the DLP.
Albert Gomes was notably harsh in his condemnation of Eric Williams,
Grantley Adams, and Norman Manley for their stand on Chaguaramas and
for embroiling "the West Indies in a senseless struggle with the Americans."
Singling out Manley for special abuse, he declared that "he must not be sur-
prised to discover . . . that the line he is now pursuing in the Chaguaramas
affair differs in no way from that which a good Communist would adopt in
the same circumstances. This is very bad for the West Indies." Manley's sin
was his fervent West Indian nationalism, a position that matched the spirit
of the times. Ghana had become independent in 1957, and national libera-
tion movements existed all over Africa. By linking Manley—and by extension


--- PAGE 109 ---
96 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
Williams and Adams—to communism because of their pro-West Indian
stance, Gomes's was the voice of a discredited past.36
Several political leaders in the other islands were also not enthusiastic
about a potential American release of Chaguaramas. Their primary concern
was that Williams's behavior would endanger good relations with the United
States, with negative economic consequences for a largely impoverished
region. The Jamaica Labour Party, the opposition party in Jamaica, was not
particularly troubled by the presence of the U.S. base on its sister island.
Edwin Allen, one of the party's deputy leaders, told the American consul
general in Kingston that the West Indies Federation should not attempt to
contest any serious U.S. opposition to releasing the site. In an interesting
aside, the consul general said that he was surprised to find Allen, a graduate
of London University, "shrewd and surprisingly articulate," a judgment that
certainly smacked of racial condescension. He described the prominent Ja-
maican legislator as "a very dark, squat, unimpressive-looking individual
with a harsh, guttural voice (reminiscent of Louis Armstrong)." Despite
these alleged defects, the consul general took Allen seriously and quoted
him as saying that American goodwill should not be forfeited over a rela-
tively trivial matter. In view of the fact that the United States was committed
to the defense of the West Indies, its refusal to leave Chaguaramas would
produce no significant reaction, Allen predicted. Should the federation be
required to find a new capital, financial support from the United States to
construct it would, however, be welcomed, he added.37
Some Caribbean leaders were also concerned that Williams was exploit-
ing the Chaguaramas issue to enhance his own political standing, with the
objective of eventually becoming prime minister of the federation. Others
accused him of anti-Americanism, even though he made a distinction be-
tween an assertive West Indian nationalism and anti-Americanism. His crit-
ics invariably conflated the two questions. Unaccustomed to dealing with the
nationalist aspirations of colonized peoples and insensitive to their strug-
gles, the Americans also equated the request for the release of Chaguaramas
with anti-Americanism. Prior to Eric Williams's volte-face on the issue at
the London conference, U.S. officials had never felt threatened by him.
The Trinidad Guardian, the largest circulating daily newspaper, had been the
most persistent advocate of the American release of the base, but Williams's
change of heart had altered the political climate. By August 1958 the U.S.
consul general in Port of Spain had begun to fear the emergence of a "Yan-


--- PAGE 110 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 97
kee, Go Home" movement fanned by Williams. Although the consul general
observed that Williams was "circumspect in language and has emphasized
that a spirit of goodwill and friendship existed at the London conference,"
the official organ of the PNM, the Nation, led by its editor C. L. R. James,
"has been beating the drum in a series of front page editorials, each more
violent than its predecessor."
The consul general found it hard to believe that "seasoned campaigners
as Manley and Adams would be prepared to stick with Williams on the
Chaguaramas issue to the point of going along with him in stirring up a
hornet's nest of anti-Americanism throughout the West Indies and inviting
the inevitable backfire." That being the case, the U.S. State Department
should emphasize to Manley and Adams that if the West Indians persisted in
demanding the release of Chaguaramas in the face of its acknowledged
centrality to the defense of the hemisphere, they would alienate the Ameri-
can public. If that occurred, they "must expect to find themselves without
the pale of American financial assistance and technical aid." In addition,
"present arrangements such as that providing for the importation of West
Indian agricultural labor into the United States might be endangered." The
two leaders should be assured that if the West Indians succeeded in getting
Chaguaramas, they would inherit only "a shell"; the U.S. Navy "for economy
reasons would salvage and remove everything of value even down to the
water mains and electricity lines."38
U.S. officials had good reason to believe that the issue could be resolved
by threats of economic reprisal. Their experience with some other poor and
developing nations must have fortified the view that principles were incon-
sequential in the face of economic need. Ironically, Sir Grantley Adams, as
one of the chief spokespersons for the West Indians, lent his support to such
a contention. After meeting with Adams in August 1957, the American con-
sul general in Barbados informed the U.S. State Department that "the Pre-
mier was very frank in stating that behind the West Indies' request for the
relinquishment of Chaguaramas was the question of money. In his view, the
West Indies being poor in resources could ill-afford to build a new town for
its capital—the United States being rich could afford to write off the con-
struction costs of the Naval Base as an expended weapon of war and build
another base in some other part of the West Indies."39 If Adams's assertions
are given any credence, it is clear that the request for Chaguaramas was not
inspired by anti-Americanism, at least from his perspective. Had he known


--- PAGE 111 ---
98 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
of this conversation at the time, Williams would have contested Adams's
claims, invoking the imperatives of anticolonialism. As the controversy de-
veloped, however, the Americans had difficulty distinguishing between na-
tionalist claims and anti-American rhetoric.
Statements like the one made by Adams fed American suspicions that
economic aid would supersede any larger principles involved in the Cha-
guaramas dispute. This was certainly not the view of Eric Williams at the
time; he insisted that "I want everybody to know that the government of the
PNM... is not at anytime to be bought... the issues involved are far more
serious."40 At one level, such suspicions by the Americans diminished the
principles that legitimized Williams's request for the release of Chaguara-
mas. On another level, they suggested with a degree of validity that some
West Indians were willing to sacrifice their national self-respect on the altar
of economic aid. The Massa who Williams would eventually denounce in
1961 was still very much alive in the imagination and behavior of many. But
there is also a third conclusion that can be drawn from such assertions that
privileged economic aid over principles. They gave comfort to the United
States that disputes with poor and developing nations could be neutralized
by the offer of financial assistance.
In the months preceding and after the start of the deliberations by the
Joint Commission, Williams began to educate his countrymen on the issues
involved in the dispute. He was energized by the challenge and obviously
enjoyed the intellectual aspects of the combat. But it was also an opportunity
for him to reach a larger international audience, especially colonial societies
that were struggling to contest the might of imperial countries or those that
would be their successors. His language was not always temperate, some-
thing his critics thought was hurting the cause as well as the image of the
West Indies.
The Americans were never certain that Eric Williams spoke for the major-
ity of his countrymen on the Chaguaramas issue. When Consul General
Walter Orebaugh met with him on October 10, 1959, the chief minister
warned that if the Americans were seen as successors to British colonial rule
in the West Indies, their presence would be opposed by a majority of Trinida-
dians. Probably in response to this statement, Orebaugh began a survey of
"public and official opinion in Trinidad concerning the Chaguaramas capital
site issue." Three months later, he reported that among the working classes


--- PAGE 112 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
who held any opinion on Chaguaramas, the majority wished the Americans
to remain in possession of it. Many of these residents were either current or
former employees of one of the U.S. military establishments. The Indians
were "probably" more favorable to the American presence than were people
of African descent.
Orebaugh's canvassing of public sentiment further revealed that there
was "a numerous element among the middle and upper-class Negroes (the
Creoles) who would like to see the Americans shown who is 'boss' in Trini-
dad." The consul general attributed this feeling to "envy" of the United
States that was "compounded with a retaliatory instinct for the widely-held
opinion that the Americans generally regard the negroes as an inferior race."
Another ingredient, he said, was "an overzealousness to rid Trinidad of the
attributes of 'colonialism' with which our possession of Chaguaramas is
associated." The "less well educated class" also feared that the U.S. presence
would invite "enemy attack in case of hostilities." According to Orebaugh,
intellectuals, politically sophisticated "whites," and influential members of
the PNM believed that the Americans would not have agreed to "negotiate"
the base issue unless it had already decided to make substantial concessions.
Still, "the politically sophisticated" believed that the West Indian strategy
was injudicious, since it endangered U.S. economic and technical support
for the West Indies Federation.
Following in the footsteps of many other observers, Orebaugh was inter-
ested in the psychological makeup of Eric Williams as a way to predict his
behavior on the Chaguaramas issue. He described Williams as an "obdurate
person" who was "especially disinclined to change his mind in dealing with
'whites.'" Williams "has little love for the United States and Americans."
Orebaugh reported that "on several occasions during the past three months"
he "has been surly, captious and less courteous than ordinary good breeding
dictates when prominent Americans have called on him to pay their re-
spects." During a recent visit from Senator George Aiken of Maine, Williams
"managed barely to be civil [,] showing transparently that he is inclined to
carry chips on both shoulders when Americans are about."
Orebaugh observed that "numerous Trinidadians" thought that it was
"sheer madness" for the Americans to "yield" on Chaguaramas. Orebaugh
agreed, believing that the United States would "suffer a disastrous loss of
prestige with little, if any, compensating credit for being magnanimous and
99


--- PAGE 113 ---
100 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
generous." If Chaguaramas were yielded, "it would only be a matter of days
or weeks before the West Indies Federation... would be rapping at our door
for further economic assistance."41
The relatively new chief minister of Trinidad and Tobago was sensitive to
fiscal issues and the need for continued American benevolence. The person-
nel at the Chaguaramas base contributed an estimated US$250,000 to the
economy of the host island, a considerable sum at the time. If the base were
vacated and an alternative site could not be found in Trinidad, the island
would suffer economic consequences, to say nothing of 800-1,000 base-
related jobs. At the time, Williams was also seeking U.S. economic aid to
help finance his five-year development plan. Thus, the chief minister was
walking a very tight rope by promoting the evacuation of Chaguaramas on
the one hand and requesting American financial assistance on the other. The
main distinction between Williams and his opponents/critics at this stage
was that Williams saw no contradiction between the assertion of a virulent
Trinidadian and West Indian nationalism vis-a-vis the United States and the
simultaneous expectation of U.S. economic aid. The chief minister knew
that the two countries needed each other: Trinidad needed economic help,
and the Americans needed a base on the island. But this was not a simple
quid pro quo. The American Goliath would be cut down to size, humiliated,
and forced to acquiesce to the rules laid down by the West Indian David. This
was realpolitik Caribbean style, the methodology of which Williams had
undoubtedly learned from his study of European statecraft and of such
masters of the art as C. von Metternich of Austria and Otto von Bismarck of
Germany.
***** The planning for the Joint Commission's work continued de-
spite the debate generated by the Chaguaramas issue. By December 1957 all
of its members had been named. The chairman was Sir Charles Arden
Clarke, a distinguished Englishman and former governor general of Ghana.
Having worked throughout the winter, the commission was ready to submit
its report by early spring. The West Indian leaders were optimistic that it
would endorse their choice of Chaguaramas as the capital of the West Indies
Federation. British colonial officials were extremely nervous that if the com-
mission found against the West Indians, the result would be increased ten-
sions with the Americans.
The Americans, on their part, were not overly concerned about the com-


--- PAGE 114 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
mission's findings and participated in its work simply for public relations
purposes. The installation of the missile tracking station at Chaguaramas
starting in August 1957 was one indication of this, and the U.S. Navy's
announcement in April 1958 that a new South Atlantic Command would be
created and also headquartered at Chaguaramas was another. According to
Admiral Gerald Wright, the commander in chief of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet,
the new command would execute American responsibility for antisubmarine
defense, the protection of shipping, and other missions. Wright promised
that "this force will strengthen our bonds of friendship between United
States and those countries in South America and Africa bordering the Atlan-
tic command area." The message he conveyed was that, regardless of the
conclusions of the Joint Commission, U.S. forces would remain at Cha-
guaramas. R. W Jackling of the British Embassy in Washington, found the
announcement "inexcusable" and questioned its timing just before the re-
lease of the commission's report.42
Although the British wanted to appear impartial in the Chaguaramas
dispute, they almost always tilted on the side of the Americans. The two
countries did not try to influence the deliberations of the Joint Commission
directly, but they exchanged notes and their respective envoys had conversa-
tions on how to handle the West Indian politicians, especially Williams. The
Americans insisted that the British, in the words of H. A. A. Hankey of the
Foreign Office, "tranquilize opinion in the West Indies in order to provide a
suitable atmosphere in which the Commission would conduct its work."
They were incensed when Eric Williams lodged a protest with the commis-
sion against the installation of the tracking station, since they had already
given the assurance that their representatives on that body would not be
influenced by the fact that the work was in progress. Hankey observed,
accurately, that "the West Indian politicians have not co-operated very will-
ingly in refraining from public discussion of the capital site issue during the
work of the commission." On the other hand, the Americans were "disin-
genuous in misrepresenting the significance of the exact site inside the base
of the tracking station, and the extent of land which it would cover."
The imminent release of the commission's report, with its expected rejec-
tion of the West Indian position, created great apprehension in both London
and Washington. British officials feared that there might be an explosion of
anti-Americanism as well as disruptions of the events associated with the
inauguration of the West Indies Federation scheduled to begin on April 22,
101


--- PAGE 115 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
1958. The Colonial Office believed that it was obligated to persuade the West
Indians to accept the report, to seek another site in Trinidad, and to avoid
reopening the question of which island should have the capital. If the latter
occurred, the future of the federation would be endangered. If the report
were unfavorable to the West Indies, Hankey noted on March 17, the British
would try to contain hostile reactions and to dispel the U.S. State Depart-
ment's "illusions" that Britain had not done enough to prevent the hostility.
Hankey cautioned, however, that "by over-playing our hand now with the
West Indian politicians we might, by appearing to range ourselves too firmly
on the American side, undermine our power to influence them in the right
direction when the crucial moment arrives."43
This view appeared in a letter from the Foreign Office to Sir Harold
Caccia, the British ambassador to the United States, on March 21. The For-
eign Office asked Caccia to assure the U.S. State Department that the British
were doing everything possible to stifle hostile opinion in Trinidad, but that
"it is no more possible for the Governor to muzzle the press in Trinidad than
it would be for the Administration to do so in the United States." The office
expressed surprise at receiving an aide-memoire from the U.S. secretary of
state, Christian Herter, declaring that his country would not vacate Cha-
guaramas irrespective of the Joint Commission's recommendations. Conse-
quently, the Foreign Office stressed that "the most critical moment" for
British support of the Americans "will presumably come . . . when it be-
comes clear that whatever the nature of the report the Americans intend to
remain inflexible." The Americans could help the British in "our task," the
Foreign Office continued, by making "some economic concessions which
would be valuable to the Federation and to the Trinidad government." These
might include foregoing some of their duty-free rights and publicizing lo-
cally an offer of economic aid. The latter should be done carefully "in order
to avoid the impression that a bribe was being offered." In addition, the
Americans should accept the suggestion to send warships more frequently
to Chaguaramas to show that the naval station was "in serious use."
The British, the Foreign Office continued, would accede to the U.S. re-
quest that the United Kingdom not propose a partitioning of the Chaguara-
mas base as a solution. The State Department needed to be assured that
British officials "have acted in accordance with our degree of responsibility
for keeping the agitation within manageable proportions if possible, and
that they can count on us not to let them down over the defense aspect of the
102


--- PAGE 116 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
problem." To the secretary of state for the colonies, it seemed that "the
Americans want it both ways, in both encouraging anti-colonialism of all
kinds and then lecturing us for not behaving as colonialists."44
The Americans did not immediately reject the suggestion regarding eco-
nomic concessions to the West Indians, but they were fearful that its accep-
tance and implementation would establish a precedent for other overseas
bases.45 They took some false comfort, however, in the fact that Williams's
party, the PNM, had suffered a defeat in the recently held federal elections,
winning only four of the ten seats at stake. Although the election was in
some respects a referendum on the PNM'S stewardship in office, the op-
position DLP supported the Americans on Chaguaramas. The opposition
party in Jamaica, the Jamaica Labour Party, also defeated Norman Manley's
People's National Party, winning twelve of the seventeen contested seats.
Pleased by these results, American officials saw them as evidence that there
was little popular support for a U.S. evacuation of Chaguaramas. This was,
of course, a self-serving misreading of the election results, particularly those
in Trinidad and Tobago.46
The Americans were relieved when they were given advanced word that
the Joint Commission had upheld their position on Chaguaramas. Embold-
ened by this information, Walworth Barbour of the American Embassy in
London wrote Selwyn Lloyd, the British secretary of state for foreign affairs,
that his government hoped that the interest of all concerned parties would be
best served "by firm, polite advice from Her Majesty's Government to the
West Indies to the effect that in the light of the Commission's report Her
Majesty's Government is not in a position to request the United States Gov-
ernment to release all or part of Chaguaramas and that the request of the
Standing Federation Committee of the West Indians to that end should be
withdrawn."47 Irritated by this imperious request, P. Dean of the Foreign
Office observed that "the truth is that the Americans have been pretty tire-
some over all this and their suggestion that we should send 'firm, polite
advice' to the West Indians is really unnecessary."48 Lloyd was also not
amused by this request. He told the American ambassador, John Jay Whit-
ney, that "the West Indian governments have achieved a degree of indepen-
dence which demands the utmost discretion in the manner in which a deli-
cate subject of this kind is handled."49
The chairman of the Joint Commission, Sir Charles Arden-Clarke, sub
mitted his report to the four governments on March 25, but its contents were
103


--- PAGE 117 ---
104 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
not released to the public until May 15 after the inaugural festivities of the
West Indies Federation had been completed. The 36-page report was en-
dorsed unanimously by all of the commission members. According to the
report, the commission functioned "as a fact-finding body of technical ex-
perts."50 After examining a massive amount of data, it supported the claim
that "the best location for a base in the Eastern Caribbean is actually on the
Gulf of Paria." Trinidad's location on the main sea-lane between the east
coast ports of North and South America, and at the eastern end of the
Caribbean with the Panama Canal at its western end, made it an ideal loca-
tion for a naval base. In fact, Trinidad could be fairly described as "The
Gibraltar of the Caribbean."51 Similarly, the Chaguaramas base met all of
"the strategic and military" requirements for a naval base in the Eastern
Caribbean.52 To partition the base was "not practicable," and there was "no
significant portion of useable area within the Chaguaramas Naval Base that
is not essential to the Base's mission."53
Unquestionably, the report constituted a major victory for the United
States. It upheld all of the American claims, and its legitimacy was enhanced
because there were no dissenters. After consultation, the British and the
Americans issued separate statements welcoming the report's conclusions.
The Americans hoped that the issue was now permanently settled, and the
British urged the West Indians to withdraw their request for the release of
Chaguaramas.54 Understandably, West Indian leaders were not pleased. Fed-
eral prime minister Grantley Adams rejected the "view" expressed by the
Americans and the British in their respective statements and called for an
early conference of the parties involved to consider the commission's con-
clusions. An angry Norman Manley condemned the United Kingdom for
conniving with the United States and for publishing a "one-sided state-
ment" designed "to prejudice" and prevent further discussion of the matter
in the West Indies. Such behavior was an "insult and an outrage to the
people of the West Indies and their Federal Government."55
Manley complained that the unilateral statement by the British violated
the understanding reached at the London conference that the four parties
would consider the Joint Commission's report at a later meeting. The be-
havior of the British, Manley said on May 26, "is not only an insult, but a
flagrant, naked breach of what we had agreed to do.... England deliberately
intervened for the purpose of making it more easy for America to withstand
any further pressure. I am absolutely satisfied that England and America got


--- PAGE 118 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 105
together behind the backs of the other parties to the roundtable conference
for that purpose." On the other hand, an obviously delighted Sir Alexander
Bustamante praised the United States for "having shown great dignity and
having demonstrated a high sense of moral democracy" in agreeing to have
the matter considered by the Joint Commission. "It serves the West Indies
right not to get Chaguaramas as site for Federation's capital," he said.56
Colonial officials were sympathetic to the difficulties the Joint Commis-
sion's report created for Prime Minister Grantley Adams. His party held a
small and thus precarious majority in the Federal Parliament, and the report
did nothing to strengthen his political position. Wanting to exploit the
situation, the opposition DLP hastily introduced a motion of no confidence
in the government. Fearing that the young government might be defeated
and thereby forced to resign, the Colonial Office extracted a promise from
the U.S. State Department to review the Chaguaramas issue in ten years. The
news served its purpose, and the Adams government survived. Eric Wil-
liams, however, was not placated by this gesture of compromise and de-
manded a conference of the four governments involved to discuss the Joint
Commission's report and to reopen the question.
British officials wavered on the issue of a new conference, eventually
arriving at a consensus that one was necessary but without separate repre-
sentation for Trinidad and Tobago. This decision to hold a new conference
was never conveyed to the West Indians, at least not for another fifteen
months. In the interim, British officials tried, with varying degrees of enthu-
siasm, to persuade the Americans to accede to the West Indian requests.
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was a major obstacle to any such
accommodation with the West Indies. In fact, on June 14, 1958, he told
Selwyn Lloyd that the United States was "not prepared to deal direct with the
West Indians on this [Chaguaramas] issue."57 This posture of lofty intran-
sigence would remain the hallmark of U.S. policy until officials, in light of
changing circumstances, could no longer justify it to themselves, much less
to the other interested parties. When the Americans agreed in October 1958
to hold a conference in ten years to review the issue, the Colonial Office
maintained: "While we were glad to learn that the Americans have agreed
that the review of the Chaguaramas question in ten years' time should be
accompanied by a conference, we would prefer not to pass this on to the
West Indies [Federal government] or to Trinidad at present. It would, we
feel, be undesirable to let them know the news at present since Williams


--- PAGE 119 ---
106 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
might well conclude that the Americans were weakening and step up his
campaign for a Chaguaramas conference as soon as possible."58
If British and American officials nourished the hope that the Joint Com-
mission's report would temper Eric Williams's position on Chaguaramas,
they were seriously mistaken. In fact, the report strengthened his nationalist
fervor, leading him to launch an even more vigorous campaign to force an
American withdrawal, the likes of which the Anglophone Caribbean had
never experienced. The campaign infuriated the Americans, alarmed the
British, and annoyed many citizens of Trinidad and the West Indies in gen-
eral. None of this deterred Williams; he seemed to thrive on the passions he
had unleashed. It was a struggle rich in drama, one that simultaneously
captured the spirit of anticolonial struggles and revealed the compromises
that their leaders sometimes had to make, as their pragmatism tempered
their idealism.
Williams's first major salvo after the report's release was to make a mo-
tion in the Legislative Council on June 6 that the legislators endorse the
request of the West Indies Federal government for an early conference of
representatives of the four governments to consider the document. Such a
meeting, he added, should be held in Trinidad. In a lengthy speech, Williams
reviewed the history of the problem and condemned the unilateral state-
ments that Britain and the United States had issued in their acceptance of the
report. These statements slammed the door "in the face of the people of
the West Indies and their representatives."59 By presenting his motion he
wanted to "claim the right of the people of the West Indies and the right of
the people of Trinidad and Tobago to be heard in their own cause." Accord-
ingly, his government "repudiates the unilateral statements" of the two
governments in question. Williams was outraged by the 1941 agreement
whereby Trinidadians were "sold for scrap" and insisted that in 1958 "no-
body is going to give away or surrender one iota of Trinidad's soil with-
out reference to the elected government of the people." Under the circum-
stances, he said, "We demand the right to be heard." Referring to the Joint
Commission's report, the chief minister wryly observed: "One gets the im-
pression that the only reason for Trinidad's existence on this earth is that a
naval base had to be located somewhere."60
Williams rejected the report's claim that it would be too costly to relocate
the Chaguaramas base and questioned the conclusion that it was crucial for
the security of the region. "If it were" crucial, he argued, "then ... it should


--- PAGE 120 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 107
not have been neglected as it obviously has been." Citing the agreements
that the United States had signed with other countries for bases since 1941,
Williams pointed out that none was for longer than twenty years, in contrast
to the ninety-nine-year lease at Chaguaramas. "Must we have a treaty in the
West Indies for 99 years as against 20?" he asked. He also wanted the
agreement revised "to bring it more in line with treaties elsewhere, to bring
it more in line with the new spirit that has spread all over the world in the
opposition to bases by Mr. Nehru, the opposition in Ceylon, the struggle in
Cyprus, the opposition in Latin America."61
Alluding to the struggle ahead, Williams observed that "the discussions
which some are now trying to close are only now beginning." He assured the
legislators that the governing body of the PNM supported his stance. Its
"line" was: "Go ahead, do not back down; you have a case, a strong moral
case; put it before the eyes of the world. Above all, if your Federation backs
down now, your Federation is going to be kicked about from pillar to post
until the end of time."62 In responding to criticisms of the opposition at the
close of the debate, Williams condemned some of the speakers for being "the
mouthpieces of a foreign power"; indeed, he accused one of them of quoting
from a "secret" U.S. document that he, Williams, had in his possession.63
The speech set the tone of the campaign that Williams would wage for the
return of Chaguaramas over the next several years. Filled with historical
allusions and statistics, it was at once combative, defiant, and conciliatory.
Two weeks later the chief minister returned to the Chaguaramas problem. In
a statement he read to the Legislative Council, he complicated the issue by
questioning whether the council had actually ratified the 1941 agreement.
Consequently, "Is the lease valid?" he inquired. Williams pointed out that
the "supplementary areas" acquired by the United States since 1941 had not
been "signed, executed, or registered." These areas included Tucker Valley,
Flagstaff Hill, La Lune, Blanchissense, Green Hill, Carlsen Field, Monos,
Huevos, Chacachacare, Arima, Verdant Vale Quarry, and Manzanilla.64
Williams argued that the Land Regulations of Trinidad and Tobago al-
lowed the governor to grant leases for a term not exceeding thirty years. The
government "has not yet been able to identify any authority for the disposal
of Crown Lands in 1941 for 99 years in excess of the term prescribed by the
Land Regulations." Moreover, the rent-free provisions of the 1941 agreement
also violated Trinidadian law, which provided for the payment of rent for the
leasing of Crown lands.65


--- PAGE 121 ---
108 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
In light of these discoveries, the chief minister wondered whether a lease
in fact existed. "Has the United Kingdom, Parliament, or the Sovereign in
effect exercised the right to dispense with or suspend the laws of Trinidad
and Tobago relating to the duration of leases of Crown Lands?" he asked.
The answers to the questions he raised "are basic to the self government of
Trinidad and Tobago. The questions involve the legality, the validity of the
United States occupation of the Leased Areas. They ultimately pose the
problem—can the United Kingdom by treaty with a foreign power bind
Trinidad and Tobago, even in the days of Crown Colony Government, to
obligations, commitments and concessions unknown to or inconsistent
with Trinidad laws duly assented to by the Governor and not disallowed by
the Secretary of State for the Colonies?"66
To resolve this legal uncertainty, Williams announced the appointment of
a commission consisting of "legal experts" to "inquire into and report upon
the legal basis of (a) the occupation by the United States of areas of Trinidad
and Tobago from 1941 to the present day, and (b) the terms and conditions
thereto."67
These questions threw a significant wrench into the dispute. Taken by
surprise and chagrined that Williams had challenged the legitimacy of the
1941 agreement, British colonial officials took immediate steps to assert
their political supremacy. In a telegram to Governor Beetham, the Colonial
Office expressed its intention to "scotch the idea that by disclosing legisla-
tive anomalies and flaws in leases, Trinidad Government can cast doubt on
the right of United State Government to retain bases. Our lawyers regard this
as self evident absurdity." The office pointed out that as a colony Trinidad
lacked "sovereignty," and in any event the governor's reserve powers suf-
ficed in the context of the 1941 agreement. In addition, the Foreign Offic
contended that the responsibility for the external relations of Trinidad and
Tobago resided with Her Majesty's government and that the governor re-
tained the power to act without the consent of the Legislative Council.
It is unclear whether the contents of this and similar letters were ever
communicated to Williams, since the governor's deputy in Trinidad cau-
tioned that such legal arguments could be seen as an attempt to influence the
findings of Williams's Legal Commission. He thought that any reference to
the governor's reserve powers should be avoided.68 In its internal discus-
sions, however, the Foreign Office was far from convinced that Williams's
claims had no legal merit. On August 25, D. H. T. Hildyard of that office


--- PAGE 122 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 109
admitted that "Dr. Williams has a strong card, in that the Trinidad Govern-
ment have omitted to enact a certain amount of legislation necessary to give
effect to the 1941 agreement. . . and the legal position in the Chaguaramas
base is therefore far from satisfactory."69
***** Eric Williams's relentless assaults on the Leased Bases Agree-
ment greatly unnerved and annoyed colonial officials. But they never con-
ceded publicly that the agreement was of questionable legality because it
had not been ratified by the local legislature. Nor had the imperial gov-
ernment validated it by exercising its reserve power. To innoculate them-
selves against having to concede the validity of Williams's arguments, the
Colonial Office concocted a fraudulent scheme to thwart and nullify them. At
first, the officials discussed whether to ask the newly inaugurated Williams
government to introduce legislation to ratify the agreement retroactively.
Governor Beetham warned against such a course, as he considered it "in-
advisable and undesirable for any attempt to be made to press Government
to introduce the necessary legislation at this juncture." He reported that
Solomon Hochoy, the Trinidadian-born colonial secretary, had expressed
the view that "no new government could be expected to embark upon con-
troversial legislation which would appear, not only [to] be a curtailment of
the rights and privileges of its own people, but also to confer greater privi-
leges on foreigners vis-a-vis its own people, when it had not yet had the time
nor the opportunity to implement to any material extent promises made to
the country."70
Beetham thought that he had a better idea. Realizing that the issue of the
agreement's legality would not disappear, he asked the Colonial Office to
send him a fraudulent dispatch, which could be later dated and numbered as
required, to demonstrate that the authorities had left it to the Trinidadian
government to validate the agreement when the necessity arose, even to be
retroactive. There was, obviously, no statute of limitations on its implemen-
tation. "Would it not be provident for me," Beetham inquired in February
1958, "to have an unnumbered and undated dispatch now so that when the
moment arrives I could telegraph for the number and date which I would
fill in?"71
The Colonial Office agreed to participate in this deception and sent the
following undated "dispatch" to Beetham, even including references to a
fictitious 1954 savingram:


--- PAGE 123 ---
HO THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
TRINIDAD
NO.
Sir,
1. I have the honour to refer to correspondence ending with your
savingram No. 2/54 of the 2nd January, 1954, regarding the
desirability of introducing comprehensive legislation to implement
the Leased Based Agreement of the 27th March, 1941.
2. I know of course that power exists under the Leased Bases
(Temporary Provisions) Ordinance, 1941, to make Regulations, if
necessary with retrospective effect, to implement that Agreement; and
I recognise that it may be possible to give effect to certain of its terms
by means of administrative direction. While it has been the view of
Her Majesty's Government that such temporary expedients should
be replaced by comprehensive legislation at the first convenient
opportunity, it is recognised that the Government of Trinidad will
wish to consider when it would be appropriate to do so. In the
meantime, Her Majesty's Government assumefs] that all the powers
and privileges conferred by the Leased Bases Agreement will be made
available as and when necessary either by administrative direction
or by Regulations under the Leased Bases (Temporary Provisions)
Ordinance; and that; should an incident occur in which failure to give
local effect to the Agreement is, or is likely to become, an issue, the
Trinidad Government will take steps to correct the position, e.g. by
exercising the power to make Regulations with retrospective effect.
It is, however, considered particularly inappropriate that matters of
jurisdiction should be dealt with by retrospective legislation.
3. I therefore hope that, if it is still considered inexpedient to introduce
comprehensive legislation, an assurance in the above sense can
readily be given.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient
humble servant,
ALAN LENNOX BOYD
GOVERNOR,
SIREDWARD BEETHAM, K.C.M.G., C.V.O., O.B.E.,
etc., etc., etc.72


--- PAGE 124 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
Colonial officials, however, were concerned that this deception could be
discovered and alerted Beetham to some of the potential difficulties:
SECRET & PERSONAL 22nd February, 1958.
As you will see from the enclosure to this letter, we have accepted the sug-
gestion in your telegram Personal No. II thatyou should have an unnum-
bered and undated dispatch on the subject of U.S. Bases legislation ready
to be numbered and dated when a suitable time arrives to produce it.
This course however is not without difficulties. It would be easy
enough to backdate the dispatch so as to allow a sufficient interval
between the apparent dates of issue and receipt. It would not however be
so easy to allot a number consonant with the date since all such numbers
would already have been used before we received your telegram. Another
snag might arise if the Secretary of State were out of the U.K. at the
selected date since the dispatch would then bear the wrong signature.
These are not perhaps very material difficulties, but because of them
it would be better, if time allows, for us to send another original of the
dispatch through the usual channels if you can give us sufficient notice
(say ten days) of the date on which you wish to produce it. But if the
favourable moment arrives so suddenly that this is not possible, we
agree that you should produce the enclosed copy and we will do our
best to overcome the difficulties I have mentioned.
(w. I. J. WALLACE)
Sir Edward Beetham, K.C.M.G., C.V.O., O.B.E.,
Government House
Port-of-Spain
TRINIDAD.73
It is not known if Beetham ever issued the "dispatch." He had not done so
by June 1958, leading one colonial official to observe that it "lies unnum-
bered and undated in Sir E. Beetham's safe." Still, the official added: "With
all the advantages of hindsight it seems to me rather a pity that we did not
take this bull by the horns before. However, there is at least this advantage,
that Dr. Williams seems to be giving himself a considerable length of rope so
that if we do have to twitch the noose rather sharply by reminding him of the
existence of reserve powers it will be against a background that it is he rather
than we who are manifestly being unreasonable."74 The official was not
troubled by the morality of the deception, of which he was manifestly a part.
22nd
111


--- PAGE 125 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
The record is silent on whether Beetham conveyed the fraudulent con-
tents of the dispatch to Williams. Since the Legal Commission appointed by
the chief minister never submitted a report, it is conceivable that its mem-
bers knew of its existence and accepted its "authenticity." The Colonial
Office had pulled the legal rug from under Williams, denying him a trump
card. It was unquestionably a low point in the behavior of the imperial
authorities, a crass exercise of Machiavellian-like deception and ruthless-
ness. Eric Williams, as we shall see in Chapter 4, was always accused of
being "paranoid." In light of the Colonial Office's behavior in this instance
and in others, the chief minister's moods and distrust of the London offi-
cials were at times entirely understandable.
***** Williams did not confine his campaign to speeches in the Legis-
lative Council, official statements, and legal contestations. Not surprisingly,
he also took his case directly to the people. In a press conference on July 12,
1958, he observed that even if Chaguaramas were not required for the Fed-
eral capital, it could meet other needs, such as "tourist development." But,
he added, "there need be no problem if some of the Trinidad population
stopped conducting themselves in the eyes of the world like stooges."75 This
statement reflected a shift in the chief minister's thinking. He now wanted
the land back whether or not it was to be used as the capital site.
Williams's insistence on the right of his small island to have a voice in
who occupied its soil and on what terms continued to irritate the Americans,
particularly those officials who were assigned to Port of Spain. They had to
listen to his persistent denunciation of the U.S. presence in his speeches and
press conferences, and the Nation published similar assaults with distressing
frequency. Unable to control Williams or at least to silence him, the Ameri-
can consul general in March 1958 thought that the time had come for the
United States to take some action against him. Walter Orebaugh wrote the
U.S. secretary of state that "I am firmly convinced we cannot attack [the]
problem on a piece meal basis. We must review our position, assess our
strength in area, decide upon a plan of action, and then proceed [with]
implementation. ... We must disengage with Williams and work for his
ultimate demise."
Orebaugh did not elaborate on what he meant by Williams's "demise."
He may have meant that the State Department should support the chief
minister's opponents, with the intention of defeating him in the next elec-
112


--- PAGE 126 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
tion. Conceivably, he could also have meant a military coup or his assassina-
tion. Orebaugh urged the State Department to convene a small group of
representatives from "appropriate agencies" to meet in ten days "to produce
a coordinated plan of action." Any plan that emerged should be given the
stamp of "highest Departmental approval." The consul general offered to
send his deputy to Washington to participate in the conspiracy.76 The avail-
able evidence does not indicate whether anything came of this proposal.
In July 1959 Consul General Orebaugh returned to the question of Wil-
liams's removal from office. In a letter to four State Department officials, he
noted that since there "seems to be more or less agreement that Williams
cannot, or at any rate will not be handled, it is ... I believe timely to
consider . . . what we can do about Williams." Although "the man is riding
high," he could run afoul of his colleagues. But, Orebaugh cautioned, "we
cannot, of course, get into a program to 'get' Williams without getting into
local affairs to a far greater degree than anything we have done heretofore."
Once again, the consul general was tantalizingly vague about the proposed
modus operand!, and it is not clear whether his proposal was considered in
Washington.77
Forgetting the nationalism that animated the historical experiences of
their own country, before and after the Revolutionary War, U.S. officials
dismissed such sentiments in the West Indies with the most pejorative lan-
guage. Still, they felt that American interests in the area would be threatened
in the long run if these nationalist stirrings were not contained and if the
United States, in the words of Walter Orebaugh, did not take the necessary
steps "to increase the palatability of a US base system in the West Indies."
Orebaugh also believed the American presence would be endangered when
the islands attained dominion status unless the United States took care to
develop West Indian cooperation. According to Orebaugh, American pros-
pects "are likely to be worsened by the degree to which Eric Williams is able
to expand his future political role." To Orebaugh, "rabid nationalists like
Williams" could "arouse a sense of frustration in the public to keep the
Chaguaramas pot boiling." In addition, the diplomat observed, "there is an
intellectual and political current among certain leaders that feeds on racial
and anti-colonial bitterness."78
Walter Orebaugh showed no deep understanding of the wellsprings of
Trinidadian nationalism. In October 1959 he reported that Eric Williams was
so preoccupied with the Chaguaramas issue that it "border[s] on mania."
113


--- PAGE 127 ---
114 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
The consul general saw the impasse principally in racial terms, describing it
"as an emotional issue . . . rooted in Williams's mind as part of a struggle
against colonialism, and a cause in which the 'colored' can show their new
strength in the face of the 'whites.'" To this racial factor "can be added the
known, and heretofore somewhat latent, anti-Americanism which is part of
Williams' background." Williams was using Chaguaramas to divert atten-
tion from domestic problems such as taxes and unemployment. Orebaugh
speculated that he was going to "pitch his allegations, inferences, and even
untruths in such a way as to emotionalize the issue." Williams would seek to
internationalize it as well, Orebaugh lamented.
Under the circumstances, the consul general saw little hope of achieving
a compromise with Williams: "The nature of his demands, his personality
and ambitions, his motivating force, and the long-run danger he poses for
United States interests in the Caribbean, all add up to the conclusion that the
United States cannot deal reasonably with the man, either now or in the
future. To the maximum effect feasible, and within the means, which can be
developed, we should work for the weakening of Williams' political position
in Trinidad and his eventual replacement by more rational elements."
This was not a call to remove Williams from office by force. But it had
ominous undertones. Orebaugh thought that the United States should pro-
vide aid to the West Indian Federal government to maximize its political and
economic viability, thereby reducing Trinidad's influence. "Federation and
Federal leaders can be used to counteract Dr. Williams," he suggested. In
addition, the United Kingdom as the imperial power should be urged to "use
its full influence to contain Williams."79
The American officials in both Port of Spain and Washington, D.C., had
little if any experience in negotiating with West Indians or having to pay
them serious attention. They were, after all, colonials, and the United King-
dom handled their relationships with foreign powers, as it had done in the
1941 agreement. Moreover, at the time of the Chaguaramas dispute de jure
segregation still existed in the United States, and African Americans were
being denied their constitutional rights in the South. If white Americans,
particularly southerners, did not accord black people due respect in their
native land, it was doubtful that West Indians who were not white would be
treated much differently. Their views, even those on the disposal of their own
land, hardly carried any weight. The State Department's refusal to deal with
the West Indians directly did not rest entirely on the legal ground that the


--- PAGE 128 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 115
United Kingdom was responsible for their foreign affairs. The fact that the
color of their skin was black or brown was a major consideration given the
racial climate of that period.
Orebaugh's recommendation that the Americans intervene directly in the
political life of Trinidad and Tobago had precedents in other societies. The
United States had already been implicated in the overthrow of heads of state
in Guatemala and Iran. Consul General Orebaugh seems to have been pro-
posing a similar fate for Eric Williams. Williams's crime was that he was
fiercely critical of the U.S. presence at Chaguaramas. His departure from
office would have probably gratified some of his domestic opponents, but
few would have endorsed the means that Orebaugh seemed to recommend.
Had Orebaugh's proposal come to light at the time, it would have seriously
hurt the American cause, enhanced Williams's popularity, and invited al-
most universal condemnation.
Walter Orebaugh was singularly inept as consul general, and his deputy,
Philip Habib, was hardly more competent. Douglas Williams, the British
colonial attache in Washington, who spent two weeks in Trinidad in late July
and early August 1958, was "frankly appalled at the way the Americans are
mishandling the situation locally." He was convinced that "the fault lies . ..
in the joint firm of Messers Orebaugh and Habib." Orebaugh's "whole
background and approach to problems make him quite unfit for the present
situation in Trinidad," the British envoy asserted. The consul general, he
reported, had spent World War II on "special operations" in Italy and later
worked for the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Thus:
He has a mentality adapted to that sort of approach and I think in his heart
of hearts really sees the situation in those terms. If he could take to the
hills and organise an anti PNM movement with Mr. Habib stowed away in
some bazaar in Port of Spain as his local intelligence agent, he would be
perfectly happy and would do a thoroughly good job. What he lacks is any
idea of how to employ diplomacy, tact, and patience in a situation where
those are the only qualities which are even likely to get him anywhere. He
keeps on harping on the fact that "somebody must do something." He is
not prepared to leave the situation to time and the influence of good
personal relations and good sense. He thinks of it entirely in terms of
fostering countermovements and of somehow trying to buy off the agita-
tion. The effect of his efforts is in consequence always the very opposite of


--- PAGE 129 ---
Il6 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
what he intends them to be, and the mistrust of him and of the whole
American consulate in Port of Spain is very considerable.
Douglas Williams proposed to convey his misgivings to his "contacts" in the
U.S. State Department. "It now seems to me that Orebaugh's personal ap-
proach to the local situation in Trinidad is colouring the whole of the Ameri-
can attitude over Chaguaramas, with results which could be unfortunate for
all of us," he concluded.80 Orebaugh was later quietly recalled to Washington
after being accused of interfering in local politics.
***** In addition to American hostility, Eric Williams faced signifi-
cant domestic opposition as his campaign intensified. His opponents hur-
ried to the U.S. consulate to record their fears and to enjoin the Americans to
resist his demands. Feeling that they were powerless to thwart the chief min-
ister and despairing that the United Kingdom was unlikely to take their side,
these Trinidadians viewed the Americans as their only hope. Although the
Chaguaramas issue was the one that angered them most, they voiced a cata-
log of other complaints. The U.S. officials gave them a polite hearing and
reported the sense of these conversations to their superiors in Washington.
The practice of colonized peoples seeking the ear of the metropolitan
power to advance one cause or another was well known. In this instance,
such prominent leaders as Victor Bryan, an African Trinidadian and opposi-
tion member of the Federal Parliament, as well as Rudranath Capildeo and
Ashford Sinanan, two distinguished Indo-Trinidadians and leaders of the
DLP, bared their souls and shared their political strategies and ambitions
with the Americans. Williams was not averse to talking to the diplomats, but
he was more reticent about his political plans when he met with them,
particularly the Americans. This is hardly surprising since he was the head of
government and was usually an antagonist of the British and the Americans;
thus he could neither run to them for political help or advice nor discuss his
modus operandi with them.
Sir Joseph Mathieu-Perez was one of the first prominent citizens of Trini-
dad and Tobago to call on U.S. officials to express opposition to Williams's
Chaguaramas policy. Mathieu-Perez, a former chief justice, told the Ameri-
cans on October 29,1958, that he opposed the four-power conference that
Williams was demanding. According to Consul General Orebaugh, he said
that if the Americans agreed to hold such a conference, "their influence and


--- PAGE 130 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 117
prestige would decline to the vanishing point." U.S. policy should be one of
"reasonableness but firmness." Mathieu-Perez repeated the point that under
no circumstances should the Americans agree to confer with Williams.81
DLP officials, too, were not reluctant to take their complaints to the
Americans, usually to assure them of their opposition to the release of
Chaguaramas. On July 10,1959, for example, in a meeting with Philip Habib,
now the acting U.S. consul general, Ashford Sinanan, the leader of the
opposition in the Federal Parliament, and Simbhoonath Capildeo, a DLP
member of the Legislative Council of Trinidad and Tobago, charged that
British colonial officials were enhancing Williams's "power and prestige" in
"such a manner as to be criminal." Sinanan wondered whether the Ameri-
cans also intended to "appease" Williams on the Chaguaramas issue. He
insisted that Chaguaramas was more properly the responsibility of the Fed-
eral government than of Trinidad. He warned that Williams was intent on
embarrassing the Americans and whipping up anti-American sentiment.
Furthermore, the two visitors told Habib, Williams was jeopardizing U.S.-
West Indian relations and Williams and his "arch-conspirator, the commu-
nist C. L. R. James," were planning to introduce "totalitarianism" into the
West Indies. Sinanan reminded Habib that the DLP was willing to continue
supporting the Americans despite the PNM's accusation that they were tools
of the United States. His party was committed to fighting what he called
Williams's anti-Americanism. Ten days later Werner J. Boos, the acting chief
secretary of Trinidad and Tobago, also visited Habib to express his disen-
chantment with Williams's Chaguaramas policy.82
Williams's demands regarding Chaguaramas and his insistence that
Trinidad and Tobago should have independent representation at any con-
ference to resolve the issue of the use of Trinidad's soil also ran afoul of the
Federal government. Prime Minister Grantley Adams and his ministers be-
lieved that Williams was encroaching on the Federal preserve, since the
conduct of foreign affairs was its responsibility and not that of any unit of
the West Indies Federation. This was constitutionally accurate, but the feder-
ation had not yet achieved dominion status so foreign affairs remained in
the hands of the United Kingdom.
Williams dismissed such political sensibilities, seeing himself as the only
authentic spokesperson for the peoples of Trinidad and Tobago. When Rob-
ert Bradshaw, the Federal minister of finance, told a public meeting in St.
Kitts in June 1960 that "Chaguaramas is a Federal problem," Williams re-


--- PAGE 131 ---
Il8 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
sponded characteristically: "Federal problem, my foot. Chaguaramas is no
longer a federal problem—it is a problem for Trinidad and Tobago. Cha-
guaramas is Trinidad property and the Americans are camping on Trinidad
soil. When they get off, it will be taken over by the Government of Trinidad
and Tobago. If the Federal Government still wants to come and talk to us
about using it for a federal capital, they can come in and we'll sit down with
them and bargain about it."83
It was widely suspected that Adams did not want the Chaguaramas prob-
lem resolved in Williams's favor, because he hoped that the Federal capital
would be relocated in Barbados. Williams, on the other hand, was not
expected to accept such a development. There was even speculation that he
would lead Trinidad and Tobago out of the federation if Trinidad lost the
capital. Matters took an ugly turn in March 1960, when the two leaders
exchanged accusations in a public brawl. Expressing some frustration with
the Federal government on a number of issues, Williams told a press confer-
ence that "Trinidad and Tobago is not going to support any West Indian Fed-
eral Government which starts off by being the stooge of the Colonial Of-
fice." Stung by this criticism, Adams said that it was "beneath contempt."84
Williams minced no words in condemning his opponents, but one speech
that he delivered at San Fernando on May 30,1960, was particularly vitriolic.
No opposition exists, he said, that "can present to the national community an
alternative program for the advancement of our national aims. Opposition
there is, opposition galore, but it is opposition for so. It is the opposition of
old talk, the opposition of bacchanal, the opposition of a caste of unregener-
ate diehards in its death throes, the opposition which seeks to perpetuate
colonialism."85
By the end of 1959, however, there were signs that U.S. officials had
begun to develop a more mature understanding of the roots of the crisis,
seen through the optic of Eric Williams and his supporters. This emerging
perspective appears in a lengthy memorandum that the new and more sensi-
tive consul general, Edwin Moline, sent to Washington on December 23.
Moline was, in a sense, establishing the context for the forthcoming con-
ference to discuss revision of the 1941 Leased Bases Agreement. He ex-
plained that he was interested in providing "a preview of West Indian views"
to "facilitate the obvious U.S. task of limiting [their] demands" in the up-
coming negotiations. This was to be done "in the interest of protecting
essential U.S. requirements." The consul general emphasized that "what


--- PAGE 132 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 119
originated as a specific request for a particular piece of ground has now
burgeoned into a wide desire among the responsible leaders of the West
Indies for a review and readjustment of U.S. base rights." He insisted that
the West Indian demands were driven by a strong sense of nationalism.
Ignoring the contrary views of politicians like Albert Gomes, Ashford Sina-
nan, and Alexander Bustamante, Moline opined, "the West Indian national-
ist, and all politicians are nationalist in the West Indies, cannot accept that
standards applicable in other parts of the world are not acceptable in his
bailiwick." Moline was, of course, alluding to the terms of the U.S. base
agreements with Libya, Iceland, and the Philippines.
The new consul general noted that it was no longer possible to speak of
"the localization of West Indian attitudes." He thought that "the intran-
sigence and the extremism of Dr. Williams on the base issue . . . while still
not approved by the majority of political leadership in the West Indies, has
nevertheless had an impact on West Indian thinking on the issue." The
solution "of the bases problem in the West Indies will have to be applicable
equally throughout the Federation" since the same standards had to apply in
all of the territories. Moline advised the State Department to acknowledge
the West Indians' sovereignty over their land in view of the forthcoming
changes in their constitutional status, asserting that "expression of this fact
will have considerable meaning to West Indian leaders."
Moline also suggested that the length of the lease period be reduced,
since "ninety nine years has the appearance of perpetuity." Furthermore,
deactivated areas of the U.S. bases in Trinidad, St. Lucia, Antigua, and Ja-
maica should be released. Chaguaramas, however, would remain a problem
because the demand for it included "elements of fetishism, or elements of
pride, or elements contrary to past commitment." As the West Indians were
almost certain to demand compensation for base rights, the U.S. negotiators
should be prepared to confront that question. Such compensation "would
be of major value in Trinidad in enabling Williams to minimize or abandon
claims to the Naval Station." Moline admitted that this amounted to "buying
the right to stay." He predicted that the West Indians would seek other
revisions in the treaty on issues such as the right of access to the bases, the
U.S. military use of local public services, custom privileges, and so on.
The consul general reminded his superiors that "without any doubt, the
status quo, in so far as U.S. bases in the West Indies are concerned, can no
longer be realistically expected to hold. We cannot expect merely to maintain


--- PAGE 133 ---
120 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
rights granted under war conditions, 18 years ago, for which West Indians
do not now recognize as an immediate and pressing need." This was a
remarkable and important shift in American thinking, a development that
was in large measure the result of the pressure that Eric Williams had
applied on intransigent American authorities.86
To keep the Chaguaramas dispute alive, Williams used a variety of tactics.
Among them, in the aftermath of the Joint Commission's report, was a
campaign to harass the Americans at Chaguaramas. His list of U.S. abuses
was lengthy. For example, Williams accused the Americans of violating the
terms of the 1941 Leased Bases Agreement, which allowed them to avoid
paying customs duties on their imports. It was common knowledge on the
islands that some of these goods found their way into the hands of citi-
zens of Trinidad and Tobago. "Chaguaramas is the greatest source today of
smuggling in Trinidad and Tobago," Williams alleged. "You have these
violations of the custom law of Trinidad and Tobago, almost daily."
Williams also denounced the Americans for landing military planes at
Piarco Airport in contravention of the agreement. Such activity, he claimed,
had damaged the airport because it was unsuited for such heavy aircraft. He
calculated that since that practice began, Trinidad had lost US$250,000in
landing fees; moreover, the physical damage to the airport amounted to
US$1 million. Williams was incensed that the Americans were also violating
Trinidad's immigration laws, as his government had no record of who went
to the bases, crossed the border, and moved around the islands. He was not
pleased that U.S. troops were "walking around Trinidad and Tobago, at
Piarco [Airport], with guns. We want to know why they should do that. Our
police don't carry any guns," he asserted.
Williams created a minicrisis when he took umbrage at the Americans
selling their surplus citrus fruits to Trinidadians. Trade with Trinidadians
was prohibited by the 1941 agreement, so this commercial relationship was
clearly a violation. Previous governments of Trinidad and Tobago had per-
mitted the Americans to engage in this trade, but Williams was not so
disposed when he became aware of it. He ordered the appropriate govern-
ment department not to process the necessary papers so that the Americans
could receive payment for the citrus they had sold, thereby producing pro-
longed and mutual recriminations. The chief minister also complained that
Americans had brought their racial virus to Chaguaramas and mistreated
citizens of Trinidad and Tobago.87


--- PAGE 134 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 121
These complaints about U.S. behavior and petty acts of governmental
harassment were designed to make life for the Americans intolerable and
hasten the resolution of the conflict. One issue, perhaps more than any
other, was particularly serious and played a major role in exacerbating ten-
sions between Trinidad, the United Kingdom, and the United States. On
June 9,1959, Chief Minister Williams told the Executive Council that he had
reports of a "reliable nature" that radiation leaks were occurring within the
Chaguaramas base. Sensing the politically explosive nature of this informa-
tion, Williams immediately asked the United Kingdom to investigate. Four
days later, he dispatched two of his ministers, Patrick Solomon and John
O'Halloran, to London to make urgent representations to the British govern-
ment to act and to "allay mounting tension and alarm locally."
In responding to these concerns, the United States assured officials of the
United Kingdom and Trinidad that the only kinds of radiation at the base
were the standard types resulting from domestic and hospital equipment.
Trinidadian officials were suspicious of such claims, and rumors began to
circulate on the island, exacerbating fears about the impact of the radiation
on the health of its citizenry. Acting on a proposal from the Colonial Office,
the U.S. State Department agreed to allow a British technical expert to visit
the base and determine whether any radiation hazards existed. The individ-
ual selected was D. R. Evans, the principal scientific officer of the Ministry of
Supply. Evans was scheduled to arrive in Trinidad on July 10, but his visit was
postponed when the Americans announced that the station would be operat-
ing on reduced power between July II and 14 and would cease operating
altogether from July 15 to August 15 owing to construction. The news of this
delay produced considerable apprehension in Trinidad and rumors that
these delays were intended to give the Americans time to either conceal the
problem or remove the offending equipment.
When public outcry about the delays did not abate, the Colonial Office
agreed to send Evans to Trinidad on August 21 once the Americans con-
firmed that low-power operation at the station would resume on August 25.
Chief Minister Williams was, as to be expected, quite animated on the sub-
ject and gave a lengthy speech at Woodford Square on July 3. Obviously bent
on using the radiation issue to berate the Americans and heighten national-
ist fervor, Williams walked a precarious political tightrope. Although he had
no firm evidence about the veracity of the charges leveled against the Ameri-
cans, he had to speak in such a way as to give the impression that he did.


--- PAGE 135 ---
122 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
"There is evidence to suggest that there is some danger to the population,"
Williams said, "but the important thing is we don't know . . . there is some
danger, we don't know what. It is a question of sheer self defense."88
Trinidad's minister of health, Dr. Winston Mahabir, once thought by
British and American officials to oppose Williams's stand on Chaguaramas,
gave his chief minister strong internal support on the radiation issue. In
mid-July, after a trip to the United Kingdom, Mahabir informed the Cabinet
that he was firmly convinced that the presence of a U.S. base in Trinidad
"involved our population in hazards over which a Minister of Health has no
control." He thought that the presence of a U.S. base "exposes us to liquida-
tion" instead of "protecting us from danger." The minister, according to a
British Intelligence report, stated that it was his "inescapable conclusion"
that "we must oppose the existence of ANY foreign base on our territory, and
offer no alternative accommodation to the Americans, if and when this
question arises." Mahabir offered to "suppress this point of view for the
moment" but emphasized that it was "neither frivolously conceived nor
lightly held."89
The health minister's position on bases went far beyond anything Wil-
liams had advocated. Williams had never said that the Americans should not
be offered an alternative site for a base. Mahabir's astonishing observations
showed the degree to which some Trinidadian officials had seemingly be-
come radicalized on the question of Chaguaramas. In an act of acute politi-
cal amnesia, Mahabir would later write in his memoirs that the radiation
issue constituted an "immaculate deception" by Williams. He assured his
readers that what he was about to relate about the dispute "will read like an
anancy story," brazenly ignoring his earlier strong private support of his
chief minister.90
Williams, in retrospect, was not crying wolf about the radiation threat. In
a secret letter to Ambassador D. A. Logan in Washington, the Foreign Office
admitted that it had "very little idea as to the power or effect of stations of
this kind and practically no technical details when we actually gave our
agreement to the installation in Trinidad." The office was "very much in the
dark," although the Americans had given their assurance that "the base was
strictly conventional." But the British officials had now learned that "the
Trinidad Station was one of the largest radar installations in existence, and
that US technicians had been talking freely of the hazards from radiation."


--- PAGE 136 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
That being said, the Foreign Office believed that "we are all in for a very
difficult time with Dr. Williams; and we count on the State Department to
help us to handle him, particularly since they are very likely to have to do so
on their own before long."
Realizing that it had a public relations disaster on its hands, the Foreign
Office feared the worst. It also chafed under the oft-repeated American
criticism that the British were not doing enough to control the West Indians,
dismissing them as having a "totally unrealistic attitude." The two govern-
ments knew that the radiation issue provided Williams with additional am-
munition with which to chastise the Americans and demand the evacuation
of Chaguaramas. The British, however, had come to understand, and to
some extent sympathize with, the nationalistic wellsprings that fertilized the
dispute.
Concerned that the United States would dismiss the radiation allegations,
and irritated by its failure to appreciate the depth of West Indian national-
ism, the Foreign Office observed: "The truth is that we have to face a grow-
ing, touchy and not always well informed brand of nationalism moving fast
towards the opinion that bases can only be accepted in the long run if
their objectives and the conditions of their operation are mutually agreed. It
would be quite wrong, we think, to regard the more extreme manifestations
of this trend as mere political gambits."91
It was a sign of changing times that the Foreign Office recognized and
accepted the legitimacy of West Indian nationalism. But many notable Trini-
dadians, such as Albert Gomes, were still not so similarly disposed. Al-
though the Foreign Office noted that Eric Williams "has inflamed feeling
and without him the issue might have remained quiescent for some time," it
was unwilling to silence him, if that were even possible. As D. H. T. Hildyard
wrote of Williams on August 10:
The fact is that in a democratic state he was free to express his opinions
and persuade others to share them which he has done very successfully.
We ourselves are entirely convinced that the campaign for revision of the
agreement is now genuine and recognition of it inevitable. There may
come a point at which we shall have to take action to ensure that the base
is not prevented from operating efficiently. But until this point is reached,
it is simply not possible to slap Dr. Williams down ... all we can do is to
123


--- PAGE 137 ---
try gradually to bring him, his supporters and the leaders of Trinidad
opinion to realize where their best interests lie. In what seems to us the
very unlikely case that he is merely indulging in demagoguery and that the
support, which he has gained on this issue, is only superficial, this will
eventually become apparent and we would hope that in time more re-
sponsible and realistic leaders would take his place.92
Williams, in the view of the Foreign Office, was being irresponsible and
unrealistic in his campaign for the return of Chaguaramas. Such a character-
ization of the chief minister revealed an imperial optic that, despite its
growing appreciation of West Indian nationalism, still had a long path to
traverse. The radiation issue gave Williams another and very dramatic op-
portunity to assert his claim to Chaguaramas, and he seized it with consider-
able aggressiveness.
On July 31, while the British were making plans to send a radiation expert
to Port of Spain, Eric Williams was telling the acting governor of Trinidad
and Tobago that the prestige of his government was at stake and that he
could no longer "refrain from taking action within our legal and moral
rights" to resolve the problem. Williams condemned U.S. intransigence,
which made it "impossible for the present situation to continue." The acting
governor reported the chief minister as saying:
It is unreasonable for the Americans, in the position in which they find
themselves today as persistent and contumacious violators of an agree-
ment whose validity in the present altered circumstances is challenged by
us, to continue after two years to refuse to get around a table to negotiate
[the] issue. It is the Americans who have rejected our offer of a new site
for the base. It is the Americans who have unilaterally decided they will be
prepared to review the need for Chaguaramas after say ten years. It is the
Americans who claim the privileges which lack the sanction of Trinidad
law required by the Agreement. It is the Americans whose planes land at
will in defiance of any agreement with Trinidad and in contravention of
the informal arrangements with the United Kingdom. It is the Americans
who use the leased areas for purposes for which they were never intended
and contrary to the very specific conditions laid down by the Foreign
Office as far as the tracking station is concerned. It is the Americans who
may even now be using or be planning to use the base for the purposes
E124 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS


--- PAGE 138 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 125
and for weapons with respect to which the recent revelations have created
the present state of grave uncertainty and even apprehension among
the population which should be a matter concerning not only Trini-
dad Government but also H.M. Government and even to the Americans
themselves.
It must be clearly understood by all parties concerned that a definitive
agreement concerning the revision of the 1941 Agreement must now be
reached. Failing such agreement it will not be possible for [me] to post-
pone further the necessary steps to maintain self-respect of [my] govern-
ment and protect the rights of the Trinidad people. These steps will
include, but will not necessarily be restricted to:
(a) a control point outside of Chaguaramas for checking of all
vehicles and persons entering or leaving the base, including
controls of immigration, health, currency, customs, fire-arms,
narcotics, animal and plant quarantine, licenses of drivers and
cars, registration of cars;
(b) the fencing of Piarco Airport with the necessary precautions
against unauthorized entry or exit:
(c) the boarding and rummaging of all planes, without prejudice
to Trinidad's protest against the practice whereby these planes
have ... arrogated to themselves the right to land at will and act
as they please;
(d) the immediate resumption of Waller Field, Carsen Field and dock
site, with implementation of the plans for their full and permanent
incorporation in the development programme of the country;
(e) the immediate cessation of all duty-free imports into
Chaguaramas and the institution of rigid customs inspection
and examination of all materials consigned to the base;
(f) a ban on all non-licensed and non-registered vehicles on the
roads of the country.93
From Williams's perspective, these were the grievances of his small and
powerless island and the steps that it was prepared to take to regain its soil
and its dignity. Essentially mere irritants or pinpricks, they constituted the
only tangible weapons Williams had at his command. Frustration with his
inability to get the Americans to the conference table accounted for the


--- PAGE 139 ---
126 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
increasing bellicosity of his language. The radiation scare heightened his
feeling of impotence, although he would use it to underscore the abuses his
people had suffered at the hands of foreign powers.
***** Technical expert D. R. Evans began his investigation of Cha-
guaramas on August 24, inspecting the site and holding discussions with
key personnel. He completed his work on September 1 and left for home the
next day. When he submitted his report two weeks later, the Colonial Office
sent an advanced copy to the U.S. State Department in order to "obtain their
urgent confirmation that they have no objection from the security point of
view to its contents being made public." D. H. T. Hildyard of the Foreign
Office instructed the British ambassador to the United States to impress
upon the State Department "that it would be very embarrassing for us, and
would almost certainly make the report suspect, were it to become known in
Trinidad that it had been shown to the Americans before being transmitted
to the Trinidad Government."94
This was, of course, another glaring example of British collusion with the
Americans against Williams and his government. Such behavior was hardly
necessary in this instance because Evans's report was most favorable to the
Americans, the alleged security considerations notwithstanding. Evans dis-
missed the charge that the Americans had removed equipment to avoid their
inspection; rather, some low-power klystron transmitting valves had been
returned to the United States because they were damaged. In addition, he
found that the nearest point to Chaguaramas that could be irradiated was
Morne Pierre, an area that "is just within the hazard zone but the terrain is
difficult and is covered with almost impenetrable jungle." Evans concluded
that "the jungle would provide substantial attenuation of the field and there-
fore even this region must be considered safe." Overall, no radiation hazard
existed on the island, and "on site" precautions "are more than adequate."95
The government of Trinidad and Tobago received the report with some
skepticism. The ministers were not convinced that Morne Pierre was safe,
and chief minister Williams sent a statement to the Colonial Office on Janu-
ary 7, 1958, rejecting Evans's findings. Williams declared that his govern-
ment would take such precautions in the Morne Pierre area that it considered
necessary "and reserves the right to seek expert advice in respect of possible
effects on flora and fauna, the game and hunters from radiation hazard." He


--- PAGE 140 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 127
emphasized his concern about "the constant readiness of the United King-
dom to sacrifice Trinidad's interests to American susceptibilities."96
The secretary of state for the colonies was quick to respond to this charge
even though Williams was obviously on solid ground. He took "grave excep-
tion" to the chief minister's statement of January 7, noting that the United
Kingdom had "on every occasion strongly opposed the Americans when we
felt that Trinidad's interests were at stake." Assuming an imperial stance,
the secretary told Williams that if he issued a public statement on the Evans
Report that was "at variance with expert opinion" and if this alarmed the
citizenry unjustifiably, the United Kingdom "would be compelled to issue a
statement designed to correct public misunderstandings."97
The governments of Trinidad and the United Kingdom also disagreed on
whether to make the Evans Report public. Williams wanted to publish it, as
well as all of his correspondence with the British on the radiation problem.
The Colonial Office only agreed to release the report, probably to deny the
chief minister any political capital that he would earn him from publication
of the correspondence. The British, contrary to their protestations of being
evenhanded, also wished to protect the United States from any embarrass-
ment that might result from public exposure of the documents. On Decem-
ber 18 H. A. A. Hankey of the Colonial Office wrote to Ambassador Logan in
Washington, enclosing a summary of a recent speech that Williams had
given. Hankey thought that the speech gave "an indication of the odium we
are incurring in our efforts to have the [Evans] report presented as favorably
as possible to the Americans. . . . You may be able to use it to counter
the unfortunate impression that we are not being helpful to them on this
issue."98
Such an admission would have been exploited to great effect by Williams
had he known of it. Failing to dissuade him from his intention to publish the
Evans Report and the official correspondence associated with it, Colonial
Office personnel speculated that Williams's attitude reflected his desire to
"get even" with the Americans for rejecting his requests for bilateral talks,
as well as other disappointments. Still, the Foreign Office wanted to take
the wind out of his sails by extracting a promise from the Americans on
their use of tracking equipment at Chaguaramas. As R. H. G. Edmonds
noted in a communication to the Washington embassy: "It would consider-
ably strengthen any statement we make if we could say that the Americans


--- PAGE 141 ---
128 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
have already undertaken to modify their tracking equipment so as to avoid
possible irradiation of the Morne Pierre area."99
The U.S. officials obliged. A week later they were able to assure their
British counterparts that "the U.S. Air Force has not utilized and does not
intend to utilize the radar station at Chaguaramas by emitting signals in the
direction of Morne Pierre. Such use is not necessary to carry out the assigned
functions of this equipment. Therefore no radiation hazard at all can have
possibly existed in that area. However, in order to allay any possible concern
in this respect the equipment will be so modified that no possible signals
can be transmitted to that area."100 There was, of course, no way for the
government of Trinidad to determine whether the Americans kept their
promise or whether this was just another act of deception carried out with
British connivance.
Eric Williams was not privy to British-American collaboration in thwart-
ing some of his government's initiatives. But he smarted over the disap-
pointments he had experienced in the struggle for Chaguaramas and what
he perceived as unsympathetic responses by the United Kingdom to his case.
On January 15,1960, he wrote another stinging letter to the secretary of state
complaining that "we have been left alone to bear the full burden of our
struggle to vindicate our rights. Never at any time has H.M.G. given the
slightest indication that it considers the cause for which we are struggling a
just one."
Williams went on to list a number of initiatives for which he had received
no support from the Colonial Office. Consequently, he wrote: "We have . . .
learnt, Government and population alike, to see in this matter of the return
of Chaguaramas to us by America that H.M.G. is neither mentor, friend, nor
ally, but sees our struggle in the light of considerations of its own, in which
the wishes and aspirations of the people of Trinidad and Tobago and of the
West Indies play an insignificant role."101
No doubt the accusatory tone of this letter further annoyed colonial offi-
cials even though Williams had chastised them on many other occasions.
The chief minister, as he said in the letter, wanted the United Kingdom to
recognize "the inherent justice of our stand." He was convinced that had
Trinidad "been free to deal itself with what are its own problems, we could
by now have achieved a satisfactory and honorable settlement." Finally, he
condemned the British because "the pressures [to which] you have subjected


--- PAGE 142 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS I29
us have created [a] fertile basis for misunderstanding among the popula-
tion, which view matters in much the same way as is expressed here."102
***** Williams's pressure for a new conference, as well as his verbal
assaults on the Americans and the British, had begun to show some glim-
mers of success by mid-1959. On September 6 he reported to a special
Convention of the PNM that his struggle now had "some prospects of
success." He was referring to discussions that he had had with the other
interested governments on the question of separate representation for Trini-
dad and Tobago at the upcoming tripartite conference on the Leased Bases
Agreement. Williams had also met with the parliamentary under secretary of
state for the colonies and two other Colonial Office officials in July to discuss
the agenda for the conference. In August he had held talks with the Ameri-
can consul general and presented his proposals for a joint U.S.-West Indian
base and for the release of all unused leased areas.103
Recognizing the obstacles he confronted in his demand for separate
representation at the tripartite conference, Williams modified his stance. In
September 1959 he informed the Colonial Office that his government would
be prepared to form part of the Federal delegation to the conference pro-
vided that bilateral talks between the United States and Trinidad and Tobago
preceded the conference. The decisions that resulted from those discussions
should constitute the bases for the negotiations at the tripartite conference.
Williams received no immediate response to this offer of compromise, caus-
ing him to complain in December that there was "not one mumbling word"
from the Colonial Office about his proposals. "They will sell their souls, and
ours too if they could get hold of them," in order "to deprive us of the
political credit of settling the Chaguaramas issue," Williams lamented.104
There was positive movement on December 10, when Prime Minister
Grantley Adams announced that the United States, the United Kingdom, and
the West Indies would hold talks on the Leased Bases Agreement. Trinidad
would not be given separate representation but would be included in the
West Indies delegation. Williams, despite his stated willingness to be part of
the Federal delegation, was not pleased with the decision to deny his govern-
ment separate representation and declined to say whether he would partici-
pate. At a press conference on December 12, he claimed ignorance of the
situation. Obviously peeved, Williams groused: "Nobody consulted us ...


--- PAGE 143 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
they can go and discuss what they want. ... I am not prepared to waste my
time on the matter.... As long as there is life, there is Chaguaramas. So let
them go ahead."105
Williams was inclined to see the decision as the result of "intrigue" by
the Federal government to reduce his authority and influence on the issue.
"Whatever intrigues are going on," he said, "we have no part of it."106 This
apparent slight only made Williams more determined to press his case with
greater energy and vituperative language. The massive demonstration and
celebrated march in the rain on April 22,1960, was the high-water mark of
the battle for Chaguaramas that had begun in London in July 1957. Almost
three years had passed, yet its elan had not diminished and Williams had not
flinched, despite the withering criticism of his opponents, American intran-
sigence, and British dissemblance.
Approximately six weeks after the spectacular April 22 show of strength,
the British proposed a series of three conferences to settle the problem. The
first, to be held in London, would engage the Americans and the British,
with the West Indies Federation accorded observer status. The second con-
ference would take place in Trinidad, with the Americans and the Trinida-
dians as the principal participants and the United Kingdom and the West
Indies Federation as observers. The third conference would involve the sign-
ing of a new agreement by the Americans and the Trinidadians. This was
acceptable to Williams and the PNM, so the stage was now set for serious
negotiations by the various governments.
When the London parley began, Williams repeated his opposition to the
terms of the 1941 agreement. He emphasized that a new one must have
the approval of his people and recognize their "fundamental economic in-
terests . . . [and] their efforts to utilize their limited resources, particularly
their land, for the benefit of the population."107 His meaning was unmistak-
able: Williams was now going to extract a price for the continued use of
Trinidadian soil by the Americans. It represented a major shift in his stance,
one that made practical sense but compromised the larger principles that the
struggle represented. On their part, the Americans agreed to release those
areas that were not needed for the operation of the naval base.
The long-awaited second conference was scheduled to take place in To-
bago during November 28-December 9,1960. In preparation for the meet-
ing, the U.S. Department of the Navy sent a report entitled "Strategic Ap-
praisal of Trinidad, B.W.I." to the Department of State. This very detailed
130


--- PAGE 144 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
study emphasized the importance of Trinidad and Tobago to protect the
southern flank of the United States, essential air and strategic shipping
routes, the Panama Canal, and logistic support for U.S. and Allied forces in
the Caribbean area.
The navy recognized, however, that the agreement had to be renegotiated
because the imminent independence of Trinidad and Tobago would render it
obsolete. It is remarkable that even after three years of dispute, the navy
did not understand its nationalist underpinnings and viewed it only as an
expression of "resentment" against the United States. The navy's report
accused "opportunistic politicians, such as Dr. Williams [of winning] popu-
lar support in 'Hate U.S. campaigns,'" and it blamed the British govern-
ment for indirectly supporting Williams by advocating a revision of the
base agreement. Characterizing Eric Williams as "basically anti-U.S." and
"unscrupulous," the report found "it is most unlikely that any negotiations
to which he is a party could produce any agreement satisfactory to both
sides."108
The U.S. Navy's pessimism was unfounded. Eric Williams would later
describe the atmosphere at the Tobago conference as "conspicuous for its
harmony and good will."109 The United States agreed to return about 21,000
acres of unused land at Chaguaramas and other sites to the people of Trini-
dad and Tobago. In the event of an outbreak of general hostilities, however,
1,400 acres at Waller Field and land at Monos Island, Scotland Bay, and
Green Hill Harbour would be made available to the U.S. government. Lands
in the Teteron Bay area could now be used jointly by the government of
Trinidad and the Federal government to train and station Trinidadian and
Federal naval units, marine police forces, and engineering construction
units. The terms of the agreement would be reviewed in 1967. A second
review would take place in 1973, at which time it would be decided whether
the agreement should be terminated. Much would depend on whether there
was any strategic need for the Americans to retain the base. Should both
governments fail to reach an agreement by the end of 1973, the Americans
would have four years to vacate the base.
Williams was able to extract from the Americans economic assistance
amounting to US$30 million, spread over five years, for four major domestic
projects. These included an arts and sciences college at the University of the
West Indies, St. Augustine; the construction of additional roads linking Port
of Spain to Chaguaramas; improvements to the government-run railways;
131


--- PAGE 145 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
and port facilities in Port of Spain. At the end of the conference, an obviously
delighted and relieved Eric Williams assured the delegates of his commit-
ment to execute the letter of the agreement in a "spirit of friendliness and
recognition of mutual needs."110
Understandably, Williams received much popular acclaim after the meet-
ing. His ecstatic supporters greeted him as a hero and the PNM'S General
Council voted to place a plaque honoring him at the party's headquarters. A
politically divided legislature eventually ratified the new agreement, but not
before Williams was excoriated by members of the opposition. Displaying a
shameless political volte-face, the DLP condemned the chief minister for
signing an agreement that allowed the Americans to retain much of the base
at Chaguaramas. Lionel Seukeran, the major opposition spokesperson in the
debate, characterized Williams's action as "a gross betrayal of the people of
Trinidad and the West Indies and a complete sell out to the Americans who
will now determine how long they will want to stay on these shores." Wil-
liams had treated the Americans with "sarcastic rudeness" but had done "an
acrobatic summersault" at the conference, selling out "Trinidad soil to the
Americans as though he had a deed for all of it in his own right." Seukeran
maintained that the "deal" involved "going down on our knees begging for
American dollars."
According to Seukeran, the agreement itself represented "the worst con-
tractual obligation that any country could have possibly entered into with any
foreign country." He noted that other nations, such as Morocco and Pan-
ama, had received more favorable terms from the Americans for the use of
their soil or water. Their leaders, he said, "were men of high caliber, sitting
at [the] international level, dealing with problems like civilized people, de-
manding benefits for a country not like a mendicant but of right." Williams
had been duped at the conference, Seukeran declared, and the result was "a
damnable fraud, a wicked betrayal inflicted on the people of the country."111
The DLP was not alone in its censure of the agreement, but it had a
political ax to grind as the major opposition party. Some people, such as
C. L. R. James, opposed the continued American occupation of the island.
Others were dissatisfied with the size of the economic package. Chastened
by these criticisms, Williams complained to William Christensen of the U.S.
mission that "you have no idea how vicious the Opposition is about the
Chaguaramas Agreement." When Christensen advised Williams not to pay
much attention to such invective because it was animated by domestic politi-
132


--- PAGE 146 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 133
cal considerations, the chief minister exclaimed, "It's the people, too," add-
ing, "They are concerned because they feel we are letting them down."112
***** The resolution of the Chaguaramas dispute helped to produce a
dramatic change in the relationship between the United States and Trinidad.
Although there were some prickly moments as the two governments dick-
ered over the economic assistance package, by 1964 the U.S. embassy in Port
of Spain was noting an improvement in bilateral relations. A 1965 embassy
survey attributed this to the US$30 million grant-in-aid provided by the
United States, which "has led the government to cease its attempt to manu-
facture public agitation against the presence of the U.S. base in Trinidad."
The American ambassador was obviously pleased with "the openly pro-
Western policy by Trinidad on most matters, including Cuba and Guiana."
Similarly, he was gratified by Trinidad's "cooperation on anti-subversive
surveillance activities in the Caribbean."113
The impression that these comments may create, to be sure, is that Wil-
liams's support of policies important to the United States had been pur-
chased. Although it is certainly accurate to maintain that tensions had eased
between the two nations, Trinidad's foreign policy was driven by an assess-
ment of its own interests. Inasmuch as Williams was an ardent anticommu-
nist who distrusted Fidel Castro's motives and personally disliked both
Forbes Burnham and Cheddi Jagan of British Guiana as well as disagreed
with their policies, it is not surprising that he did not support them on the
international stage. Trinidad and Tobago had only become independent in
August 1962, so its foreign policy was still taking shape in 1965. Conse-
quently, it hardly made sense to imply, as the American ambassador did, that
Williams had become more compliant and that his pro-Western stance was
bought. The fact is that Eric Williams really had no extensive foreign policy
record in 1965 to defend, modify, or change.
In an attempt to keep Williams as an ally in the Cold War, the Americans
also made conciliatory gestures to him. The U.S. Department of State was
concerned in 1965 when it appeared that Williams might establish diplo-
matic relations with the Soviet Union. In a memorandum to U.S. national
security adviser McGeorge Bundy on August 28,1965, the State Department
observed: "The Soviet Union is currently courting Prime Minister Williams
with the probable intent of concluding arrangements for the establishment
of a Soviet Mission in Trinidad. We are seeking means to strengthen Wil-


--- PAGE 147 ---
134 134 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
Hams'
 normally pro-Western attitude and to discourage any Trinidad-USSR
relationship."114
The rapprochement with the United States was further aided by Wil-
liams's break with his erstwhile mentor C. L. R. James. The "sometime
Trotskeyist," as the American consul general described him, had been in-
vited back to Trinidad from England in 1958. After his return, the chief
minister appointed him managing editor of the Nation, a position he held
until 1960, when he resigned after the paper was criticized at the PNM'S
Fourth Annual Convention. As managing editor of the Nation and a close
adviser to Williams, James had played a major role in the formulation of
policy on the Chaguaramas issue. In discussing his break with Williams,
James accused the chief minister of being "callous" and denounced what he
saw as a trend toward authoritarianism in the country. He was not pleased
when Williams announced in mid-1960 that Trinidad was allied with the
West, adding that such an alliance was not a subject for debate. Such a
posture, James charged, was a "piece of political gangsterism." With a critic
of such towering intellectual stature removed from his inner circle, and
ultimately from the country, Williams's position on foreign policy issues,
particularly Trinidad's relationship with the United States, and his fervent
anticommunism gained an unquestioned ascendancy.115
Three years after the landmark Tobago Agreement had been hammered
out, U.S. defense officials began to reconsider the strategic value of the
Chaguaramas facilities. Consequently, for the first time they began to enter-
tain the prospect of releasing the naval base to the government of Trinidad
and Tobago. Writing to Edwin L. Sykes of the Commonwealth Relations
Office on December 3,1964, the British high commissioner in Port of Spain,
Norman Costar, doubted that Williams "would want to see the U.S. Navy
move from Trinidad," regarding the base as a source of stability for the
country. Costar said that Williams had told him that if there was "army
trouble" in Trinidad, he would not hesitate to seek help from the U.S.
Marines at Chaguaramas. Since Trinidad "gets American money because of
the base," Costar thought that that would be an important consideration. On
the other hand, he observed, the value of the base would be "a windfall" to
Trinidad.116
Understandably, Eric Williams kept a watchful eye on the ways in which
the Americans were utilizing Chaguaramas. He told Costar on November 10,


--- PAGE 148 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 135
1965, that since they were not using all of the land area at the base, they
would have to release the land he needed to build a hotel, new houses of
Parliament, or the supreme court. Two days later, Costar consulted with the
American ambassador, who told him that the base was then, in the words of
Costar, "of very little, if any value to the United States" except for its "naviga-
tional facilities" and its value as a missile tracking station. Although Costar
did not believe that a U.S. withdrawal from the base was imminent, he got
the "distinct feeling that the Americans had now reconciled themselves to
giving up the bulk of the base if any pressure was brought to bear upon them
by Dr. Williams to this end." Costar repeated his view that Williams would
be disappointed if the Americans left, because that would mean the end of
U.S. aid that was linked to the base agreement. Williams would, however,
"nibble at specific areas of the base when he has a use for them."117
The end came rather quickly. By early 1966 the press in Trinidad had
begun to report that the U.S. Navy planned to relinquish substantial areas of
the base to Trinidad and Tobago. This was not denied in official circles. The
announcement when it came on February 5 was not unexpected:
The Government of the United States and the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago have agreed that the United States will release a major portion of
the Chaguaramas Defense Area to the Government of Trinidad and To-
bago by July, 1967. The United States proposes to begin withdrawal in mid
1966 and to phase withdrawal so that the areas will be available to the
Government of Trinidad and Tobago as they are vacated. Authorities of
Trinidad and Tobago will be working together to provide for the orderly
transfer of areas involved and hold necessary discussions.118
The Americans, however, continued to occupy the missile tracking station as
well as a navigational station.
Throughout the prolonged struggle for Chaguaramas, Williams's main
weapons were his sense of history, his harsh rhetoric, and his capacity to
keep the dispute alive and his supporters engaged for so long a period. The
conflict would have been less acrimonious, and may even have been of
shorter duration, had it not become such a divisive issue in the domestic
politics of Trinidad and Tobago. The Americans clung to the vain hope that
Eric Williams would somehow lose his political base and would be defeated
at the polls. They were convinced—and assured—by the DLP that it would


--- PAGE 149 ---
136 THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS
be more accommodating to their position. But Williams's core supporters
never lost confidence in him and never wavered in their embrace of the cause
he promoted so vociferously and passionately.
The Americans were slow to understand the intensity of the feeling be-
hind the Chaguaramas controversy and that the political mood of the West
Indian people was changing. The struggle for Chaguaramas became part
of a larger assault on colonialism, and the forces it unleashed could not
be contained. In a speech at Arima on July 17, 1959, Williams had made a
clear connection between the Chaguaramas dispute and the battle against
colonialism:
When we deal with Chaguaramas, we are not merely dealing with what
has become today the symbol of self government and the symbol of
independence for the Federation. What all this means, ladies and gentle-
men, is that we in Trinidad and Tobago, you in the West Indies, have
begun a long overdue attempt which India has started, which Ghana has
started, which all the former colonial territories have already begun—we
too in Trinidad and Tobago are well on the road—we who have been
passive agents of a history made and written for us by other people, we in
the PNM symbolize today the determination of Arima and Trinidad and
Tobago to write their own history, and to keep it in the democratic tradi-
tion of which we are the proud standard bearers.119
Imperious refusals by the Americans to conduct direct talks with the West
Indians only further inflamed passions. Williams skillfully played on these
emotions, manipulating them to bring his mighty adversary to the con-
ference table and to concede the legitimacy of his claims. America's intran-
sigence was strengthened by the mixed messages it received from some of
the other Caribbean leaders. Their private communications with U.S. offi-
cials and their public rhetoric often gave the impression that the Chaguara-
mas dispute was being driven by the need for U.S. funds and that their
principles, to the degree that any existed, were for sale.
The Americans, and British officials as well, speculated that Williams
would settle for an appropriate price. But there is no evidence that he made
any such overtures. In fact, Williams insisted that Trinidad's national integ-
rity had no price. His acceptance of a U.S. grant-in-aid of $30 million at the
Tobago settlement was an act of pragmatism on the one hand and of real
politik on the other. The Americans, if they wanted to remain at Chaguara-


--- PAGE 150 ---
THE STRUGGLE FOR CHAGUARAMAS 137
mas, would have to pay Trinidad for the privilege. But there is no doubt that
the acceptance of the money compromised the lofty moral legitimacy and
idealism of Trinidad's very just claims.
Yet the Chaguaramas battle was hardly about a crass materialism. Eric
Williams was on the right side of history when he demanded that his peo-
ple's voice be heard on the important question of the alienation of their soil,
their birthright. Those who opposed him so vociferously were clinging to a
historical moment that was passing. By privileging U.S. claims over their
own, these people were demonstrating a lingering affection for the Massa
who Williams had declared dead in 1961. In the end, the Americans' aban-
donment of Chaguaramas in 1967 was anticlimactic, given the intensity
of their struggle to keep it. After a prolonged and debilitating David and
Goliath-like conflict, Eric Williams had achieved the greatest victory of his
political career.


--- PAGE 151 ---
CHAPTER 4
ERIC WILLIAMS AND
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
***** The letter was not entirely unexpected. Still, its arrival on Har-
old MacMillan's desk on that November day in 1962 created a high degree of
annoyance. "Dear Prime Minister" the letter opened coldly, a pointed depar-
ture from the more fraternal salutation, "My dear Prime Minister," that had
graced earlier communications. "I acknowledge with many thanks your
letter of November 15 in which you replied to my observations on the aide
memoire from the Commonwealth Relations Secretary in respect of eco-
nomic aid to Trinidad and Tobago," the text began. "The Cabinet has en-
dorsed my recommendation which I conveyed to you in my letter of Novem-
ber 5," it continued. Then came the bombshell. "In the circumstances I
must, with regret, decline your government's offer for the reasons I have
already indicated," the letter ended. It was signed simply, "Eric Williams,
Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago."1
This extraordinary letter, unprecedented in the history of Britain's rela-
tionship with its colonies and former colonies, was a haughty rejection of
the parting gift that newly independent countries received from the former
mother country. Known as the "golden handshake," the gift was designed to
be an expression of Britain's goodwill to the new nation as well as to help the
former colony grapple with the economic problems it would now have to
face on its own. Beginning in the 1950s, the United Kingdom had granted
independence to Ghana, Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Uganda, Ceylon, and
Tanganyika, and, except for Ceylon, all had accepted the golden handshake
without disputing its nature and size. Nothing in Britain's experience with
these territories had prepared it for Williams's rejection of the gift and the
lengthy and bitter row that ensued.
Eric Williams had spent much of his adult life researching, writing, and
speaking about the unequal relationships between imperial countries and


--- PAGE 152 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
their colonies. As a persistent foe of colonialism, he maintained that the
imperial powers bore the principal responsibility for the economic condi-
tions of their colonies. The nation of Trinidad and Tobago was, to be sure,
not poor when its per capita income was measured against those of other
developing countries at the time. Of the British colonies that received inde-
pendence up to that time, Uganda had a per capita income of £24, Nigeria
£30, Jamaica £157, and Trinidad and Tobago, £229.2 But Williams was con-
vinced that Britain should provide a generous golden handshake to his
country since it had not been a major beneficiary of aid in the years prior to
independence.
Williams had known, of course, that he had to make a convincing case to
the British government if Trinidad was to receive a generous golden hand-
shake. In a letter to the secretary of state for the colonies in March 1962, he
exploited the fear generated by the Cold War by invoking the specter of
communism as a basis for significant economic assistance. "Quite frankly, I
see our role as an independent country in this light," Williams wrote. "The
crucial issue is defence with Trinidad and Tobago sitting astride the triangle
of pro-Soviet influence from Cuba to British Guiana and across to Venezuela
with its communist minority." As Williams saw it, the primary challenge that
the new nation would confront was how to "develop the expanding democ-
racy of Trinidad and Tobago, both political and economic, as to make it an
obvious and visible contrast to these three countries." He reminded the
British secretary that there was already "enough inflammable material and
sufficient arsonists all over the Caribbean, without necessarily adding to
both in Trinidad and Tobago."3
To help meet governmental obligations in Trinidad and Tobago, Williams
requested an Exchequer loan of £5 million "possibly in anticipation of United
Kingdom economic aid on independence."4 There was no immediate re-
sponse to the request, but in an exchange of telegrams on April 26 and May 1,
1962, Williams and the secretary of state agreed that any discussion of
economic and financial issues should occur after the Trinidad and Tobago
independence conference scheduled to take place in June. In anticipation of
that meeting, on June 18 Williams submitted a document, entitled "Equip-
ment for Independence," to the United Kingdom outlining Trinidad's case
for substantial British support on the occasion of its independence. This
carefully prepared statement, the tenor of which was unusual in its stridency,
declared: "The concept of a 'parting gift' to a 'departing colony' has no place
139


--- PAGE 153 ---
140 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
in the thinking of the Government and people of Trinidad and Tobago in
respect of economic assistance from the United Kingdom." Ominously, the
document continued: "What we seek, and regard as not unreasonable to
expect, is to be adequately equipped for the journey on which we embark
when we join the Commonwealth Caravan." Williams deftly raised the issue
of British economic negligence by acknowledging that "it is of little value ...
to question why we do not now possess all that we now require to play our
part" in "ensuring the continuous progress of the Commonwealth," as "this
is no time for recrimination over past neglect."
This reminder of "past neglect" must have stung colonial officials as
much as similar sentiments articulated by Williams in the past had done.
Reiterating his rejection of a "golden" or "any other kind of handshake,"
Williams asserted that his new nation had no desire to be "pensioned off" or
"compensated for loss of office." He merely wished to be "equipped" with
the material resources without which the "spirit" and the "determination"
of his people could not reach their possibilities.5
The premier elaborated on the issue of imperial support for Trinidad and
Tobago in a statement to the Colonial Office dated July 9,1962. He began by
expressing his "disappointment and concern" with Britain's tendency "to
regard the efforts made during recent years by the people of Trinidad and
Tobago to help themselves, as in some measure reducing their eligibility
for United Kingdom assistance." Here, of course, he was referring to his
achievements in office since 1956, when he became chief minister, and these
were considerable. He went on to press his case for significant assistance by
pointing out that "it would be unfortunate indeed if the view were to gain
currency that, on independence when the responsibilities are greatly in-
creased, a Commonwealth country could expect little assistance from the
British people because, during the period of its colonial existence, it had
achieved by its own efforts some success in providing necessary but hitherto
neglected facilities."
This biting and accusatory document continued: "If the achievements of
Trinidad and Tobago in the sphere of economic and social development
during the past five years are to provide an argument for rejecting the new
nation's request for reasonable assistance then, at least for the benefit of
those territories still on the road to independence, it should be made abun-
dantly clear that self-help is a disqualification and that the United Kingdom
would prefer to help those who do not help themselves."


--- PAGE 154 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 141
Williams then enjoined the British government to "recognize the need to
assure Trinidad and Tobago of the means not merely of maintaining the level
of development already achieved but of raising it to the point where self
sustained growth becomes a real possibility." As he had emphasized in his
June 18 statement, his government needed the resources:
To secure the safety of the nation.
To strengthen its social and economic foundations.
To speed the development of the skills and capacities of its people.
Trinidad's independence coincided with the end of a five-year develop-
ment program initiated by the Williams government in 1958. As much as
981/2 percent of the funds for this program had come from the resources of
Trinidad and Tobago to construct new schools, hospitals, and a variety of
capital works. Williams wanted to initiate a new five-year development pro-
gram in 1962, but one that had fundamentally different sources of funding.
First, the plan called for a greater recourse to external loan markets. Second,
its implementation would create a large gap between needs and resources
that could be satisfied only by external aid. Williams thought that indepen-
dence afforded "a conventional opportunity for seeking some of the needed
external aid from the former metropolitan country."
Under the circumstances, Williams provided the United Kingdom with
a detailed plan outlining his country's specific needs and the amount of
money required to fulfill each objective. This included the creation of a
defense force for the new nation; the construction of houses for those who
needed them; the development of the town of Scarborough in Tobago; aid
for the national airlines, the British West Indian Airways (BWIA); support
for the University of the West Indies; and funds for the expansion of tele-
phone service in Trinidad and Tobago.
To meet his defense needs, Williams requested £750,000 in grants for
four fully equipped coastal vessels and four light aircraft, as well as funds
to train personnel. To finance the construction of six thousand houses,
he asked for an interest-free loan of £3 million and an additional loan of
£2 million at a rate not exceeding 2 percent per annun, with both loans
repayable in twenty years. Williams noted that housing construction would
have a "multiplier-effect" because of its "immediate impact" on the problem
of unemployment and its stimulation of consumer demand—both resulting
in economic expansion and growth.


--- PAGE 155 ---
142 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
In making his case for funds for the "redevelopment" of the town of
Scarborough, the premier called attention to the "consequences of decades
of neglect." Lower Scarborough was "unplanned, cramped and congested,
badly drained in certain areas and totally incapable of accommodating satis-
factorily the volume of pedestrian and vehicular traffic which flow daily into
it." Williams believed that Scarborough, as a seaport town, had enormous
tourist potential. To improve the town, therefore, he wanted to acquire
"appropriate" areas and effect a "physical reconstruction." He estimated the
development costs to be £1.3 million and the acquisition costs, £1.8 million.
The United Kingdom would underwrite the development costs, and a long-
term interest-free loan would fund the acquisition costs.
Williams also needed assistance for the regional carrier of the British
territories in the Caribbean, the BWIA. When the carrier had fallen on hard
times, the government of Trinidad and Tobago assumed responsibility for
its operation. Williams emphasized the operational losses that the carrier
had experienced and the apparent unwillingness of the other islands to share
the financial burden. Accordingly, he requested that Britain arrange for the
transfer to BWIA the aircraft that it held on loan from the British Overseas
Airways Corporation (BOAC). Moreover, he urged that Barbados and the
Leeward and Windward Islands be allowed to become partners with Trini-
dad and the BOAC in the "ownership and operation" of BWIA. Detailed
estimates of the cost of his requests were being prepared, and he hoped that
Britain would "bear a reasonable portion of the cost of such operations as a
contribution to the economic development of the islands."
With the independence of Jamaica and Trinidad, unspent funds allocated
to them under the Colonial Development and Welfare Program would have
to be returned to the United Kingdom, since the two entities had graduated
from colonial status. Williams was troubled that £133,000 allocated to the
University of the West Indies on Trinidad's behalf would revert to Britain. In
his June 18 statement, he had asked that those funds be credited to Trinidad
and Tobago in addition to a grant of £100,000 to enable the university's
Faculty of Agriculture, located in St. Augustine, to create a research farm.
Finally, Williams maintained that an Exchequer loan from the United King-
dom of £2.5 million would permit the new nation to acquire the existing
telephone system. This would expand telephone service to meet the needs of
an independent country.
In submitting these requests for £2.283 million in grants and £9.3 mil-


--- PAGE 156 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 143
lion in loans (excluding the cost of support for BWIA), Williams indicated
that Trinidad's new five-year development plan would cost £50 million, or
£10 million per annum. His rough estimates for the major areas of expendi-
ture were as follows:
Agriculture £4,000,000
Industrial Development 8,000,000
Roads and Bridges 3,500,000
Electricity 10,000,000
Sewerage 4,500,000
Education 3,000,000
Water 3,000,000
Housing 4,000,000
Seen in the context of the overall cost of the development plan, Williams
was only asking the United Kingdom to underwrite slightly more than one-
fifth of the amount. His statement explained that the projects for which he
needed support "represent a relatively small proportion of the program of
activities which are not merely desirable in themselves but essential to the
preservation of the new nation as, perhaps, the major stabilizing element in
the Caribbean region." Speaking as a historian, Williams assured British
officials that their assistance would enable his nation "to play with in-
creased success the role which history, and its own efforts, seems to have
determined for it." Sensing that his requests were probably extravagant in
view of the modest support Trinidad and Tobago had previously received
from the mother country, Williams urged the government to resist, "in its
own interests, to apply to Trinidad and Tobago the same criteria of assis-
tance it uses elsewhere." The ardent nationalist concluded: "It is no spirit of
national conceit that Trinidad and Tobago claims for itself a unique position
in the Commonwealth,... a unique position justifies unique treatment."6
Colonial officials must have experienced apoplectic fits on reading these
detailed and often sharply worded documents. Although they had grown
accustomed to Williams's caustic comments about imperial behavior and
neglect, these documents were requesting the kind of financial assistance
that they were unwilling to imagine, much less contemplate. Williams was
mindful of the lukewarm response to his earlier request for financial sup-
port. The under secretary of state for the colonies, Hugh Eraser, had told
him on July 10 that the golden handshake would be in the vicinity of £2 mil-


--- PAGE 157 ---
144 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
lion. Two days later, Williams requested a short-term loan of £589,000 to
repay a housing debt to the defunct West Indies Federation, but the decision
on this loan had been shelved.7 An angry and disappointed Eric Williams
responded by telling the airport audience that welcomed him home on July
13 that "in the United Kingdom everybody was absolutely fed up with the
West Indies." Indeed, the British had an "absolute contempt for the West
Indies." He admonished his greeters to "start off your independence under-
standing Britain is not going to help you. They have no interest in the West
Indies whatsoever."8
As usual, colonial officials were annoyed by such outbursts. Williams was
reacting to the recognition that Britain was unlikely to provide the kind of
financial support he was requesting for the new nation. His statement at the
airport was an exaggeration, but it was not untrue. Edwin L. Sykes at the
Colonial Office suggested that officials need not take Williams's comments
"tragically." According to Sykes, there were even "some advantages in get-
ting it made known to the people of Trinidad that independence does mean
independence, and that independence means getting a certain amount of
'kicks' and not additional amounts of 'ha'pence.' "9 Had he seen this memo-
randum, Eric Williams would no doubt have responded that the entire colo-
nial experience had been characterized by "kicks." He would have reminded
Sykes of the role that the colonies had played in the construction and growth
of the British economy. Such reminders would not have served any purpose,
however, as colonial officials had long since decided to be parsimonious in
their dealings with Trinidad and Tobago.
***** In preparation for the Independence Conference to be held in
late May and early June 1962, colonial officials informed the British delega-
tion that the criterion for assistance to Trinidad "is need and on this basis
alone Trinidad, as the wealthiest per head of the West Indian islands, has
little claim on Her Majesty's Government." The memorandum, which would
become official policy, emphasized that "our object, therefore, will be to give
the least we can," adding, "if Trinidad wants independence, especially in a
hurry, our aim should be to let it be on our own financial terms." The
officials admitted, however, that the government had not yet given any de-
tailed consideration "to the sort of financial settlement which we would
hope to get away with for Trinidad."10 Clearly, there was an enormous gulf
between Trinidad's expansive assessment of need and expectations, on the


--- PAGE 158 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 145
one hand, and the British government's desire to give the departing colony
as little as possible, on the other.
The colonial officials could not, on their own, determine the size and
composition of the golden handshake. The Department of the Treasury had
to approve any grant, and it had its own ideas on the dimensions of the
financial package. In early August, a few weeks before Trinidad formally
received its independence, the Colonial Office submitted its proposals for a
financial settlement to the Department of the Treasury. The proposals in-
cluded a gift of £500,000 from unspent Colonial Development and Welfare
funds, as well as a gift of four Viscount aircraft that were then on charter to
BWIA, with an estimated value of £500,000.11 In addition, Trinidad and
Tobago would receive a development loan of £1 million. As paltry as this
potential offer seemed, the even more parsimonious Treasury rejected it but
endorsed the Colonial Development and Welfare Grant of £500,000 and a
development loan of the same amount. Recognizing the political difficulties
involved in making such a Scrooge-like offer to Williams, and fearful of his
wrath, the Colonial Office demurred. J. D. Higman, one of the officials,
called the Treasury's proposals "derisory" in a departmental minute.12
Duncan Sandys, the colonial secretary, was equally appalled. In a letter to
John Boyd-Carpenter, secretary of the Treasury, he complained that the Trea-
sury offer is "one that I cannot put to the Trinidad government. If I did, it
would virtually certainly be rejected." Sandys noted that he was mindful of
the fact that the country faced a development deficit of £5.6 million for the
current year and £25 million over a five-year period. But although Trinidad
was "imprudent" in its plans and spending decisions, he argued that "we
must offer a sum which, while admittedly only going a small way towards
bridging this year's deficit, will at least be regarded as a steadying hand to
Trinidad in its descent to realism." He firmly believed that Eric Williams
would consider £500,000 in "new money" as "little better than a calculated
snub" and that Britain's relationship with the new nation would be seriously
affected. To prevent Williams from viewing the offer to his country as "dis-
criminatory" vis-a-vis the £1.25 million given to Jamaica, he urged the gift of
the Viscount aircraft to enable Trinidad and Tobago and BWIA to continue
service to the Little Eight islands. Sandys also supported a development loan
of £1 million in addition to the Colonial Development and Welfare Grant
balance of £500,000.13
The Treasury responded with a compromise. The new offer included


--- PAGE 159 ---
146 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
the Colonial Development and Welfare Grant of £500,000 and the choice
of either a £1 million loan—without the Viscount aircraft—or a £500,000
loan with the aircraft. Secretary Sandys made a counterproposal: a loan of
£750,000, the Colonial Development and Welfare Grant, and the aircraft. He
noted that Williams, who would be attending the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers' Conference in September, "is coming over here in a difficult
mood and I am naturally anxious to avoid superimposing a row with Trini-
dad on this issue on top of the difficult negotiations which will inevitably
arise during the Prime Minister's meeting."14
As the internal discussions continued, the Treasury reported that the
unspent portion of the Colonial Development Welfare Grant was likely to
amount to £375,000, substantially lower than had been estimated earlier. In
addition, the Colonial Office discovered that there were complications aris-
ing from Trinidad's debt to the defunct Federation of the West Indies. In the
opinion of the Colonial officials, Trinidad owed £75,000 toward the defense
expenditure of the federation, though Williams had declined to accept that
figure. H. A. F. Rumbold of the Colonial Office held the view that if Trinidad
refused to pay its share of the defense costs, Jamaica was likely to follow suit.
If that happened, the total assets of the federation would be insufficient to
meet its liabilities unless Britain met the deficit.
The second complicating factor was that Trinidad had obtained a short-
term loan from the federation to construct houses for the Federal officials
who resided on the island. These funds had to be repaid, but Williams
lacked the resources to do so. Under the circumstances, he requested a
short-term loan from the United Kingdom and, according to Rumbold,
implied "that this should be additional to whatever items were included in
the Independence Settlement."15 Colonial officials recommended against
granting a loan to defray the housing debt. Yet they wanted to make the
golden handshake dependent on Trinidad's discharge of its obligations to
the federation. Because Williams was contesting the Colonial Office's posi-
tion on the extent of his government's obligations to the defunct federation,
the matter was certain to exacerbate tensions and invite a great deal of
acrimony.
When Williams attended his first Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Con-
ference in mid-September, he still had no clear idea about the nature and
size of the golden handshake. At the end of the conference, he met with
Duncan Sandys on September 21,1962. Although the parting gift was on the


--- PAGE 160 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 147
minds of both men, it was never discussed. Colonial officials would later
complain that Williams had delivered a lengthy "monologue" on the Little
Eight, preventing them from raising the issue. H. A. F. Rumbold recalled
that the Commonwealth secretary "was going to raise this matter but could
not get a word in edgeways."16
Williams was, nevertheless, very upset by the failure of the colonial offi-
cials to address the issues that he had raised in the detailed statements that
he had submitted to them in June and July. His irritation with the officials
showed when he declined their invitation to meet with them on his return to
London from a trip to continental Europe after the Prime Ministers' Con-
ference had concluded. Not until October 30, roughly eighteen weeks after
Williams had submitted his "Equipment for Independence" statement on
June 18, did colonial officials inform him about the nature of the golden
handshake
In an aide-memoire from the Colonial Office, Williams learned that Trini-
dad would receive a Commonwealth Assistance Loan of £1 million for the
"purchase of British goods and services" required for development. The
loan would be repayable over a period of twenty-five years and the interest
rate would be adjustable; the amount of interest would depend on the exist-
ing rate at each drawing on the loan (according to the aide-memoire, the
current rate was 57/8 percent). In addition, Trinidad would pay a "manage-
ment charge" of 1/4 of 1 percent. In order to provide the loan, the British
government "would wish to agree with the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago the purposes to which the loan would be applied and the phasing of
disbursements from it."
The United Kingdom would make a gift of the unspent portion of the
Colonial Development and Welfare funds that had been allocated to Trini-
dad. The nation would also receive that proportion of the funds earmarked
for regional services, such as the University of the West Indies and its teach-
ing hospital, but Trinidad would have to contribute at least equal sums to
these services. The total amount of the grant "on present information" was
about £250,000, a far cry from the original estimate of £500,000. The aide-
memoire also provided for the gift of the four Viscount aircraft, now esti-
mated to cost £800,000, a wildly inflated figure. These offers were made
contingent on Trinidad's repayment of its debt to the former West Indies
Federation. Finally, the United Kingdom rejected Trinidad's application for
an Exchequer loan of £600,000 that Williams had submitted in March.17


--- PAGE 161 ---
148 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
***** The very disappointing aide-memoire dashed Williams's hope
of significant economic aid. Two months earlier he had told the British High
Commission that the United Kingdom should invest substantially in Trini-
dad to make it a showpiece for successful British decolonization. When he
visited Williams on the night of November 1, 1962, Sir Stephen Luke, the
Federal interim commissioner, found him "depressed, morose, and more
critical than ever of what he considers our 'niggardliness' towards Trinidad
on independence."18
Yet Williams lost no time in attacking the terms of the aide- memoire,
which obviously were considerably less than the proposals that he had made
in June and July for millions of pounds in gifts and loans. In an angry letter
of November 5 to Prime Minister Harold MacMillan, Williams asserted that,
except for the aircraft "write off," the proposals in the aide-memoire "ap-
pear to have been drawn up with little reference" to those that he had
submitted. "You will readily understand, therefore," "my inability to give
them serious consideration."
Williams rejected the "unfortunate implication" that the proposals were
conditional on Trinidad's assumption of "certain outstanding obligations"
relating to defense arrangements for the former Federation of the West
Indies. He had already "firmly refuted" those claims, and he did not propose
to "revive the discussions on this particular subject." But he was prepared to
refund to the United Kingdom the amount that his government had bor-
rowed for the construction of housing for the Federal officials, "including,
of course, that portion that might ordinarily have been regarded as repre-
senting the share of Trinidad and Tobago."
Williams was especially distressed that the British government had not
responded to his request for a £5 million Exchequer loan to tackle the
growing problem of unemployment in his country "and to forestall the
inevitable threat of political instability." He added: "If the Aide Memoire is
the answer, it would then become a serious matter if the question of eco-
nomic aid to a former colony should end merely in the old-fashioned colo-
nial policy of providing a colonial market for British industry and employ-
ment for British workers." Thus, the author of Capitalism and Slavery linked
the past to the present, invoking the specter of colonial exploitation and its
relationship to the construction of the British economy. It was a calculated
assault on the British government and its people for centuries of colonial


--- PAGE 162 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 149
oppression and a blunt reminder that those days were passing. Williams was
advising his Cabinet to reject the aide-memoire since it did not, in fact, offer
"economic aid."19
Calling Williams's letter "discourteous," seasoned officials could not
recall seeing anything like it emanating from a colonial or, in this case,
postcolonial leader. On November 15, ten days after writing to MacMillan,
Williams continued his attack at a press conference in London. He declared
that "Trinidad and Tobago is the only country reaching independence with-
out having Britain extend a hand with something in the palm. We are the
only country attaining independence within the Commonwealth which has
received no financial aid, in loans or grants from Britain." "But," he added,
"we are quite happy to have it remain so." This, of course, was not entirely
accurate. Neither India nor Ceylon had received a golden handshake, and
Trinidad had just received an aide-memoire, however unattractive and unac-
ceptable the terms.
Williams reserved some of his most biting comments for the clause in the
aide-memoire that required Trinidad to purchase British goods with the
funds it borrowed. He observed: "If aid fails to create employment in the
country to which it is given, then it is a trap.... Economic aid limited to the
purchase of the goods and services of other people is nothing more than a
perpetuation of colonialism."20
Five days later, on November 20, Williams told an audience at the London
School of Economics: "The West Indies are in the position of an orange. The
British have sucked it dry and their sole concern today is that they should not
slip and get damaged on the peel." Vituperative comments such as these, no
matter how justified, did nothing to improve the atmosphere of the discus-
sions on the golden handshake. But Williams was not likely to hold his
tongue, especially where Trinidad's interests were concerned and when the
metropolitan power appeared to be shirking its responsibilities as he saw
them. Thus, on November 25, he informed West Indian students in London:
The [British] offer is quite unacceptable and we would prefer not to have
it. ... The British offer was not worth the time and energy we spent on
[the] preparation of Trinidad's case.... The aid offer which I have turned
down amounted to aid to Britain rather than to Trinidad. . . . People talk
to me of giving aid in the form of goods and services. Goods and services


--- PAGE 163 ---
150 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
for what? To keep people unemployed in Trinidad and Tobago? What is
this? I do not propose to accept any concept of the Commonwealth which
means common wealth for Britain and common poverty for us.
Williams was equally incensed by the stipulation that he submit his de-
velopment plans to British officials for their examination before his govern-
ment could qualify for a loan. Such a request was probably justified from the
perspective of the lender. But it conveyed the wrong message to a sensitive
new prime minister who had spent much of his life criticizing colonial rule.
Speaking to the students on November 25, Williams asked: "Must we, in
order to get economic aid, have to submit our affairs to the countries giving
aid, when we have our own economists working out our plan? Is colonialism
to continue? If so, on what terms?"21
The British government was in no mood to make any concessions to
Trinidad, and Williams had gone too far out on a limb to retreat, even if he
were so inclined. The two countries remained adamant, and the former
colony was now set to reject the former mother country's gift publicly and
ostentatiously. On November 26, with his Cabinet's approval, Williams for-
mally declined to accept the golden handshake, initiating a bitter year-long
dispute between Trinidad and the United Kingdom.
In a vain attempt to mollify Williams, Prime Minister MacMillan sent him
a letter on December 2 explaining his government's inability to change the
terms of the aide-memoire. The United Kingdom had "many other commit-
ments," and "in deciding what we can do for one country we need to bear in
mind its relationship with what we do for others." MacMillan was satisfied
that "the terms of the financial settlement offered to Trinidad are in line with
those offered to, and accepted by other independent territories."22
Neither Williams nor British officials showed any sign of compromising
in the aftermath of the rejection letter of November 26. Colonial officials
were particularly displeased when Williams ignored their appeals and pub-
lished the text of his letters to MacMillan. In doing so, they argued, he had
violated the customary norms of conduct of Commonwealth prime minis-
ters inasmuch as correspondence between them was never made public. The
day before he rejected the golden handshake, Williams gave a speech at
Woodford Square castigating the British for their treatment of his country.
According to the Trinidad Guardian, Williams said that "he wanted everybody
to understand that the Government never asked the United Kingdom for one


--- PAGE 164 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 151
single penny": 'We said, 'Loan us some money to start and we would pay
back.' Your own money would be voted year after year by the Minister of
Finance and approved by the Parliament to pay back that loan which would
help us to build houses and rehabilitate the population. We are entitled to
ask for that. And if they say 'no' then, after all, it is their money and they do
not have to live in damn barrack yards."23 Williams, to be sure, had re-
quested grants, but if the newspaper report is accurate, this was an example
of his rhetorical excess.
Both governments sought to embroider their respective positions. It was
an extraordinary spectacle of the former mother country and its tiny former
colony locked in a dispute, each trying to second-guess and outmaneuver the
other. The personality of Eric Williams remained at center stage. British
officials tried to develop a strategy for dealing with him, and members of his
Cabinet sought in subtle ways to get him to embrace a more conciliatory
stance. Although colonial officials had been dealing with Williams since
1956, they barely understood the intellectually pugnacious West Indian poli-
tician. They spent an inordinate amount of energy speculating on his mo-
tives and formulating strategies based on their frequently flawed conclu-
sions. To these officials, Williams was an enigma, and they scrambled to
make his character the central issue in the developing conflict, as opposed to
the merits of his claims. Interestingly, Williams and his persona still invite
the attention of scholars as they attempt to understand his behavior in
political office and his practice of statecraft. Such a preoccupation, to be
sure, is not unique to the study of Eric Williams. The difficulties occasioned
by the golden handshake, coming as they did about seven years after Wil-
liams entered the political arena, provide us with an opportunity to make an
informed but risky assessment of his persona and the ways in which it might
have shaped his modus operandi.
***** To understand Williams's intellectual positions, particularly
as they related to colonialism, colonial officials read Capitalism and Slavery
(1944), although their comprehension of its thesis was often in doubt. When
Williams published The History of the People of Trinidad and Tobago (1962), just
prior to Independence Day, in August 1962, Stanley J. G. Fingland of the
British High Commissioner's Office in Trinidad and Tobago quickly dis-
patched two copies to Edwin Sykes, explaining that "we have naturally not
had time to read the book yet, but at a quick glance, it seems to contain some


--- PAGE 165 ---
152 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
fairly acid stuff on colonialism as we had feared."24 Sykes read the book as
soon as he received it. Relieved, he wrote to Fingland on September II,
saying that the "the book does not strike me as too bad. It is—as the old lady
said about Shakespeare's plays—full of quotations, and many of the criti-
cisms levelled against British policy were really made by other people before
Dr. Williams." Sykes reported that he included references to the book in the
"Country Brief" that he had prepared for the secretary of state and the
visiting prime ministers from the Commonwealth nations. He thought that
Williams "might be flattered if he found that ministers knew of his latest
publication."25
Colonial officials frequently offered negative assessments of Williams's
ideas and personal style. On April 16,1958, from Port of Spain, R. L. Baxter
wrote that he had had his first exposure to the chief minister's oratory at
Woodford Square. He had found the speech "a queer mixture of scholarly
exposition and demagogic invective, ending with a parody of the New Testa-
ment that smells unpleasantly of Africa." The reference to Africa had un-
mistakable racial overtones.26 About three years later, Hugh Gaitskell, a
senior British Labour Party official, described Williams as a "difficult" per-
son to get on with, one who required "most careful handling." He thought
that Williams manifested an "unusual combination of the political dema-
gogue" with a "highly intelligent, almost academic mind."27
The most sustained attempt to understand Eric Williams and his psychol-
ogy was undertaken by Sir Norman Costar, the first British high commis-
sioner in Port of Spain. Costar was not an admirer of the new prime minister
and was never on consistently good terms with him. Williams had made a
point of receiving Costar's credentials shortly after Trinidad and Tobago
became independent, thereby making him the dean of the Diplomatic Corps.
Officials in London relied heavily on Costar's advice. The high commis-
sioner seemed to have relished his job, writing lengthy descriptions of the
political developments in Trinidad and Tobago, laced with unflattering com-
ments about Prime Minister Williams. On May 8,1963, barely nine months
after his arrival in Port of Spain, Costar wrote a detailed assessment of
Williams's character, one that helped to shape Whitehall's attitude toward
the Caribbean leader.
Costar began his lengthy report by stating that Williams had "two faces":
one external and the other internal. To outsiders, he "often appears as the
far-sighted and patient, if somewhat schoolmasterly, statesman with solu-


--- PAGE 166 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 153
tions for most of the problems of the Caribbean... and has words of wisdom
for all the smaller and less developed countries." At home, however, he was
"the bad tempered bottleneck through which all the administration of Trini-
dad and Tobago has to pass. He is also for good measure incalculable and
inaccessible, and unwilling even to listen to arguments with which he is not
disposed in advance to agree. The result is that problems needing attention
are frequently left unattended because Dr. Williams has not pronounced."
Costar was not impressed by Williams's administrative style, charging
that he tended to deal with only one issue at a time. "With Dr. Williams," the
high commissioner wrote, "the best is the enemy of the good, and one more
or less proposal after another gets laid on one side while yet another which
might be slightly better is investigated." The consequence of all of this was
that there "are long delays," and the solution that eventually emerged "is
generally too complicated to be administered by his civil servants."
"Tolerance is not Dr. Williams' strong suit, despite the lip service he pays
to the word," Costar reported. He was equally contemptuous of Williams's
speeches at Woodford Square, asserting that the prime minister's "public
outbursts in Woodford Square arouse interest as theatrical performances.
There is no live theatre in Port of Spain and Dr. Williams' speeches are rated
high as entertainment by those for whose benefit they are uttered." This was
an extraordinary observation given the role that Williams's speeches had
played in the construction of Trinidad's nationalism. Costar said that mem-
bers of the middle class and government officials attended these presenta-
tions "to find out what is to be their fate, if in business, or their policy, if in
Government." Costar added, uncharitably:
However statesmanlike his utterances at Prime Minister's meetings, [or]
in the University of Woodford Square; Dr. Williams is essentially the
grassroots demagogue. His speeches have been marked by memorable
phrases, such as "Massa's day done" marking the triumph of colored
over white, and "I'm the boss now," emphasising the same point with a
more personal flavour. Nevertheless few people leave Woodford Square,
his "Hyde Park Corner," fired to be beastly to the British even though Dr.
Williams' constant theme is that all Trinidad's misfortunes stem from
her colonial past.
Costar painted a picture of "a man who likes to be top," an ambition that
undermined Williams's effectiveness, especially in his dealings with other


--- PAGE 167 ---
154 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
Caribbean leaders. He aspired to be "the leading figure in the Eastern Carib-
bean, indeed its Saviour." But Williams was not the man to forge a unity
among these islands, since "in the past his periods of frantic courtship of
this country or that person have ended in an unpleasant quarrel and a house
of cards of his own creation has collapsed into nothing." Costar reported
that "at the moment" Williams was "on good terms with hardly anyone who
he cannot boss; yet he is aiming high and should not be underestimated."
Despite being "his own worst enemy," Costar found Williams to be "in-
dustrious, intelligent, has financial integrity (not universal in the West In-
dian politician), he espouses the democratic ideas and institutions of the
West, and he can, on occasion, show great personal charm, which he uses to
good persuasive effect." But such qualities were negated by his "vanity and
conceit and contempt for most of his fellow men. In addition, for all of his
ability, he lacks the skill to administer wisely and put first things first. There
is also, I am afraid, a streak of would-be dictator in the man. Like Cromwell,
he believes that people should have the freedom to make their own choice
provided always that they choose wisely. If they do not agree with him, it is
he suspects because of antagonism to him personally, and an element of
personal animosity having crept in, Dr. Williams loses all sense of balance in
argument."
Costar urged British officials to "stand firm" in whatever stance they
embraced for Trinidad "and avoid public polemics" on matters of policy
"with such a past master in the art as Dr. Williams." He recognized that
nothing the British did or said could dissuade the prime minister from his
activities, and however "sound" his "concept," "he will sooner or later
almost certainly antagonize the other political figures whose cooperation he
needs to achieve it."28
Norman Costar's critical view of Eric Williams was reinforced by the
comments of others. On March 7, 1963, Costar reported that Sir Solomon
Hochoy, the native-born governor general of Trinidad, had said that the
British "were not dealing with a rational man"; the "madman," Hochoy
allegedly continued, had been elected by the people and was likely to remain
in power for some time. Williams had "removed elsewhere" anyone who
exercised some influence over him. As matters stood, Hochoy knew no one
in the Cabinet or outside of it who enjoyed the prime minister's confidence.29
Newspaper columnist Peter Farquhar, a member of the opposition party,
was most vitriolic in his assessment of Williams's personality and leadership


--- PAGE 168 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 155
style. He accused Williams of lacking coherent government policies and of
keeping members of the Cabinet in the dark. Ministers attended Cabinet
meetings "not to take decisions but to be informed of decisions already
taken, but they are only informed of matters of little consequence; of impor-
tant matters, they are as ignorant as the average citizen." Members of the
Cabinet were "merely spectators, subdued and silent spectators who cannot
even applaud." Farquhar, however, said he did not believe that Williams was
a dictator since "a dictator is a man who knows where he wants to go and is
prepared to cut down anyone who stands in his path. Our Prime Minister is
quite prepared to cut down anyone but he does not know where he wants to
go and is, in fact, going nowhere.... [He] is the captain of a rudderless ship
in the midst of a typhoon."30
A week later Farquhar described Williams as an "expert dribbler," the
soccer player who plays to the spectators and is not interested in scoring a
goal. "Expert dribblers," Farquhar observed, are "apt to fall so deeply in love
with themselves and their own expertise that they ignore the objective of
scoring goals and amuse themselves and their fans by monopolising the
ball. Williams was such a footballer, and he is such a politician ... in
football Williams played to the gallery and in politics he does the same... in
politics he does not care whether his country rises or falls so long as he
occupies the centre of the stage."31
In many respects, the characterization of Eric Williams by Norman Costar
and others represented a caricature of his complex personality. Throughout
his long tenure in office, the educated elite in Trinidad and Tobago became
amateur psychologists in their attempt to understand the personality of their
head of government. The somewhat diminutive leader who hid behind dark
glasses and wore a hearing aid fascinated the citizenry, captivating them
with his brilliance and his remarkable command of the issues of the mo-
ment, but simultaneously infuriating some with his intellectual arrogance.
In November 1964 Costar observed that Williams "is not popular with the
wealthier classes whom he does not even try to conciliate, but he is respected
by them for his intelligence, drive and honesty, and is feared by them for his
unpredictable moods."32
It is difficult to provide a reasonably plausible assessment of the persona
of any historical personage, and psychological determinism as a mode of
historical analysis has enormous pitfalls. In the introduction to this work, I
indicated that I would attempt to do this only after the reader had been


--- PAGE 169 ---
156 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
exposed to a good deal of information about Eric Williams the man, the
scholar, and the politician. His unusually long tenure in public life compli-
cates the problem, since the person he was in 1956 was obviously not the one
he would become in 1970 or the one he was in 1981, when he died. His
experiences in political office and his life in a rapidly changing world af-
fected him in significant ways. Thus, care must be taken not to present a
static picture of the man in order to capture his complex development over
time. There were, of course, certain ideological positions and personal char-
acteristics that appear not to have changed at all.
Possessed of a caustic tongue, Williams was somewhat austere in de-
meanor, although he could be a doting father, a genial host, and a relaxed
conversationalist in social settings. Idle chatter easily bored him, and ill-
informed or critical speeches by the parliamentary opposition drove him to
distraction. On such occasions he would deliver the ultimate insult to his
colleagues by unplugging his hearing aid. As Williams noted in Inward Hun-
ger, "a hearing aid is a powerful weapon against an Opposition in Parlia-
ment, one can always turn it off!"33
***** Eric Williams was, ostensibly, not given to humility. In his pub-
lished memoirs, he observed that "Greatness, Trinidadian style, was thrust
upon me from the cradle."34 In fact, young Eric, the oldest of twelve chil-
dren, was told by his parents that great things were expected of him. As
Williams recalled in his unpublished memoirs, "I was regarded, and not
only in the family circle, as a boy with a bright future, from whom, pub-
licly and privately, many people expected much." In retrospect, Williams
took exception to such an obligation: "This burden of responsibility far
beyond the weight of such young shoulders has been borne by many before
and after me; it is being borne by many today, and will continue to be borne
until that revolution takes place in West Indian public opinion and social
attitudes, of which there is of yet no sign, and the extensive production of
good citizens is given precedence over the intensive cultivation of distin-
guished individuals."35
His parents gave the boy an inordinate amount of responsibility, becom-
ing, as he put it, their "principal assistant." He was "a valuable aide" to his
father in his second job as auditor of the "books of Friendly Societies." As a
result of his work on these books, Williams acquired "an abiding love of
figures which leads me even today to make all sorts of intricate compu-


--- PAGE 170 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 157
tations—multiplications, divisions, square roots, cube roots, in my head,
whilst driving, sitting on a veranda or walking on the beach."
Eric was equally helpful to his mother. As the number of his siblings
increased, at least every two years, the amount of work became "too much
for my mother." Consequently, he was "drafted into the service on the
domestic front to the point where for several years I was so integral and
necessary a part of [it] . . . that I ranked next in importance to my mother."
He helped to prepare Sunday dinners and became "an excellent cook in the
process." Eric also played his part "valiantly" in "that most arduous of West
Indian chores in those days, getting down on one's knees and scrubbing the
floor, and [I also] became an expert dishwasher."
After school Williams washed the babies' diapers, then he was allowed to
go out to play games. He also did the marketing and went to town on
Saturday mornings at his mother's request "to buy stockings or lace for the
petticoats or ribbon for the girls' hair or to trim their hats." Encumbered
with all of these domestic tasks, Williams concluded that he was "almost a
daughter to my mother." But such responsibilities inevitably took their toll,
at least on one occasion. He related, obviously with a humorous intent, an
incident involving the celebration of a new baby's arrival: "I was nine years
old at the time. With my mother immobilized, and my father at work, I was
obviously the man of the home. As the neighbours, relatives, and friends
trooped in, one by one, I poured the rum and mixed the drinks, and, as a
young gallant, kept them company. I doubt that any boy nine years old can
equal my record that day. I woke up some hours later, to find myself igno-
miniously under the table, with someone pouring soda water over my face."
Williams did not regret these heavy childhood burdens. On the contrary,
he acquired "a keen appreciation of domesticity, a strong sense of masculine
responsibility for the home, an ability to take care of myself in my bachelor
days, and a practical training which, coupled with my innate good taste, has
reflected itself in competence in delicate lingerie and feminine accessories
for my wife or daughter which has never failed to amuse my friends or to
astonish the store clerks."
Young Eric enjoyed some benefits for discharging his numerous domes-
tic chores. Since they were heavier than those of his siblings and because he
was regarded "as the intellectual hope of the family," his diet was "some-
what better" than that of the other children. "Many an afternoon," Williams
remembered, "instead of the bread and butter and tea which comprised the


--- PAGE 171 ---
158 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
children's supper, I found a whole red fish with a large pot of soup, or tasty
curried shrimps awaiting me, on the theory, firmly held by my mother, that
fish was good for the brain." If the meal proved too much for him to
consume, and in the absence of refrigeration, "the other children were able
to participate in the feast" after he had finished. He was undoubtedly the
favored and therefore privileged child.
Based on his account, Eric was an exemplary and dutiful youngster. But
his father was a strict disciplinarian and was never reluctant to beat him
severely. When his shoes became worn prematurely because he played foot-
ball with them, his father "paid out of his pockets, and I out of my but-
tocks." Williams surmised that this pattern was "really false economy in
both senses," since "my buttocks became inured to the payment; the cost of
repairs eventually added up to more than the price of football boots."
Corporal punishment of the most severe kind was not unusual in the
Trinidad and Tobago of Williams's youth. He observed that "the emblem of
the paternal power" in Trinidad was the strap, "its exaltation was a matter of
principle and its application was made into a fine art." He maintained that
such violence "betokened the slave parentage of the society." While conduct-
ing research in the Public Record Office in London, he encountered a docu-
ment with "a description of a slave punishment which I was able to appreci-
ate fully, having undergone the same experience [because] on one occasion
when I had 'kicked off my [shoe] soles'—made to lie on the floor, in the
foetal position with a long black ruler between my knees, my bare buttocks
exposed to the leather belt." Eric was not the only recipient of parental
violence. One of his siblings, afflicted with bed-wetting, was "in Trinidad
fashion, 'disciplined' by my father by burying the child's head in the mat-
tress, not as a substitute for but as an addition to corporal punishment."
Williams emulated his father in the exercise of violence on his playmates.
When his family lived in Diego Martin, then a working-class neighborhood
in Port of Spain, his playmates were some German girls of his own age. The
regular pastime "was playing school under their house." Not surprisingly,
Eric was "always the teacher." When his playmates misbehaved, he "stressed
corporal punishment" as the corrective. Eric was "barely six" at the time but
was quite precocious. He remembered that "the freedom of women in those
days was for the most part unhampered at least at home, by underclothing,
and, whether it was innate delicacy or a daunting respect for women, I
preferred the personal touch to the birch."


--- PAGE 172 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 159
Young Williams exercised similar control over his siblings. With his fa-
ther preoccupied with his work and the struggle to "keep our heads above
water" and his mother suffering from "the strain of looking after an in-
creasingly complicated household, the discipline of the younger children fell
increasingly on my shoulders." Eric found the challenge "exasperating."
The younger boys sometimes drove him to distraction. "Many a time,"
Williams recalled, "I was rash enough to follow them under the house to
catch one culprit who had insisted on disobedience; their loud guffaws when
I invariably bumped my head as they ran this way and that were not calcu-
lated to improve my temper."
Williams found the task of keeping his four younger brothers at their
lessons "and inculcating in them some intellectual discipline was a whole-
time one utterly beyond the capacities of a boy himself buried in studies who
had his own friends and obligations." He worried that the "early habits of
discipline" that "form the foundation of the character in later years became
more and more tenuous in these younger children."
As he grew into adolescence, Williams continued and perhaps even ex-
panded his role as disciplinarian in chief. The following account from his
unpublished memoirs reveals the power he exercised over his siblings:
One day, as I was walking through the savannah, I noticed the oldest of
the four playing football. One of his friends shouted to him that I was
passing, and I noticed how slyly he looked at me. He told my mother
glibly in the evening that he had been to his private lessons. When I asked
him if he had not been playing football at the time when he should have
been attending the extra classes for which my father had to pay, he called
me a liar. I gave him the best hiding he ever got in his life, but even whilst
administering it, I could not but wonder as to whether it would be any
use. I could understand truancy and lying to protect oneself—I had done
both at his age—but to call the one who knew you were lying a liar
himself, that was what is called Trinidad brazenness.36
Williams was shaped by these early experiences as well as by the ethos of
colonial society and the "solidly English" content of his education. None of
this was unique. Many of his peers could undoubtedly have recounted simi-
lar experiences, and girls in particular were not strangers to enormous do-
mestic burdens. Nevertheless, Williams's obligations as a boy must have
developed in him a heightened sense of discipline and responsibility, thereby


--- PAGE 173 ---
160 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
helping to prepare the youngster for the public duties he would later ex-
ercise. This is entirely speculative, to be sure, since girls with similar child-
hood experiences were not likely to achieve the successes that Williams did
on the larger public stage and occupy positions of leadership. Their gender
was a definite liability in a male-dominated society, their exercise of early
leadership roles in their families notwithstanding.
These observations aside, Eric Williams was unquestionably the most
privileged of the twelve children in his family, and he knew it. He occupied
first of place; he was the focus of his parents' devotion and the repository of
their dreams for familial success. A mature Williams, not surprisingly, had
to be the principal actor on the political stage, and had to be in command of
any situation in which he found himself. He had not been raised to play a
secondary role in any capacity, a fact that made it difficult if not impossible
for him to take orders from anyone, especially those whom he considered
his intellectual inferior. He expected his associates in government to accept
his leadership uncritically, just as his siblings had done, usually associating
criticism or dissent with disloyalty. Although he could not administer the
whip to them as he had to his siblings, he could banish them to the dog-
house or to the political wilderness. This was hardly an admirable quality,
and it was certainly not a political asset. It deprived Williams of frank advice
from colleagues, who feared his wrath and confinement to the icebox.
Williams treated the representatives of foreign governments accredited to
Port of Spain in a similar manner. If he had differences of opinion with an
official or his government, he would decline to conduct business as usual
until his anger had abated. Norman Costar was himself the victim of such
treatment. In November 1962, for example, Costar reported that if Britain
stood firm on the terms of the golden handshake, "the result... will be that
Britain, and I in particular, will be put in the dog house for the next six
months or so."37
The roots of this behavior are not difficult to fathom. Some have said that
Williams possessed an authoritarian personality, but this may well be a
misreading of the inner makeup of this complex man. The clue to this aspect
of his character is to be found, once again, in his early childhood experi-
ences. The untrammeled power that he exercised over his siblings meant,
inevitably, that he had to be distanced from them emotionally lest he com-
promise his position as surrogate parent, senior sibling, and role model.
Although these awesome obligations helped to make him an unusually re-


--- PAGE 174 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE l6l
sponsible young man, they robbed him of a carefree childhood, the inti-
macies, the give-and-take that normally characterize relationships among
siblings, and the social and familial bonding that are at the heart of the
human developmental process. Nowhere in his memoirs does Williams
speak of childhood activities that he enjoyed with his siblings, of their play
together, or of the secrets they shared. He refers to them in a detached way as
"the children" or "the boys." Deprived of strong emotional bonds with his
siblings and of the attendant socializing lubricants, Williams grew into
manhood conditioned to always being the exemplar, the primus inter pares, or
all too frequently the jefe maxima whose superior talents and position had to
be acknowledged.
Similarly, Williams's early experiences may account for his emotional dis-
tance from most members of his political family and his inability to deal with
dissent with equanimity. To them, he always had to be the confident, self-
assured leader. But this public persona masked his inner tensions, storms,
vulnerabilities, and insecurities. None of this was readily apparent, given the
pugnacity of his language; his unparalleled ability to outsmart, confuse, and
belittle his opponents; his widely acknowledged grasp of the issues; and the
awe and adulation he inspired in numerous supporters. His many accom-
plishments, notwithstanding, he was never satisfied with them, at least not
for very long.
***** Eric Williams undoubtedly derived much psychic strength from
the respect and adulation lavished upon him by his supporters and enjoyed
his spectacular victories over his opponents. But this was a fleeting gratifica-
tion; he needed the constant nourishment of success for his emotional
sustenance, but success when achieved only provided the impetus for the
next battle, the next struggle, the next mountain to be ascended. This rest-
lessness, this desire to be in continuous motion was, in part, a function of
his personality. As Williams acknowledged in his unpublished memoirs, he
was "a man of action who lacked the patience to be a spectator at athletic and
cycle sports or cricket."38 This self-assessment could be extended to include
his behavior as a politician. At another level, Williams's predilection for hard
work was not only a result of the discipline he acquired during childhood,
but it was also driven by a profound need to constantly prove himself and to
keep faith with his father's high expectations. In the end, Trinidad had a
political leader who was thoroughly committed to its best interests as he saw


--- PAGE 175 ---
l62 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
them, but one whose idiosyncrasies sometimes made the chances of success
more difficult. Norman Costar was close to the mark when he observed that
Williams "is interested first in Trinidad, and secondly in the Caribbean. His
interest in the world beyond the Caribbean, whether it be in Africa or in the
relationship among the Great Powers and between the rich north and the
poor south, is all looked at from the point of Trinidad and the Caribbean."39
Williams could be a cold, hard, and brusque taskmaster, quick to scold
and to withdraw his trust. Costar described him as a prime minister "who
works in secret, through a band of select but obscure advisors, who change
from time to time, but who also are rarely, if ever, his official advisors on any
given subject."40 The fact that Williams could often make and unmake ca-
reers at will was due less to his authoritarian personality and more to the
weakness of his political associates who cowered before him, dwarfed by his
intellect and intimidated by the firm exercise of the power at his command.
Those who summoned the courage to challenge his authority either licked
the wounds they received in return and departed or were unceremoniously
cold-shouldered and abandoned.
This seemingly harsh treatment of some of his subordinates invited
charges that Williams was ruthless. Patrick Solomon, the deputy prime
minister who fell out of favor with his leader in 1966, later depicted him
as "being more ruthless, perhaps than de Gaulle, whom he admired, or
Churchill, whom he affected to despise." But Williams was a skilled practi-
tioner of a real politik borrowed from its European masters, Metternich and
Bismarck, and adapted to the political environment of Trinidad and Tobago.
Just as these Europeans had displayed an unapologetic toughness and moral
pragmatism as essential ingredients of their statecraft, Williams had no
compunction about using similar approaches in his relationships with col-
leagues and others. Solomon observed that to Williams "all human beings
are the same; they either want to buy or have something to sell; and he has a
single formula for dealing with them all—if the price is right, he will do
business." But, as Solomon also concluded, "in many respects" Williams
was "no better and no worse than other great men of this or any other age."41
Ambitious and brilliant, Eric Williams was the professor who saw Trini-
dad and Tobago as his lecture hall writ large. Norman Costar thought that
"Dr. Williams' attitude to Trinidad is that of a school master to his class. He
administers nods of approval or frowns of rebuke according to the be-
haviour of his pupils. If their behaviour looks like [it is] getting beyond what


--- PAGE 176 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 163
he thinks is right then he is not averse to using the rod."42 But Williams
never condescended to his fellow citizens and tried valiantly to educate them
about their history and contemporary domestic and international issues, all
the while attempting to forge a national consciousness. When an interviewer
from the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) told him that other West
Indian leaders often accused him of "intellectual arrogance, of considering
yourself to have a better analytical mind than the people that you deal with"
and asked him whether he felt he was "in intellectual contact with the
ordinary people in Trinidad" or whether he thought of himself "as a rather
remote and fatherly leader," Williams responded:
No, I don't see anything remote about it at all because, after all, we
organise on the basis of a political party in the British sense, the party
decided that the principal plank in its platform would be the education of
the people in the country. I speak to them about economic matters or
constitutional matters or the position of oil on which they depend in
world economy and the thing is they understand. I once told your Prime
Minister, who was out in Trinidad not so long ago, that if he were going
to speak in our University [of Woodford Square], I would ask him to
speak precisely as he spoke in the House of Commons and not talk down
to them and he said he was quite astonished by that, it must mean that
Trinidad is the Athens of the Caribbean, quite right.43
Although Williams spoke the language of the intellectual, he said that he
drew his strength from ordinary citizens. When the BBC interviewer ques-
tioned why he based his faith on the "common people," he answered:
"What else could you put it in, you'd have to put it in something, you
couldn't put it in the autocratic government, you couldn't put it in the Crown
Colony regime, you couldn't put it in any small group of people, intellec-
tuals, you had no intellectuals . . . you had no university ... the only people
you could put faith in was the people of the country, they didn't know much,
you had to take them along with you."44
As the architect of the new nation, Williams challenged his compatriots
to reach their possibilities, frequently denouncing the civil servants for their
shortcomings. He expected the best from his Cabinet ministers but seldom
gave them the autonomy they needed to discharge their duties. Williams
never knew how or perhaps never wanted to delegate much authority to his
subordinates. The result was that he became mired in detail, sometimes to


--- PAGE 177 ---
164 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
the detriment of administrative efficiency. Although critics accused him
of harboring dictatorial ambitions, Williams was committed, with reserva-
tions, to the principles of parliamentary democracy, despite his cavalier
treatment of the legislative assembly. In November 1964 Norman Costar, a
Williams critic and at times an astute observer, reported:
In conversation with me Dr. Williams . . . has expressed sympathy with
these African Prime Ministers who, after independence, tear up the Con-
stitutions with which they have been saddled so that they can get on with
the real job of governing the country without factious Opposition. Dr.
Williams has said to me that the British institutions do not really suit
Trinidad. He has private leanings towards a presidential system and a one
party State, and he told me recently that it was his deliberate policy not to
waste his time by attending meetings of the House of Representatives to
answer futile questions or attend stupid debates. He would only go for
really important occasions. But... I do not believe that, at any rate for the
present, Dr. Williams would go so far as to scrap the Constitution, if only
because the Opposition by lying low have not provided him with adequate
excuse. Despite some signs, and there are some, that Trinidad might
move towards a near dictatorship run by Dr. Williams personally, I do not
think that this will come about as long as the Opposition remains as
dormant as it is and Dr. Williams can continue to control his Cabinet and
to ignore Parliament as he does at present.
Volunteering his overall assessment of the political climate under Williams,
Costar noted that Trinidad "is still a realm within the Commonwealth; it still
operates the Westminster-type Constitution agreed upon by the political
parties before independence; Parliament still meets, debates, and legislates;
political parties still function unfettered and no political leader has been put
in gaol; there is still a free press." Six years later, High Commissioner
Richard Hunt voiced an essentially similar assessment of Williams's political
modus operandi. He thought that Williams's "attitude towards opposition is
ambivalent. On the one hand he is clearly tempted to regard all or any
opposition as subversive. On the other, he is normally punctilious towards
the official opposition—though in fact he does not let them into his confi-
dence." Williams, Hunt said, "dislikes force" but "is capable of firm admin-
istrative and indeed legislative action when he thinks that security requires
it." In general, the high commissioner maintained, Williams's "first ploy"


--- PAGE 178 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 165
in "dealing with opposition from any quarter" is "to ignore it, and the
second [is] to get the issue shelved or sidetracked. Failing these, he is apt to
buy people off: if a man is a nuisance, give him a job, or a trip abroad, or even
an embassy."45
Although he continued to smart from the racial discrimination he experi-
enced at Oxford, harbored doubts about the efficacy of British institutions in
Trinidad, and criticized its colonial policy, Williams never lost his admira-
tion for the United Kingdom. Familiar with this lingering affection for the
former mother country, Lord Bukhurst, a prominent member of the West
India Committee in London, recommended that Williams be awarded an
honorary doctorate by Oxford University. He felt that such an award "would
be likely to do far more than anything else to cement relations between
the United Kingdom and Trinidad." Although Williams would undoubtedly
have accepted such a degree had it been offered at the time, J. O'Neil Lewis, a
senior member of the Trinidad civil service and a man who worked closely
with the prime minister, said that Williams really wanted to be a Fellow of All
Souls, Oxford. Lewis believed that nothing would give him greater pleasure
than such an honor. Lewis noted that Williams cherished his ties with the
United Kingdom and had a deep affection for British culture. He believed
that his negative public comments were not an indication of his feelings
toward Britain.46 These observations were doubtlessly reassuring to British
officials, but they hardly captured Williams's ambivalence to, and even re-
sentment of, the metropolitan country. He was at once an Anglophile, an
ardent nationalist, and an overly sensitive man who wore his emotions on
his sleeve.
Eric Williams was easily the most academically distinguished and contro-
versial politician of his day in the Anglophone Caribbean. But except for
his devoted supporters in Trinidad and Tobago—and there were many-
Williams inspired a profound respect elsewhere in the Caribbean but not a
deep affection. He manifested, at times, the charismatic appeal of Alexander
Bustamante of Jamaica and Cheddi Jagan of British Guiana, but he disdained
the empty flamboyance of Eric Gairy, the Grenadian chief minister. Wil-
liams lacked the quiet and more controlled persona of the equally bril-
liant Norman Manley of Jamaica, and he had little in common with the seem-
ingly passive, indecisive, and politically accommodating Grantley Adams of
Barbados.
The dispute over the nature of the golden handshake gave Williams an


--- PAGE 179 ---
l66 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
opportunity to display his political skills, but his weaknesses were visible as
well. In the difficult days following his rejection of the aide-memoire, British
officials vigorously debated his personality traits and plotted their course of
action based on their conclusions. Norman Costar counseled the officials to
remain firm, since any concessions would serve "to encourage Dr. Williams
to think that by being intransigent and unpleasant he can extract further
concessions from Britain." According to Costar, that was Williams's "regu-
lar technique, and one which he practices on the Americans also." Costar
urged the officials to remind the prime minister that Trinidad was the bene-
ficiary of other forms of aid, such as the preferential price that Britain paid
for the sugar it produced under the terms of the Commonwealth Sugar
Agreement. Aid also came from the Colonial Development and Welfare
Fund. Costar also believed that the growing investment by British citizens in
Trinidad and Tobago constituted a form of economic assistance. The high
commissioner, however, was under no illusion that Williams would find
such arguments persuasive.47
Anticipating the failure of such a "difficult" exercise, Costar urged his
government to seize the offensive by publicizing the extent of its aid to
Trinidad and Tobago.48 Colonial officials were also anxious to demonstrate
that the terms of the golden handshake offered to Trinidad and Tobago
compared favorably with those offered to other recently independent coun-
tries. To support this contention, they prepared a table, replicated here as
Table 1, outlining the assistance Britain gave them.
The figures demonstrated that Trinidad and Tobago was the wealthiest of
the Commonwealth countries listed as measured by its per capita income of
£229. They also revealed that Trinidad and Tobago ranked third after Cyprus
and Sierra Leone in terms of British per capita support, expressed in shillings.
Moreover, British officials maintained, when compared with other Western
countries, the United Kingdom provided generous support to "underdevel-
oped" nations. Based on their statistics, in 1961 Britain contributed 1.32
percent of its gross national product to these countries, whereas France gave
2.41 percent, Germany 1.17 percent, and the United States 0.97 percent. Over
the years 1956-60 the United Kingdom contributed US$4,006,000 to devel-
oping countries, compared with US$2,917,000 by Germany, US$6,113,000 by
France, and US$17,843,000 by the United States.49
Williams, of course, was not interested in such comparisons. His primary
concern was to maximize the amount of aid to his nation, hence his relent-


--- PAGE 180 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
TABLE 1 * British Financial Assistance to Various Commonwealth Countries
i67
Country
Nigeria
Cyprus*
Sierra Leone
Tanganyika
Jamaica
Uganda
Trinidad
Amount of
Grantor
Development
Loan
£12m
£15m (Grant)
£3. 5m plus
£3m (Grant)
£4m plus
£4m (Grant)
£1.25m
£1.5 (Grant)
£1m
Population
in
Thousands
35,000
578
2,400
8,788
1,613
6,682
819
Expressed
as Shillings
Per Head of
Population
6/10d.
-
29/2.
plus25/
9. Id.
plus 9/
15/7d.
4/6d.
25/
National
Per
Capita
Income
£30
£139
£25
£21
£157
£24
£229
Source: DO 200/86.
*The high figure for Cyprus took account of the fact [that] this territory had suffered from
something approaching civil war for several years.
less assaults on the British government. His anger did not abate in the
months after his rejection of the golden handshake. In an effort to reopen
discussions with Williams, John Profumo, secretary of state for the colonies,
decided to visit Trinidad and Tobago over the 1962 Christmas break. Demon-
strating his ire at the British, Williams refused to meet with High Commis-
sioner Costar to discuss the visit. The permanent secretary in the Ministry of
External Affairs, K. F. Sealey, told Costar that Williams would be spending
the holidays outside of Trinidad and Tobago. Incredulous, Costar asked
Sealey whether the government realized that such a gesture "could only have
unhappy repercussions in all spheres of British/Trinidad relations." In re-
porting this conversation to Whitehall, Costar opined: "It would be wrong to
attribute Dr. Williams' attitude merely to sulks. It is due to [a] combination
of wounded amour-propre and belief based on past successes that it is the best
tactic for securing what he wants on aid. His bad manners in present cir-
cumstances are quite in character." In fact, "Dr. Williams' very difficult
temperament is notorious and is something we shall have to be prepared to
deal with. When he is in these moods our best policy is to do nothing for
him and ask nothing of him." In light of the experiences of Governor Gen-
eral Hochoy and the Americans, there would be a thaw in several months,


--- PAGE 181 ---
l68 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
with Williams making it known "indirectly when his mood has changed and
he is looking for an excuse to bury the hatchet."50
Williams never met with Profumo when he visited Trinidad and Tobago.
This deliberate insult exacerbated the tensions between the two nations, a
blunder for which Williams would later make a veiled apology. Profumo,
however, held a meeting in Barbados on January 1, 1963, to discuss relations
between Britain and Trinidad Tobago. Present were Sir John Stow, the gover-
nor of Barbados; A. R. Thomas, the assistant under secretary of state; and
Costar. According to the minutes of the meeting, Profumo outlined his
government's policy on Trinidad and Tobago as follows:
1. To take no present initiative ourselves to reopen the financial
settlement;
2. Meanwhile to withhold all the items covered by our offer whilst
leaving the offer open;
3. For the rest, to behave as if there was no disturbance in
Anglo/Trinidad relations.
Those in attendance, the minutes said, "agreed that Dr. Williams, though
at times personally charming, was a most difficult man to deal with, and
the Secretary of State expressed his sympathy with those who carried this
task."51
In public, the British officials and Williams clung tenaciously to their
respective positions during the winter months of 1963. In private, the British
considered various approaches to resolve the conflict, all the while speculat-
ing about Williams's intentions and state of mind. On March 2 Costar
reported that he had heard that Williams was "raving" about the "conspir-
acy" to refuse aid to Trinidad and Tobago. Williams "attributes the lack of
success of his negotiating methods to personal animus against him." Costar
thought that the government was short of cash but that it was likely to be
rescued by the Americans and by British companies operating in the country.
"The pinch," Costar surmised, was on Williams's "pride and not on his
finances." He feared that the prime minister would indulge in an "outburst"
against the United Kingdom in a future speech and put a "squeeze" on
British interests. Williams was likely to do both, since he "is not by normal
standards a rational man."52
It seemed that the favorite sport of some British officials, led by Costar
and his poisonous pen, was to denigrate Eric Williams at every turn. Wil-


--- PAGE 182 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 169
Hams was the brash, independent ex-colonial who could not be influenced,
much less controlled, by the former colonial bosses. They found this galling
and were not prepared to show any weakness or willingness to compromise
lest that be construed as "a policy of appeasement," in the words of Denis
Williams of the Colonial Office. This official mused that Eric Williams would
gloat if the United Kingdom compromised on the terms of the financial
settlement. As he expressed it, "I wonder indeed whether, while we are
congratulating ourselves on the success of our tactics in dealing with Dr.
Williams, he may not equally well be congratulating himself on something
like the following lines: 'My tactics are working nicely. I rejected the British
offer, defaulted on my debts and abused them publicly. I have now ceased
abusing them, and—if I hang on for a few weeks more—they will be so
anxious to "restore good relations" that they will substantially increase their
September offer and excuse me both my original debts and also my subse-
quent ones.' "53 Observations such as these demonstrated the myopia of the
British officials and the substitution of wild fantasies for rational thinking.
Eric Williams and his personality had become the primary issue, the validity
of his claims on behalf of his country notwithstanding. The conflict had
become a contest of wills, and in any such confrontation the metropole had
an advantage.
In the late winter of 1963 there were signs that Williams was becoming
amenable to a resolution of the conflict. He needed money to finance his
new five-year development program, and some members of his Cabinet and
party were quietly beginning to question his handling of the dispute. The
first sign of a thaw appeared in March 1963, when Williams met with Sir
Stephen Luke, the British official charged with winding up matters relating
to the defunct West Indies Federation. Luke had visited Port of Spain to
discuss with local officials Trinidad and Tobago's defense and housing debts
to the Federal government. After initially refusing to see him, Williams met
with Luke on March 7.
During the course of the meeting, as reported by Luke, Williams de-
nounced Britain's "gratuitous and insulting" insistence on linking the re-
payment of the loans to their "ungenerous" proposed financial settlement.
In response to Luke's inquiry about how the impasse could be resolved,
Williams indicated that he could not take the initiative to reopen discus-
sions because of the domestic political implications. He wondered, however,
whether the British would do so. From this exchange, Luke concluded that


--- PAGE 183 ---
I7O THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
Williams was expecting him to convey his sentiments to the British govern-
ment, thereby paving the way for new negotiations.54
Norman Costar was quite pleased when he learned of Williams's tentative
overture to the British government. He thought that the prime minister "is
beginning to realize that his own policy of public blackmail has not this time
so far paid and he may have become more anxious to settle with us now that
he is in dispute also with the Americans." He viewed this development as a
measure of the success of British policy, cautioning colonial officials not to
make "any early move" to settle the disagreement. Costar could not resist
returning to his earlier negative assessments of Williams's character and to
urge the officials to be wary of him:
One hears more and more talk here of Dr. Williams being paranoiac. The
particular form which, according to past patterns, his paranoia takes is to
regard any thwarting of his will as due to a desire to persecute him
personally. After he has carried on his vendetta for what he regards as the
appropriate period, his custom is to seek a settlement. His normal prac-
tice is then to try to re-open negotiations by hinting his readiness to do so
indirectly through an intermediary. But though this is his normal pattern,
you need to consider very carefully before you fall in with the idea that the
approach now made through [Sir Stephen] Luke . . . constitutes a suffi-
cient indication of a change of heart to provide a basis for a successful
negotiation.55
Several members of Williams's Cabinet were also beginning to grumble
about the stalemate with Britain. Three of them confided their concerns to
High Commissioner Costar in March, a development that the high commis-
sioner thought was "in marked contrast to the silence previously observed
on the subject." John O'Halloran, the minister of agriculture, industry, and
commerce, actually raised the matter with Costar on two occasions, once in
March and then in April. O'Halloran, Costar reported, was "unsparing" in
his criticism of Williams's handling of the problem. Although Costar be-
lieved that O'Halloran's "intellectual capacity" was not "high," he found
him "sensible and right thinking."
Obviously unaware of Williams's meeting with Luke on March 7, O'Hal-
loran proposed that a "neutral" third party should try to persuade Williams
to reopen discussions with the British. But he acknowledged that it would be
difficult to find such a person. Costar noted that the chief significance of


--- PAGE 184 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 171
O'Halloran's admission "was the absence of any suggestion that anybody in
the Cabinet could play this role of influencing Dr. Williams."56
By the summer it became increasingly clear that both sides were prepared
to resolve their problems. Still, the matter of Trinidad's indebtedness to the
defunct West Indies Federation had to be settled before the terms of the
golden handshake could be revisited. Colonial officials were adamant on
this issue, and Eric Williams was not prepared to abandon his position. The
first of the two debts was a loan granted to Trinidad by the Federal govern-
ment in 1957 to build houses for Federal officials in Port of Spain, the capital
of the new Federation of the West Indies. The second debt represented
Trinidad's unpaid portion of the cost of expanding the federation's defenses.
Of the two issues, the defense debt was the more difficult. Sir Stephen
Luke, the interim commissioner for the West Indies, was charged with the
task of negotiating a settlement with Trinidad. The defense debt had origi-
nated in mid-December 1960 at a meeting held in Jamaica attended by repre-
sentatives of the British, Federal, and Jamaican governments, including Fed-
eral prime minister Grantley Adams. The meeting decided that since the
defense needs of the federation were expanding for 1961, the additional
costs would be shared by Jamaica, Trinidad, the Federal government, and
possibly the United Kingdom. Subsequently, Chief Minister Williams was
informed by Federal officials of the Jamaica decision and told that Jamaica
and Trinidad would be asked to contribute TT$683,080 each to the defense
fund. The Federal government would provide TT$60,00, and the United
Kingdom was expected to give TT$623,080.
In responding to this request, Williams emphasized on December 29,
1960, that his government "is not disposed to object to the financial arrange-
ments, but the basis of this allocation is not readily apparent."57 This reply,
although it did not reject the request for the defense funds, fell far short of
an enthusiastic endorsement. Williams seemed to have been deliberately
ambiguous so he would later have a safety valve should he decline to provide
the funds.
The problem became more complicated when the United Kingdom de-
clined to make the contribution requested of it on the grounds that the
Federal government had sufficient reserves to meet the costs. This decision
was revealed by the parliamentary under secretary of state to several Carib-
bean leaders who were attending a meeting in Port of Spain on February II,
1961. Williams would later issue a white paper stating, among other things,


--- PAGE 185 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
that at the February n meeting "the Premier of Trinidad and Tobago made it
clear, in most emphatic and unambiguous language, that Trinidad and To-
bago would not agree to contribute one cent more to any expansion pro-
gramme to make up for Britain's failure to support Britain's creation."58
Colonial officials disputed this claim, noting that there was no such state-
ment in the records of the meeting. They wanted it known that the United
Kingdom declined to make any contribution solely because the Federal gov-
ernment had adequate funds at its disposal. In addition, it had agreed to
contribute up to £1.2 million for the construction of barracks for the soldiers.
Accordingly, the British government considered the use of the phrase "Brit-
ain's failure to support Britain's creation" to be "gratuitously insulting."59
Obviously displeased by Britain's failure to make a contribution to the
defense fund, Williams declined to attend a meeting with Jamaican and
Federal government representatives to establish a new contribution for-
mula. Rather, he proposed that the matter be considered by the Carib-
bean leaders at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference. There, the
defense program "should be modified with a view to its accommodation
within the scope of the contributions already agreed upon."60 This com-
ment, especially the phrase "already agreed upon," would be used by the
Colonial Office to support its contention that Williams had endorsed the
defense levy.
When the Intergovernmental Conference convened in May 1962, the lead-
ers who attended agreed that Jamaica and Trinidad should each contribute
TT$683,080 to the 1961 defense coffers and the Federal government, the
balance of TT$746,000. Williams, however, reserved his government's posi-
tion on that decision. Two months later, at a constitutional conference held
in London, he suggested that the defense levy be examined in relation to the
overall issue of British aid to the Federal government, a matter that was
scheduled to be discussed at another meeting in the fall.
The fall meeting never took place because Jamaica voted to secede from
the West Indies Federation on September 19. As Williams put it, the defense
question "was thrown into the waste paper basket." But the first real indica-
tion that Trinidad would not pay its share of the 1961 defense expansion
costs came at a Common Services meeting held in July 1962. This meeting
had been called to determine ways to continue those common services that
the islands needed in light of the breakup of the federation. Speaking for
Trinidad, Ellis Clarke noted that his government "did not bind itself at any
172


--- PAGE 186 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 173
time" prior to the Intergovernmental Conference of May 1961 to contribute
to the defense costs. Consequently, Trinidad "regrets that it cannot regard
itself as either legally or morally bound to contribute to those costs." "Such
costs," he added, "should be borne by the defunct Federation." Shocked by
this declaration, Jamaican delegate Edgerton Richardson announced that if
Trinidad declined to pay its share, his government would demand the return
of the money it had already contributed.61
The position taken by Trinidad on the defense debt was neither strong,
persuasive, nor politically astute. The government was right to question how
the debt of £75,750 as stated in the aide-memoire was determined and why
the issue was linked to the golden handshake. On the other hand, although
Williams's contention that the defense costs should have been tied to the
overall question of British aid to the federation possessed merit, it flew in the
face of the commitment he had made on December 29,1960, to accept the
levy. In the end, Williams would have to make a graceful retreat.
***** The housing debt was not as contentious and helped to exacer-
bate the tensions between the two governments. In 1957, as plans began to
take shape for the inauguration of the Federation of the West Indies, the
committee charged with responsibility for making recommendations on
matters relating to the Federal capital, had recognized the need for housing
for the Federal ministers and other officials. Accordingly, the subcommittee
asked Trinidad to purchase a number of properties and to construct new
houses on them for the occupancy of the Federal officials. These houses
would be leased to the Federal government at a "reasonable" cost. The
committee estimated that sixty-seven houses would be needed by April 1958.
The chief minister and his colleagues responded favorably to the request.
The estimates that were prepared indicated that capital expenditures would
amount to TT$2.75 million. To meet these costs, the British government
agreed to advance the amount in question to the Federal government, which
then loaned it to Trinidad with interest rate at 51/2 percent. The money
advanced by Britain, it should be stressed, came from the £1 million that it
had promised to contribute to the cost of the Federal capital.
Williams agreed to repay the loan in three years. During this period,
Trinidad would receive the equivalent of 2 percent per annum of the capital
cost to meet maintenance expenses and the Federal government would not
be assessed taxes or insurance costs. After the loan was repaid, and if the


--- PAGE 187 ---
174 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
houses remained occupied by Federal officials, Trinidad would be paid rental
costs at a rate equivalent to the loan charges at the time the loan was effected,
in addition to 2 percent per annum. According to British estimates, Trinidad
received TT$2,786,868 (about £600,000) in housing loans before the federa-
tion collapsed.62
Williams acknowledged responsibility for these loans even though the
federation had become defunct. In fact, in the months preceding indepen-
dence, he sought a short-term loan from the United Kingdom to repay the
debt. The request was rejected on the grounds that British loans were not
normally granted to meet debt obligations. In a letter to Prime Minister
MacMillan on December 5, 1962, Williams regretted the failure to approve
the £600,000 loan, noting: "The refusal to grant our request is, in effect, a
demand for the immediate refund to your government of money which, it
had seemed, was originally intended as a gift to the people of the West
Indies, including those of Trinidad and Tobago. My Government will natu-
rally refund the entire sum now claimed, including, of course, that portion
that might ordinarily have been regarded as representing the share of Trini-
dad and Tobago."63
This was, unquestionably, an admission of responsibility. But Williams
lacked the cash to make good on his promise. In succeeding months he
would begin to question the amount of the debt to be repaid and the terms of
the proposed settlement. In a white paper that he presented to the Trinida-
dian Parliament, Williams argued that there was "no written agreement
between the Government of Trinidad and Tobago and the Federal Govern-
ment in respect of the transaction." Moreover, "the whole arrangement was
clearly based on the premise of the continued existence of the Federal Gov-
ernment." Since the federation no longer existed, the "arrangements and
understandings" must be reviewed "in the light of events." The document
also insisted that any negotiations on the debt must be restricted to the
government of Trinidad and Interim Commissioner Sir Stephen Luke, the
successor in title to the Federal government.
Williams's white paper noted that Trinidad was now burdened with
houses that it would never have built but for the arrangement with the
federation. In addition, the land could have been devoted to other uses. In
contesting the amount that the British said was owed, the paper included a
list of charges that should be deducted from the original loan, including
expenditures for repairs to the houses, taxes, maintenance fees, the cost of


--- PAGE 188 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 175
furniture, rental costs, and so on. The total amounted to TT$1,789,114. The
white paper acknowledged the government's liability for "some repayment"
but demanded "appropriate deductions" from the sums advanced. Since the
advances were made in installments, "no instalment can become due before
the end of three years from the time it was made." This was a plausible
argument. But Williams advanced another line of reasoning that placed the
moral responsibility for the housing expenditures with the United Kingdom.
It was an argument that deserved the mother country's serious attention and
ultimate acceptance. According to the white paper:
Any negotiations which may take place must be based on the acceptance
of the position that the expenditure was incurred in the promotion of a
venture which has failed. This being so,... the United Kingdom cannot
reasonably expect to realize out of the assets of the Federal Government
the full value of any funds it may have put into the unsuccessful venture.
So ... [it is unacceptable] to place on the shoulders of the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago full responsibility for a burden which morally falls
on the shoulders of Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom.
Britain rejected the assertion that it had a moral responsibility for the
housing expenditures. It maintained, self-servingly, that it sought the repay-
ment of the loans to raise the funds to meet the federation's liabilities, "the
vast majority of which will be to West Indians." It questioned, understand-
ably, the white paper's statement that there had never been any negotiations
regarding the terms of the loan. The United Kingdom also dismissed the
paper's list of expenses, "since with the possible exception of the claim in
respect of maintenance charges, none of these matters appear to have been
covered in the arrangements originally made between the Federal Govern-
ment and the Trinidadian Government." In addition, the United Kingdom
maintained that "rates and taxes" were to be waived. Strictly speaking, the
government was on solid ground, but the times called for an imperial mag-
nanimity to the new nation that was conspicuously absent.64
The difficulties in the way of a settlement notwithstanding, Sir Stephen
Luke doggedly pursued negotiations with Prime Minister Williams. In early
March 1963 he met with representatives of Trinidad and resolved some
minor issues in dispute. Soon afterward, when Luke reported to the Colonial
Office that he had detected a thaw in Williams's attitude toward the United
Kingdom, the officials thought that Luke's conversation with Williams "was


--- PAGE 189 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
intended, in Dr. Williams' usual devious way to reopen discussion with us
about the financial settlement."65
Colonial officials were accurate in their assessment of Williams's inten-
tions, but their continuing mistrust of him was not helpful. In the ensuing
months, Stephen Luke worked tirelessly with Trinidad officials to resolve the
disputes surrounding the defense and housing debts. Simultaneously, Brit-
ish officials wrestled with various alternative scenarios to settle them. By the
summer time had brought its rewards, and the weary governments began to
see the possibility of a rapprochement. Strapped for funds, Williams held
his tongue and offered no public criticism of the United Kingdom. Sensing
the changing mood, Norman Costar had urged British officials in early May
to "do nothing to disturb this growth of harmony by unnecessarily rocking
the boat over the financial settlement."66
High Commissioner Costar was delighted when Williams invited him for
a "friendly" talk on June 7,1963. He reported on July 7 that "the thaw is now
in steady progress," relishing the thought that Williams "has swallowed his
pride." Costar was pleased with the conciliatory tone of his communications
with the Trinidad officials. Nevertheless, he cautioned that "it would be
ingenuous to suppose that, if we take advantage of the present thaw in order
to settle our main difficulties with Dr. Williams, we shall not find ourselves
in his bad books again some time in the future." Williams was "the type of
person who must at all times have some whipping boy and both we and the
Americans have often served the purpose in the past." But Costar urged the
colonial officials to reach some accommodation with him on the outstand-
ing debts, since it was in the United Kingdom's interest to do so.67
Costar had warned that if Williams felt that "his overtures were rebuffed,"
British officials "must be prepared for him to really turn sour. "He feared that
Williams would "make moves" against British interests in Trinidad and
Tobago since he was "irrational enough when roused to do so despite the
damage to Trinidad which might also result." Williams might "encourage"
or "at any rate not discourage" strikes against British firms, or he could make
it difficult for expatriates to receive immigration permits. If the prime minis-
ter "put his mind to it, there are many other things of increasing seriousness
which he would have no difficulty in thinking up." Costar pointedly re-
minded the officials that in 1962, British exports to Trinidad and Tobago
amounted to £28 million. Under the circumstances, he encouraged the offi-
cials to make a change in the "old offer" and perhaps promise some future
176


--- PAGE 190 ---
THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE 177
help to Williams, which he could "represent in Trinidad as justifying his
acceptance of the settlement."68
Relieved by the conciliatory sounds emanating from Port of Spain, Edwin
Sykes of the Commonwealth Relations Office thought that "they are now
behaving in a proper manner." He was gratified that "our nine months stand
has thus achieved one of its objectives by teaching Trinidad that rudeness
does not pay." Sykes was also pleased that the Williams administration was
now proposing "confidential negotiations." That was the course of action it
should have originally pursued instead of "making public speeches in Ken-
sington and publishing tendentious White Papers in Port of Spain." Clearly,
British officials wanted to punish the new nation for what they considered to
be the "rudeness" of its leader and his violation of diplomatic norms. Nev-
ertheless, Sykes welcomed the new developments and expressed a willing-
ness to compromise, particularly on the size of the housing debt. In addi-
tion, the United Kingdom was now prepared to approach the dispute on an
issue-by-issue basis rather than as a complete package.69
By early fall, the dispute over the debts was settled, thereby paving the way
for a resumption of the golden handshake negotiations. Sir Stephen Luke
and officials of the Trinidad government agreed that the defense and hous-
ing debts amounted to £581,250, a considerable reduction from the almost
£700,000 that the British had originally claimed the island owed. British
officials gloated over their apparent victory, since Williams was now willing
to settle on terms that were somewhat less satisfactory than those that had
been included in the aide-memoire of October 31,1962. Trinidad received all
of the gifts that had been promised originally except that instead of a loan of
£1 million, it would receive one for £581,250, the exact amount that it needed
to settle its debts to the defunct West Indies Federation. The British govern-
ment received a promissory note from Trinidad to repay the loan no later
than the December 9,1965, with annual interest at 41/2 percent.70
British officials were obviously elated when the negotiations were con-
cluded, essentially on their own terms. Before the final negotiations began
in early December, Edwin Sykes had admitted that "our position in the
negotiations will be a strong one." When the relevant documents were
finally signed on December 9, Sykes reported that "the whole business
concluded with goodwill all round."71 There was probably more restraint in
Port of Spain, as the Williams government could hardly claim that its posi-
tion had prevailed.


--- PAGE 191 ---
178 THE GOLDEN HANDSHAKE
The end to the year-long dispute was anticlimactic. Williams had to settle
on the United Kingdom's terms, as Norman Costar had long predicted he
would do. There were large issues involved, to be sure. By using the most
pejorative terms to describe Williams and reducing him to a caricature,
British officials avoided granting his demands any legitimacy and believed
them to be driven by other than economic and political considerations. To
them, Eric Williams was a cantankerous, irrational, and paranoid leader
who needed to be reduced to size. On the other hand, Williams had rejected
the aide-memoire precisely because he firmly believed that the imperial
power had a responsibility to correct its history of exploitation by providing
substantial economic assistance to colonies when they became independent.
The British government contested such arguments and sought to abandon
its colonies quickly with as little economic assistance as possible. The two
positions were irreconcilable, and the imperial power never viewed Trinidad
as its equal. Williams did not relish the role of a supplicant, hence the
bellicosity of the language that usually accompanied his requests for aid. As
a historian, he understood the power dynamics that governed the relation-
ships between the colonized peoples and their colonizers. Consequently, the
golden handshake imbroglio was not only about Trinidad and Tobago. It
was a battle fought in the name of all colonized peoples. Its failure, if it can
be so characterized, underscored the fact that independence did not trans-
form the power relationships between the countries involved, and the new
order that Williams sought would be long in coming.
Williams's struggle with the United Kingdom also had enormous psy-
chological dimensions. He wanted the former mother country to recognize
that a profound change was occurring in the attitudes of the formerly colo-
nized peoples. As he had expressed it in 1960: "Those discussing with us
economic, political, or strategic problems will commit gross blunders if they
do not realize that, apart from the material questions being discussed, the
state of mind of our people must be taken into consideration. It is our right
and our duty to ensure that, as we seek to establish the material foundations
of our society, we define our spiritual attitude, we reject outworn attitudes,
and we substitute new ones suited to our time and place."72 The golden
handshake dispute, then, was as much about economic aid to Trinidad and
Tobago as it was about a new nation's painful, complex, and often contra-
dictory struggle to claim itself.


--- PAGE 192 ---
CHAPTER 5
COURTING GRENADA
***** "One from ten leaves nought," declared the premier of Trinidad
and Tobago when the Jamaican electorate voted to secede from the West In-
dies Federation on September 19,1961.1 Eric Williams's command of arith-
metic, at least in this instance, was questionable, but the political implica-
tions of his comment were unmistakable. Jamaica's impending withdrawal
from the ten-member federation was its deathblow, and the remaining nine
islands were compelled to reassess their political future. The dissolution of
the federation was a setback to the regional unity that Williams had advo-
cated so vigorously, and no one, not even he, could predict the consequences
for the Caribbean area.
Williams had worked tirelessly to help bring the West Indies Federation
into existence. But the leaders of the various islands had fundamental differ-
ences over the federation's structure, taxation policies, issues relating to
freedom of movement, economic development, and so on. Such differences
were exacerbated from time to time by personality clashes among the leaders
and by an endemic insularity that proved impossible to surmount. The three
principal federalists of the region—Grantley Adams of Barbados, Norman
Manley of Jamaica, and Eric Williams of Trinidad and Tobago—were not
always on the best of terms, making it more difficult to resolve policy issues.
There was strong antifederation sentiment in Jamaica, a problem that often
tied Manley's hands and prompted him to make ambivalent statements
about the viability of the infant federation.
When Jamaica decided to secede, however, it was not entirely clear what
course of action Trinidad would pursue. In the immediate aftermath, the
colony had two principal political options: remain a member of the now
nine-member federation, becoming the largest and most powerful territory,
or follow Jamaica's lead and opt for independence. A third option, but one
that seemed a political long shot, was for the eight other islands, or at least


--- PAGE 193 ---
180 COURTING GRENADA
some of them, to join Trinidad in a unitary statehood. In the several months
following Jamaica's vote, Williams gave no indication as to which alternative
he preferred. His tantalizing diffidence on the matter created much specula-
tion in the Caribbean as well as in London. After Jamaica's vote, Federal
prime minister Grantley Adams repeatedly expressed his confidence in the
viability of a federation of the remaining nine islands. At a meeting in
London in December 1961, he told the British prime minister that a federa-
tion of the Leeward and Windward Islands and Barbados, but excluding
Trinidad, would be "lamentable." Adams urged Harold MacMillan to delay
introducing an independence bill for Jamaica at least until August or Sep-
tember 1962. An earlier bill, he surmised, would make it politically impera-
tive for Williams to demand independence for Trinidad.2
The British, to be sure, preferred to see an Eastern Caribbean Federation
consisting of the remaining nine territories. Colonial officials looked wist-
fully at the prospect of British Guiana joining the new federation, since it
would exclude Jamaica's large and predominantly black population. Cheddi
Jagan and his largely Indo-Guianese People's Progressive Party would no
longer fear being swamped by the black population of the other islands, they
reasoned. The officials also entertained the thought that British Honduras
might "think more favorably of joining," as "the British Hondurans have for
Jamaica a long standing antipathy not extending to the rest of the West
Indies."3
Colonial authorities feared the worst for the Leeward and Windward
Islands if Trinidad sought independent status. The secretary of state for the
colonies, Iain McLeod, felt that if Trinidad wanted independence, "it is
difficult to see a 'rump' federation of Barbados and the smaller islands
surviving." He thought that Barbados would want to continue as a separate
self-governing colony, probably in view of that island's historically close ties
with the mother country. McLeod was alarmed at the "most dismal pros-
pect" of Britain retaining control of the remaining seven small Windward
and Leeward Islands. They had "no prospect of making independence alone
and all but one... are budgetarily in the red and supported financially by the
United Kingdom." A new federation led by Trinidad would relieve the United
Kingdom "of the prospect of having the smaller islands indefinitely on our
hands." McLeod feared that Eric Williams would "in that case make full use
of his strong bargaining position and no doubt demand a handsome finan-
cial contribution over the early years from Her Majesty's Government."4


--- PAGE 194 ---
COURTING GRENADA l8l
There was considerable support among the leaders of the Leeward and
Windward Islands for an Eastern Caribbean Federation. The chief ministers
of St. Kitts, Antigua, and Dominica were quick to urge the salvaging of the
federation within days of the Jamaica vote. They all shared the view, however,
that massive economic assistance from Great Britain would be needed to
make the new entity viable.5 But Britain wanted neither to provide such
assistance nor to keep these islands as dependents. In a brief prepared for
Harold MacMillan prior to Sir Grantley Adams's visit in December 1961
colonial officials advised the prime minister to disabuse Adams of the notion
that any new federation that excluded Trinidad could count on "much finan-
cial aid." Rather, MacMillan should say that he hoped that the nine terri-
tories
 would retain their political links. He should put a palatable face on
British policy by affirming his nation's wish that these islands, united in a
federation, would soon become independent. He should also remind Adams
that he was "sure the natural political aspirations of the West Indian people
would grievously suffer should the failure of this hope mean a continuation
of the colonial status from which they are clearly fitted to emerge."6
***** When Williams announced in January 1962 that Trinidad would
seek independence, the news could hardly have come as a surprise. Ideally,
as a vigorous advocate of regional unity, Williams would have preferred
another scenario. He would have welcomed an Eastern Caribbean Federa-
tion under his leadership if the United Kingdom had been willing to provide
the requisite economic assistance. At the West Indies Intergovernmental
Conference in May 1961, Williams had indicated that if Jamaica withdrew
from the federation, Trinidad would not assume any additional financial
burdens to save it. The West Indies Federation was then receiving approxi-
mately 87 percent of its locally raised revenue from Jamaica and Trinidad.
Although Williams opposed being part of a new Eastern Caribbean Fed-
eration without the appropriate financial support, he was not averse to hav-
ing some of the other islands join his country in a unitary statehood. In April
1962, for example, he invited the Leeward and the Windward Islands to
consider becoming part of Trinidad. This extraordinary invitation, if ac-
cepted, would have had profound implications for the political landscape of
the region, for Trinidad and Tobago, and for Williams's leadership and
stature in the area.
The Williams invitation had an immediate resonance on the neighboring


--- PAGE 195 ---
l82 COURTING GRENADA
island of Grenada. This island, of some 87,000 persons in 1962, enjoyed a
special relationship with its larger and wealthier neighbor. Residents of the
two islands traveled back and forth, and Grenadians migrated to Trinidad to
seek employment. In 1962 there were forty thousand Grenadians living in
Trinidad and working in a variety of occupations. Trinidadians provided
them with a generally welcoming environment, and many Grenadians be-
came integrated into the host society through their involvement in its cul-
tural and social life. Grenada, to be sure, was the junior partner, but the two
islands enjoyed a harmonious if unequal relationship.
Although emigration to Trinidad and England represented a safety valve
for the Grenadian economy, the island was experiencing severe economic
deprivation. In 1965 an economic survey found that "in common with other
under-developed economies, Grenada shows unmistakable signs of high
levels of unemployment and even higher levels of under-employment." Dur-
ing the period 1954-60, the island's economy grew at a rate slightly under 3
percent annually, compared to about 8.5 percent in Trinidad and Tobago.
The survey concluded that Grenada's economy "fitted very closely the classi-
cal description of an underdeveloped country with low income levels result-
ing from low production and productivity, under-utilised labour and primi-
tive methods of production."7
Williams raised the question of unitary statehood at a time when Grenada
was preparing for new elections. The island's constitution had been sus-
pended for three months in early 1962 after a Commission of Enquiry found
that the government led by flamboyant trade unionist Eric Gairy was guilty of
corruption and intimidation of civil servants. The restoration of the con-
stitution required new elections, which were scheduled to take place in
September.
The principal opposition to Gairy's return to office came from Herbert
Blaize, the leader of the Grenada National Party. Blaize, in the initial stages
of the campaign, identified "squandermania" as the main issue. Despite the
widely acknowledged view that the previous Gairy government had been
corrupt, the issue failed to stimulate any enthusiasm among the majority of
voters. The question of unitary statehood with Trinidad, Blaize discovered,
provided just the right galvanizing issue for his party. Grenada's business
community, which had extensive trading links with Trinidad, members of
the middle class seeking to escape from Gairy and what his return to power
portended, and those who wanted the freedom to emigrate to Trinidad,


--- PAGE 196 ---
COURTING GRENADA 183
found unitary statehood with Trinidad an attractive proposition. These vot-
ers gave Blaize a 6-to-4 win over Eric Gairy and his Grenada Labour Party.
Blaize's victory forced Williams's hand on the nature of Trinidad's rela-
tionship with the "Little Eight," as Barbados and the Leeward and Windward
Islands were now called. It was, and would remain, a relationship in dy-
namic formation, subject to bewildering fits and starts. On September 21,
1962, barely three weeks after becoming prime minister of Trinidad and a
few days after Blaize's electoral victory in Grenada, Williams met with the
secretary of state for the colonies in London. According to the minutes of the
meeting, he told the secretary that Trinidad had no desire to "absorb" any of
the Little Eight islands. Williams also said:
The Party which has just won the election [in Grenada] . . . pledged to
explore a relationship with Trinidad and a similar movement might de-
velop in St. Vincent. But Trinidad would definitely not wish to absorb
more than these two during the next three or four years. She might be
ready to take on Dominica and St. Lucia later on, despite the French
influence in those islands. Trinidad would definitely not want to absorb
St. Kitts or Antigua because of their distance away and the trade union
element, which dominates their politics. She has associations with Mont-
serrat but her ability to deal with that small island would depend on
communications.8
Statements such as these revealed Williams's pan-Caribbean dreams. He
noted that he had had an exploratory meeting on unitary statehood with Eric
Gairy in February 1962, and that Gairy had proposed a separate Parliament in
Grenada in addition to Grenadian representation in the Trinidad Legislature.
Williams said that he had "torn this idea to bits." In any event, he continued,
Trinidad and Tobago would not accept any of the islands with more than a
county council status. This meant that any island that was absorbed by
Trinidad and Tobago would be relegated to the status of a county in the new
nation. But he was in no hurry to arrange a meeting with the newly elected
government in Grenada. Moreover, he had promised the former colonial
secretary, Hugh Fraser, to wait for two years before assimilating any of the
Little Eight.
Williams stressed that Trinidad's absorption of the islands would depend
on the extent of Britain's financial support to improve their economies. His
country could not share its own limited development resources with the


--- PAGE 197 ---
184 COURTING GRENADA
other islands. This insistence on a significant commitment of resources by
the United Kingdom for the islands of the Little Eight as a prerequisite for
unitary status with Trinidad remained Williams's consistent theme. The
secretary of state for the colonies urged him to keep the Grenada initiative
"uncrystallized" until he had a chance to visit the West Indies and determine
whether six or seven islands in a federation would be less viable than eight.9
Blaize, of course, was not privy to these discussions between Williams
and the secretary of state for the colonies. Armed with what he considered to
be an electoral mandate for political union with Trinidad and Tobago, he lost
no time in requesting the permission of the secretary of state to open discus-
sions with Trinidad. In mid-October the secretary responded: "I have no
objection to your government having talks direct with the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago on this subject, on the understanding that they are
purely exploratory at this stage, without commitment either to you or to the
British Government. The question of the British Government's joining in
any such talks can be considered later, in the light of the results of the ini-
tial talks."10
Chief Minister Blaize immediately contacted Patrick Solomon, the acting
prime minister of Trinidad, to arrange for the first of their discussions. The
two officials agreed to begin as soon as Eric Williams returned from a
European trip. Based on the statements of Grenadian officials, it was clear
that they underestimated the difficulties they would confront and the speed
with which an agreement with Trinidad could be reached. Blaize thought
that the negotiations could be completed in a year, although Williams had
earlier predicted two years. Whereas Williams, as he had told the secretary of
state, wanted Grenada to become a county of Trinidad, Jimmy Lloyd, the
island's administrator, appeared not to envision such a sharp diminution
in Grenada's status, noting on October 4: "We are not unmindful of the
fact that the acceptance of Unitary Statehood within Trinidad and Tobago
will mean diminishing some of the direct power and authority over our
people but my government is convinced that this can be achieved without
loss of dignity."11
Herbert Blaize made a similar point in a radio broadcast on October 17.
He assured his listeners that "this business of Unitary State of Trinidad and
Grenada and Tobago is not an association of states; it is not merely Grenada
attempting to join with Trinidad and Tobago; it also means Trinidad and
Tobago willing to join with Grenada." Blaize wanted to dispel any notion


--- PAGE 198 ---
COURTING GRENADA 185
that Grenada was a mendicant. As he put it, "Grenada is not going cap in
hand, or on bended knees, or begging for economic security. Both Trinidad
and Tobago and Grenada are expected to enter into these discussions on a
basis of mutual partnership."12
Eric Williams, on the other hand, never saw the potential marriage as
being a contract between equals. He clung to the position that Grenada,
without massive economic aid from Britain, would tax Trinidad's limited
resources. Trinidad's per capita income was, after all, more than twice that
of Grenada's, a fact not lost on colonial officials and Grenada alike. But
Williams had no desire to expend his country's funds on Grenada, thereby
risking economic stability at home. On October 31, 1962, an official at the
Commonwealth Relations Office complained that Williams was likely "so to
arrange things that the size of the dowry to be granted to Grenada becomes
the determining factor in whether or not union will come off."13 In Novem-
ber Williams told West Indian students in London that "the discussions that
are impending in respect of the incorporation of Grenada into the state of
Trinidad and Tobago would not in any circumstances involve Trinidad and
Tobago carrying Britain's baby for her." He predicted: "I expect nothing to
come out of the negotiations with Grenada."14
Colonial officials were always annoyed by Williams's frequent private and
public insistence that political union carried an expensive price tag. Time
and time again he asserted his nation's inability to assume Britain's financial
obligations to Grenada. The British High Commissioner's Office reported
on the following exchange between Williams and a journalist at a press
conference in Port of Spain on November 25,1962:
[Question]: Did I understand you to say that you would have nothing
to do with Grenada joining a unitary state if Britain did not make a
substantial grant?
[Answer]: Dr. Williams is reported to have replied to [the] following
effect. Trinidad's ties with Grenada were close but what did the ques-
tioner want him to do. Since 1956 his Government had tried to repair
generations of colonial neglect and 981/2% of Trinidad's development had
been paid for from local resources. In Grenada the neglect was worse.
Was he to saddle the people of Trinidad and Tobago with yet another
bill—and Grenada might not be the only bill. Not at all. He had to deal
with realities and this time Britain was not going to get away with it.15


--- PAGE 199 ---
l86 COURTING GRENADA
The United Kingdom's developing policy on political union was charac-
terized by a lack of clarity and much ambivalence. British officials con-
fronted two important issues: first, the need to develop a coherent policy on
the potential federation of Barbados and the Leeward and Windward Is-
lands, and second, the need for a policy on Grenada's desire to be integrated
into Trinidad and Tobago. On the former, the United Kingdom had four
options: (1) encourage federation of the eight territories, (2) try to establish a
looser form of association such as the sharing of common services, (3) keep
the territories as separate entities, or (4) effect their integration into Trinidad
and Tobago.
***** The government of Grenada stood alone in its enthusiastic en-
dorsement of unitary status with Trinidad and Tobago. Although others
such as Montserrat and St. Vincent did not oppose the prospect of doing
so, the clear preference among them was for a federation of the "Little
Eighf'with Grenada or the "Little Seven" without Grenada. The Colonial
Office, in a memorandum dated October 15, 1962, argued that federation
offered the "best prospect of advancing all the islands to independence and
of securing some measure of economic vitality for them." If they became
independent as a federated unit, they would be eligible for aid from sources
other than the United Kingdom, "thereby lessening the burden on us." In
addition, provided that the central government was made strong enough,
federation offered "the best prospect of cutting the small island political
bosses down to size."
Federation, the memorandum suggested, had its disadvantages as well.
The islands would continue to need substantial aid. "The smaller islands," it
asserted, "have shown themselves to be financially irresponsible and admin-
istratively incompetent." That being the case, federation would mean that
"we shall have even less control over the way they spend our money than we
have now." There was not much to recommend a looser form of association.
Political independence could hardly be granted to "a common services orga-
nization and ... it would leave the small island political bosses dominant in
their own territories." Keeping the islands separate was also not an inviting
prospect for the United Kingdom. The islands would remain dependent on
the mother country, which would be "stuck with them indefinitely and we
could expect growing political frustration in the islands, which might lead
to trouble."


--- PAGE 200 ---
COURTING GRENADA 187
The Colonial Office welcomed the idea of the islands' absorption by
Trinidad, because "we thereby get rid of all responsibility." They would
become part of a unitary independent state with responsibility for their
welfare residing with the central government in Port of Spain. But the office
feared that Williams would demand "very considerable sums" to assimilate
any of the islands. Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of each
option, the Colonial Office concluded that federation, "provided it can be
brought about on suitable terms—particularly with a strong central Govern-
ment—offers the best solution to the problems of the area."
But the United Kingdom should not place any obstacles in the way of the
negotiations between Trinidad and Grenada. Still, the Colonial Office recog-
nized that the "defection" of Grenada to Trinidad and Tobago "will diminish
the already meager resources of the Eight—though not fatally." If some of
the other islands followed Grenada's lead, this would jeopardize any pros-
pect that the rest would federate, the memorandum surmised.16
The animating impulse behind British policy was to jettison the islands as
quickly as possible and at the lowest possible cost. Britain was prepared to
endorse any means to this end provided the initiative appeared to emanate
from the islands themselves and not from London. But although Williams
was never an ardent suitor, he would have become one if the dowry had been
sufficiently attractive. With the exception of Grenada, the other islands were
not committed to a marriage with Trinidad and Tobago, a match Britain
would have welcomed but did not consistently encourage.
There was, understandably, some opposition in Trinidad to the prospect
of integration with Grenada. The opposition Democratic Labour Party (DLP)
voiced concern about its potentially negative impact on the economy and
social services in Trinidad and Tobago. In the legislature on November 23,
1962, the deputy leader of the opposition, Ashford Sinanan, declared that
Trinidad should reject this "dangerous experiment, which is likely to over-
burden further the people of this country." He thought that union would
exacerbate the already high unemployment and underemployment problems
and would place great pressures on schools, hospitals, and other public
institutions. Sinanan also believed that the business community, in particu-
lar, would resist any additional taxation that might be needed to support the
services provided by these institutions.17
In reporting Sinanan's observations to the Commonwealth Relations Of-
fice, the British High Commissioner's Office in Port of Spain noted the


--- PAGE 201 ---
l88 COURTING GRENADA
"mounting" public opposition to union. The official (presumably Norman
Costar) commented on the prevailing "selfish, but natural feelings in all
communities" that union would mean loss of jobs. There was, he said, "a
longstanding genuine fear of Grenadians swamping the labour market." But
the question of union also had "racial undertones." The "earlier rumblings"
of the Indians "have now developed into a flat statement of opposition" to
union. He believed that this was due to the pressure of the Indian Associa-
tion, a powerful civic organization. "Indian feeling that union with Grenada
is a move designed to prevent them catching up numerically with the Negro
population in the country in fact lies at the root of the opposition." Assess-
ing the overall situation, the official concluded that "it is fair to say that at
the moment the wind of union seems to be blowing colder."18 Sensing this
internal dissent, Deputy Prime Minister Patrick Solomon said that union was
"too big an issue" for the government to decide by itself, promising that
citizens would be given a chance to express their views, presumably by
means of a referendum. Such assurances notwithstanding, the DLP never
wavered in its opposition to the projected union with Grenada. In July 1964,
for example, DLP leader Rudranath Capildeo denounced unitary statehood
as "dangerous political talk" and an effort to "play politics to upset the DLP
vote." The government, he alleged, was "playing with fire" and "the DLP is
not willing to burn."19
The primary legal obstacle to union was that it needed a constitutional
amendment endorsed by three-fourths of the lower house of Parliament.
Since the Williams government controlled only two-thirds of the seats, it
was highly unlikely that political union would be approved, given the op-
position of the DLP. The politics of the situation, to be sure, would be-
come even more muddled if a referendum demonstrated majority support
for union.
Williams and Blaize also had to contend with opposition to political
union among some Grenadians. The administrator of Grenada reported to
the Colonial Office in March 1964 that he sensed "a lingering but definite
suspicion of Dr. Williams' intentions for this and the other small islands."
Despite an early flirtation with the idea, Eric Gairy had become a vocal
opponent. The opposition leader strongly supported Grenada's becoming a
part of the proposed Little Eight Federation, arguing that "other countries
were more likely to provide assistance to the small underdeveloped islands
than they would to a wealthier Trinidad. He believed that the funds that


--- PAGE 202 ---
COURTING GRENADA 189
unitary statehood would require should be used exclusively to enhance Gre-
nada's development. Gairy feared that Trinidad would absorb Grenada's
tourist trade and that its higher wage scale might upset the wage structure in
Grenada. This, he predicted, would contribute to labor unrest. Gairy was
also apprehensive that Grenada would lose its personality as a consequence
of unitary statehood. He said that some Grenadians thought that Trinidad
was "associated" with communism. This was an absurd allegation, given
Williams's unwavering anticommunist stance.20
A petition from "women drawn from all classes and sections of the
Grenada community" expressed fear of Trinidadian "contamination." The
petitioners, characterized by the administrator of Grenada as Gairy support-
ers, were "horrified at the spectacle that Grenada is hardly likely to escape
contamination in time in the face of the general and growing disregard for
law and order in Trinidad." They also were alarmed by the inability of the
police to control the "constantly mounting" incidence of violence and crime
on the island, viewing with "special concern" the assaults on "women and
young girls" by "vicious and unscrupulous males."21 Gairy, the chief oppo-
nent of unitary statehood, had little credibility in official circles in London
and Port of Spain. Indeed, Eric Williams ventured the opinion that he should
be "in gaol."22 British officials, on their part, could not understand Gairy's
appeal to Grenada's working class. One Colonial Office memorandum de-
scribed him as "a thug and a gangster [who] has an immense hold over the
illiterate masses in Grenada who regard him as a kind of Messiah."23
Such uncomfortable realities posed serious difficulties for Williams,
Blaize, and a British government that was anxious to dispose of Grenada
either as part of a Little Eight Federation or as a territory of Trinidad and
Tobago. The situation was complicated by British officials' distrust of Eric
Williams: their attribution of the worst motives to him and their obsession
with making him appear responsible for the failure of the discussions if they
did fail. They were even prepared to play Grenada off against Trinidad if that
would place Williams in a bad light.
Consequently, British policy on the issue of union had several dimen-
sions. First, colonial officials did not wish to discourage the prospects of
union, since a federation of the Leeward and Windward Islands—or the Little
Seven—"might never come off and, if it did, would be slightly less expensive
without Grenada." Clearly, the British wanted to be excessively parsimonious
in their relationship with the seven small islands, which always teetered on


--- PAGE 203 ---
190 COURTING GRENADA
the edge of bankruptcy. Second, Britain hoped that political union would
succeed because its failure would result in Eric Gairy's return to office, a
most worrisome prospect. Third, officials wanted "to ensure that in the event
of failure the responsibility clearly lay with the Trinidad Government."24
Not surprisingly, Williams planned to blame the British if the negotia-
tions failed. The principal issue was the size of the "dowry," as British
officials characterized a potential financial settlement. On December 10,
1962, the British High Commission in Port of Spain predicted that Williams
would present the United Kingdom with an "impossibly large bill as the
price of take over." The two governments' division on this issue seemed to
be irreconcilable.25
The United Kingdom, however, conceived a disingenuous policy in which
Herbert Blaize was expected to play, unwittingly, a malevolent role. Colonial
officials saw Blaize as an acceptable alternative to the unpredictable and
corrupt Eric Gairy. But he did not inspire their deep respect. "He is a very
good chap," one official wrote, "but needs help in clearing his mind."26 In a
December 1962 meeting, Blaize had assured the colonial secretary of state
that the evidence would "prove that Grenada could hold her own without
being a drag on any other territory." Seizing upon this comment, the secre-
tary told Blaize that Grenada should be careful lest it kill the possibility of
unitary statehood by requesting too much money from Britain.27
In an internal memorandum that referenced the December 1962 meeting,
Denis Williams of the Colonial Office observed that the statements by Blaize
and the colonial secretary "provide the way out of our difficulty," as far as
financial support for political union was concerned. "While accepting that
any proposals put forward must deal with the economic as well as the
political aspects of union, what we need to ensure is that the proposals
acceptable to Grenada are also acceptable to Her Majesty's Government. If
such proposals are then not acceptable to Trinidad, then the onus for their
rejection is on Trinidad and not on Her Majesty's Government."
In Machiavellian-like fashion, Denis Williams suggested how this trav-
esty could be played out: "The ideal answer to our difficulty, therefore, lies in
our persuading Grenada to put forward modest proposals to Trinidad and
not simply to subscribe to exorbitant proposals put forward by Trinidad. If
we have to face the situation that the initial offer must come from Trinidad,
then I suggest if we can get the government of Grenada to reject the offer
on the grounds that Trinidadian claims are exorbitant, we are still off the


--- PAGE 204 ---
COURTING GRENADA 191
hook." He recommended that colonial officials in Grenada be enlisted to
advise Blaize not to acquiesce to "an exorbitant demand from Trinidad for
economic assistance."28
Blaize, to the extent that he was aware of these machinations, could
hardly have been expected to sign his own death warrant. He had confided to
the new Grenada administrator, L. A. Pinard, that if union failed, he would
feel compelled to resign. Surely a disagreement with Eric Williams over the
critical issue of the extent of British financial support would have invited the
prime minister's wrath, guaranteed the failure of the project, and produced
Blaize's resignation. Britain's bete noire, Eric Gairy, would undoubtedly
have been returned to office.
Faced with this potential scenario, Ms. M. Z. Terry of the Colonial Office,
in November 1963, complained that she saw "no way to get Blaize off the
hook." She thought that "the best tactic is to take all possible steps to
maintain the illusion that union with Trinidad is still a possibility and to
keep the idea in play as long as may be necessary." The immediate challenge
was to buy some time "during which external events and developments (and
even possible internal developments in Grenada, such as an accident to Mr.
Gairy) might come to the rescue." Comments such as these reflected the
profound sterility of British policy with regard to the matter at hand.29
Eric Williams did little to move the discussions forward. As time wore on,
he seemed to have realized that the obstacles to political union were insur-
mountable and wished to extricate himself. However, Stanley J. G. Fingland
of the British High Commissioner's Office in Port of Spain was convinced
that "Dr. Williams has never really been interested in Grenada for itself, but
took up the question for a mixture of economic and political motives at a
time when other avenues [federation] for increasing Trinidad's influence
and safeguarding her interests seemed closed to him. His interest in Gre-
nada was only a means to an end."30
This comment had some merit, but it gave short shrift to Williams's long-
standing commitment to regional integration. Williams, in his turn, was
getting ready to throw in the towel, informing the secretary of state in July
1963 that in order to discharge his obligation to Blaize, he would introduce
the constitutional amendment in Parliament that was needed to facilitate
union. Williams knew that this was an empty exercise, since there was little
chance that the amendment would be adopted. The prime minister, how-
ever, never kept his word.31


--- PAGE 205 ---
I92 COURTING GRENADA
Having staked his political life on effecting unitary statehood with Trini-
dad and Tobago, Herbert Blaize remained naively optimistic throughout
1963 that his goal would be accomplished. In December 1962 he had led a
delegation of Grenadian officials to meet with Prime Minister Williams in
Port of Spain to initiate talks on political union. Blaize returned from the
talks, praising Williams, his government, and the people of Trinidad and
Tobago "for creating the proper atmosphere in which delicate negotiations
must take place." But, he cautioned, "a start is not necessarily the end."32
***** The December talks resulted in an agreement to create five fact-
finding commissions, comprised solely of officials from Trinidad and To-
bago, to prepare reports on five major issues. The first and most important
commission would prepare a development plan for Grenada. As Blaize ex-
plained in a radio broadcast on December 12: "In order to have constructive
discussion on any subject so important as the joining together of two territo-
ries into one, a reasonably good idea of the development potential of both
territories must be obtained."33 Accordingly, the "Commission on the De-
velopment Program for Grenada" was to establish such a program, "taking
into account the proposals prepared by the former Federal Government for
the period 1959-1964, and to make recommendations for its financing."
The second commission, called the "Fact Finding Commission on Gre-
nada Public Service," was to undertake a study of the Grenada civil service
and recommend ways in which it could be reorganized and integrated into
that of Trinidad and Tobago. The third commission, known as the "Eco-
nomic Commission," was to examine "the implications" of assimilating the
fiscal structure of Grenada into that of Trinidad and Tobago and the integ-
ration of the two economies. The fourth commission, the "Legal and Con-
stitutional Commission," was to study the constitutional implications of
integration, with a focus on citizenship, electoral law, judicial and legal
organization,
 and so on. The fifth commission, the "Local Government
Commission," was empowered to study the organization and operations of
local government authorities in Grenada and to recommend how much local
autonomy Grenada should possess in a unitary state. These five commis-
sions began their work in December 1962 and January 1963.
As the civil servants continued their fact-finding studies, Eric Williams
once again began to harbor dreams of absorbing some of the other islands
as well. To maintain his credibility with these islands, he told Norman


--- PAGE 206 ---
COURTING GRENADA
Costar that he would "be obliged to attack Britain for providing insufficient
aid to enable the federation of the Little Eight to get going." According to
Costar, Williams predicted that the proposed federation would not occur
and Barbados would seek its independence. Williams "looked forward ulti-
mately to the day when Trinidad would pick up Grenada, St. Vincent and
perhaps St. Lucia. Jamaica could take the Leeward Islands, and perhaps
Barbados could take one or two islands." Costar added, cynically, that the
ones that Barbados could potentially acquire were "presumably those not
wanted by Dr. Williams." Williams stressed, however, that much would
depend on the amount of aid the United Kingdom would be willing to
commit to the development of the island economies.34
With the exception of Barbados, Williams was not certain that the islands
deserved independence. In late 1963 he had told Costar that the British gov-
ernment should not succumb to pressure to grant them independence. Wil-
liams believed that if Jamaica, Trinidad, and an independent Barbados con-
tinued to develop closer ties among themselves, the smaller islands might
be persuaded to join them, provided that they did not embrace individual
courses of their own. Williams, in keeping with his Pan-Caribbean vision,
thought that Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti should be invited to
join any renewed effort at regional integration.35
Williams confided his fears about political union with Grenada to the
Duke of Edinburgh when His Royal Highness visited Tobago in 1964. Wil-
liams had emphasized that he was not enthusiastic about unitary statehood
but that it was politically advantageous for him to pursue it. Williams, the
duke reported, was worried about Grenadians migrating to Trinidad as well
as integrating Grenada's inefficient civil service into that of Trinidad and
Tobago. Impatient with Williams because of such seeming vacillation and
ambivalence on unitary statehood and other matters, British officials blasted
him. When Williams wrote to the secretary of state in November 1964 on the
Grenada issue, Denis Williams characterized the letter as "the kind of tissue
of half and quarter truths one has come to expect in any communication
from Dr. Williams. He always gives a highly selective version of events,
convenient to his own thesis, which has little relation to facts." The colonial
official added contemptuously, "That, after all, is the reason why he failed to
get a fellowship at All Souls!"36
Not content with accusing Prime Minister Williams of mendacity, Denis
Williams went on to blame him for the apparent failure of the attempts to
193


--- PAGE 207 ---
I94 COURTING GRENADA
create an Eastern Caribbean Federation and for demanding an exorbitant
price to absorb Grenada. "Dr. Williams' blatant pan Caribbean ambitions
are anathema to all the other territories in the Eastern Caribbean except
Grenada," wrote the colonial official. "To them he is 'the threat from the
South.' If we once provided extra money on this scale for Grenada, we
should appear to the other territories to be providing financial encourage-
ment to Trinidadian imperialism," he concluded.37
Such unhelpful statements by colonial officials reflected their inability to
address the problems of the Eastern Caribbean islands with understanding,
good judgment, and foresight. Eric Williams was not the stumbling block to
the federation of the Little Eight or even to unitary statehood with Grenada.
These islands stood no chance of achieving some degree of economic suffi-
ciency without substantial British aid to compensate for centuries of neglect
by the imperial government. Williams, more than anyone else, recognized
that truth. Colonial officials knew it, too, hence their extreme sensitivity to
Williams's demands and criticisms.
Williams's insistence on significant aid for Grenada as the sine qua non
of unitary statehood received substantial support when the Commission on
the Development Program for Grenada and Economic Commission pre-
sented their reports. The Development Program Commission recommended
capital expenditures of approximately TT$32 million (£6.5 million) in Gre-
nada for the years 1964-68; this represented "the minimum sum required to
push the economy of Grenada forward." The commission urged that about
TT$12 million be earmarked for agricultural development, TT$5 million for
roads and bridges, and substantial sums for social services. For Grenada to
become economically self-supporting, the commission recommended capi-
tal expenditures of TT$6o million (£12 million) on the island's infrastructure
and agricultural base over a ten-year period.38
The Development Program Commission calculated that at least TT$29
million (£6 million) of the money needed for the first five-year plan would
have to come from internal sources. Recognizing that Trinidad and Tobago
could not provide those resources, it recommended that the funds be ob-
tained in the form of soft loans rather than grants. Such loans were prefer-
able to commercial loans at existing market rates, because Grenada would
have difficulty repaying them. The soft loans should be for a longer term
than the customary commercial loans and should carry interest rates from
zero to 21/2 percent. These loans should not be tied to the import content


--- PAGE 208 ---
COURTING GRENADA I95
usually associated with development loans, whereby the recipient must use
the money to purchase goods and services only from the creditor country.
This was one of the requirements that had led Eric Williams to reject the
golden handshake on the occasion of his nation's independence.
The Economic Commission's report presented a comprehensive survey of
the economy of Grenada, as well as a detailed examination of the major
implications of the assimilation of the fiscal structures by Trinidad and of
the integration of the two nations' economies. The report also included a
cost study of the proposed unitary state emphasizing aspects of public fi-
nance, namely capital receipts and expenditures, current receipts and expen-
ditures, and the balance of payments.
After assessing the economic condition of Grenada and its long-term
prospects, this commission noted that "the need to develop the economy of
Grenada does not arise from the establishment of the unitary state." Rather,
"some effort to promote the well being of the people of this colony would be
necessary regardless of which of the various alternatives for political organi-
zation may be selected." The commission was convinced that "the integra-
tion of the economies of Trinidad and Tobago and Grenada hold out the
enhanced prospects for economic development in both islands."39 Accord-
ingly, it recommended a program of phased implementation of five eco-
nomic objectives, namely:
1. A unified tariff
2. A common tax rate and structure at the national level
3. Free movement of products between the two islands to create a larger
market
4. Free movement of the factors of production with[in] the area, that is
to say capital and labour
5. The greatest possible parity between the social services of the two
countries in order to minimize the pressure for population movement
from the more rural to the more urban areas.40
The program of phased economic integration, as well as the one for
development, should be supervised jointly by officials from Grenada and
Trinidad who, together, would constitute a mixed commission. But, the re-
port cautioned, "firm commitments for a programme flow of capital funds
from the United Kingdom for an agreed time period is a fundamental pre-
requisite, and so too is the commitment to assist in the financing of certain


--- PAGE 209 ---
196 COURTING GRENADA
current expenditures." The first two commissions both recognized the cen-
trality of significant British economic assistance for the success of unitary
statehood. This, to be sure, was unwelcome news to colonial officials, but
they could hardly have expected to have heard otherwise.41
The development and economic reports provided Eric Williams with ad-
ditional ammunition for his case that massive economic aid was required for
the potential unitary state. As usual, colonial officials demurred. His politi-
cal future in grave peril if political union was stillborn, Herbert Blaize pro-
posed a compromise. He asked the United Kingdom to foot one-third of the
cost of the development program and support his island's request for loans
elsewhere. The colonial secretary turned a deaf ear to this proposal, inform-
ing Blaize that his government's limited resources and competing overseas
claims made it impossible to endorse his request.42
Eric Williams was never the compliant figure that Herbert Blaize was in
his relationship with the Colonial Office. Whereas colonial officials smarted
from Williams's verbal assaults and worried over his every move, they had
little respect for Blaize because they knew that their support was crucial to
his remaining in office. A memorandum from the West Indian Department
at the Colonial Office, for example, described Blaize as "morally sound" but
"politically ineffective." A personable, gullible, and compromising individ-
ual, Blaize became a tragic figure caught between the arrows emanating
from London and Port of Spain.43
Throughout much of the lengthy period in which Blaize waited for the
unitary statehood issue to be resolved, he never seemed to have lost con-
fidence in Williams's intentions. In June 1964 Norman Costar observed that
"Blaize still seems to be under Dr. Williams' spell, even though other West
Indian leaders are perhaps becoming disenchanted."44 After a visit to Port of
Spain in November 1964, Blaize expressed satisfaction with the progress of
the negotiations, although by then it should have been clear that unitary
statehood was experiencing its last gasp.
By the spring of 1965, however, Blaize was beginning to doubt whether
his dream of unitary statehood could be accomplished. A Colonial Office
memorandum in April welcomed the seeming lack of movement on the
issue. Such inactivity was desirable, it reasoned, "in light of our own policy
of helping to keep alive the illusion of union so as to maintain Mr. Blaize in
power in Grenada in the hope that something might happen to release him
from his electoral commitments."45


--- PAGE 210 ---
COURTING GRENADA I97
***** Despite his own doubts, Eric Williams never completely shut
the door on unitary statehood. Had it been possible, he would have wel-
comed Grenada by itself, but his preference was for as many of the islands as
appeared feasible. Norman Costar was close to the mark when he said: "My
guess would be that his ambitions focus on the whole shoal in the Eastern
Caribbean and not on a single sprat, even one as attractive as Grenada."
Williams never cut bait even when he realized that unitary statehood was an
exercise in futility. As Costar expressed it rather colorfully, Williams "wants
to keep Blaize on a string. Everytime Blaize may feel tempted to write union
off, Dr. Williams will give another pull to the string." Whenever Blaize
demonstrated any interest in another regional grouping such as a federa-
tion of the Windward Islands, Williams felt that that was "the right moment
for a tug."46
In the end, Williams neither hooked a sprat nor the whole shoal. Toward
late 1965 the issue of political union disappeared from the consciousness of
all the parties involved. By that time, Blaize, Williams, and colonial officials
had begun to realize the futility of the project, an awareness that seems to
have been unduly late in coming. The British government was left with
Grenada on its hands. As the disappointed officials put it, "Our present
policy is really one of keeping alive an illusion to maintain Mr. Blaize in
office in the hope that something will turn up. But nothing seems very likely
to turn up except—alas—Mr. Gairy."47
In retrospect, the realization of a unitary state of Trinidad and Grenada
was illusory. The DLP in Trinidad opposed the plan, and without its support
there was no chance that the requisite constitutional amendment would have
passed. Williams did not pursue political union as aggressively as he could
have, fearing that Trinidad and Tobago would have had to assume Grenada's
considerable economic burdens. Williams was also torn between a policy of
integration with Grenada and one that involved the absorption of several
additional islands. The two policies were not necessarily contradictory, but
he pursued both simultaneously, to the detriment of both. Britain wanted to
be rid of Grenada at the lowest possible cost, a policy steeped in myopia,
duplicity, and selfishness. It did not work because it was morally bankrupt,
and the West Indian leaders knew it. The trusting and somewhat naive
Herbert Blaize was the victim of forces he could neither shape nor control.


--- PAGE 211 ---
CHAPTER 6
BLEEDING GUIANA
***** Situated on the northeastern coast of South America, British
Guiana was the largest of the Anglophone Caribbean colonies. Its area of
83,000 square miles made it slightly smaller than the British Isles. In 1965 its
population numbered only 605,000 and was concentrated in Georgetown,
the capital city, and on the coastal belt. British Guiana was home to many
ethnic groups. Indo-Guianese, who were the descendants of indentured
servants from South Asia, numbered 297,000, constituting about 50 percent
of the population. The African Guianese, the descendants of enslaved Afri-
cans, comprised about 192,000 persons, or 32 percent of the inhabitants.
Racially mixed groups, generally referred to as "coloureds," amounted to
74,000 people. The descendants of Portuguese immigrants from Madeira
numbered 7,000, other Europeans 3,000, Amerindians 28,000, and the Chi-
nese 4,000.
The modern political history of British Guiana began in 1950, when a
young Indo-Guianese dentist, Dr. Cheddi Jagan, along with his American-
born wife Janet, founded the People's Progressive Party (PPP). The new
party received the support of Forbes Burnham, an African Guianese attorney,
who became its deputy leader. Attracting the votes of Indo-Guianese and
African Guianese, the PPP won the elections that were held in April 1953 and
Jagan became the first premier. His government was short-lived, however, as
the British government became alarmed at Jagan's public assertion of Marx-
ism and the behavior of his administration. It suspended the constitution a
bare six months after Jagan had assumed office, returning British Guiana to
crown colony status, or direct rule.
The association between Cheddi Jagan and Forbes Burnham ended in
1955 after a series of disputes based mainly on their rivalry for the leadership
of the PPP and to some extent ideological differences. Two years later Burn-
ham founded the People's National Congress (PNC), which attracted sub-


--- PAGE 212 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 199
stantial support from the African Guianese population, while most Indo-
Guianese remained with the PPP. When the constitution was restored in
1957 with severe restrictions on the power of the elected legislature, the PPP
won the new elections, and Jagan once again became the dominant political
personage in the colony, although the office of premier no longer existed.
The future did not augur well for British Guiana. Party alignment began to
crystallize along racial lines, and Jagan's continued articulation of Marxist
dogma earned him the antipathy of officials in the United Kingdom and the
United States. This was the era of the Cold War and the political anxieties it
engendered in the Americas. Fidel Castro's ascendancy to power in Cuba in
1959 and his alliance with the Soviet Union thereafter exacerbated American
and British fears that British Guiana could become the second communist
bastion in the hemisphere.
The colony, however, remained sufficiently stable for the British govern-
ment to call a conference of its leaders in London in March 1960 to deter-
mine its future. Delegates at the conference endorsed the principle of in-
dependence for British Guiana. In July 1961 full internal self-government
was introduced, although responsibility for defense and external affairs re-
mained with the British governor. But there was trouble on the horizon. In
the general election held in late 1961, the PPP received 43 percent of the
votes but won 20 seats in the 35-member legislature. The PNC won only II
seats but received 41 percent of the votes. A newly formed party, the United
Force (UF), received 16 percent of the votes, winning 4 seats. Led by Peter
D'Aguiar, a wealthy businessman of Portuguese descent, this conservative
party won the support of white voters, coloureds, and members of the mid-
dle class in general.
Critics of Cheddi Jagan were disturbed by the fact that his was a minority
government, having received only 43 percent of the votes cast. They were
troubled by his pro-communist rhetoric and his attempts to seek closer
relationships with Cuba and the Eastern Bloc countries. His wife Janet, a
gifted organizer and Marxist theoretician, was his acknowledged ideological
mentor and principal adviser. Jagan's opponents feared independence under
his leadership and were worried that he would continue to remain in office
indefinitely if the "first past the post" electoral system were not changed.
Indians, who comprised the largest sector of the multiracial electorate, were
expected to remain the basis of his support.
The period 1962-63 saw the country wracked by one crisis after another,


--- PAGE 213 ---
200 BLEEDING GUIANA
Cheddi Jagan, premier of British Guiana, greets Eric Williams at the airport on
Williams's arris's arrival in the territory, March 1963. Photograph courtesy of Eric Williams
Memorial
 Collection, University of the West Indies (Trinidad and Tobago). © Eric
Williams Memorial Collection and used by permission.
stimulated in part by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Unhappiness with
the budget that Jagan introduced in 1962 led to a major strike and social
disturbances mainly in Georgetown. British troops were hastily dispatched
to restore law and order. In 1963 Jagan introduced legislation to ensure that
the ppp-backed Guiana Sugar Workers Union (GSWU) would replace the
older and more independent Manpower Citizens Association (MPCA) as the
organized voice of the sugar workers. This precipitated a lengthy strike that
pitted Indians against blacks, especially in rural areas, again necessitating
the use of British troops to restore order.
In October 1963 the Guianese leaders met with British officials in London
to settle their constitutional differences. To resolve the crisis in their country,
the two opposition parties endorsed a system of proportional representa-
tion. Cheddi Jagan, recognizing that this could lead to his removal from
office, adamantly rejected the proposal. He also proposed reducing the vot-


--- PAGE 214 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 2OI
ing age to eighteen, a change that would be to his advantage in view of the
growing Indian population. Peter D'Aguiar and Forbes Burnham opposed
this proposal. The three leaders also failed to agree on whether fresh elec-
tions should be held before independence.
Having failed to reach an agreement on these critical issues, Jagan,
D'Aguiar, and Burnham invited the secretary of state for the colonies to
resolve them on their behalf. "We are agreed to ask the British Government,"
their letter read, "to settle on their authority all outstanding constitutional
issues and we undertake to accept their decisions."1 Secretary of State Dun-
can Sandys welcomed this opportunity in view of Britain's support for pro-
portional representation and its expressed desire to grant independence to
the colony. Sandys announced his decision on October 31, endorsing propor-
tional representation. He thought that British Guiana's problems could be
attributed to the development of party politics along racial lines. Propor-
tional representation, he predicted, would encourage coalitions between
parties and would make it easier for multiracial groupings to develop. He
gave his assurance that elections under the new system would be held expedi-
tiously, to be followed by a conference to set a date for independence.
Jagan vociferously rejected proportional representation, as he was con-
vinced that its objective was to defeat the PPP. Although he probably had no
hard evidence that the British wanted to drive him from office, this was
indeed the case. Not only did the imperial government see the removal of
Jagan as a priority, it was anxious to jettison British Guiana altogether. In a
brief prepared for Prime Minister Harold MacMillan in early July 1963, the
Colonial Office admitted flatly that "we have no strategic interest in British
Guiana and the sooner we can shed our obligations there the better from our
point of view." After reviewing internal developments in British Guiana, the
office noted that since 1960 "our aim in government had altered from "mak-
ing the best of Jagan" to the achievement of independence under a govern-
ment "not led by Jagan. "This policy had been developed "in agreement with
the Americans."2
The United States also strongly opposed granting British Guiana inde-
pendence under Cheddi Jagan's leadership. U.S. officials dreaded the cre-
ation of a communist state after independence, a development that would
have "profound and lasting effects on Anglo/US relations . . . and on the
overall position of the West," a British top secret document revealed. The
Americans "said that an independent British Guiana under Jagan was unac-


--- PAGE 215 ---
202 BLEEDING GUIANA
ceptable to the U.S. They, therefore, believed that we should set as our
immediate policy objective the removal of the Jagan government prior to
independence. As a long run objective the US officials believed that we
should work for an independent British Guiana with a government prepared
to cooperate with the West and to govern the country in the interests of
all races."3
The Americans urged the suspension of the British Guianese constitution
and the assumption of direct rule by the British. But colonial officials tied
such actions to a commitment by the United States to provide resources for
Guiana's development. In addition, they thought it "essential for the Ameri-
cans to give us full diplomatic support at the United Nations and elsewhere
for the resumption of direct rule."4 After reviewing all of the policy options,
the Colonial Office held that proportional representation provided the most
feasible means of achieving its objectives. But the officials were under no
illusion that this constituted a long-term solution for British Guiana's ills.
"At best," they concluded, "proportional representation might produce an
electoral victory for Burnham and D'Aguiar at the first election only."5
Although the Colonial Office disliked Jagan, it was hardly enamored of
Forbes Burnham or Peter D'Aguiar. In March 1960 colonial secretary Iain
McLeod had dismissed Jagan as "of no great ability" and characterized
Burnham as "being much more able" but "showed himself so incredibly
conceited" that it was difficult to discuss issues with him. Other officials
considered Burnham "unreliable" and predicted that a coalition government
formed by D'Aguiar and Burnham "would be inefficient, [and] would be
subject to severe internal strains."6 Nevertheless, the introduction of propor-
tional representation was a boon to opposition leaders.
The stage was set for a prolonged, acrimonious struggle by the three
leaders for political ascendancy. British Guiana became a veritable battle-
ground as its leaders fanned the flames of racial fears, mistrust, hatred,
and discord. None of the leaders seemed capable of stanching the flow of
blood from the wounds they had helped to inflict on their country. Worse,
British Guiana's racial sparks threatened to ignite similar fires in other
countries such as Trinidad, with its almost similar ethnic composition and
uneasy relationships between African Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians. A
communist-controlled British Guiana supported by Cuba and the Eastern
Bloc was also deemed to threaten the stability of the Anglo-Caribbean area.
Eric Williams, for one, understood that he could not remain a disinterested


--- PAGE 216 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 2O3
observer of British Guiana's descent into disorder, violence, and poisonous
racial hatreds. Trinidad and Tobago had too much to lose if he did not act.
Thirteen hours after Trinidad and Tobago became an independent state
and a member of the British Commonwealth, Eric Williams raised the sub-
ject of British Guiana with British High Commissioner Norman Costar.
According to Costar, Williams said that he was going to devote his attention
"to the problem of British Guiana where both Africans and Indians were
acting foolishly." Costar reported that "I forbore to enquire more about this
lest I should be taken as encouraging an interest or activity which might not
be welcome to us."7 In succeeding months Williams made good on his
promise. But he did not develop a coherent policy on British Guiana, tending
more to respond to the changing situation in the colony than to articulate a
consistent course of action. The interests of Trinidad and Tobago were,
understandably, paramount in all of his efforts, although he genuinely de-
sired to play a useful role in British Guiana.
***** Williams's attempts to resolve the crisis in British Guiana for-
mally began in March 1963. While in Georgetown on an official visit, he
conversed with many groups, individuals, and politicians on the political
situation. According to Williams, this gave him an opportunity to emphasize
his position "(1) for independence, (2) against proportional representa-
tion, (3) on adequate constitutional safeguards to protect the interests of
the people, and (4) for, based on the experience of Trinidad and Tobago,
the maximum possible community participation in the exercises preceding
independence."8
During his visit in British Guiana, Williams said that he encountered an
atmosphere of "fear, frustration, stagnation and a division in the country
that could only be described as chaotic."9 On his return to Port of Spain, he
wrote to Prime Minister Alexander Bustamante of Jamaica, describing the
"situation" he had found in British Guiana and suggesting that their two
nations, as the only independent Commonwealth countries in the region,
should consider "most seriously direct representation in British Guiana at
the Commissioner level." It was his view that Jamaica and Trinidad should
combine their efforts to resolve "the difficult situation" and that the self-
governing territory of Barbados should also be involved.10
On April 24,1963, he sent Bustamante and Errol Barrow, the premier of
Barbados, a telegram expressing his deep concern about "the possible reper-


--- PAGE 217 ---
204 BLEEDING GUIANA
cussions on all of us in the West Indies, Jamaica, Barbados, Trinidad and
Tobago if we make no effort to mediate in the British Guiana difficulty."
Williams urged the two leaders "in all sincerity" to join him in offering their
services to Jagan and to endorse the following telegram to the Guianese
premier:
The Prime Minister of Jamaica, the Premier of Barbados and I are very
deeply and sincerely perturbed about the recent developments in British
Guiana and their possible effects, both short term and long term, on West
Indian development and prospects and the reputation of our peoples. We
appeal to you therefore in the interest of peace and stability to postpone
further stages of the Labour [Relations] Bill. We would like to suggest
that you give us the opportunity of face to face discussions with you and
your advisers either in Georgetown or in any other place of your choice.
We are satisfied that such action on your part will be widely acclaimed not
only in your own country and in our countries, but in the world at large.
Williams hoped for an "urgent and sympathetic" reply, since "all three of us
have a grave responsibility, moral and political, to do all in our power to avert
what appears to be impending catastrophe as a result of a confrontation of
legitimate government and the labour movement which sets a precedent that
bodes no good for any one of us."11
It is noteworthy that Williams's potential involvement in British Guiana's
internal affairs at this stage was narrowly conceived. He avoided any men-
tion of the worsening racial climate, confining his concerns to the contro-
versial Labour Relations Bill. But the impetus behind the bill and the fire-
storm it created reflected the deeper tensions in British Guianese society, its
festering racial sores and systemic ills. Williams certainly realized this, and
he probably knew that Jagan would not, at that point, look favorably on
outsider mediation on the larger issues.
Bustamante responded with alacrity to Williams's appeal. "You have my
full support," he telegraphed his Trinidadian counterpart on April 26.12
According to the British High Commissioner in Kingston, the Jamaican
prime minister acted without consulting his ministers. There was "no sym-
pathy" for Jagan in Jamaica, nor was there any disposition there to become
involved in British Guiana's affairs. Nonetheless, the high commissioner
observed, "Bustamante seems to find it difficult to resist Williams' leads."13
The Barbadian premier also assented to Williams's request. The British


--- PAGE 218 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 205
high commissioner in Port of Spain was, however, restrained in his embrace
of the prime minister's initiative. "I am sure that Dr. Williams' action," he
reported to the Commonwealth Relations Office, "though perhaps a little
precipitate, is well meant... he will handle matters in his own way."14
Nothing of consequence emerged from the overture to British Guiana
from the three heads of government. Cheddi Jagan replied that he was
prepared to send Ashton Chase, the president of the British Guiana Senate,
to Port of Spain for talks with Williams. Finding this response somewhat in-
sulting, Williams sent a telegram to Barrow and Bustamante stating: "While
I understand the present circumstances make it impossible for Dr. Jagan to
leave the territory at this time, I think you will agree that it would be prefer-
able if the discussions took place on the basis of direct contact and not
through an emissary. I therefore suggest that Dr. Jagan be informed that, in
order to secure direct contact, the Premier of Barbados and Prime Ministers
of Trinidad and Jamaica would be prepared at whatever inconvenience is
involved to go to Georgetown for the purpose." Bustamante and Barrow
quickly agreed with him.15
British officials were not enthusiastic about Eric Williams's potential
involvement in the Guianese crisis. They distrusted him, and Williams had
not helped matters when he said, in a speech on April 22, 1963, at the
University of Woodford Square, that he feared British Guiana was not ready
for independence. According to a report transmitted to the Colonial Office
by Sir Ralph Grey, the governor of British Guiana, Williams stated that "the
British could not be expected to hand over control of the territory at the
present moment when there were insufficient safeguards against the abuse
of minorities by the majorities and vice versa. This would create a dangerous
precedent for other emerging territories." Grey thought that these state-
ments were impolitic, commenting: "One would have supposed that Wil-
liams' speech . . . would disqualify him from effectively offering help. But
things are different in the Caribbean."16
Williams was probably unaware of such criticisms, but if he had known
about them, he would most likely have ignored them. Although he possessed
a thin skin, he was markedly stubborn if convinced of the righteousness of
his cause and if his nation's national interests were at stake. As Stanley J. G.
Fingland, the acting British high commissioner, had telegraphed the Com-
monwealth Relations Office on April 21: "Dr. Williams' interest in British
Guiana is based on (a) fear that increased Communist influence in British


--- PAGE 219 ---
206 BLEEDING GUIANA
Guiana presents a potential risk to Trinidad ...; (b) desire to include British
Guiana in his plans for closer economic and ultimately political association
in the Caribbean (under his own aegis of course); (c) willingness to acquire
prestige as an international figure if this can be achieved consistently with his
own objectives." Fingland believed, however, that "Dr. Williams' offer of his
good offices is well intentioned." But, he warned, Williams "will of course
play the hand his own way, treating British Guiana as he has said he would, as
independent, and the way may not be our way."17
All of these and other overtures to Cheddi Jagan received a lukewarm
reception, even though British Guiana had become paralyzed by the strike
provoked by the Labour Relations Bill. Jagan's seeming lack of interest in the
tripartite offer of mediation annoyed Williams, who told High Commis-
sioner Costar that he would not continue to press the offer and that he was
"writing B. G. off. "In view of his fear that Jagan would establish a one-party
communist state in his country, Williams proposed that British Guiana be
given a new constitution containing effective safeguards to protect the op-
position. He recommended a constitution based on the Jamaican model,
which enshrined the role of the opposition, in contrast to the one in Trini-
dad, which had weaker clauses for its protection. According to Costar, Wil-
liams also urged the creation of an "impartial commission to re-define
electoral boundaries on the basis of voters and not of populations (thus
reducing somewhat the Indian preponderance)." All constitutional guaran-
tees would be ensured by a United Nations force.18
Suspicious of Williams's motives, British officials were quick to dismiss
these proposals. Referring specifically to the prime minister's suggestion
regarding electoral boundaries, Edwin L. Sykes in the Commonwealth Rela-
tions Office observed contemptuously that there "is nothing in this sugges-
tion and it shows the shallowness of Dr. Williams' judgment if he believes
that all which is required to solve the problem of British Guiana is now to
endow that territory with a Constitution based on what Dr. Williams con-
siders to be the 'Jamaican model' rather than the 'Trinidadian model.' "19
In a conversation with Costar on November 12,1963, Williams returned
to the subject of British Guiana. He voiced his concerns about the policy
of proportional representation that the United Kingdom was preparing to
implement. Not wanting to irritate the British, he assured Costar that he
"would not oppose the Secretary of State's decision." He believed, however,
that British Guiana was not ready for independence in view of the existing


--- PAGE 220 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 2OJ
circumstances. The African leaders with whom he had discussed this ques-
tion supported his stance, he said, provided that he endorsed their position
on Southern Rhodesia—that is, that the British remove the white minority
government in that colony.20
Despite his frustrations with Jagan, Williams continued his efforts to find
an answer to the British Guianese problem. Above all, he sought a West
Indian solution. When a United Nations subcommittee dealing with British
Guiana decided to visit the country, he instructed Trinidad's representative
to the United Nations to seek a delay. In a letter of July II, 1963, to his envoy,
Williams wrote: "You will suggest, therefore, that in the circumstances, any
intervention from outside the West Indies should be eschewed until the West
Indians have had an opportunity to make their further approach to the issue
and to assess the results of that approach."21
Williams had hoped that when Jagan, Barrow, and Bustamante visited
Trinidad and Tobago on July 22, 1963, to attend the first meeting of the
newly created Big Four Conference, the leaders would have an opportunity to
discuss the Guianese situation. The matter was indeed raised with Jagan at
the conference, and Williams reported that Bustamante said "something
like this" to Jagan: "Look here, Jagan, I do not want to get into any discus-
sions on this matter; I do not want any argument. What we are asking for is
this: that Williams, Barrow, and Bustamante should meet in the same room
with Burnham, D'Aguiar, and Jagan and that we would try to work out a
constitution in that atmosphere."22
According to Williams, there was no response—"neither favorable nor
unfavorable"—by Jagan to the proposal on that occasion or later. Neverthe-
less, the three leaders insisted that "certain safeguards" be included in
British Guiana's constitution before it proceeded to independence. These
included a bill of rights, an independent judiciary, an auditor general, a
Public Services Commission, and the inclusion of a senate in the parliamen-
tary system. The three leaders also wanted elections in British Guiana to be
supervised by the United Nations. Jagan declined to respond to any of these
proposals, leading a disappointed Williams to admit that the exercise had
been a complete failure.23
In spite of this setback, Williams retained a strong interest in the Brit-
ish Guianese situation. When colonial secretary Duncan Sandys decided to
introduce proportional representation in the colony in October 1963, he
was concerned that he would antagonize Williams. Apprehensive that Indo-


--- PAGE 221 ---
208 BLEEDING GUIANA
Trinidadians would follow the Guianese example and launch a campaign for
proportional representation, Williams adamantly opposed this electoral
strategy. Shortly after Sandys made his decision, Edwin Sykes recommended
that officials begin "softening up" Williams for "proportional representa-
tion, which is a solution he will not like."24 The secretary of state quickly
dispatched conciliatory letters to Williams inviting his understanding of the
reasons for introducing proportional representation in British Guiana. In
response, Williams assured him that:
1. We would be most unwilling here in Trinidad to do or say anything
that would impede a settlement, because we are satisfied that some
settlement is absolutely necessary;
2. Equally we will be most unwilling, if and when a settlement is arrived
at, to do or say anything that would make the implementation of such
settlement more difficult than it could confidently be expected to be;
3. We would consider it our duty to give all possible support to any
settlement which we might feel is a satisfactory one, given all the
miserable circumstances and wretched difficulties involved.25
The secretary of state was delighted with Williams's assurances of his sup-
port. His response was immediate, informing Williams on November I that
"I cannot tell you how much I appreciate your message ... [and] I shall look
forward to keeping in the closest touch with you throughout and continuing
to exchange views as the situation develops."26
***** British officials never abandoned their commitment to seek
Williams's blessing of the new electoral system. But they also never lost their
distrust of him, scrutinizing all of his actions for hidden motives. Williams
was willing to mute his public criticisms of British policy if that helped to
facilitate a cure for Guiana's pain, even if he disagreed with the medicine. He
was no admirer of the Guianese premier and had no tears to shed if and
when his political demise occurred. Referring to the new electoral system,
Williams admitted to Stanley Fingland of the British High Commissioner's
Office in Port of Spain that "this solution is very difficult but Jagan has
brought it on himself." Fingland reported to the Commonwealth Relations
Office that Williams spoke in "a very disparaging way" about Jagan, describ-
ing him as "a frightful, frightful man."27
Overall, Fingland was pleased by Williams's cooperative stance on the


--- PAGE 222 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 2O9
Guianese question. He thought that the policy of including him in the pic-
ture "has been so far a successful one." But he cautioned that Williams's
public "attitude" will "be very dependent on how things develop both in
British Guiana and in relation to the Opposition here." Fingland predicted
that "it will pay us to continue to keep Dr. Williams as closely informed as
possible."28
British Guiana's agony was further discussed informally at the second
Big Four Conference, held in Jamaica during January 13-17, 1964. As Wil-
liams noted in his opening address, the leaders were meeting "in response
to a general recognition by the four countries participating in the conference
of the urgent necessity for presenting as far as possible a united front of the
Commonwealth Caribbean countries to the increasing pressures of an in-
creasingly confused world."29
Although Eric Williams and Sir Alexander Bustamante wanted to place
Guiana's problems on the meeting's formal agenda, Cheddi Jagan demurred
but agreed to informal discussions. The British high commissioner in Ja-
maica, Alec Morley, said that Errol Barrow was also not particularly keen
on discussing British Guiana. Bustamante, in Morley's opinion, "probably
nursed a simple hope that it might be possible to change Dr. Jagan's ideol-
ogy and external policy." The high commissioner thought that "possibly
only Williams felt any strong direct interest in furthering the resolution of
the internal tensions in British Guiana both on the merits (because of their
implications for Trinidad and Tobago) and in order to further his own
ambitions as regional leader."30
The private conversations between Jagan and the other leaders resolved
nothing. In a characteristic fit of pique, Bustamante declared that he was
"through with Jagan" and forbade any of his ministers to see him off at the
airport. Bustamante had no patience with Jagan's Marxism and, according to
Morley, "had little use" for him personally. The Jamaican prime minister told
the press on January 17 that his country's support for British Guiana's inde-
pendence "would depend on Dr. Jagan's attitude toward the West."31
Eric Williams was equally disappointed with the failure to reach any
agreement with Jagan. He was incensed that Jagan "was not prepared to
accept" a "general declaration of principle on British Guiana" that Williams
had drafted. The declaration asserted that Guiana's problem should be set-
tled in the Caribbean by Caribbean leaders. It alleged that "the Common-
wealth Caribbean countries, including British Guiana, are feeling today the


--- PAGE 223 ---
210 BLEEDING GUIANA
full effects of centuries of colonial control and the deficiencies inherited
from that control." The external world "tends far too often to take them for
granted and to regard their independence as purely nominal." The statement
urged solidarity among the Commonwealth Caribbean countries in defense
of their vital interests. Acknowledging that Williams, Bustamante, and Bar-
row had ideological differences with Jagan, the declaration affirmed: "What-
ever the particular variations of constitutional forms or economic practices
which they may each adopt, consistent with the accepted conventions of
national sovereignty, the fact is that what the Commonwealth Caribbean
have in common is more important than the incidental differences of em-
phasis or temperament which may occasionally divide them."
With British Guiana squarely on the minds of the Anglophone leaders,
Williams's draft statement embraced the "overriding principle" of indepen-
dence, for it as well as other territories, "just so soon as the inescapable
constitutional and other procedures can be settled." It rejected the "imposi-
tion of a settlement by the United Kingdom," because this was incompatible
with the spirit of independence. Instead, the four leaders would meet in
Tobago on February 1 and 2, 1964, "to begin consideration of the details
involved in its implementation."32
Jagan told the press that he was unable to endorse this "declaration of
principle" because the different approaches to foreign policy prevented a
unified stand by the four leaders on the British Guianese question. This
assertion, though accurate in acknowledging the foreign policy disagree-
ments between Williams, Barrow, and Bustamante, on the one hand, and
Jagan, on the other, was not the complete story. Offended by Jagan's state-
ment to the press, Williams obtained Bustamante and Barrow's agreement
to release the "declaration of principle." In a conversation with Park Wol-
lam, the interim American charge d'affaires in Port of Spain, Williams ex-
plained that Jagan had declined to endorse the declaration because it was not
sufficiently strong in its condemnation of a British-imposed electoral solu-
tion. In addition, Jagan looked askance at any suggestion in the document
that the intervention of the West Indian leaders in the Guianese problem was
in response to a request by him. According to Williams, if Jagan had ac-
cepted the declaration, all four leaders would have met in Tobago to draft
changes in the Guianese constitution and then invite Peter D'Aguiar and
Forbes Burnham to meet with them for talks.
During the same conversation, Williams acknowledged that his "princi-


--- PAGE 224 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 211
pal fear" was the establishment of a second communist "center" in the
Caribbean. He was, according to the American diplomat, "not particularly
worried about Guianese subversives unless they had been trained abroad, for
example in Cuba or in Communist Europe." Williams believed that Jagan
"would never be able to establish a state organized along Marxist lines but it
was indeed a worrying possibility that foreign trained subversives might
make British Guiana their base."33
Another reason that Jagan rejected the declaration of principle was that
the other leaders might try to propose a settlement of British Guiana's
problems that was not in his own best interest or that of the PPP. The Big
Four Conference had convinced Jagan that his point of view and ideological
positions found little support among his colleagues. On the fourth day of
the meeting Bustamante had made matters worse by attacking Jagan's asso-
ciation with Cuba and his claim of political neutrality. Although Williams
would later say that he "washes his hands" of Jagan, he could hardly ignore
Guiana's difficulties in view of their implications for Trinidad's internal
harmony.34
When he visited Africa in February, March, and April 1964, Williams
discussed the problems in British Guiana with African leaders and other
officials with whom he met. President Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana and
President Ben Bella of Algeria had developed a keen interest in developments
in British Guiana. In February 1963 Nkrumah had sent a Ghanaian delega-
tion to Guiana to try to resolve the crisis. Ben Bella and Jagan were ideologi-
cally similar and seemed to have developed a close friendship as well. Wil-
liams did not welcome any African involvement in British Guiana's affairs,
preferring a Caribbean resolution of the conflict. Moreover, he questioned
Nkrumah's sincerity, telling the British high commissioner in Monrovia,
Liberia, that there was "the probability that Dr. Nkrumah had sent his medi-
ators merely in order to be able to say that Her Majesty's Government had
once more sabotaged an honest attempt to reconcile the parties."35
Williams lobbied extensively against African support for Jagan and his
administration. As the acting British high commissioner in Tanganyika
(later Tanzania) reported after conversing with the prime minister: "Wil-
liams had done his best to undermine any African support for Dr. Jagan. In
the end, this did not prove difficult. He had found little regard for Jagan in
Ghana. A member of the Ghanaian good will mission to British Guiana had
commented to him in Accra that Jagan 'was not even a good Communist—he


--- PAGE 225 ---
212 BLEEDING GUIANA
just spouted the language without understanding it; he was basically just an
out-and-out racialist.'" The acting high commissioner also reported that
Williams felt that "the East African Governments were not likely to cause us
any trouble" over British Guiana. In particular, President Jomo Kenyatta of
Kenya had "formed a poor impression of Jagan" when he attended his
nation's independence celebrations.36
On returning home, Williams made a similar report to Norman Costar.
According to Costar, "Dr. Williams believes that his tour of Africa, and
especially his talks on British Guiana with Dr. Nkrumah and President Ben
Bella (hitherto Dr. Jagan's friends) have undermined the position of the
British Guiana Premier in the Afro-Asian group."37
During his African tour Williams had sought to assure U.S. officials that
he could assist them on matters relating to Soviet influence in British Guiana
and Cuba. He told the American ambassador in Cairo, for example, that he
had advised the Soviet ambassador to the United Kingdom that his govern-
ment should not involve itself so deeply in the internal affairs of Cuba and
British Guiana. Obviously taking the side of the United States, Williams also
said that he wanted the U.S. State Department to inform him about the
extent of Soviet support for the Jagan government. He promised that he
would use this information against Jagan, who was "playing the fool" in
British Guiana. It is not clear whether the State Department acquiesced.38 (In
February 1962 it had denied Williams's request for information on commu-
nism in British Guiana and the Dominican Republic, stating rather incredi-
bly that it had "no appropriate unclassified information on this subject.")39
***** The worsening political climate in British Guiana during the
spring of 1964 forced Cheddi Jagan to reconsider the offer of mediation by
Barrow, Williams, and Bustamante. But, as his subsequent behavior would
indicate, he never had much confidence in their ability to resolve the crisis.
Of the three Caribbean leaders who were potential candidates to act as
mediator, Eric Williams was the obvious choice, given the ethnic composi-
tion of his nation-state and his acknowledged interest in British Guiana's
problems. On April 7, 1964, its deputy premier, Brindley Benn, requested
that Trinidad raise the Guiana question at the Commonwealth Prime Minis-
ters' Meeting scheduled that summer. A month later, Jagan formally asked
Williams to mediate the dispute in his country. At Williams's invitation,
Jagan and a number of his ministers were visiting Trinidad at the time to


--- PAGE 226 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA
discuss matters arising from Williams's recent trip to Africa, Europe, Can-
ada, and the United States.
Williams readily accepted Jagan's invitation. Evidently, he felt that his
anti-Jagan stance in Africa would not compromise his ability to be an impar-
tial mediator. On the other hand, the invitation provided him with an oppor-
tunity to resolve a burning dispute in the Caribbean, while simultaneously
enhancing his stature at home and abroad. Williams indicated to Jagan that
the Cabinet of Trinidad and Tobago would be asked to approve his role as
mediator. As a condition of his acceptance, Williams required a free hand
to summon to Port of Spain for talks all political party leaders in British
Guiana, as well as others whose opinions and counsel might be useful. He
also wanted the discretion to keep "other interested parties" advised of
developments. Jagan assented to these provisions and agreed to return to
Trinidad "as soon as possible."
According to Williams, the politically wily Jagan then asked that he pro-
pose that the United Kingdom defer the new electoral system while the talks
in Trinidad were in progress. Jagan, Williams reported, attributed the politi-
cal difficulties in British Guiana solely to the newly devised system of pro-
portional representation. Williams said that he was unable to do this. Jagan
then suggested that the talks in Trinidad be restricted to himself and Burn-
ham and their parties, and that D'Aguiar be excluded. Williams also rejected
this request, emphasizing that he needed "complete freedom" if he were to
accept the assignment.
These issues evidently decided, Williams held lengthy talks with Jagan
and his visiting team "to ascertain where, if anywhere, a wall had been set up
by the ruling PPP that would make concessions difficult." In these discus-
sions, which took place on Saturday, May 2, and Sunday, May 3, Williams
explored such matters as:
1. [The nature of] consultation with the Opposition;
2. An upper chamber based on proportional representation and with
revised powers;
3. A coalition government;
4. The removal of the police from Ministerial control;
5. International guarantees of the
(i) neutrality and
(ii) territorial integrity of British Guiana;
213


--- PAGE 227 ---
214 BLEEDING GUIANA
6. [The nature of] association with the West Indies;
7. Independence of the judiciary;
8. [A] Bill of Rights;
9. Appointments to the Public Service without political interference;
10. Special legislation in respect of racial difficulties;
11. Constitutional provision for the recognition of unions and collective
bargaining;
12. Supervision of British Guiana for a prescribed period by either the
United Nations or the Commonwealth;
13. Emergency regulations;
14. Special entrenchment of particular clauses of the constitution.
These informal discussions concluded, Williams wrote to Burnham and
D'Aguiar to ask whether they would be prepared to participate in the effort to
resolve the crisis and "to come to Trinidad, with such associates as you may
consider necessary, within a few days." Meanwhile, the Trinidad Cabinet
quickly authorized Williams to accept the mediation assignment on May 4.
D'Aguiar readily accepted Williams's invitation and agreed to visit Trinidad
on May 6. After some difficulty in reaching Burnham, he agreed to meet with
Prime Minister Williams on May 10.40
Burnham's acceptance of Williams's invitation amounted to a remarkable
exercise in dissemblance. The next day he visited the American consul gen-
eral assigned to Georgetown to discuss the Williams initiative. Burnham
wanted to know whether the United States was "privy to Williams' efforts
and [to make] sure [the] U.S. [was] not backing these efforts." The consul
general assured Burnham that Williams "was strictly on his own" and that
he believed that "Williams ['] mediation hinged essentially around [the]
same old coalition idea already so familiar to Burnham." Acknowledging
that that was "also his impression," Burnham said that he did not want to
waste time going to Trinidad for "this exercise in futility." He planned to go
only for "courtesy sake." Burnham asserted that insofar as Guiana's prob-
lems were concerned, Williams only wished to "pontificate." Burnham,
according to the consul general, criticized D'Aguiar for going to Trinidad
"so promptly" rather than waiting "to coordinate strategy with the PNC."41
As far as Jagan was concerned, Burnham admitted to the American con-
sul general that he was not amenable to compromise. He preferred to con-
front more violence and "oppose [the] well armed PPP onslaught" with


--- PAGE 228 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 215
nothing but "grease guns" than agree to "any compromise which would
keep Jagan in power."42 Unaware that Burnham was not acting in good faith
and sensitive to the need for secrecy in the talks, Williams requested the
newspapers in Trinidad and Tobago to refrain from publishing any com-
ments by the visiting politicians since they could exacerbate the Guianese
situation.43
In his meeting with Williams, Peter D'Aguiar accused Jagan of having
an ideological fixation because, D'Aguiar contended, his government re-
ceived loans from Cuba and the Soviet Union. He thought that British Gui-
ana must "either follow the path to Marxism or the path away from Marx-
ism." D'Aguiar felt that Jagan was losing popular support and might incite a
race war to remain in power. The UF leader supported a coalition govern-
ment but only if elected; such a government could not be imposed on the
country. He saw the partition of the colony as the only alternative to continu-
ing rule by Jagan. As D'Aguiar put it, "If you want a guarantee, the only
guarantee is partition." The leader of the UF also advocated the removal of
the police from ministerial control and the establishment of a Commission
of Enquiry into the recent and continuing disturbances in Guiana. The com-
mission should be -empowered to ascertain responsibility and award com-
pensation for damages. D'Aguiar affirmed his support for independence but
said that it should not be granted for another five years. "We support inde-
pendence but we are not supporting communism," he declared. "I would
rather be a colony of the United Kingdom than a satellite of Russia."
Throughout his eight hours of talks with Williams, D'Aguiar expressed
an implacable opposition to Jagan as a person and as the head of govern-
ment. He believed that no "sane" man or party could collaborate with the
premier. For a coalition government to be established, Jagan would have to
disavow communism and the PPP could not be entrusted with the premier-
ship, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry
of External Affairs. Clearly, if his proposals were adopted, Jagan and the PPP
would have no meaningful role in the government of British Guiana.
Forbes Burnham met with Williams for seven hours. He supported hold-
ing new elections to resolve the crisis. Burnham affirmed the PNC'S en-
dorsement of a bill of rights and human freedoms similar to those enshrined
in the constitutions of Jamaica and Trinidad. He proposed the creation of
an independent Elections Commission and a Judicial Service Commission
whose members would be nominated by the premier, the leader of the


--- PAGE 229 ---
2l6 BLEEDING GUIANA
opposition, and the Bar Association. In addition, Burnham advocated the
creation of a Police Service Commission composed of a representative of the
Public Service Commission and a nominee of the premier and of the leader
of the opposition. He wanted the nature and scope of consultation with the
opposition clearly delineated in the colony's constitution.
To reduce tensions and to lead the colony to independence, Burnham
expressed his support for a "national" or coalition government. He thought
that this would also improve British Guiana's international image. He en-
dorsed a "serious declaration of non-commitment to existing power blocs"
and closer collaboration with the British Caribbean area on industrial de-
velopment policy, foreign affairs, and economic cooperation particularly
with regard to sugar and bauxite.
To stop the proliferation of weapons in his country, Burnham proposed
that all arms be turned over to the military, and he supported police and
military searches of houses or people without warrants. He wanted a general
amnesty declared to allow all unlicensed arms and ammunition to be turned
in during a two-week period; failure to do so would constitute a criminal
offense for which the penalty would be imprisonment. Burnham stressed
that unless the PPP accepted these conditions, there would be no basis for
discussion. Should a national government be established, he said, his party
would expect to be assigned the Ministries of Home Affairs, External Affairs,
Education, Housing, and possibly Agriculture. A government formed by him
would not expropriate property and would provide fair and adequate com-
pensation in the event that nationalization occurred.
Although the talks with D'Aguiar and Burnham proceeded smoothly,
difficulties soon arose. On May 8 Janet Jagan, the minister of home affairs,
appeared before the United Nations Committee of Twenty-Four in New York
to express her government's opposition to the United Kingdom's introduc-
tion of proportional representation in British Guiana. When he heard about
her testimony, an angry Eric Williams telegraphed Premier Jagan: "Report
has been received from our U.N. representative that your representative
before Committee of Twenty Four has been authorized by your Government
to put forward proposal to invite Commonwealth and non-Commonwealth
team to discuss constitution for independence. Urgently request clarifica-
tion of this position, which is difficult to reconcile with our request that
Trinidad and Tobago should use its good offices to explore possibilities of a
peaceful solution of present deadlock."


--- PAGE 230 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 217
Prime Minister Williams also expressed displeasure at an alleged attack
on D'Aguiar's property while he was in Trinidad. He seemed to attribute
responsibility for this assault to Jagan and his supporters. "I must further
deplore," Williams said in the telegram to Jagan, "the reported attack on the
property of one of the parties in British Guiana at the very moment when he
is in Trinidad at our express invitation... and I must formally request you to
use publicly all your influence to put a stop to all activities calculated to
render the present exploratory efforts abortive for such period at least as
these exploratory efforts continue."
The premier was quick to respond by telegram. He did not find his wife's
"representations" to the Committee of Twenty-Four to be "inconsistent"
with Williams's assignment. As he explained:
Our representative seeks to expose to United Nations American interven-
tion and intrigue in British Guiana and American pressure on Britain to
withhold independence. Committee of Twenty Four had on October 8,
1963, adopted resolution requesting appointment of constitutional ex-
perts to visit British Guiana and formulate acceptable constitution. Brit-
ain had rejected proposal on ground that Independence Conference was
to be held in London later that month. The British imposition being
unacceptable, my representative has now requested Committee to pursue
resolution of October 8. This does not preclude your good offices to help
achieve peaceful solution, which if successful, will indeed make United
Nations intervention unnecessary.
Jagan was on secure ground when he charged British and American collu-
sion in delaying independence for Guiana. Although he did not mention it in
his telegram, he also knew that the two countries would welcome his re-
moval from office as a prerequisite for awarding his country independence.
On the other hand, the timing of Janet Jagan's appearance before the Com-
mittee of Twenty-Four was problematic and indicated a lack of confidence
in Williams's capacity to resolve the deadlock in British Guiana. Jagan would
later say that the decision to send her to New York had been made by his
Cabinet before Williams agreed to mediate the conflict. The premier was
incensed by Williams's remarks concerning the alleged attack on D'Aguiar's
property. In his telegram to Williams, Jagan noted that he regarded "your
reference to the reported attack on the property of one of the parties in
British Guiana as unfortunate and reject its implications." In denying re-


--- PAGE 231 ---
2l8 BLEEDING GUIANA
sponsibility for any behavior that might compromise Williams's work, Jagan
shifted the blame to the opposition. "As regards activities likely to jeopardize
your efforts," he wrote, "you may be aware that sections of the press in-
cluding a newspaper owned and controlled by one of the leaders of the
Opposition [D'Aguiar] have been devoting their columns to rendering talks
abortive."
Undeterred by these comments, Williams sent a terse cable to the premier
on May 12: "Grateful if you would return to Trinidad tomorrow, Wednes-
day." Not surprisingly, Jagan denied the request. In a move calculated to
annoy Williams, Jagan did not respond to him directly but sent his reply
through the Trinidad high commissioner in Georgetown: "In view of state-
ments made by Opposition leader, Premier would like to know whether
Prime Minister considers his return at this time essential. Premier thinks
that a proposal put forward by Opposition or any suggestions Prime Minis-
ter may have could be communicated to him for consideration by colleagues
before his return to Trinidad if it is agreed that this is desirable."
Clearly, Jagan was being disingenuous. In the first instance, he was using
an intemperate outburst by Forbes Burnham as an excuse not to return to
Trinidad and participate in the talks. Addressing the students at the Univer-
sity of the West Indies, St. Augustine, on May 12, Burnham had declared: "I
don't think that Dr. Williams can solve the problems of British Guiana. He
has enough problems here in Trinidad and Tobago to solve." This comment,
even if it contained some truth, was impolitic at best and insulting to the
prime minister at worst.
Jagan's desire to be made privy to any proposals put forward by the
opposition was unacceptable to Williams. If he had acquiesced to this un-
usual request, it would have compromised his role as mediator. Jagan could
hardly have expected Williams to tell him what his political antagonists had
said as a precondition for his return to Trinidad. On May 15 the prime
minister formally responded to Jagan's cable:
I had indicated to you that I should like to see others first before inviting
you to return for general exploratory discussion, which would not neces-
sarily be limited to the three political parties in the legislature. I consider
this the appropriate stage for your return for continuation of these dis-
cussions in the context of discussions with the others. I do not consider it
would be appropriate procedure to send something in writing for consid-


--- PAGE 232 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 2I9
eration. Our exploration was not to be limited to proposals that any of the
parties might or might not put forward. I therefore repeat my invitation
to come to Trinidad at the earliest possible opportunity so that we can
explore with you the assignment which you requested me to undertake.
Evidently Jagan found this appeal unconvincing, for on May 16 he cabled
Williams his regret that "developments here preclude my return imme-
diately." He repeated his request that he be informed about what had trans-
pired between Williams, Burnham, and D'Aguiar in Port of Spain. "In view
of urgency," Jagan wrote, "I wonder whether your Commissioner would
come to Georgetown to brief me on developments or alternatively whether I
might send representative to Port of Spain for same purpose." Williams's
response was predictable. On May 19 he told Jagan that "briefing through an
intermediary is wholly inconsistent" with his request that I "should use my
good offices to explore possibilities of a settlement [and] the agreement of
the leaders of the Opposition to take part." In view of these circumstances,
Williams asked Jagan to give him a "firm date" so he could complete "with a
minimum of delay an assignment I undertook in view of what you assured
me on May 2 was the urgency of the situation in British Guiana."
But Jagan would not budge. On May 22 he informed Williams that he
regretted that the "deteriorating domestic situation still prevents me from
fixing a firm date for visit. I will communicate with you as soon as situation
is sufficiently improved to admit of my leaving the country." Jagan was
certainly correct that the domestic situation had worsened, given the marked
increase in racial violence. But the violence gave him an excuse to sabotage
the mediation efforts that Williams had undertaken at his behest. Jagan's
absence from British Guiana for a day or two would not have exacerbated
local tensions; indeed, it may well have served to ease them.
***** The violence in British Guiana intensified throughout May. On
the twenty-fourth an ugly racial clash occurred at Wismar, a rural commu-
nity, leaving several people dead and their property destroyed. Still trying to
keep mediation alive, Williams issued a new invitation to Jagan, Burnham,
and D'Aguiar to return to Trinidad together for discussions. He asked the
three leaders to issue a joint declaration calling for a truce and an end to the
violence in Guiana for at least a week so that the talks could proceed in an
atmosphere of calm.


--- PAGE 233 ---
220 BLEEDING GUIANA
Of the three leaders, D'Aguiar was the first to accept the new invitation.
Burnham declined, urging Williams to visit British Guiana to observe the
situation firsthand. He would only participate in joint talks if Williams went
to Georgetown. Moreover, Burnham indicated that he would endorse a truce
only if an amnesty were declared, allowing firearms and explosives to be
turned in to the authorities, with prison sentences to follow for those who
declined to do so. Jagan's response to the new Williams initiative was ambiv-
alent. He neither accepted nor rejected the invitation but renewed his request
that he be informed about the details of the discussions in Trinidad. He told
Williams that because he had invited Burnham and D'Aguiar to a meeting on
June 1 to explore possibilities for ending the crisis, he was unable to respond
to Williams's invitation until after that date. In this instance, as in the case of
Janet Jagan's appearance before the United Nations Committee of Twenty-
Four, Premier Jagan was actively undermining the Williams initiative.
Rhetorically at least, Jagan still professed to support Williams's media-
tion efforts. But he took no responsibility for the stalemate in the discus-
sions. On June 4 he told Williams that he still supported his initiative pro-
vided it could be shown that a continuation of the exercise was not futile. As
he had done before, he blamed others for his own failure to return to
Trinidad. Jagan said that Burnham's refusal to compromise on the issue of
elections under proportional representation impeded his return to Trinidad.
Burnham's insistence that the Guianese people should settle their own prob-
lems was yet another obstacle, as was his statement that Williams should
focus on his own difficulties in Trinidad. But Jagan emphasized that if
Williams related the nature of his discussions with the other leaders, he
would consult with his colleagues, and, if they approved, he would return to
Trinidad.
In an attempt to solicit opinions from others in Guianese society, Wil-
liams invited Richard Ishmael, the president of the Trade Union Council,
and H. H. Pollydore, the general secretary, to visit Trinidad. In their meeting
with Williams on May 25, the two men accused the ruling party of trying to
split the unions and affirmed their support for proportional representation
and a national or coalition government. They recommended the adoption of
a new constitution before the elections, with provision for a president as
well as a prime minister elected by the legislature who would both have seats
in the Cabinet. Presumably, one of these persons would be of Indo-Guianese
heritage and the other would be an African Guianese.44


--- PAGE 234 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 221
These meetings behind him, Williams met with the American ambas-
sador, R. G. Miner, on May 26 to discuss the state of his mediation initiative.
Miner reported to the U.S. secretary of state that Williams found Pollydore
and Ishmael "more realistic" than Burnham and D'Aguiar, although "they
had little to offer concerning ways and means to improve public order and
stability in British Guiana." Williams indicated that Jagan's failure to return
to Port of Spain meant that his efforts to mediate the crisis had "probably
come to an end." He believed the "plain fact was that British Guiana was not
ready for independence but in [the] present world climate GOTT [the gov-
ernment of Trinidad and Tobago] certainly could not take such a position
publicly." According to Miner, the "only hope" that Williams saw "for re-
stricting British Guiana's capacity for making trouble in the area was [the]
formation of some kind of Caribbean regional grouping to include or at least
fence in British Guiana."45
On June 12, approximately six weeks after he had accepted Jagan's assign-
ment, a frustrated Eric Williams submitted his report to the premier of
British Guiana. Its caustic tone reflected Williams's profound disappoint-
ment in his inability to advance the peace process in the colony and his low
regard for its leadership. Although he was "satisfied that the essential pre-
requisite for British Guiana's development is independence," he found that
"independence is little more than a slogan or catch-word in British Guiana,
and the political parties have failed to appreciate the necessity of achieving
some broad general agreement among the majority of the population as to
the conditions under which the country must proceed to Independence, both
in order to promote internal stability and avoid internal strife, in order to
satisfy world public opinion and not discredit the world movement against
colonialism."
In Williams's opinion, Guiana was "far removed" from the "ideal basis of
national independence." He based this assessment on the seemingly "per-
manent disorder" in the colony and the failure of efforts to achieve a coali-
tion government and of outsiders' attempts to help settle the crisis. He had
accepted Jagan's invitation to mediate because "the interests of developing
nations all over the world required that yet another effort should be made to
ensure the early independence of British Guiana, and therefore to find some
rational and stable basis on which that independence could be built."
Williams blamed the "various parties" in British Guiana for the failure of
his efforts. Forbes Burnham, he said, objected to the joint discussions being


--- PAGE 235 ---
222 BLEEDING GUIANA
held in Trinidad instead of British Guiana. Premier Cheddi Jagan had con-
tributed to the "lack of confidence" in his initiative by "seeking alternative
mediation" while his own efforts were in progress. Here Williams was refer-
ring to Janet Jagan's appearance before the United Nations Committee of
Twenty-Four and the premier's own attempts to initiate tripartite discus-
sions in British Guiana while joint talks were taking place in Trinidad. He
also believed that Peter D'Aguiar's appeal to the leader of the opposition in
the United Kingdom to intervene in the Guiana dispute was unhelpful.
Williams questioned the statesmanship of British Guiana's leaders: they
lacked a sustained "sense of gravity and urgency" to resolve their problems.
"There was no readiness on any side," Williams asserted, "to subordinate
sectional interests or personal antagonisms or ideological vagaries to the
overriding national interest." The political leaders' proposed solutions to
their country's predicament were "either meaningless or intransigent or
not intended to be taken seriously," and their "intemperate remarks" com-
promised the search for answers. "Notwithstanding the grim and tragic
precedents which are there today [in Guiana] for all to see," declared Wil-
liams, "the vital importance of appropriate constitutional provisions and
safeguards in the Independence Constitution received perfunctory consider-
ation." Under the circumstances, he concluded, "I find that there is no basis
or reasonable hope for any accommodation between the political parties, for
any resolution of the political deadlock, or for any agreement on the national
and stable foundation on which the independence of British Guiana must
necessarily be built."46
Predictably, Jagan was not pleased with the Williams report. In a letter to
the Trinidadian prime minister on June 29, he expressed regret that "your
efforts have not been successful." He acknowledged his disappointment
with his own attempts to resolve his country's crisis, blaming Burnham's
refusal to join him in a coalition government as the principal cause of
his own failure. Quite correctly, Jagan blamed U.S. support of Burnham's
stance: "I think that the fact is that Mr. Burnham is supported and influ-
enced by the United States, who seem to want nothing less than the destruc-
tion of me and my Party. He increases his demands with every concession I
make: proposals which he found favour with a few months ago are no
longer acceptable to him. It is clear that he feels that the cards are stacked
against the Government and so has hardened his attitude."
Jagan was upset that Williams had released his report to the press since it


--- PAGE 236 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 223
was "a Report addressed to me [and] produced as a result of my request to
you." He noted that it contained "a number of inaccuracies" that "should be
corrected for the records." Jagan took issue with Williams's claim that Jagan
had agreed that "[the] discussions would not necessarily be limited to the
leaders of the political parties in the British Guiana Legislature." His delega-
tion "has no recollection of any such reservation being expressed, and in-
deed was surprised that Mr. R. A. Ishmael was summoned to Trinidad and
Tobago for discussion."
Jagan also contested Williams's assertion that the premier had asked
him to persuade the United Kingdom to delay the implementation of the
new proportional representation electoral system "whilst exploratory efforts
were in progress on the ground that the tension in British Guiana was to be
ascribed solely to the new system of proportional representation." This was
"not correct." On the contrary, "My Attorney General and I made it quite
clear that the current disturbances had their origin in an industrial dispute in
the sugar industry. The employment of scabs mainly of another race caused
the struggle for union recognition to gather racial overtones. We added that
existing tensions were also in part due to the feeling that the imposition of
proportional representation by the British Government was aimed at de-
stroying the People's Progressive Party and the Government."
Jagan defended his decision not to return to Trinidad for the talks, repeat-
ing his earlier contention that "events at home prevented me from leaving
the country during this period." His request to be made privy to the pro-
posals made by the opposition "was reasonable in the light of the situation
in British Guiana at the time and of the pronouncements of the Opposition
leaders." In addition, Jagan rejected Williams's conclusion that his govern-
ment's representatives who appeared before the United Nations Committee
of Twenty-Four interfered with the mediation process. These representa-
tives, he explained, were "aimed to the United Nations foreign intervention
and intrigue in British Guiana and foreign pressure on Britain to withhold
independence." Jagan could also not agree with Williams's statement that
"my efforts to discuss our problems with my colleagues in British Guiana"
impeded the mediation. He reminded Williams "of the horror that news of
the disturbances at Wismar evoked in this country. "He did not think "that in
such circumstances my efforts to secure a meeting with the leaders of the
Opposition needed to be justified."
Premier Jagan recounted his various attempts to achieve a compromise


--- PAGE 237 ---
224 BLEEDING GUIANA
with the opposition. "I have made every effort to work out some sort of
accommodation with Mr. Burnham, not only now, but since 1957, without
success." He feared that "interracial relations in British Guiana will be dam-
aged beyond repair" if something was not done immediately to "restore
normal relations." Accordingly, he asked Prime Minister Williams to place
his country's problems on the agenda of the forthcoming Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' Conference. He was certain, he concluded on a conciliatory
note, that "there is room for the working out of a genuine constitutional
compromise and settlement by a Commonwealth team."47
It is hardly surprising that Williams's attempts to mediate the crisis in
Guiana had failed. To begin with, he did not inspire the confidence of the
Guianese leaders. Jagan's invitation to mediate the conflict notwithstanding,
the three major politicians in British Guiana looked askance at any inter-
ference in their internal affairs by outsiders. In addition, none of them
wanted Williams to increase his stature in the Caribbean by success in
Guiana. Such was the pernicious nature of the crippling rivalries and jeal-
ousies in the region's politics. Williams, on his part, was never a consistent
admirer of the Guianese leaders, especially Jagan. As early as December 1,
1962, for example, he had told Ambassador Miner that "we in Trinidad know
how to cut Jagan down to size, and will do so when the time is right." But, he
added, he could not do so "when it would appear that we were acting simply
as American agents." Six months later, Williams said that he had "written
off the idea of preserving good relations with Dr. Jagan."48 Williams's ac-
knowledged personal, ideological, and political antipathy to Premier Jagan
was not helpful and raises questions about the integrity of the mediation
process over which he presided.
Forbes Burnham's disingenuous stance on Williams's mediating efforts
was not constructive, either. Basking in the clandestine support of the Amer-
icans, Burnham was unwilling to reach any compromise with Jagan that
would endanger his chances of becoming the head of government or under-
mine his support from his friends outside the country. Two weeks after
Burnham visited Port of Spain to meet with Williams, Ambassador Miner
reported that Burnham's behavior was allegedly based on his expectation of
U.S. support. The Trinidadian commissioner in Georgetown had told him
that "Williams' mediation efforts [were] stymied principally by attitude of
Burnham who claims U.S. supports him and approves his refusal [to] con-
sider joining coalition with Jagan."49


--- PAGE 238 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 225
These personality issues, political jealousies, and intrigues aside, the
Williams mediation initiative confronted insurmountable problems. Given
the deteriorating political situation in British Guiana, the talks were doomed
before they began. The strike in the sugar industry was a major impediment,
producing much violence, unrest, and chaos. When Williams wrote his
report to Premier Jagan on June 12, 1964, the strike was already 118 days
old. During the three weeks that led up to June 5, 16 people had died, 243
had been wounded, and 315 had been arrested. During the eleven awful days
that immediately preceded that date, 365 houses had been damaged or
destroyed. By the time the strike ended in late July, 166 people had lost
their lives and over 800 had been wounded; approximately 1,400 buildings,
mostly houses, were razed. In addition, many cane fields were destroyed
by arson.
As the situation worsened, Janet Jagan, as minister of home affairs and the
official responsible for internal security, resigned on May 22. She charged
that the police force was controlled by the government's opponents and
rejected her authority. Premier Cheddi Jagan, seeking to exploit the situation
politically, declined to name a successor to his wife. This forced the colonial
governor to assume responsibility for internal security, a role he exercised
until mid-December 1964. Employing his emergency powers, the governor
on June 13 ordered the detention of 36 persons, including 34 members of the
legislature—among
 them, Deputy Premier Brindley Benn. The governor's
dramatic action reduced the level of violence temporarily, only to have it
reappear with increased vigor in July.
The violence began to abate in August, partly because the bitter and
racially divisive strike in the sugar industry had ended. The governor had
also used his powers to disarm the civilian population in the coastal areas,
where violence had become almost endemic. Further, the creation of a multi-
racial Home Guard eased tensions considerably. Above all, the people of
British Guiana had grown tired of violence, arson, and murder and wel-
comed the uncertain truce.
***** The difficult political climate that existed throughout the spring
and summer months helps to explain Eric Williams's failure to mediate the
Guianese crisis successfully. Williams, the anticolonialist, was highly critical
of the governor's assumption of emergency powers in June, since "the con-
PPP and 2 members of the PNC, as well as the arrest of 6 PPP members of the


--- PAGE 239 ---
226 BLEEDING GUIANA
trol of the intensified lawlessness and disorder has now been transferred to
the hands of the colonial power." But British Guianese leaders also guaran-
teed the failure of the Williams initiative by their political grandstanding and
inability to place their country's interest above their narrow partisan con-
cerns and their penchant for blaming others for its difficulties.
Peter D'Aguiar, for example, was not inclined to place the national inter-
est above his own. In rejecting Burnham and Jagan's call for a coalition
government, D'Aguiar admitted: "I am not desirous of pulling Dr. Jagan's
chestnuts out of the fire. Dr. Jagan is sinking in the mud he himself created.
To try and help him out only means getting dragged in the mud too." Never
an enthusiastic supporter of the Williams initiative, Forbes Burnham also
questioned the efficacy of his role, noting that "in this kind of atmosphere a
negotiable solution is an absolute impossibility."50 These leaders could sum-
mon neither the courage nor the statesmanship to address the serious prob-
lems that they had helped to create and that they continued to exploit for
partisan ends.
Having made this direct, albeit unsuccessful, foray into the political quag-
mire in British Guiana, Eric Williams seemed unwilling and unable to extri-
cate himself. In June 1964 he instructed Trinidad's permanent representative
to the United Nations, Sir Ellis Clarke, to convey his proposals for a Guiana
settlement to the British mission in New York. In his meeting with Sir Hilton
Poynton, Britain's representative to the United Nations, Clarke noted that his
government had concluded that Guiana's problems had to be solved expedi-
tiously to avoid the risk of a major East-West confrontation. He said that
Trinidad agreed with the United Kingdom that the political leaders in British
Guiana had not shown the capacity to govern. Indeed, the country was not
ready for and "did not deserve" independence.
Any grant of independence to Guiana, Clarke opined, would be disas-
trous, since there would be an inevitable breakdown of law and order. The
Trinidadian government feared that if Cheddi Jagan were in control, he
would seek assistance from "undesirable" quarters, meaning Cuba or the
Soviet Union. Clarke believed that this would produce an immediate con-
frontation with the United States, a development that would be fraught with
risks for the Caribbean area. Clarke was highly critical of the United Nations
Committee of Twenty-Four, which he accused of making incessant accusa-
tions of "imperialism" and "divide and rule," thereby adding to the difficulty
of Britain's task in Guiana. Any solution, he asserted, must meet the ap-


--- PAGE 240 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA
proval of the United States in view of its interest in the future of Brit-
ish Guiana.51
Under the circumstances, Ellis Clarke expressed the willingness of his
government to help the British "get off the present hook" in British Guiana,
where they had been "taking all the kicks" for a situation that they were
powerless to control. Williams's desire to help the British, as articulated by
Clarke, was not as altruistic as it appeared. Two months earlier, the prime
minister had instructed John O'Halloran, Trinidad's minister of agriculture,
industry, and trade, to tell British officials that since he, Williams, was being
helpful to their government on the Guiana question, he hoped that they
would be generous to him in return.52
Sir Ellis Clarke, acting on Williams's behalf, proposed that the United
Kingdom set an early date for British Guiana's independence, perhaps Octo-
ber 1965 or January 1966. In the interim, the colony would become a trustee
of the United Nations. His government believed that if Britain left the scene,
most of the existing turmoil would dissipate. Under United Nations trustee-
ship, the secretary general would appoint a commissioner to replace the
colonial governor and oversee government operations. Once "a suitable
formula" had been worked out, the commissioner would arrange to hold
national elections and prepare the colony for independence. The Trinidadian
government believed that a New Zealander would be best suited to assume
the duties of commissioner, as his country had had no prior association with
British Guiana and he could be expected to be impartial. Efforts should be
made, however, to appoint nationals of other Commonwealth countries to
his staff. Eric Williams specifically excluded nationals of England, Australia,
Canada, and the African and Asian nations, as well as communists, from
consideration for the job of commissioner.53
This proposal received a cool reception in the Colonial Office. Britain had
no intention of involving the United Nations in the internal affairs of its
colonies, as this would have meant an admission of failure to solve an
essentially imperial matter. In dismissing the plan, Sir Hilton Poynton said
flatly that "it offers no solution for British Guiana." He thought that it would
be irresponsible to fix a date for independence without first removing the
obstacles to it. Poynton doubted very much that the United Nations would
assume the financial burden—probably £3 million or more—attendant upon
its assumption of the trusteeship. Moreover, he believed that the violence in
Guiana would increase if Britain departed. In any event, the Williams plan
227


--- PAGE 241 ---
228 BLEEDING GUIANA
"would involve the United Nations, but would do nothing to quiet American
fears that an independent Guiana under Jagan would be a Communist satel-
lite, or to keep out Cuban and other Communist influences."54
This rejection notwithstanding, Williams presented a similar proposal at
the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held in London later that
summer. It failed to receive any support, not even from Donald Sangster, the
acting prime minister of Jamaica. Opposition leader Norman Manley chas-
tised Sangster for his failure to support Williams, but this was not represen-
tative of Jamaican opinion. The Jamaican daily tabloid, the Star, was closer to
the nation's pulse when it attacked Manley for his "elite kinship with anti-
Jamaican Eric," characterizing Williams's ideas as "impracticable." Jamai-
cans were incensed when Williams declared that the Commonwealth "has
meant little in our part of the world," prompting Donald Sangster to assure
the other prime ministers that Jamaica attached considerable importance to
its Commonwealth ties.55
Betraying his frustration at the unfavorable reception of his proposals,
Williams once again threatened to ignore developments in British Guiana.
In September he told Norman Costar that Guiana no longer interested him,
repeating his opposition to proportional representation and declaring that
should Burnham win the upcoming elections, the British would find him as
bad as, and possibly worse than, Jagan. The only solution would be to get rid
of both Jagan and Burnham.56
But on December 7, 1964, Election Day, the Guianese people had other
ideas. Held under the new and controversial system of proportional repre-
sentation, the entire country formed one constituency and each of the parties
submitted a list of candidates. Consequently, the electorate voted for parties
and not for individuals. Under the system, the number of seats in the fifty-
three-member legislature won by each party reflected the proportion of votes
that it had received. When the votes were counted, the results were as shown
in Table 2.
Had a system of proportional representation not been implemented, the
PPP would have won 20 seats, with 45.8 percent of the votes; the PNC 13;
and the UF 2. An extraordinarily high 96.3 percent of registered voters went
to the polls. Had a "first past the post" system been in operation, the PPP
with its projected 20 seats would have been a minority government, thereby
guaranteeing the continuation of political chaos. Although Cheddi Jagan
was unable to command majority support in the House of Assembly because


--- PAGE 242 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 229
TABLE 2 * Results of 1964 General Election in British Guiana
Party
People's Progressive Party
People's National Congress
United Force
Guiana United Muslims Party
Justice Party
National Labour Front
Peace and Equality Party
Votes
109,332
96,657
29,612
1,334
1,194
224
177
Seats
24
22
7
-
-
-
—
the PPP had only 24 seats and a coalition with the PNC or the UF was
infeasible, he declined to resign as premier in protest against the new elec-
toral system that had resulted in his impending removal from office. The
colonial governor had no choice but to dismiss him and swear in Forbes
Burnham as the new premier of a coalition government consisting of mem-
bers of the PNC and the UF.
***** The Burnham-D'Aguiar administration succeeded in restoring
some modicum of stability to British Guiana during its first year in office.
Relieved, the colonial authorities began to make preparations for indepen-
dence, hoping that internal peace would prevail. At a conference held in the
fall of 1965, the decision was made to grant independence to the colony in
the following summer.
Burnham's assumption of the reins of government did not reduce Wil-
liams's concern about the fate of British Guiana. He distrusted Burnham,
and that sentiment was amply reciprocated. During the early months of the
Burnham administration, Williams kept his distance, watching develop-
ments largely from a posture of interested and often irritated silence. When
the Big Four Conference was held in British Guiana in March 1965, Williams
declined to attend—in part, because a strike of sugarcane workers in Trini-
dad required his attention. Still, the Nation, the PNM'S news organ, im-
plored Williams to boycott the meeting for other reasons. It is likely that he
had inspired the article, given his antipathy to Burnham. In an open letter to
Williams, the Nation related an encounter that "we" had with "four represen-
tatives" of the "ordinary man in the street." Concerned for Williams's safety


--- PAGE 243 ---
23O BLEEDING GUIANA
in Guiana, the "ordinary men" urged him to stay in Trinidad. The men, the
open letter continued, "were of the opinion that the prestige you acquired
over the years as the strongest protagonist of independence in these parts
and of the defunct West Indies Federation and as the arch enemy of colonial-
ism, that this prestige was now to be used to bolster a government nurtured
in the very bosom and tradition of colonialism. They meant, they said, no
offence to the present government of Mr. Forbes Burnham because, as they
said, 'Burnham was our boy; he is one of us.' What they did not like was the
means whereby the government came into being."
The letter reminded the prime minister that "British Guiana is today what
you deplore—a mess created by colonial powers, imperialists, governments
who can see only 'red' and who must have around them only persons who
would do their bidding or through whom they can carry out their wishes."
There was no reason why Williams "should go getting your fingers burnt
drawing out of the imperialist fire, colonial chestnuts." The letter went on to
assure him that "the mess" was not of his creation, so he should not "wal-
low in it." Williams should allow all those who created "the mess" and "all
those who created it who are sitting smiling by, manipulating the strings
come out from behind the stage and mend the figures, change the scenery
and fix everything before the world audience." The letter ended on a high
Shakespearian note: "We appeal to you in the name of political decency, for
your own political prestige which you have so painstakingly built up over the
years since your student days to keep hands off. In the words of that popular
hit parade song 'Please stay, don't go.' Or, if that is too modern, we appeal in
the sober and respected language of Shakespeare: It is meet that noble
minds shall keep ever with their likes."57
Whether Williams inspired this letter or not, there is no doubt that it
reflected his view of Burnham and the government over which he presided.
Williams's absence from the Big Four Conference exacerbated the tensions
between the two men, and they continued to annoy one another over seem-
ingly minor policy decisions. When Burnham signed a new trade agreement
with Jamaica, for example, the British high commissioner said that an angry
Eric Williams responded by banning the importation of British Guianese
plantains. Reportedly, Burnham then threatened to purchase his country's
main imports from Trinidad elsewhere. Williams was also displeased when
British Guiana, Barbados, and Antigua created the short-lived Caribbean
Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) at Burnham's initiative.58


--- PAGE 244 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA
Although Williams repeatedly said that British Guiana no longer con-
cerned him, his public statements did not reflect his private anxieties. In
fact, he confided to High Commissioner Costar his fear that if Guiana were
granted independence under Burnham, Jagan's supporters would create tur-
moil that could spill over to Trinidad. Williams hoped that the British would
keep his potential difficulties in mind when they acted. Costar did not be-
lieve that Williams's concerns should be allowed to determine British policy,
but he felt that he should be kept fully informed of any developments. After
all, Costar maintained, despite Williams's criticisms of the United King-
dom's policy toward British Guiana in private, he had been generally helpful
in public. The perpetuation of this policy would continue to pay rich divi-
dends, Costar believed.
The visit of Trinidad's deputy prime minister, Patrick Solomon, to British
Guiana in March 1965, representing Williams at the Big Four Conference,
seemingly offered the prospect of a thaw in the relations between the two
countries. Although Solomon had a favorable impression of Burnham, he
had his doubts about the wisdom of racial balance in the police force if that
would reduce its efficiency. According to Norman Costar, Solomon, "who is
inclined to be a negro racialist, or at any rate to have little patience with East
Indian maneuverings, said that talk of racial balance in the police and security
forces in British Guiana was not very sensible if the objective was the mainte-
nance of an efficient police force." Solomon's generally favorable assessment
of Burnham, Costar hoped, would have a positive impact on Williams's
attitude toward independence for British Guiana. Costar noted that in the
past, "Dr. Williams has had little time either for Burnham or Jagan and has
said that British Guiana is unfit for independence. If he changes his mind,
which now seems possible he may well urge early Guiana independence."59
Williams did not urge independence for British Guiana when the Com-
monwealth prime ministers met in London in June 1965. He was, however,
sharply critical of British policy and repeated his proposal that the colony be
placed under a United Nations trusteeship. He once again condemned the
system of proportional representation and predicted that it would do noth-
ing to improve the racial climate in Guiana. Trinidad, he threatened, would
hold the United Kingdom responsible for the consequences of its actions in
the colony. These criticisms having been articulated, Williams declined fur-
ther participation in the discussion and requested that Trinidad be disassoci-
ated from any conference report on British Guiana.60
231


--- PAGE 245 ---
232 BLEEDING GUIANA
Williams continued to be troubled by developments in the colony and
their implications for the political and racial health of his nation. On Octo-
ber 5,1965, he told David Rose, the administrator of Antigua, that he could
not endorse any American interference in the affairs of British Guiana. In
addition, Williams maintained that there were sound reasons why he could
not accept the legitimacy of the Burnham regime, which had come to power
as a result of proportional representation. His critics did not realize that his
good relations with Indians in Trinidad were held in a fine balance and that
he could ill afford to jeopardize that rapport. If he supported Burnham and
the means by which he came to power, Williams speculated, the Indians in
Trinidad might demand proportional representation. This stance was con-
sistent with his belief that proportional representation was a threat to na-
tional unity. Indeed, in an address to his nation on April 10,1962, Williams
rejected proportional representation because it would "emphasise and in
fact establish sharp lines of division between the various social groups" and
"in that way madness lies." Rose informed the Colonial Office that "the
thread that ran through all our conversation was the thinly veiled suggestion
that British Guiana had much to gain from cooperation with Trinidad, but
that the initiative must come from British Guiana in order to prevent what
Dr. Williams regards as his good relations with the Trinidad Indian commu-
nity becoming soured."61
Administrator Rose also reported on his talks with other officials in
Trinidad and Tobago. He said that the governor general, as well as opposi-
tion leader Ashford Sinanan, both believed that Williams wanted a thaw in
his relations with Burnham and was under considerable pressure from poli-
ticians and from the business community to end the freeze. Both men be-
lieved that the initiative should come from Burnham, that he should make "a
private and tactical approach" to Williams. Burnham, however, should dem-
onstrate a willingness "to accept Dr. Williams informally as Primus Inter Pares
in regional councils," and this would lead to "a very rapid development of
good relations and economic cooperation." Although Norman Costar gen-
erally agreed with this approach, he thought that "the depth of Dr. Williams
feeling about British Guiana is ... ingrained .. . there is certainly a clash of
personality between himself and Mr. Burnham. Dr. Williams wants to pa-
tronize Mr. Burnham and the latter has not played up to this wish. Mr.
Burnham will not bow to Dr. Williams; not that I suggest he should consider


--- PAGE 246 ---
BLEEDING GUIANA 233
doing so except as a calculated course to smooth his road; and Dr. Williams
will not hold out his hand."62
There was, of course, no immediate thaw in the relations between Wil-
liams and Burnham. After visiting British Guiana in January 1966, High
Commissioner Costar reported that Burnham expressed a desire for im-
proved relations with Trinidad. But, according to Costar, he was aware that
Williams "could be a very difficult man." Burnham expressed a willingness to
welcome Trinidad into the recently established CARIFTA. As Costar re-
ported, "contrary to the wishes of Mr. Barrow, who appeared to have the
strongest possible dislike of Dr. Williams, he, Mr. Burnham, had insisted on
postponing bringing the Free Trade Area into effective operation for some
months in order to give Trinidad a chance to be a founding member." Andrew
Rose, the Trinidad high commissioner to the United Kingdom, had an expla-
nation for Williams's hostile reaction to the formation of CARIFTA, noted
Costar. The attorney general of British Guiana, Shridath Ramphal, had told
him that Rose "had inferred that Mr. Burnham could not seriously expect Dr.
Williams to join an organization sponsored by anybody but himself."63
***** As British Guiana took its first awkward steps toward indepen-
dence in 1966, the relationship between Williams and Burnham remained
cool and ambivalent. In an effort to promote a rapprochement, High Com-
missioner Costar recommended to the Commonwealth Relations Office that
Williams be encouraged to make a statement supporting British Guiana in
its continuing border dispute with Venezuela. In response, D. M. Cleary
agreed that this support was desirable but emphasized that the idea should
emanate from Williams himself. Echoing the long-standing official distrust
of the prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Cleary added: "There is, I am
sure you will agree, always the possibility that Dr. Williams might take a
deliberately perverse position if he felt that we were attempting to influ-
ence him."64
Weary of the difficulties with Trinidad, Burnham told High Commis-
sioner Costar in February 1966 of his desire to improve relations between the
two countries. When Williams was apprised of this desire, he denied any
responsibility for the tensions. He acknowledged, however, that Burnham
resented his opposition to proportional representation.65 Williams would
make a major step toward a rapprochement with Burnham by appointing a


--- PAGE 247 ---
234 BLEEDING GUIANA
high commissioner to British Guiana, though after some delay. This de-
velopment led D. M. Cleary to hope that "with the advent of further indepen-
dent neighbours, Dr. Williams can be brought to realize that it is to his
advantage to be on good terms with them."66
As British Guiana's Independence Day approached in the summer of
1966, Eric Williams declined the invitation to participate in the celebrations
in Georgetown, saying that it would be inappropriate for a head of govern-
ment of an independent country to attend. His attendance, notwithstanding
the protocol he invoked, would have gone a long way toward healing the
breach with Burnham. Williams also made it known that he objected to the
presence at the celebrations of C. L. R. James, his former mentor, political
associate, writer, and later political antagonist. Costar reported Williams's
objections to the Commonwealth Relations Office, characterizing James as
"the elderly left wing Trinidad writer, whose distaste for Dr. Williams is
more than balanced by Dr. Williams' own almost morbid hostility to, and
suspicion of him. ... To Dr. Williams, this is equivalent to Trinidad giving
an honored position to Dr. Jagan."67 Alarmed by this latest problem between
the two leaders, the officials immediately investigated the reasons for the
James invitation. The Guianese attorney general acknowledged that James
had been invited as a representative of "literature" but denied that there had
been any intention to irritate Williams or to embarrass the government of
Trinidad and Tobago. The matter was thereby contained, but that it became
an issue at all spoke volumes about the nature of Caribbean political life and
its leadership.
Eric Williams's involvement in the British Guianese quagmire was an
exercise in futility. He had a genuine desire to be of service to the people of
that country, but he also understood that what was occurring in Guiana
could be reproduced in Trinidad and Tobago. His involvement was, accord-
ingly, an expression of enlightened self-interest. But Guiana's problems
could not be solved in Port of Spain. The colony lacked mature leadership,
and years of racial politics had scarred its fiber and its soul. While British
Guiana bled from its internecine warfare, its leaders thought mainly in
terms of their chances of retaining power or how to assume it. The country's
agony was a Caribbean agony. Eric Williams looked into his crystal ball and
saw a bleeding Trinidad and Tobago if he failed to provide leadership at
home that transcended race. This was a daunting challenge, as the frustra-
tions and the minefields tested his character and his skills.


--- PAGE 248 ---
CHAPTER 7
ERIC WILLIAMS, AFRICA,
AND
***** Fresh from a six-week tour of eleven African states, Prime Min-
ister Eric Williams addressed one of his favorite audiences on April 22,
1964. It consisted mainly of West Indian students at McGill and Sir George
Williams Universities in Montreal who had gathered to hear the former
professor discuss his tour, the historical connections between Africa and the
West Indies, colonialism, and neocolonialism. Energized by his young audi-
ence, Williams said that "the historical connection between Africa, princi-
pally West Africa, is nothing to be ashamed about, though the West Indians
don't like it and I get the feeling that the West Africans like it even less."1
This statement captured the historical ambivalences in the relationship
between the peoples of Africa and of African descent in the Americas. Fifty
years earlier (1914) Jamaican Marcus Garvey had founded the Universal Ne-
gro Improvement Association (UN IA) to promote racial pride and a back-to-
Africa movement. Eric Williams was born three years before Garvey founded
his organization and came to maturity at a time when peoples of African
descent were beginning to struggle against colonialism. Intellectuals from
Trinidad and Tobago played important roles in this campaign as well as in
conceptualizing, fostering, and enhancing relationships among the peoples
of African descent in the diaspora. Henry Sylvester Williams, for example,
organized the first international gathering of Pan-Africanists in London in
1900. Attended by such African American luminaries as Anna Julia Cooper
and W E. B. DuBois, the congress was called to "bring into closer touch with
each other the peoples of African descent throughout the world" and "to the
securing to all African races living in civilized countries their full rights,"
among other goals. The conferees established the Pan-African Movement
to give organizational expression to their objectives and to fight for self-
government for colonized peoples in Africa and the Caribbean.2
AFRICANS


--- PAGE 249 ---
236 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
The 1900 congress was held at a time when Liberia, Haiti, and Ethiopia
were the only historically black countries that remained free from colonial
rule. Finding this situation intolerable, the Pan-Africanists held congresses
in 1921,1923,1927, and 1945 to raise the political consciousness of blacks in
the diaspora and to contest European domination. Although the Pan-African
Movement did not boast a large membership, the elites who comprised
it were intellectually gifted, pugnacious, and eloquent in their condemna-
tion of colonialism. Among the most prominent and influential voices were
those of Trinidadians George Padmore, C. L. R. James, and Claudia Jones.
The fledgling Pan-African Movement did not stand alone, however. Pro-
claiming "Africa for the Africans at home and abroad," Marcus Garvey's
Universal Negro Improvement Association advocated an end to European
domination of Africa when it was founded. The UN IA drew its membership
chiefly from the lower middle and working classes and from persons who
were phenotypically black. Espousing a philosophy of "race first," the asso-
ciation promoted the interests of blacks worldwide, including the assump-
tion of political power and the assertion of economic independence. Garvey-
ism politicized millions of blacks in the diaspora, but the dream of an end to
colonial rule was never achieved in its heyday. The Italian invasion of Ethio-
pia in 1935 dramatized the political weakness of blacks universally, although
it elicited angry protests and demonstrations in the United States and else-
where. Emperor Haile Selassie and Ethiopia came to represent the plight of
blacks who were the victims of foreign domination, emphasizing the need to
struggle against it and to command their own destinies.
The anticolonial struggle was only partially driven by such developments
as the American occupation of Haiti, the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, and the
racist ideology and its practice that caused World War II. Its major impetus
came primarily from internal developments in the black colonial world. The
Pan-African Movement and Garveyism had sensitized many people to fight
for political independence. Colonized peoples and blacks in the United
States were becoming increasingly literate, in many cases forming an ex-
panding professional group and a growing middle class. Some of these
highly skilled individuals were frozen out of jobs they deserved, as the colo-
nial state and other employers preferred to hire whites. Such exclusionary
practices based on race fed the demands for political change. Though it
would be erroneous to maintain that the colonized peoples had never chal-
lenged their status, it is clear that new energies were unleashed during the


--- PAGE 250 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 237
1940s and 1950s. Emboldened by the rhetoric that animated the struggle
against fascism and the racist ideology espoused by Adolf Hitler and others,
a new group of colonial leaders became uncompromising in their assaults
on European rule.
Reflecting the change in the temper of the times, the Fifth Pan-African
Congress, which met in Manchester, England, in 1945, was attended mainly
by delegates from the colonized countries. W. E. B. DuBois was the lone
delegate from the United States. The conference was dominated by anti-
colonial issues, demonstrating a rising nationalism among African and Ca-
ribbean peoples that would culminate in political independence for many
countries in the ensuing decades.
***** The previous discussion—albeit brief—provides the context
within which to situate Eric Williams and his positions on Africa. Williams
grew up at a time when the challenges to colonial rule were acquiring a new
fervor. Not surprisingly, the politically conscious historian could write in 1951
that "a governing principle of my life has always been that complete self-
government is the first prerequisite to the unleashing of the dammed ener-
gies, productive and spiritual, of the people of the European territories."3
Williams became chief minister of Trinidad and Tobago in 1956, just
before Ghana received its independence in 1957. By December 1963, thirty-
two British, French, and Belgian colonies in Africa had also won their inde-
pendence. Williams welcomed these developments. As the prime minister of
a newly independent Trinidad and Tobago, however, he had to formulate his
country's policy toward these nations, a challenge that the early advocates of
Pan-Africanism did not have to confront.
Eric Williams, to be sure, had demonstrated a long-standing interest in
Africa and its peoples. During his visit to Africa in 1964, he recalled that
while working for "one of the small and new Research Foundations" in
Washington, D.C., in 1947, he began doing some research on Kenya and
Nigeria. The foundation, however, "could not understand why a West Indian
should go meddling in African affairs." It declined to publish what Williams
wrote about the two African colonies "and insisted that I write on some
insipid metropolitan organization dealing with the West Indies."4
Although he never used the term, Williams would, in today's parlance, be
characterized as a student of the African diaspora. He was an advocate of
making the study of Africa and its peoples a fundamental part of the univer-


--- PAGE 251 ---
238 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
sity curriculum in the Caribbean, as well as on the African continent and in
the United States. As early as 1947, while a member of the Howard University
faculty, he proposed that the university establish "an Institute of what neces-
sarily had to be called in those days Colonial Studies, which had to deal with
Africa and the West Indies."5 Seventeen years later, on February 21,1964, he
told the students at Hansberry College at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka,
that he wanted a Chair in African Studies created at the University of the West
Indies. On that occasion, Williams also called for "a conference of West
Indian and African specialists in the general field of African studies, using
'African' in the widest possible sense to include the Africans abroad wher-
ever people of African origin and descent have settled and therefore have
made some impact on societies in the world."6
Such views clearly suggest a diasporic vision. Approximately one month
after his address in Nigeria, Williams told the students at Haile Selassie
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, that he wanted to see students and schol-
ars from African universities and the University of the West Indies, as well as
those in the United States, Europe, Brazil, and elsewhere, meet "to discuss
this whole bag, this vast field of what, for want of a better phrase we might
call Afro-American Studies."7
Williams also supported collaborative research in African studies by Afri-
can and West Indian scholars. He viewed the field "as not only important in
itself" but "as absolutely essential as an integral part of the process of
decolonization which cannot be limited to the political and economic." In
his opinion, African studies had "the equally important contribution to
make of redefining the basis of our civilization, of our heritage, and giving to
Africa and what Africa represents in the world a status and dignity which the
imperialist historians have deliberately tried to take away from Africa over
the centuries."8
By political conviction, as well as by the imperatives of racial heritage,
Williams was most certainly a Pan-Africanist in the traditional sense. By
1962, however, when he became the leader of an independent Trinidad and
Tobago, the political vocabulary insofar as Africans and the peoples of the
diaspora were concerned, had changed. The desire for some link between
Africa and its diaspora never waned, but the emphases in Africa became the
construction of individual nation-states and the fostering of some degree of
political unity among them. In May 1963, for instance, the leaders of the
newly independent African states established the Organization of African


--- PAGE 252 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 239
Unity (OAU) at a meeting held in Addis Ababa. The purpose of the OAU was
to promote unity among the African nations, and it espoused such goals as a
common defense, an African development plan, an African free trade area,
an African university, an African news agency, and so on. The OAU also
advocated an end to colonial rule on the continent, denounced the system of
apartheid in South Africa, and wanted Africa to be declared a denuclearized
zone. In a speech to the Trinidad Legislature on December 6, 1963, Prime
Minister Williams welcomed the formation of the OAU and associated his
government with its objectives. He announced that his minister of labor had
recently walked out of a meeting of the International Labor Organization
when South Africa's representative took the floor. Trinidad's representative
at an international conference on tourism held in Rome was instructed to
behave similarly.9
Although Williams identified his government with a variety of causes
promoted by black Africans, he took pains to point out that it was part of
both the Afro-Asian and European blocs. As he said three weeks after his
nation received its independence: "We are naturally part of the Afro-Asian
bloc and at the same time we are just as naturally a part of Europe. Our
political traditions have come from Europe, our trade to a large extent is with
Europe. . . . We are part of Europe and we are likely with independence to
have that connection with Europe strengthened."10
Despite his anticolonial rhetoric and his assertion that the imperial pow-
ers were responsible for the ills of the West Indies, Williams could not sever
his nation's ties with Europe. He manifested this ambivalence to Europe
throughout his career, even as he became known as one of the most vocifer-
ous critics of colonialism and of Europeans by extrapolation.
Notwithstanding the black majority on the Anglophone islands, Williams
contended that they were not "African communities." He emphasized, accu-
rately, that the nation of Trinidad and Tobago was comprised of several
ethnic groups. In an address to students at the University of Dakar, Senegal,
in March 1964, Williams stressed that Trinidad "is Afro-Asian on a European
base." Although recognizing that "West Africa was depopulated in order to
populate the West Indies" and that there was "a powerful African influence
in the West Indies," the prime minister argued that "this cultural contact
does not mean, contrary to what so many Africans think, that the West
Indies are African communities." He cautioned his audience that "whilstyou
emphasize the cultural link, you must not over emphasize the racial associa-


--- PAGE 253 ---
240 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
tion." After four centuries of colonialism, the West Indian "is not an African,
nor is he an Asian, nor is he a European. He is an African or Asian assimi-
lated to the European."
Pleased with the reception to this speech, Williams sent a copy to his
Cabinet, observing that the lecture "went down quite well, particularly be-
cause I spoke in French; you will see the line that was taken there, after being
worked out by the ministers and diplomats." He reported that "we have been
able to establish the realities as we see them" on "the other great danger":
the "tendency to equate Trinidad and Tobago with the African states."11
Williams had little patience with those African diplomats at the United
Nations who viewed Trinidad as an African state and courted its vote accord-
ingly. Speaking at Oxford University in April 1964, he underscored this
point: "It had emerged at the United Nations that the Africans were tending
to take the view, a little too often for our comfort, that we were an African
state and therefore must vote uncritically with the African bloc. Trinidad and
Tobago is not an African state."12
Such a declaration, to be sure, did not mean a repudiation of an emo-
tional connection with Africa or a denial of common political and economic
interests as developing countries and former colonies. In explaining the
reasons for his forthcoming visit to Africa, Williams had told his nation on
February 7, 1964, that "I have a strong personal interest in this African
tour. As you know, I have been working for many years on the History of the
West Indies, and I have consciously sought to recover the roots of our
nation. . . . The present tour, therefore, will embrace the sources of our
African heritage."13
The prime minister gave a second reason for his visit. Noting that the trip
"has wider significance" than a search for the nation's roots, he said: "The
Organization of African Unity is one of the fundamental realities of the
world today. The Arab League also has deep political significance. Both
organizations are heavily involved in the world struggle against colonialism
and both are particularly concerned with the problems of developing coun-
tries. Our brief experience of Independence has shown us that there is a
great similarity of interests in many areas of international affairs between the
Caribbean, Africa, and the Middle East, and that we have many economic
and commercial problems in common."14
Williams had been less than candid about the primary reason for the trip.
As he would later explain, his mission was intended to lobby the African


--- PAGE 254 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 241
nations to support Trinidad's request for preferential treatment in Euro-
pean markets. Williams had learned that some African countries, led by the
United Arab Republic, were developing criteria that would have excluded
Trinidad from such preferences if their proposals were endorsed by the
forthcoming Geneva Trade Conference. These nations were taking the posi-
tion that countries like Trinidad with petroleum resources and a relatively
high per capita income should not receive preferential treatment in the
European markets. Williams believed that this call for free trade would, if
implemented, be a disaster for the small West Indian countries, since prefer-
ences amounted to "a form of reparation, inadequate and belated, for cen-
turies of preferential arrangements imposed by the United Kingdom and in
the interest of the United Kingdom investors in the West Indies."15 Evidently
fearing that the failure of his African mission in this regard might invite
criticism at home, Williams chose not to bring the public into his confi-
dence, although his Cabinet was fully aware of the nature of the negotiations
he hoped to undertake.
***** The prime minister's trip to Africa provides us with the most
complete picture of his views on the continent and its peoples. He insisted
on speaking to university students in most of the countries he visited and
sent written reports to his Cabinet on his sojourn in seven countries. Wil-
liams had the trained optic of a scholar, the curiosity of a tourist, and the ear
of a politician. His reports were thus laced with informed judgments, caustic
comments, and humor.
Williams visited eleven countries: Sierra Leone, Liberia, Ghana, Nigeria,
Uganda, Kenya, Algeria, Ethiopia, Senegal, the United Arab Republic, and
Tanganyika. As a result of internal difficulties, his visit to Guinea had to be
canceled at the request of the country's president. Williams's entourage
included Cabinet ministers, civil servants, and Trinidad's ambassador to the
United Nations. The prime minister had been to the African continent only
once before, when he made a brief stop in the United Arab Republic. Conse-
quently, his observations on the places he visited and their political leaders
were fresh and candid.
Williams characterized Senegal as being "tied hand and foot to France,
and nobody attempts to conceal it."16 On the other hand, "the outstanding
characteristic of Sierra Leone is the domination of Great Britain"; moreover,
"there are expatriates everywhere, indicating the tremendous disadvantage


--- PAGE 255 ---
242 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
the country faces in respect of technically qualified personnel to operate its
Independence. The expatriate domination is to be seen both in the Police
and in the Army, and in view of the spate of mutinies one has to keep one's
fingers crossed."17 The prime minister was quick to add—knowingly or
perhaps tongue in cheek—that "the minister of Home Affairs in Trinidad
ought not to exclude the possibility of the spread of the contagion."18
According to Williams: "The dominant feature of Liberia is the domina-
tion of the United States of America. One sees this at the Firestone Planta-
tion, in the Peace Corp this is very much in evidence, in the composition of
the University Faculty, and in the presence of the American Military Mission,
and the American Aid Mission."19 He was aware of the "many rumours of
political repression, and brow beating of opposition elements." But it was
his description of the ostentatious decor and trappings of Liberian official
life that seemed devastating. He wrote:
A special feature of Liberian life is the enormous waste of public funds by
and on the President and his entourage. The most monstrous example of
this is the Executive Mansion. It was almost an embarrassment to stay
there. To put it simply it is "Le roi soldi" transferred from Versailles to
Monrovia; Versailles is depicted on murals, and the mansion is all crystal
and gold. The dining room where the President offered a State Banquet in
our honour is a positive scandal. The expensive rugs, cutlery, plate, fur-
nishings, air-conditioning, the troops that seemed to be on 24-hour duty
merely to give a fanfare to the President or distinguished visitors on
arrival or departure, apart from the general impression of indecency that
all these convey, all suggest the positive danger of unrest and disturbance.
The President's lavish Banquet for his wife's birthday, at which he pre-
sented her with a Lincoln Continental, is a positive invitation to disorder.
One can only assume that his philosophy is apres moi le deluge.20
Williams was appalled by the "ancien regime atmosphere" in the country.
The "ridiculous protocol" was seen at its worst "at the Grand March with
which the President and his wife opened the dancing at his wife's birthday
party." The prime minister concluded that "not just a man but a dynasty"
ruled Liberia: "the President's son is married to the Vice President's daugh-
ter; the Vice President's brother is also a member of the Cabinet; the Presi-
dent's brother formally [sic] held a high army rank and lives in the Executive
Mansion." Williams formed a low opinion of President William Tubman. He


--- PAGE 256 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 243
thought that Tubman "was quite delighted, his vanity being what it is, at my
invitation to him to visit Trinidad."21
Unlike his negative reaction to Liberia, Williams was favorably impressed
by what he saw in Ghana. "The dominant note in Ghana," he reported, "is
the domination of Nkrumah and the Peoples Convention Party." He de-
scribed the country as being "predominantly African." Moreover, "If Sene-
gal is predominantly French, if Sierra Leone is predominantly British, if
Liberia is predominantly American, then Ghana is predominantly African."
Ghana "is an African state, ready to oppose Britain, France, America, and
all of these combined, and it is belligerently African. After Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, one moves into a new world in Ghana."22
Williams was impressed by President Kwame Nkrumah's leadership and
vision. He was very aware, however, of the rising sentiment against him in
the country. The Trinidadian delegation "encountered more than one exam-
ple of the jealousy and intrigue and struggle for position among the mem-
bers of the presidential entourage." Such intrigue, Williams confessed, "is
not strange to any member of the PNM." But he was certain that "nothing
will come out of Africa without Nkrumah." "If Nkrumah goes," he pre-
dicted, "then Africa will be for several decades to come a battle ground of
competing American, European, Russian, and Chinese interests."23
As in the case of Liberia, Williams was troubled by Nigeria's "tremen-
dous expenditure of public funds on status symbols—magnificent Parlia-
ment buildings, gigantic Ministerial offices, Ministers' houses, quarters for
Federal legislators in Lagos." In his opinion, "the dominant feature of Ni-
geria is suspicion of and dislike for Ghana."24
Williams noted striking differences between the West African and East
African countries that he visited: "Where in West Africa the dominant note
is the African personality—most pronounced in Ghana, suitably muted in
French Senegal, British Sierra Leone, and American Liberia, the dominant
note in East Africa if Uganda is taken as typical is that the African personality
is very much in the background. The most obvious illustration of this is the
general Westernization in terms of dress, both male and female.... Uganda
gives the appearance of almost being [in] a different continent from Ghana
or even Nigeria."25
In his report on Kenya, Williams elaborated on the differences between
East Africa and West Africa. He found President Jomo Kenyatta's Cabinet
"the best balanced that we have encountered in Africa and for competence is


--- PAGE 257 ---
244 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
probably superior to all others." Furthermore, Kenya's "economic potential
probably exceeds that of any other country." Williams was so impressed by
what he saw that he concluded: "The way to the future of Africa in general
and of East Africa in particular, is Kenya."26
Williams held very congenial and productive meetings with President
Kenyatta. The visiting prime minister reported that "the dominant feature of
Kenya is the personality and prestige of the Prime Minister, Kenyatta." He
was struck, however, by the tension between the country's unique African
cultural identity and its "general Westernization in dress." As he explained:
"Apart from the personality of its Prime Minister, Kenya's importance lies in
the fact that it is supremely African. This is not to say that it emphasizes the
African personality of Nkrumah or the Negritude of Senghor. It is African in
the sense that it remains predominantly tribal, it looks in every respect
African, even to the length of the grandmothers' [dresses?] with cleanly
shaven heads."27
Williams's impressions of the individual countries and their leaders un-
doubtedly shaped Trinidad's future foreign policy. He thought most highly
of Presidents Nkrumah and Kenyatta and their respective countries and was
obviously troubled by what he observed in Sierra Leone and especially Libe-
ria. Williams was shocked by the low level of administrative competence he
encountered, particularly in East Africa. "The general impression conveyed
by Uganda," he concluded, "is one of inefficiency and confusion."28 On
leaving Africa, he told an audience at Oxford University that he found a
"total absence in some places of anything that could be called an administra-
tive apparatus. "29 Williams was surprised that the East African countries had
such a paucity of teachers, doctors, lawyers, stenographers, and so on. "The
problem," he noted, "is greater in a place like Tanganyika, where there is
nothing at all ... you look at Tanganyika and feel that the Europeans
never intended to stay there, never expected that they would have to stay
too long."30
In view of their urgent need for technical assistance, the East African
countries requested Trinidadian aid. The Kenyans, for example, wanted
teachers, lawyers, doctors, and help in training their students at the College
of Agriculture at the University of the West Indies.31 Uganda had an acute
shortage of stenographers. When he met with the Ugandan Cabinet, Wil-
liams was surprised to find that the stenographer was "an English girl."32 He
was, understandably, sympathetic to the requests for assistance. After meet-


--- PAGE 258 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 245
ing with Kenyan officials, he reported to his Cabinet that "we MUST do
whatever we can to assist."33 But as the requests for aid multiplied, the prime
minister told his audience at Oxford, he was unable to help them all, given
his nation's own pressing needs.34
The West Indian prime minister was pleased to see the number of West
Indians in important positions in the countries he visited. He did not believe,
however, "that this is a case of West Indian superiority over [the] African."
Rather, it was the consequence "of the longer colonial regime in the West
Indies, which, in the field of education, has done more for assimilation to
Europe than the shorter period has done in Africa."35
Williams was particularly interested in the question of African unity. In
Ethiopia on March 16, he told the students at Haile Selassie University that
"the reason why in fact we came to Africa apart from the fact that since
Africa did not come to the Caribbean, the Caribbean thought it best to come
to Africa—is the movement for African Unity which we regard down in the
West Indies as one of the fundamental realities of the political world in
which we live." He saw in African unity "a powerful political movement
towards decolonization," as well as the "removal of colonialism and its
attendant evil of racial discrimination and apartheid."36
But the West Indian prime minister was not oblivious to the internal as
well as external obstacles that had to be surmounted. The external threat
emanated from what he called the third "scramble" for Africa. The first
scramble, in his view, was the Atlantic slave trade, and the second was
the division of the African continent among the European countries in the
1880s. The third scramble was "for influence and control over the indepen-
dent African states ... as if the better way to control former colonial areas of
the world of the 1960s is to declare them independent and to indulge in what
the Ghanaians and others call neo-colonialism."37 He was also suspicious of
the role that the Chinese and Russian communists might play in exacerbat-
ing local tensions.38
Williams's visit to Nigeria exposed him to some of the internal problems
that undermined the quest for African unity. Here he was briefed on the
boundary disputes between Morocco and Mauritania, between Morocco and
Algeria, between Ethiopia and Somalia, and between Kenya and Somalia. He
was also apprised of the tension between African unity and Arab unity. This
issue revolved around whether the United Arab Republic's primary loyalties
resided with the Africans or with the Arab world. The same question arose in


--- PAGE 259 ---
246 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
relationship to Algeria; but Algeria was thought to be more African in its
allegiances, whereas the United Arab Republic was said to be more oriented
to the Arab world. There was also the added complication, as Williams
would later learn in Uganda, of "the contradictory Arab and African views
on Israel."39
The African governments, as Williams was told in Nigeria, were divided
on how the movement for further decolonization should be conducted. The
problem was whether this should be done "on a continental basis through
Governments, or by freedom fighters supported by one or more individual
governments."40 Williams also recognized the distrust with which some
governments viewed others, creating further disunity. Nigeria, for instance,
had such a great "suspicion and dislike" for Ghana that it "refused to bite at
our suggestion for a Prime Ministers' conference to deal with Southern
Rhodesia. It was quite obvious that the explanation is that Ghana had pre-
viously agreed to this."41 Similarly, Williams observed, "The dominant note
in Senegal is suspicion of Ghana, to the point of dislike. Senegal's friends in
Africa, in Senegal's eyes, is [sic] non-French Africa, [especially] Nigeria and
Liberia. Its particular bete noir after Ghana is Mali."42
He also came to understand that such practical complications as different
currencies stood in the way of African unity. His visit to Sierra Leone drama-
tized this problem rather starkly: "The difficulties of African unity are very
obvious in Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone, tied to Sterling, is surrounded by the
Ivory Coast, part of the French Community, using a currency of its own
which no one wants; Liberia using the American dollar. Trade relations are
close with all these countries. It is obvious that Sierra Leone is not too
optimistic about the African Common Market. It has a deep suspicion of
Ghana, and a profound respect for Nigeria; what Nigeria does in Africa,
Sierra Leone is likely to do."43
Williams saw additional obstacles to African unity. He was acutely con-
scious of the absence of effective networks of communication, the difficulty
involved in traveling from one country to another. As he expressed it, "There
is a lot to be done in the field of African communications before you make a
reality of the African Unity in the political field."44 In his address to the
student body at Haile Selassie University, Williams elaborated on another
problem that he identified: political unity could not be fully achieved until
the "intellectual boundaries" that divided one nation from another were
erased. He bemoaned the almost complete lack of cooperation between the


--- PAGE 260 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 247
various African universities. "Its worst example," he said, was "the impor-
tant field of African Studies." The former professor warned the students:
"If the institutes [of African Studies] are working in isolation one or the
other possibly having some contact with the outside world but not with the
world inside Africa, it would appear, ladies and gentlemen, as if in essence,
the conception is as much colonial as the old colonial system which is be-
ing eroded and destroyed by The Organization of African Unity. . . . The
movement for African Unity which has developed very powerfully in recent
months has not yet extended to the intellectual field."45
Overall, Williams was only guardedly optimistic about the future of Afri-
can unity. He expressed his concerns quite early on the tour, after visit-
ing Senegal. "African Unity is likely to be a plant of very tender growth,"
he wrote, "if one accepts as a fundamental assumption the suitability of
the soil."46
Williams's embrace of an African heritage and his unquestioned identi-
fication with the struggles of blacks on the continent for selfhood did not
make him an uncritical admirer of the leaders and scholars he met. He was
unimpressed by the justifications for the one-party systems he encountered
and was profoundly skeptical of the constructs of African socialism, negri-
tude, the African personality, and so on. Williams wondered, for example,
how the African personality, "whatever it is," could withstand the conse-
quences of the introduction of Western technology: "Wherever it is one finds
this curious juxtaposition of the African values and the African personality in
contradistinction to the European values and, let us say, the American per-
sonality, existing side by side with the conscious, deliberate and vociferous
adaptation of Western technology in Africa, leading immediately at least to
the intellectual dilemma as to whether the African personality and the Afri-
can values could in fact survive the impact of Western technology."47
Eric Williams the academic criticized African scholars for not devoting
adequate attention to the history of the slave trade, slavery, and the impact of
Africans on the societies of the diaspora. Speaking to this point at Haile
Selassie University, he said: "It is almost as if Africans have been upset by
their previous history and seek by the simple formula of forgetting slavery to
behave as if it didn't exist at all... you cannot remain satisfied by what has
been done by European scholars, or American scholars or by West Indian
scholars.48 Williams would later articulate another reason for this seeming
lack of interest in the history of the slave trade and slavery. "The African, I


--- PAGE 261 ---
248 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
believe," he told the audience at Oxford University, "still suffers from that
sense of inferiority, he doesn't want slavery recalled."49
Although very sympathetic to the desire of some African nations for tech-
nical assistance from the Caribbean, Williams thought that some reciprocity
should be involved. When he spoke to students at the University of Ife,
Nigeria, on March 4,1964, he was particularly candid on this subject: "The
problem is that you in West Africa have got a lot of help from the West Indies
and we in the West Indies have got no help from you at all in West Africa. We
haven't even got visits from your political leaders to us and it can't only be a
one-way traffic. We in the West Indies have made significant contributions to
you in West Africa for West Africa to begin to reciprocate."50
***** Williams's speeches and written reports from Africa provide
important insights into his image of that continent. But these should be
weighed against the frequently uncharitable assessments of the trip by Brit-
ish officials. Their reports generally described the mixed reactions of African
officials to the Williams visit. In addition, the officials listened carefully to
any criticisms that the visiting prime minister made of colonialism and the
British, reporting them faithfully. The British ambassador to Liberia ob-
served that Williams gave a number of speeches in that country, speaking
"with great fluency in a pleasing voice." He was relieved that Williams said
"nothing very important or damaging .. . [since there] were no kicks at the
colonialists." Williams, the ambassador wrote, admitted that he felt "at
home" in Monrovia because of the "West Indianness" of the city.51
The ambassador in Dakar, Senegal, reported that Williams's visit coin-
cided with the last two days of the "grand French Week of Art, Technology
and Elegance," a celebration of French culture. He thought that the fes-
tivities "made a profound though distorted impression upon Dr. Williams
and his party." The prime minister greeted with "acid remarks" his sugges-
tion that "the celebrations and the city of Dakar" were not representative of
Senegal as a whole. The ambassador noted that Williams compared the
British unfavorably to the French, telling him not to make "derogatory
remarks abut the French presence." In general, Williams's visit "gave him
some useful ammunition for discrediting the British effort in the Caribbean,
which he appeared to be by no means averse to doing." The British were not
the only targets of Williams's criticism, however. He delivered a "vigorous
onslaught" on the "personality and policies" of Cheddi Jagan of British


--- PAGE 262 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 249
Guiana in a conversation with President Leopold Senghor and the minister
of foreign affairs. Williams also made "a strong attack" on Fidel Castro in
the speech he delivered at the University of Dakar, but his comments were
"not well received" by the audience, the ambassador reported.52
D. J. C. Crawley, the British high commissioner in Freetown, Sierra Leone,
thought that Williams made "his most waspish comments about the legacy
of British colonialism" when he spoke to the students at Fourah Bay. "This
was apparently heady stuff," Crawley wrote, "that was received with slightly
self-conscious delight. . . even the Principal was licking his lips over it a
little." At a state dinner given by the governor general, Williams "delivered
himself of his, by then, customary polished and dryly humorous contribu-
tions," in contrast to Sir Milton Margai, the prime minister of Sierra Leone,
who "was not having one of his most lucid days, but spoke volubly and
impromptu." In his speech, Williams stressed the similarities between Trini-
dad and Sierra Leone, their common traditions and ancestry, and the role that
West Indians had played in the building of the country. The high commis-
sioner observed that "some of his hosts, I fear, demonstrated that these
similarities did not extend to a common tradition of polished manners." He
noted, with a hint of bemusement: "A few of the Ministers, centered as so
often round Albert Margai, the Finance Minister [the prime minister's son],
became somewhat rowdy towards the end of dinner, and the Trinidadian
sitting next to my wife remarked that if Trinidadian ministers behaved like
that in Trinidad their Prime Minister would have sent them out of the room."
Crawley thought that in "propaganda terms," Williams's visit would be
represented as a success, although "the continual journeyings of ministers
of minor countries which is so prevalent today, is admittedly extravagant."
But he was uncertain how the Sierra Leoneans perceived the West Indian
visitors, surmising that they may have thought of them as "a little too con-
sciously brilliant and superior for comfort." According to the high commis-
sioner, Williams was "an impressive emissary" but "he and the senior mem-
bers of his delegation were demonstrably more civilized, poised, and urbane
than their counterparts here." He speculated that the visitors considered the
Sierra Leoneans "a fairly rough lot, however much they might feel curiously
at home in a country where even the capital's architecture shows such a
marked West Indian character."
The high commissioner reported that there was "a patronizing streak,
hidden but undoubtedly present" in Williams's comments on his country's


--- PAGE 263 ---
250 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
relations with Africa. Although the Sierra Leoneans had made much of
Williams's African descent, Crawley thought that he "put this sentimen-
tality" in its place "by declaring flatly (according to press headlines on the
day he left) that Trinidad was not a part of the Negro world and that West
Indians as a whole were not of African descent." This was obviously a
misrepresentation of what Williams had said. Most likely, he was underscor-
ing the multiracial composition of Trinidad and Tobago, a point that the
news report missed. In any event, the high commissioner thought that
Williams "rubbed the superiority" of his country in the field of education by
drawing attention to its literacy rate of 90 percent. Williams added fuel to the
fire by seeming to apologize for the rate not being higher, thereby making
"an implicit comparison with the miserably low figure on this side of the
Atlantic." High Commissioner Crawley wondered whether the Sierra Leon-
eans would "want to have much to do with Trinidadians, or even perhaps
West Indians, if they are personified by the rather chill, touchy and superior
Dr. Williams, who may have won respect but certainly no affection."53
The United Kingdom's ambassador to Ethiopia, John Russell, gave a more
favorable assessment of Eric Williams's sojourn. "On balance," he wrote,
"the visit was a success." The West Indian prime minister had made "an
agreeable impression on his hosts, who are now aware that Trinidad exists
newly independent and pursuing courses not widely different from those
favored by Ethiopia." Russell thought that Ethiopians were "a little puzzled"
that this "small country" should have spent so much money to visit so many
African states. He doubted, however, that the Williams visit would alter the
relations between East Africa and the West Indies, although he found Wil-
liams's "general attitude on African affairs shrewd and well informed."
Ambassador Russell reported that Williams was highly critical of Presi-
dent Nkrumah of Ghana, saying that he had "lost all his standing in Africa
and was now a little mad." This surprising comment was at variance with the
prime minister's written report to his Cabinet stressing his high regard for
Nkrumah. Russell must have been aware of Williams's earlier positive as-
sessments of the Ghanaian prime minister because he surmised that "it is
possible he [Williams] suits his conversation to his audience." The ambas-
sador described the author of Capitalism and Slavery and the recipient of a
doctoral degree from Oxford University as "a relatively sophisticated West
Indian" and a "mature product of the British colonial system." His observa-


--- PAGE 264 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 251
tions constituted an extraordinary assertion of British official condescen-
sion. The "interest" in Williams's visit, Russell stated, "lies in the impact of
Africa on a relatively sophisticated West Indian, with all the accumulation of
British colonial heritage behind him, overlaid in recent years by the bright
new varnish of the American connection. He was certainly impressed by
what he saw here, both material and spiritual. It will, in turn, I think, have
done his hosts good to see this mature product of the British colonial system
as it was on the other side of the globe."54
E S. Miles, the acting British high commissioner to Tanganyika, also
stated that Williams's visit "appears to have been quite a success." Prime
Minister Williams and President Julius Nyerere "seem to hit off well." Wil-
liams was able to brief Nyerere on "Cuban and Communist subversion in the
Caribbean" and "probably had a beneficial effect" on Nyerere, who was be-
coming concerned at the prospect of "Communist infiltration" from Zanzi-
bar into Tanganyika. In an hour's private conversation with the acting high
commissioner, Williams said that he had told President Jomo Kenyatta of
Kenya that if he feared subversion by the Chinese embassy in Nairobi, "the
simple
 answer" was not to establish diplomatic relations with communist
countries, a policy that he had pursued in Trinidad. Williams, Miles thought,
felt more at home in East Africa than in West Africa because those countries
had a racial mix similar to Trinidad's.55
Williams's tour was closely followed by the press in Trinidad and Tobago.
He was roundly censured at the outset for saying in his radio broadcast to
the nation that he was going to Africa to "embrace the sources of our Afri-
can heritage." Obviously stung by the criticism, he retracted by saying that
"Trinidad was not a negro country," a mantra he repeated on the tour.
Williams was also reprimanded by the largely Indian opposition in the legis-
lature for spending an estimated TT$500,000 on his African "safari." High
Commissioner Norman Costar felt that the trip "has not been greatly re-
sented by the non-Indian man on the street, who, if he thinks about the trip
at all, sees it as more 'bigness' for Trinidad and a feather in the cap for the
tough little terrier at the top." The Indians, he noted, "are less impressed."56
Williams's African tour strengthened the relations of his new nation with
the eleven countries he visited. He developed a fresh understanding of their
problems, established a warm rapport with leaders like Julius Nyerere, and
acquired a deep respect for Kwame Nkrumah, Jomo Kenyatta, and especially


--- PAGE 265 ---
252 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
Ben Bella of Algeria. Williams saw Ben Bella, in the words of Norman
Costar, as "an outstanding leader, the outstanding leader in Africa." He was
able, Williams said, to undermine any support that existed in Africa for
Cheddi Jagan.57 He was also very outspoken in his criticism of Fidel Castro,
but this was not always well received and probably had little effect.
There can be no doubt, however, that Williams's tour enhanced his stat-
ure among the African leaders. He received substantial support for his view
that small developing nations should embrace common positions in their
relationships with the wealthy industrial nations as well as the larger de-
veloping ones. The first test of this solidarity would be at the forthcoming
World Conference on Trade and Development scheduled to take place in
Geneva. Williams also wanted the Africans to recognize Trinidad as the
leader of the West Indian islands in international affairs. After meeting with
Williams on his return to Trinidad and Tobago, High Commissioner Costar
reported that "rightly or wrongly (and he is not a modest man) Dr. Williams
feels that he had made an impression in Africa, upon which he can build."
He "believes that he has been recognized in Africa as a, indeed the, unifying
leader in the Caribbean." Furthermore, Williams "sensed" that moderation
toward Britain "earns no plaudits in Africa." Under the circumstances, Cos-
tar predicted that in the future Williams would "take a more publicly un-
friendly view towards British policies, both in Africa and the Caribbean."58
Costar always expected the worst from Eric Williams. He never quite
understood that the interests of Britain and Trinidad were not the same.
Williams was the principal spokesperson for his new nation, and its inter-
ests, no matter how he defined them, were always paramount. This was
seldom recognized by the former colonial masters, and it would take them
some time to realize that the nation of Trinidad and Tobago had to chart—as
best it could—its own destiny.
Williams's African tour obviously broadened his appreciation of the polit-
ical pulse of the Africans. His visit to Ghana, for example, had made him
understand the "economics of neo colonialism." He looked approvingly at
the changes under way on the continent and the colonial world in general.
Williams was not displeased that the map of the world was "completely torn
up ... there is still some tearing up to be done, I believe. They are about
doing it in Nyasaland and in Rhodesia and so on." An unrepentant anti-
colonialist
 and opponent of apartheid, Eric Williams returned from Africa


--- PAGE 266 ---
WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS 253
convinced that Europeans "tend to underestimate the force of African op-
position to South Africa, to colonialism, and to Apartheid."59
***** Shortly after his return home, Williams discussed with Jamaica
the question of joint diplomatic relations overseas. Although the details
remain somewhat unclear, it appears that Trinidad had agreed to represent
Jamaica's interests in Africa and that Jamaica would reciprocate in Latin
America. But implementation of this understanding was stymied because of
poor personal relations between the leaders of the two countries. Perturbed
by the lack of movement, Williams attacked Jamaican officials at a public
meeting in Trinidad in late August 1964 for not taking steps "to put the plan
in operation." An angry Alexander Bustamante responded: "If Dr. Williams
has so much unused time on his hands, one would think he would use it
more profitably in the interest of his country. One thing I wish to make clear
is that the Jamaican government is not following Dr. Williams [,] as we are
too experienced and knowledgeable in West Indian and World Affairs to
follow those who know less than we do. When Jamaica decides how it wants
to be represented overseas, it will take appropriate action."60
These were harsh words, indeed, and an intemperate criticism of a fellow
Caribbean leader. In the months after it gained its independence, Jamaica
had accepted Trinidad's leadership in foreign affairs. The British high com-
missioner in Jamaica had considered this a period of Jamaica's "docile ac-
ceptance" of Trinidad's "tendency to speak for Jamaica . . . and in some
respects appear[s] to be running Jamaica's external policy." Soon, however,
the Jamaican leaders began to chafe under this situation, and, according to
the high commissioner, a "reluctance to continue to be led by the nose has
become explicit." Bustamante's outburst against Williams must be seen in
this light, although the personal animus between the two leaders exacer-
bated the political tension.61
Although the concept of shared overseas representation for these two
small, developing Caribbean nations made sense, it was never implemented.
Trinidad and Jamaica went their separate ways on the matter, although they
generally had similar views on anticolonial issues, apartheid in South Africa,
and black majority rule in the African countries. Williams was outspoken in
his rejection of white minority rule in Southern Rhodesia. His government
denounced Ian Smith, its white leader, when Smith declared the colony


--- PAGE 267 ---
254 WILLIAMS, AFRICA, AND AFRICANS
independent rather than submit to black majority rule. Williams urged the
United Kingdom to intervene in the former colony and accused British
officials of racial prejudice when they declined to do so. He gave tacit ap-
proval to university students in Trinidad and Tobago when they protested
against British policy in Southern Rhodesia and sought, unsuccessfully, to
get the volatile issue discussed at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Con-
ference in the summer of 1964.
A citizen of the African diaspora, Eric Williams was also a Caribbean man
and a Trinidadian nationalist. His embrace of Africa was bereft of empty
sentimentalism and romantic condescension. His opposition to colonialism
and racism was strident and unwavering. As a scholar and the descendant of
enslaved Africans, he wanted to emancipate black people everywhere from
the political, economic, and intellectual fetters that circumscribed their hu-
man possibilities. Speaking of his work as a historian in February 1964,
Williams told students at Fourah Bay College that "it is the slave-owners
who have written the history of slavery and when I—I have spent my life
writing the history of slavery—write the history of slavery I don't write like a
slave-owner, I write like a slave who has been emancipated."62 Williams kept
faith with this imperative, one that defined his career as a scholar and as a
politician.
Still, Eric Williams was from a small country that exerted little influence
in the international arena. Any influence that he wielded outside of Trini-
dad's borders resulted from the power of his pen and his compelling rheto-
ric. As a descendant of Africa and as a scholar who wrote primarily about
peoples of African descent, he had an emotional and an intellectual connec-
tion to the continent. As head of government of a multiracial Trinidad and
Tobago, however, he had to perform a balancing act. He had to appear to
transcend
 a narrow identification with the peoples of African descent in his
political behavior, a goal that sometimes eluded him. Williams's trip to
Africa
 in 1964 reflected the importance he placed on that continent in a
changing world and his recognition that Trinidad and the West Indies as a
whole had to develop and nurture ties with the various African peoples. A
vigorous advocate of this vision, Williams realized its crucial role in the
construction and shaping of a modern West Indian identity.


--- PAGE 268 ---
CHAPTER 8
THE ECONOMICS AND
POLITICS OF RACE
***** Eric Williams always boasted about Trinidad and Tobago's eth-
nic diversity. To him, the two islands comprised the most distinctive Carib-
bean peoples. Writing in 1964, he characterized the new nation as "the most
cosmopolitan of all the West Indian territories—its African stock having
been supplemented in the last century by large numbers of immigrants from
India and lesser numbers from China and Syria, all superimposed on its
diverse European base." He took pride in recognizing that the nation of
Trinidad and Tobago had been able "to integrate its various stocks and
strains into a multi-racial and multi-religious community." The historian,
nationalist, and politician was also elated when Prime Minister Harold Mac-
Millan described Trinidad and Tobago as "the Athens of the Caribbean."
Such an accolade, Williams said, constituted a powerful tribute to the "polit-
ical genius" of his country.1
Certainly Trinidad and Tobago constituted one of the most racially di-
verse and politically sophisticated countries in the Caribbean. In 1965, the
year after Williams praised his nation for its apparent racial harmony, 43
percent of the people were predominantly of African descent, 36 percent
Indo-Trinidadian or of South Asian provenance, and 16 percent mixed or
white African; Europeans, Chinese, and Syrians together made up 3 percent.
The population as a whole was increasing at an annual rate of 3.6 percent,
with Indo-Trinidadians as a group showing the highest rate of growth. The
population amounted to just over one million in 1970, with a density slightly
above four hundred inhabitants per square mile. Unlike in the southern
United States, residential segregation had no basis in law, though most
Indians resided in rural areas and the majority of blacks lived in cities and
towns. Regardless of their ethnicity, socioeconomic status, place of resi-


--- PAGE 269 ---
256 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
dence, religion, and so on, many people accepted the unofficial motto, "All
ah we is one" as an ideal, if not quite a reality.
In many respects, the two principal racial groups—Africans and Indians-
shared a similar but also a different historical trajectory. Their ancestors had
been brought to Trinidad to work for the Europeans, who themselves were
immigrants. The Africans had come as slaves and the Indians arrived as
indentured servants, replacing the Africans in the cane fields after coerced
African labor ended in 1838. Despite the cultural differences that existed
between them, in time the Indo-Trinidadians and the African Trinidadians
worked out a modus vivendi and lived, for the most part, without serious
tension or conflict. In fact, during the labor unrest that marked the society
before and after World War II, Indian and black workers cooperated in the
struggle for social justice. Representatives of the two groups also worked
together, if sometimes uneasily, to promote constitutional reform.
The interwar and postwar years of the twentieth century saw enormous
political ferment in the Caribbean. The insistent demands by workers for
their rights, the strikes that advanced their cause, the introduction of univer-
sal adult suffrage, and constitutional reform in some islands produced a
heightened political consciousness everywhere. In 1947 Anglophone West
Indian
 leaders met in Montego Bay to begin discussions on the creation of a
West Indies Federation. An agreement to federate was hammered out a few
years later, and some political leaders, intellectuals, and others began to
imagine an end to colonialism and the achievement of independence for a
federated West Indies.
In 1950 Trinidad and Tobago received a new constitution that introduced
a modified ministerial system. The colonial governor, in whose hands ulti-
mate power resided, chose five ministers from among the elected represen-
tatives of the people. Such tentative steps toward self-government produced
anxiety among the white colonial elite and others who feared a diminution in
their privileges. Indians, who were beginning to flex some political muscle,
at first worried that, with federation, they would be smothered by the black
majority. Although these concerns were deeply felt, they rested on the prem-
ise that blacks throughout the West Indies shared a similar political vision
and spoke with one voice. West Indian politicians were nothing, if not a
fractious group, characterized by ideological and personality differences.
Nevertheless, Indo-Trinidadian fear of black domination presaged unhappy
developments in the civic life of the colony. The problem eventually became


--- PAGE 270 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 257
one of competing racialized nationalisms, and this did not augur well for the
health of the body politic.
The evolution of a racialized tone to the political culture of the country
had deep historical, economic, and cultural roots and preceded Eric Wil-
liams's election to political office in 1956. British colonialism had fostered
divisions among Indians and blacks, producing a situation where the two
groups frequently took their cues from colonial authorities and shared a
mutual distrust of each other. Such habits of mind were not easily exorcised,
and the proverbial Massa remained imprinted on the psychology of many
people. Not until 1946, however, did "race" become a very divisive factor at
the electoral level. It was demonstrated most blatantly in the constituency of
Victoria, setting an ugly precedent for the emerging nation.2
There were, to be sure, cultural differences among the various ethnic
groups, notably between Indo-Trinidadians and blacks, but these should not
be exaggerated historically. Indo-Trinidadians clung tenaciously to their cul-
tural and religious traditions. The overwhelming majority of them were
Hindus; Muslims comprised about 16 percent, and Christians formed an
even smaller minority. Indians had, to some extent, resisted cultural assimi-
lation, but this never meant that they lived in a world alien to other Trinida-
dians. In fact, they crossed cultural boundaries at will, and their claims to
full participation in their country's life were as authentic as those of any
other group.
The racial tensions that manifested themselves in political behavior, par-
ticularly after 1956, also had a profound economic basis. Although in 1962
Trinidad had a per capita income of L229, making it one of the wealthiest
developing nations, the territory was characterized by severe inequities in
access to resources,as well as large pockets of poverty and high rates of
unemployment. Since poverty wore both black and brown faces, there were
structural reasons for the economic disabilities of the people. The expecta-
tion that the majority black population would inherit the political power
exercised by Great Britain in the wake of constitutional reform and use it to
its advantage frightened the Indian minority. But since African Trinidadians
as a group had never exercised political power in Trinidad and Tobago, such
fears were misplaced. The major tensions were generated by the competition
for the society's scarce resources and who would occupy the locus of govern-
mental power. That this competition would, in time, become racialized,
represented a failure of leadership and a disposition on the part of many


--- PAGE 271 ---
258 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
politicians to exploit race to their party's advantage. Similarly, when Eric
Williams later faced a Black Power-inspired revolt in 1970, the underlying
problem was not the product of race although the language of race was used.
As damaging as the racial bogey was, and has been, to Trinidad and
Tobago's civic life, it did not poison social relations between the two prin-
cipal groups. Citizens of all racial groups interacted at various societal levels
with ease and good humor, and without acrimony. Responding in 1962 to a
question from a reporter for the British Broadcasting Corporation, Eric
Williams admitted that, although there was not a great deal of intermarriage
in Trinidad and Tobago, "there is a lot of social intercourse, one sees it in the
clubs at night, one sees it at carnival, one sees it in the office, one sees it on
the road work that is going on in the territory, at the professional level there
is almost total Westernization, assimilation . . . the schools are the most
interracial aspect of Trinidad."3
***** Eric Williams was obviously familiar with the construction and
operation of race in Trinidad and Tobago. He grew up in a family and in a
society that were deeply conscious of the importance of skin color in a white-
dominated society. Williams recalled that his parents "had all the complexes
of the lower middle class and 'status' involved 'questions of colour and
hair.'" In later years, he wrote: "Perhaps in no other respect is it possible to
see more clearly the price that the West Indian society has paid for slavery
than in the pathetic concern with the quality of one's hair. The phrases used
to describe the bad variety speak for themselves: tic-tic, scroop-scroop (al-
legedly
 [an] expression of the task of counting out the knots), and a gang of
us boys could think of no more adequate description of a certain local girl
than to call her 'wirehead.' But, in the phrase 'goat dung' local contempt for
the typical Negro hair reached its nadir."4 Williams escaped such pernicious
psychological onslaughts since he had "good" hair or "good grass." His
parents took great pride in his "curls," which "were allowed to grow to a
considerable length before it was agreed that my locks should be shorn."5
His siblings, Williams recalled, fell "broadly" into two categories. He
belonged to the group that consisted of the "dark skinned ones with good
black hair," whereas the second group comprised "the lighter skinned ones
with bad lighter hair known locally as shabeens." Occasionally, a child did
not fit into either category, with the lighter-skinned child having "good" hair
and the darker-skinned one cursed with "bad" hair. According to Williams,


--- PAGE 272 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 259
the children were never discriminated against either inside or outside the
family on the basis of their phenotype or hair. He thought this was due to the
fact that "the lighter ones were obviously coloured" and because "I, one of
the dark ones achieved [such] intellectual position in the face of which the
conventional barrier among coloured people is lowered."6
Williams had a complex, although not necessarily unique, racial ancestry.
He described his father as "dark brown." His father's mother was white,
"the daughter of a local family of means" who was "disowned by them for
eloping with and marrying a negro employed by them in a menial capacity."
Williams's "light skinned" mother was "connected with an old French Creole
family." His parents, in common with many others, never embraced their
African ancestry. "My parents were adamant in their philosophy that one
might come from Africa—that was one's misfortune, but hardly one's fault,"
Williams recalled, "but there was no point in going back to Africa—that
would be not only one's misfortune but one's fault." His parents disliked
"the negro associations of some of my aunts" and "the illiberal occupations
of these [men] only reinforcing the objections on grounds of colour." They
wanted professional men—doctors and lawyers—for the women and "lighter
skinned women for the boys." For the girls, his parents wanted educated
men, and for the boys, "colour in the case of wives, or, in its unavoidable
absence, education or a good family background."7
Williams's girlfriends did not always win the approval of his parents.
"The satisfaction they showed with my choice of my first girl friend, shortly
before my departure for England, the daughter of a prominent coloured
professional family with important political status, was as great as their
disappointment with her substitute, the daughter of a retired school teacher,
without education herself and without means." His father forbade him to
see the girl, but he continued to do so. Williams's parents were delighted
with his eventual marriage "to a woman whose English education, personal
means and fairly good hair compensated for her humble antecedents." He
never knew what his father would have thought of his subsequent marriage
"to a girl whose beauty of face and hair [was] combined with a lack of means
and the absence of corruption by higher education," because he was already
deceased. Williams admitted that he never sought his mother's opinion of
his second bride. He knew, however, that his parents had disapproved "of
the mulatto primary school teacher and the junior civil servant to whom
other brothers and sisters subsequently became attached." They showed


--- PAGE 273 ---
260 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
their "displeasure" by "their resort to one of the highest manifestations of
the patric potestas in the Trinidad of those days, forbidding the persona non
grata the house."8
The future prime minister was the product of a family that was racially
heterogeneous. He characterized it as running "almost the entire gamut of
race and colour in Trinidad." He had white relatives and "cousins with
French and Spanish names." His first wife had a Portuguese father, and his
second wife was Chinese. One of his sister's husbands, he wrote, "has
Indian blood," three of his aunts and an uncle married mulattoes, and two
other aunts chose "negroes" as their husbands.9 This familial configura-
tion made it easy for Williams to operate comfortably in diverse racial set-
tings. Ashford Sinanan, a prominent opposition politician and himself an
Indian, told David Rose, the administrator of Antigua, that Williams "was
often more at home in Indian villages than he was in some of the Negro
villages."10
His diverse family background hardly prepared Williams to deal with the
racially inspired insults that he received as a student at Oxford University
and later in the United States. As a youth in Trinidad and Tobago, he had
witnessed racially based mistreatment of African Trinidadians and Indo-
Trinidadians at his school, but he does not appear to have been a victim of it.
Perhaps these early experiences help to explain his acute sensitivity to any
slights from white Americans or Europeans, which he was inclined to inter-
pret in racial terms. Norman Costar observed that Williams's skin "is so thin
as to be almost non-existent."11 To temper the pain of some of the racially
motivated wounds inflicted on him in the United States, Williams had to
"discipline" himself: "Yes, I met [racism] because I traveled about the US a
great deal... but one knew what one was going into, one resented it but one
learnt to discipline oneself. As individual protest was absolutely futile we
learnt to keep one's temper."12
Probably because of his experiences, Williams developed a profound in-
tellectual interest in the roots of racism and its expression historically. In
Capitalism and Slavery, he maintained that "slavery was not born of racism,
rather, racism was the consequence of slavery."13 This assertion remains
controversial, as some historians have questioned its validity. But whether
his conclusion was valid is not the point. Williams's corpus of works em-
phasized the centrality of race, racism, and slavery to the construction of the
Caribbean. To Williams, slavery and its progeny, racism, were responsible


--- PAGE 274 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 261
for the Caribbean's ills, which he described as "our urge to run away from
agriculture, the domination of our society by racial and colour distinctions,
the prevalence of crime and violence, the flimsiness of our family structure,
our propensity for conspicuous consumption, our individualism, and politi-
cal inexperience."14 Slavery had corrupted the Caribbean, and "the minds of
the West Indian people have been warped—in my more pessimistic mo-
ments I believe they have been permanently warped by slavery."15
Throughout his career Williams also emphasized the historical links be-
tween colonialism, imperialism, and racism. In a speech that he delivered at
Woodford Square, he declared: "The root of this problem of race is imperial-
ism, which has sought to justify its economic control by regarding the
colonial peoples as inferior, despising their personal habits and social cus-
toms, denying their fitness to govern themselves, and describing them as a
people without a history." Williams argued that the West Indies had served
as the guinea pig for the expression of European forms of racism: "What has
been done in Africa was first thought out in the West Indies, practiced in the
West Indies, and then at its best, shall we say, it was transported to Africa
and the Africans have some knowledge of what it was we West Indians went
through over the centuries."16 This was an overstatement, for the system of
rigid racial segregation known as "apartheid" that South Africa was then
experiencing had no precedent in the modern Caribbean. But there was no
denying the fact that slavery in the Caribbean and elsewhere was legitimized
by racism and its legacy remained, in varying degrees of intensity, in the
islands. Williams the politician associated himself and his government with
the struggle against apartheid in South Africa, assuring students at Mon-
treal's McGill and Sir George Williams Universities in 1964 that Trinidad and
Tobago "stand solidly with the Africans against racial discrimination."17
***** Eric Williams's first extended public discussion of the contem-
porary racial climate in Trinidad and Tobago occurred in a lecture, entitled
"Federation in the World Today," that he gave on February 25,1955, before
his formal entry into politics. But the ideas he espoused shaped his philoso-
phy, if not always his behavior, once he assumed political office. Among
other issues, he addressed whether cultural and other differences among the
constituent units of a federation were sources of strength or weakness. His
analysis of several federations and their constitutions, Williams said, "has
not indicated that community of language or of race or of religion or of


--- PAGE 275 ---
262 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
nationality is an essential prerequisite of federal government." Rather, he
asserted, "in so far as the history of federal systems indicates anything at all,
it suggests that differences of race, religion, language or nationality, far
from encouraging hostility to federation, strengthen the sentiment for it, as
the only means of securing the advantages of union whilst retaining separate
allegiances."
Sensitive to the opposition of some Indians in Trinidad and Tobago to the
prospective federation in the West Indies, Williams assured his audience that
autonomy could exist within unity:
Here in the British West Indies we have our insular differences and our
racial distinctions. We are Barbadian and white, Trinidadian and Indian,
Jamaican and Negro. We now face the problem of imposing a common
nationality upon these differences. The very existence of the differences
suggests the desire for separation within union. . . . The Indians, for
example, might be as vociferous a minority as the French Canadians, but
demanding federation.... They could be tenacious of their own identity as
the Swiss cantons, as the majority group in British Guiana, as a powerful
minority in Trinidad, they could be insistent on state's rights. The posi-
tion in many respects suggests that they can be excellent federationists.
Williams was disappointed that this was not the case, however. He had
the impression that there was opposition to federation from "a tiny minority
of leaders whose nationalism, focused on India is potentially disruptive of
West Indian nationalism." But he was certain that most Indians remained
unaffected by such pulls. "One has only to recall," he said, "the recent
carnival to appreciate the hollowness of the claim that the Indians were not
good West Indians. Carnival, that great leveler in our community, is liberty,
equality, above all fraternity, not as an empty slogan, but as a living and
fascinating reality for two days in the year." In fact, "the Indian masses will
really become a hostile minority in Trinidad only when they cease to jump up
to the music of the steel band or when they propose the suppression of
carnival." But "there is not the slightest prospect of either." To Williams,
then, Indians were integrated into the political and cultural life of their
native land. Yet he opposed the teaching of Hindi in the schools. He won-
dered whether the teaching of Hindi might not lead to requests for the
introduction of African languages and "the allocation of each racial or re-


--- PAGE 276 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 263
ligious group of a percentage of the educational revenues proportionate to
their numerical strength in the population."
Eric Williams the historian noted that the Indians had been in the West
Indies for over a century and had been "steadily assimilated." Thus, it was
"hard to see how the further division of our already over-divided commu-
nities can help either the British West Indies as a whole or even the Indians
themselves in their quite legitimate and understandable aspirations for inte-
gration into the civil service and the professions and employment generally."
Saying that "this so called desire for cultural independence must end some-
where," Williams conjectured: "It was the denominational school yesterday,
it is Indology today, what will it be tomorrow? The communal vote?"18
In this lecture Williams displayed empathy with the Indians, but he did
not endorse any sentiment for cultural autonomy. He blamed the desire for
the teaching of Hindi on "outside interference," and, as we shall see, this was
not totally untrue.19 Although his embrace of the teaching of Hindi would
not, by itself, have led to his having a greater rapport with the Hindus, it
certainly would have paid some political dividends. But Williams was prob-
ably not thinking of a political future when he delivered the lecture. On the
other hand, he intimated that he would not support requests to teach African
languages as well. He was more comfortable with "a basic curriculum built
around West Indian history and the English language and literature."20
The state of race relations, particularly its black-white expressions, in
Trinidad and Tobago was one of Williams's major concerns, but he saw
racism as a legacy of slavery and colonialism so it was a global phenomenon.
Unlike several of his contemporaries, Williams understood that racial diver-
sity constituted one of the considerable strengths and appeal of the West
Indies, but he also knew, as the racial blood bath in British Guiana would
show, that unscrupulous politicians could stimulate and exploit racial ten-
sions to their advantage. Williams had used his lectures at the University of
Woodford Square to foster a nonracial nationalism in Trinidad and Tobago,
but his message had a far greater resonance among African Trinidadians
than Indo-Trinidadian and other groups. Blacks, particularly those who were
young, working-class, urban, and literate, identified strongly and personally
with the brilliant black historian to a degree that other ethnic groups never
approximated.
His founding of the People's National Movement (PNM) in January 1956


--- PAGE 277 ---
264 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
gave institutional expression to Williams's vision of a nonracial nationalism.
As such, the party promoted itself as multiracial in composition. Its charter
endorsed the principle of interracial solidarity, and its leadership struc-
ture included representatives from the major ethnic groups, although Afro-
Trinidadians predominated. Writing in the PNM'S organ, the Nation, on
August 30,1956, Williams emphasized the party's multiracial commitment:
"Recognizing and, indeed, welcoming cultural diversity, the PNM calls for
unity among racial groups on one common platform—agreement on com-
mon economic, social and political objectives: utilization of all resources,
human and physical, for the common good. . . . PNM proudly exhibits
its banner on which are emblazoned the words revolutionary for Trini-
dad and Tobago—POLITICAL LIBERTY, SOCIAL EQUALITY, RACIAL
FRATERNITY.21
Although the PNM was animated by a multiracial vision, its support
came mainly from African Trinidadians. Few Hindus rallied to its banner,
but it attracted a significant percentage of Indians who were Muslims and
Christians. Their embrace of the PNM was due less to their being comfort-
able in that party and more to their tensions with the Hindus, who were
beginning to constitute the party's principal opposition. The unfortunate
reality was that political party alignment in Trinidad and Tobago was becom-
ing more racialized precisely when the emerging nation's challenges were
decidedly more complex, notably its entry into the West Indies Federation,
the selection of a Federal capital site, the future of Chaguaramas, and a
new five-year development plan. In contesting the general elections of Sep-
tember 1956, the PNM presented a racially diverse slate of candidates. Of its
25 candidates, 15 were African Trinidadians; 6 were Indians, comprising
3 Muslims, 2 Hindus, and 1 Presbyterian; and 1 each was European, Chinese
Creole, and Spanish Creole.22 The specter of race haunted the election cam-
paign, an unhappy development that presaged the country's pain. Fearful
that a PNM victory would undermine their privileges, the old established
elite waged an unsuccessful campaign to thwart the PNM juggernaut.
The PNM'S assumption of political power would, in time, produce a
crystallization of its opposition and the politics of race. The Democratic
Labour Party (DLP), when it was founded, consisted of a motley group of
politicians united only by their opposition to the PNM and Eric Williams. Yet
a substantial proportion of its support came from Indians. The DLP was
established to contest the Federal elections that were held in March 1958. Its


--- PAGE 278 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 265
defeat of the PNM and its affiliated West Indies Federal Labour Party was a
stunning blow to Williams and, according to some critics, a repudiation of
his party and leadership. It was an ugly campaign at best, as supporters of
both parties hurled racially charged abuse at one another. One scholar cap-
tured the essence of this developing cancer by concluding: "No party was
blameless; there was instead a balance of blame. As the nationalist move-
ment became more fully developed, the irresistible tendency was for race
and nationhood to become interrelated. Both ethnic groups interpreted na-
tionhood and emancipation in terms of their own communities and sym-
bols. Even the party leaders, committed though they were to universalistic
norms, could not resist the temptation to manipulate sectional symbols
sometimes subtly, sometimes quite unashamedly, in their pursuit of political
advantage."23
Such behavior, to be sure, wounded the nation's social fabric. A growing
and increasingly confident Indian minority had emerged to challenge an
uncomprehending black majority. A hemorrhaging of the nation's spirit was
occurring, and the wounds inflicted by the politicians defied any simple
treatment. The Federal elections of 1958 and the racially charged rhetoric
that it engendered marked a nadir in Trinidad and Tobago's civic life.
Events that occurred in the election's aftermath only exacerbated racial
tensions. On April 1., one week after the PNM experienced defeat, an angry
and disappointed Eric Williams addressed his supporters at the University of
Woodford Square. It was an unusual speech. The chief minister delivered
what was essentially an academic paper presenting a statistical review of the
voting patterns at various polling stations. He told his audience that his
analysis was not an attempt "to juggle with election statistics." Rather, he
was providing "a factual, cold blooded analysis of a situation which poses a
dangerous threat to the stability of our country and new nation." He went on
to demonstrate that Indians, in the polling divisions in which they predomi-
nated, had voted almost exclusively for the DLP. Williams claimed that
"P.N.M's decimation in areas with an overwhelming preponderance of In-
dian votes reflects the D.L.P. campaign and the D.L.P.'s appeal that Indians
should vote for D.L.P. so as to ensure an Indian Governor and an Indian
Prime Minister." He also said that "religion figured heavily in their cam-
paign." And then the chief minister charged: "By hook or by crook they
brought out the Indian vote—the young and the old, the literate and the
illiterate, the lame, the halt and the blind, men and women."


--- PAGE 279 ---
266 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Williams accused his opponents of "distributing by the thousands ... a
letter addressed, 'My dear Indian Brother' and signed 'Yours truly, Indian.'"
The letter was "seditious in intent, offensive, derogatory, an insult to the
West Indian nation they claim the honour to represent." Williams was espe-
cially offended by a sentence that read: "If my dear brother you have realized
these occurrences and the shaky position in which our people are placed,
woe unto our Indian nation in the next ten years." An outraged Williams
continued:
Just think of that, Ladies and Gentlemen. An election to bring into being a
West Indian nation is fought on one side on the issue of "our Indian
nation." The Indian nation is in India. It is a responsible, reputable
nation, respected the world over. It is the India of socialism, the India of
Afro-Asian unity, the India of the Bandung Conference. It would repudi-
ate any divisive attempts as are being made in Trinidad, as it has repudi-
ated them in Kenya, South Africa, Ceylon and Malaya, in all of which
countries the Indian nation and its representatives abroad are working
with the movement for self-government and not against it.
After invoking the name of the distinguished prime minister of India,
Jahawarlal Nehru, Williams went on to denounce the Trinidadian advocates
of "an Indian nation" as "the recalcitrant and hostile minority of the West In-
dian nation masquerading as 'the Indian nation' and prostituting the name
of India for its selfish, reactionary political ends." This was, arguably, the
most
 controversial and criticized speech that Eric Williams delivered during
his long political career. Its reference to a sector of the Indo-Trinidadian
population in politically pejorative terms was the most memorable phrase in
an otherwise dull and perhaps sleep-inducing address. The unfortunate
language would come to be perceived by some, notably Indo-Trinidadians, as
the signifier of Williams's attitude to the entire race. But it is unlikely that
this was his intention, since the PNM included many pro-federation Indo-
Trinidadians—as did the DLP—and the chief minister would not have in-
cluded them in his strong and ill-chosen verbal denunciation.
The speech, entitled "The Danger Facing Trinidad and Tobago and the
West Indian Nation," was well crafted. Williams had obviously spent a great
deal of time gathering statistics and framing his arguments and conclu-
sions. About twelve typewritten pages in length, this address lacked the
spontaneity of the ones he customarily gave at the University of Woodford


--- PAGE 280 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 267
Square. The fact that it was carefully researched was an indication of the
seriousness of the occasion and the chief minister's intention to say exactly
what he meant.24
Several observations can be made regarding the timing and nature of the
chief minister's speech. Stung by an electoral defeat coming less than two
years after he assumed office, Williams was unable to accept the people's
apparent repudiation with equanimity. Although it was a Federal election,
domestic issues and the young government's performance received dispro-
portionate attention during the campaign. By emphasizing the race-based
support for the DLP, Williams was trying to dilute the charge that the
PNM'S weak performance in office helped to account for its defeat.
An argument can also be made that Williams, despite his commitment to
fostering a multiracial democracy, had not completely kept faith, at least
rhetorically, with those high-minded principles. His speech could be read as
a castigation of the African Trinidadians who had stayed away from the
polls, believing that a PNM victory was inevitable. The presumption was that
these people would have supported his party and, as Williams said, "Today
they regret it bitterly, and they are already swearing that it must never happen
again." In the context of the increasing racialization of the country's politics,
this seemed to be a soft-core invocation of race. "We sympathize deeply with
those misguided unfortunates who, having ears to hear, heard not, eyes to
see, saw not, who were complacent... who had the DLP covered," Williams
asserted.25
The chief minister's characterization of the Indo-Trinidadians whose pro-
paganda and rhetoric he cited as "the recalcitrant and hostile minority of the
West Indian nation masquerading as 'the Indian nation,'" appeared to be
harsh and intemperate. It was a politically charged statement, and Williams
was undoubtedly questioning the patriotism of those who were rejecting the
Pan-West Indian nationalism that the federation represented and was help-
ing to call into being. These people were the ones who constituted the
"recalcitrant and hostile minority" of the emerging West Indian nation. It
was first and foremost a political characterization, one that was unaccept-
ably pejorative, sharp, and biting, coming from the head of government. But
since it referred to a sector of another "race," it was almost inevitable that
the political and the racial would be conflated by many. Yet, as we shall see,
Williams was not alone in his concern, first expressed in 1955, about cen-
trifugal forces in Trinidadian society. The chief minister, in an act of incred-


--- PAGE 281 ---
268 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
ible political misjudgment and insensitivity, however, exacerbated the pas-
sions his speech had aroused by repeating it at San Fernando, a town with an
Indo-Trinidadian majority.26
***** In the immediate aftermath of Williams's speech, European
Creole Albert Gomes and Indo-Trinidadian Ashford Sinanan—two promi-
nent opposition politicians—met with British secretary of state John Pro-
fumo, Governor Edward B. Beetham, and colonial secretary Solomon Ho-
choy on April 22. Gomes and Sinanan accused the PNM of inflaming racial
tensions with the connivance of the police and government authorities.
According to the minutes of the meeting, they said that the PNM trained
"gangs of negro roughs," called "marabuntas" or "hornets," to disrupt
meetings held by the DLP. They made the startling allegation that these
individuals were paid for their services from the public treasury. Governor
Beetham contested their assertion that the police allowed heckling at DLP
meetings but not at those held by the PNM.
Secretary Hochoy agreed that racial tensions in Trinidad and Tobago were
cause for concern. He noted that some government ministers, especially
Winston Mahabir and Gerard Montano, had voiced their apprehensions. The
charges leveled by Gomes and Sinanan were endorsed by Indo-Trinidadian
Bhadase Maraj, another well-known member of the opposition, when he met
with Profumo on April 28. The British official who sent a report on the two
meetings to London observed that "racial tension and threats are nothing
new in the political life of Trinidad and ... it is more a question of tacit
connivance by the Chief Minister in the actions of his supporters than explicit
direction by him of a full scale campaign." According to the report, Governor
Beetham agreed with Profumo that the "situation was potentially extremely
ugly, and that wherever the blame may have lain in the past, the Chief
Minister was very seriously at fault for having made a most injudicious
speech on racial lines earlier in April which brought strong reaction from the
Opposition."27
The opposition's primary reaction to the Williams speech found expres-
sion in a motion in the Legislative Council on May 23,1958, to censure him.
Offered by Lionel Seukeran, the member for Naparima, the motion accused
the chief minister of making a "derogatory attack" on Indo-Trinidadians.
Prior to the start of the expected debate, Williams read a statement denying


--- PAGE 282 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 269
that his intention was to malign Indo-Trinidadians. "All of my public ac-
tivities,"
 he said, "indicate a complete negation of all forms of racial discus-
sions, racial division, and racial discrimination." He went on to affirm that
"my whole philosophy is based on racial integration, racial harmony, and on
the policy that where there is a division on political issues, that division must
be totally divorced from all considerations of race." He emphasized that
both his government and the PNM were committed to "interracial soli-
darity." Some legislators believed that a debate on the motion to censure was
certain to be racially divisive, thereby further inflaming societal tensions.
Consequently, they persuaded Seukeran to withdraw it, and he did so, as he
put it, "in the interest of this country and in the interest of better racial
relationships." In withdrawing his motion, however, Seukeran said that the
chief minister had "suddenly gone racial" by virtue of the controversial
speech that he had delivered. This was an injudicious comment in light of
the conciliatory statement that the chief minister had just read to the legisla-
tors and ultimately to the country.28
Williams's denunciation of a sector of the Indo-Trinidadian community
for lacking in commitment to "the West Indian nation" probably had a
favorable resonance in the Colonial Office. Beginning in the mid-1950s,
colonial officials had become increasingly concerned about the antifedera-
tion stance embraced by some Indo-Trinidadians. Their position on the
Federal issue, the officials maintained, was being stimulated by Shri Badir
Nath Nanda, the Indian commissioner. The post of Indian commissioner to
the West Indies, with headquarters in Trinidad, had been created in 1948.
The jurisdiction of the post initially included Jamaica, Trinidad, and British
Guiana, but it was later expanded to cover Barbados, St. Vincent, St. Lucia,
and Grenada. As one draft of a document prepared for the Colonial Office in
the fall of 1954 noted: "The activities in the cultural and social field of
successive Commissioners have had the inevitable effect of building up a
sense of Indian nationality among the East Indians. In addition to this, the
Commissioners have tended, though not too obviously, to exceed their in-
structions both by the issue of controversial material likely to exacerbate
racial tensions and by interesting themselves unduly in local politics."
The draft report, entitled "East Indians in the West Indies," was par-
ticularly critical of the conduct of Shri Badir Nath Nanda. It revealed that in
September 1954 the acting governor of Trinidad, presumably the colonial


--- PAGE 283 ---
270 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
secretary, "spoke informally" to him about his interference in local politics.
Nanda, the report asserted, "has taken undue interest in the issue of Federa-
tion in Trinidad." It continued:
He is known to have consulted with many of the East Indian politicians...
and is believed to have spared no effort, unsuccessfully, towards the defeat
of a recent motion passed in the Legislative Council. He was present
during the first part of the debate both in the morning and the afternoon.
He was obviously enthusiastic, smiling appreciatively and nodding his
head, at any point scored by an Indian speaker. He listened seriously and
with occasional fleeting distaste to other speakers. In the intervals he
talked in animated fashion with all of the Indian members. The Trinidad
Ministers and non Indian members of the Legislature are convinced that
the Commissioner was behind and had organized Indian opposition to
Federation. Not a single Indian voted for the government motion.
Moreover, the report contended, "there is not the slightest doubt that Indian
party politics is now emerging into the open in Trinidad, that it is a stronger
and better organized bloc than expected and that the Indian Commissioner
is actively engaged in it all." The commissioner was so influential that "little
of political importance now goes on in East Indian circles without his being
consulted." And "for the first time in Trinidad there are real fears that the
next elections, due in the summer of 1955, or perhaps the elections after
that, may return an East Indian party to power." The report concluded on an
alarmist note:
The Indian Government maintains a Commissioner in the West Indies
the result of whose activities, both innocent and otherwise is to accen-
tuate the East Indian sense of separateness from the rest of the commu-
nity and to encourage them to look forward to a position of political and
economic domination. It may be that the Government of India cherishes
the hope that if and when the East Indians secure control, these two terri-
tories [Trinidad and British Guiana], in the course of their constitutional
progress, will turn towards India [rather] than the United Kingdom.29
Albert Gomes, the chief minister, was not pleased with Nanda's inter-
ference in Trinidad's domestic politics. In a private conversation with Ameri-
can consul general William Maddox in late November 1954, he charged


--- PAGE 284 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 271
Nanda with "being the directing Indian politician in the Colony, and the
spearhead of Indian Imperialism." "If I were a private member and not a
Minister," Gomes reportedly said, "I would introduce a motion to have
Nanda... thrown out of Trinidad." Two weeks later, Maddox reported to the
U.S. Department of State on a legislative debate on federation that took place
on Saturday, December II. Titling his report "East Indian Racialism Domi-
nates Legislative Debate on Federation," Maddox went on to observe that
"the 18-hour debate which preceded this vote brought a latent but growing
East Indian racialism out in the open as a major political factor in Trini-
dad. . .. The outcome of the debate, important as it is, has been completely
overshadowed by the accompaniment of racialism, sinister intrigue, and
reported venality . . . threatening to plunge this Colony into internecine
politico-racial warfare which could be disastrous to federation as well as to
domestic political stability and development."30
Troubled by these developments, the Colonial Office held a meeting on
January 19,1955, to develop a strategy to confront them. It was attended by
the colonial secretary of Trinidad and seven other officials. According to the
minutes of the meeting, Maurice Dorman, the colonial secretary, "explained
that the appointment of an Indian Commissioner to the West Indies with
headquarters in Trinidad had had the effect of coordinating the local East
Indian community on a racial, cultural, and religious basis." Nanda "was a
much pleasanter person than his predecessor and this was a factor in mak-
ing him much more effective." Dorman stated that Nanda "had no love for
some of the East Indians' [sic] leaders whom he considered his social in-
feriors but nevertheless they all found a focal point in him and this tended to
strengthen the East Indian separatist movement." The commissioner's sta-
tus was enhanced "in local Indian eyes" because he ranked higher than "any
other representative of a foreign state or other Commonwealth country."
Those attending the meeting wrestled with the appropriate course of
action based on the evidence presented against Nanda. One official, a Mr.
Mathieson, was of the opinion that if it "could be clearly shown that the
Indian Commissioner had infringed his Instructions in any matter or that
serious embarrassment was being caused as a result of his activities, it would
be possible to ask for his recall." Similarly, if it could be shown that Nanda's
behavior "was such that his position had become compromised in the eyes
of the Trinidad public as a whole to such an extent as to make it potentially


--- PAGE 285 ---
272 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
embarrassing both for the Trinidad government and the Indian Government
to continue him in office, in these circumstances the Government of India
would have no answer to a request for his removal."
It was ultimately decided that there were adequate grounds to ask for
Nanda's recall. The governor of Trinidad was to be informed that the secre-
tary of state was prepared to make the request, "and it would greatly help if
the request for his removal were to have the backing of the Trinidad Govern-
ment, although this would presumably entail bringing the subject up in
Executive Council." Accordingly, the minutes continued: "The Governor
should be asked for his views on this point and in this connection it might be
suggested that in order to shorten discussion in the Council the Governor
might mention the matter privately to some members beforehand and per-
haps arrange for the item to be taken late on the agenda. It should be made
plain in any decision reached by the Executive Council that the damage
already caused could not be rectified however the Commissioner behaved in
the future."31
The decision to request Nanda's recall was not surprising in light of the
serious allegations against him. Colonial officials seemed to have made up
their minds to pursue that course of action before the January 19 meeting
with Secretary Dorman. On January 3 N. L. Mayle had observed in a depart-
mental minute that "the East Indian opposition to Federation undoubtedly
adds to the difficulties inherent in the attempt to federate the West Indian
territories and the possibility of the East Indians getting into power at the
next election in Trinidad and reversing the decision in favor of Federation
before the Government of Trinidad can be formally committed makes the
situation very uncertain." Mayle thought that the problem could be miti-
gated to some extent if Nanda were withdrawn "and [by] deferring our
consent to the appointment of a successor." Five days later, W. I. J. Wallace,
another colonial official, stressed that "it is important to bring out that it is
not merely the malevolent activities of the Indian Commissioner which are
dangerous; even his innocent activities have the bad effect of building up an
East Indian sense of separateness from the rest of the community."32
Nanda had not confined his activities to Trinidad. In fact, he was accused
of "several misdemeanours" in British Guiana as well. A report prepared for
the Colonial Office in February 1955 noted that his conduct in British Guiana
"can only be regarded as an extension of his main field of action in Trini-
dad." But "the stimulation of Indian separatism in British Guiana is still in


--- PAGE 286 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 273
its very early stages." Desirous of containing what one functionary called
"Indian Nationalism" in Guiana, the Colonial Office declined the request of
the Indian government to open a "sub-office" of the commission in that
colony. Nanda had become persona non grata in the two colonies, and his
government quietly withdrew him in the fall of 1955, less than a year before
Eric Williams became the head of government in Trinidad and Tobago.33
Nanda's recall did not ease the fears of the Colonial Office that Indo-
Trinidadians would not support a West Indies Federation. Cognizant of the
continuing opposition to the union, the Colonial Office and Chief Minister
Albert Gomes wanted the British Parliament to quickly adopt an Enabling
Act to create the federation. As Lord Lloyd of the Colonial Office explained to
Sir Hugh Foot, the governor of Jamaica:
The Trinidad problem is, I am sure, well known to you and it is a very real
one. I am advised that the Indians may well win the Trinidadian elections
next September [1956]. As long as they regard Federation as a foregone
conclusion, they will probably accept it and an Enabling Act will, I hope,
have the effect upon them. If, however, there were no Enabling Act they
might well decide to withdraw from Federation which would mean the
collapse of the whole scheme. It is therefore not merely a parochial
Trinidad interest. On the contrary it involves the future of Federation
itself and I am satisfied that if Federation is to come about an Enabling
Act before the Trinidad elections is absolutely essential. . . . For all these
reasons [Albert] Gomes' interest is to expedite Federation."34
The dire prediction by colonial officials that Indo-Trinidadians would
constitute a majority in the legislature after the September 1956 elections
never materialized. Eric Williams led the pro-federation PNM to victory, and
African Trinidadians won most of the seats. As the new head of government,
Williams was most likely briefed by the British colonial authorities in Port of
Spain on the Nanda imbroglio and their profound unease about the implica-
tions of the Indo-Trinidadian opposition to federation. He may have had
prior knowledge of Nanda's conduct and probably saw the relevant classi-
fied official records. Consequently, he would have been sworn to secrecy and
so could not have mentioned Nanda and his behavior to buttress and justify
his angry attack on a sector of the Indo-Trinidadian population at Woodford
Square on the night of April 1. Since Nanda's indiscretions were not com-
mon knowledge, Williams's language appeared to some to be incomprehen-


--- PAGE 287 ---
274 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
sibly strident, provocative, and racially insulting, even in a political culture
where verbal abuse of opponents had been elevated to an art form and
provided good theater. The ghost of the speech would continue to haunt
Williams, but he never invoked the Nanda affair to help exorcise it. To do
so would have embarrassed the Indian government, compromised official
secrets, and further inflamed local tensions.
***** In spite of what appeared to be a political misstep at the time,
Eric Williams continued to affirm his commitment to a multiracial Trinidad
and Tobago. He promoted "interracial solidarity," expressing the view that
it should be "translated into practical terms." He was committed to "the
equality, not only juridical and constitutional but also political and moral, of
all, with reservations only in respect of merit and talent." Without identify-
ing any individuals or groups, he rejected "the opposition which seeks to
divide our inter-racial community and to substitute a new colonialism based
on the aristocracy of race for the old colonialism based on the aristocracy of
the skin." Affirming his identification with his native land, Williams de-
nounced "the opposition which looks to Mother England, or Father India or
Grandmother Africa." By 1960 he had begun to show a greater empathy for
the cultural pulls of Indians by endorsing "such practical steps toward unity
whether it is the teaching of Hindi or the attention to Indian culture." He
also spoke approvingly of a proposal by his colleague, Winston Mahabir,
that an Institute of Afro-Asian Studies be established at the University of the
West Indies.35
As part of the process of effecting a modus vivendi with his opponents,
Williams developed a very cordial relationship with the Indo-Trinidadian
leader of the DLP, Rudranath Capildeo. In November 1964 Norman Costar
informed the Commonwealth Relations Office that Capildeo spent most of
the year in London teaching mathematics at the University of London, the
result being "that many people suspect him of being in the pay of Dr.
Williams, who has indeed told me himself that he has an understanding
with him." As Costar did not elaborate on the nature of that "understand-
ing," and if his report is accurate, this issue and its implications for the
political ethics of the two men must remain tantalizingly speculative.
The high commissioner reported that since the Independence Conference
of 1962, "there has been a tacit agreement recently made almost explicit
between the Government and Opposition not to play on the underlying racial


--- PAGE 288 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 275
animosities which still exist below the surface in Trinidad." Costar main-
tained that "Dr. Capildeo's occasional racialist utterances contrast with his
actual tameness in action." He noted that "in practice there is undoubtedly
some degree of racial discrimination in the handing out of jobs and in
determining how and where the Government spend their [sic] money." But
"this discrimination ... is not very serious and in the job sphere is more
anti-white than anti-Indian." Embracing some of the stereotypes of whites
about the incapacities of blacks, Costar held that any discrimination in their
favor "is counter-balanced by the superior industry, ability and providence of
the non-negro races in Trinidad."
Costar correctly observed that Trinidadians feared that "racial troubles in
British Guiana will spread by example" to their nation. Consequently, "Brit-
ish Guiana is a useful object lesson to Trinidad on the awful consequences of
the incitement of racial feelings by politicians." This had led the two princi-
pal parties in the country to refrain from pursuing "overt racialist policies."36
Williams, as we have seen, was actively involved in the quest for a solution to
British Guiana's problems. As head of government, particularly after the
controversial speech of April 1, 1958, he was sensitive to the need to avoid
exacerbating racial tensions in Trinidadian society and to spare his nation
British Guiana's agony. Williams was undoubtedly pleased when Common-
wealth secretary Duncan Sandys compared Guianese premier Cheddi Jagan
unfavorably to him in October 1963. "The trouble with lagan," Sandys wrote
Williams, "is that he has failed to show your statesmanship in dealing with
racial matters and merely pays lip service spasmodically to your example."37
The intractability of the racial problem in Trinidad could be observed in
the personal anguish and disappointment of Victor Bryan, an African Trini-
dadian who served as minister of agriculture from 1950 to 1956. Bryan was
elected to the Federal Parliament in 1958 as a candidate of the DLP but left
the party to become an independent member. At a meeting with American
consul general Edwin Moline in September 1960, Bryan said that he probably
enjoyed greater respect among Indians than any other black person in Trini-
dad. Nevertheless, he, in Moline's words, "had been disappointed, and
indeed exploited, by the East Indians in the past and that he can no longer do
business with them." He had "been forced to swallow humiliation in the
interests of party harmony." According to Moline, Bryan had concluded that
"the East Indian community cannot be trusted and has no independent
political future in Trinidad." The consul general continued:


--- PAGE 289 ---
276 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
He elaborated somewhat on his visit to East Africa in 1955, where he
claims to have seen how Indian communities on that continent treated
the Negro far worse than did the White man—and is convinced that the
East Indian community of Trinidad is essentially no better. He suggested
a visit to the shops owned by East Indians in downtown Port of Spain
where one would observe that there are no Negroes in positions above
that of janitor or lowliest clerk. The East Indians, he insisted, practiced
widespread nepotism, and if they took control of the government would
open the way to greater infiltration and domination of the business com-
munity by people of their own race. He added that even an educated and
well-placed representative of the community such as Ashford Sinanan,
Leader of the DLP Opposition in the Federal House, was not an exception
to this generalization.38
Bryan's candid conversation with Moline points out the obstacles that
stood in the path of racial understanding and healing. His comments, which
were intended only for the ears of the American diplomat, revealed a distrust
of the Indians as deep as that displayed of blacks by Indian leaders Rudra-
nath Capildeo and Ashford Sinanan in similar conversations. Public remarks
by the country's leaders, no matter how racially conciliatory, reassuring, or
sugarcoated, must be weighed against this inner climate of mutually shared
suspicion and mistrust.
Florence Daysh, another member of the Federal Parliament, who was
described as a light-skinned Barbadian, was persuaded that the racial prob-
lem in the Caribbean resulted primarily from a failure of leadership. She
maintained that Harold MacMillan's observation that "multi-races" were
"living together in harmony in the West Indies" was "utterly ridiculous." In
fact, "we loathe each other." Referring specifically to Trinidad and Tobago,
Daysh, according to the American consul in Barbados, believed that Ashford
Sinanan could be a real leader if "he would only admit that he is partly
Negro, as she did several years ago. She said that she has talked to him at
length about the advisability of doing this." Sinanan never made such an
admission, and there is no independent corroboration of Daysh's claims
about his racial background. Still, the notion that a leader's mixed racial
ancestry was an asset in the Caribbean at the time was at best intriguing and
may even have been a perspicacious observation.39
Racially intemperate remarks by politicians and others did not, however,


--- PAGE 290 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 277
lead to any serious disruption of the civic culture of Trinidad and Tobago.
Despite being frayed, the bonds that united the various groups were stronger
than those that divided them. The competition for political power at election
time worsened the racial tensions, but some degree of normalcy was re-
stored after the political wounds inflicted by the protagonists on one another
and on the society as a whole had healed. Still, Eric Williams's policies such
as the demand for Chaguaramas and his use of a virulent anticolonial rheto-
ric angered many, and the opposition to him did have a racial dimension.
Some Europeans interpreted his attacks on colonialism as the product of
racism and felt he was undermining the privileges they had acquired in
society by virtue of colonial rule and their skin color.
***** White business leaders feared and therefore generally opposed
a government headed by Eric Williams. The term "white business commu-
nity," of course, lends itself to diverse interpretations. One American diplo-
mat, Harry M. Phelan, gave what appears to have been a valid definition of
this group: "Since the adjective 'white' when applied to people in Trinidad is
used rather loosely, we will define the 'white business community' as com-
posed of those Trinidadians (they are mostly white) who own or otherwise
control the large import agencies, wholesale and retail establishments and
include other Trinidadian or foreign whites who manage foreign-owned
investments in the banking, shipping, exporting and agricultural fields."40
These enormously privileged people comprised a relatively small group, but
they exerted an influence on the economic life of the society that far exceeded
their numbers.
Many other Europeans, not just business leaders, also disliked the idea of
a black head of government. Williams was aware of this opposition, once
telling William H. Christensen of the U.S. mission that it consisted of "reac-
tionary, fascist forces that live in the past." Writing to the State Department
on November 24, 1961, Christensen observed that the "remark of Dr. Wil-
liams
 about certain people not liking the idea of having a black Premier was
not without foundation." The previous day, a white businessman "with
roots going back 100 years" had complained to him that Trinidad was a
"police state," claiming that his mail was being opened and his telephone
tapped. The businessman accused Williams of wanting to start "a black
aristocracy." Fearful of developments, the businessman had sent his wife
and children to England before the elections scheduled for December 4.


--- PAGE 291 ---
278 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Christensen acknowledged that the views of "this white businessmen are
not unique." The president of the federated Chamber of Commerce had told
him that it would be in Trinidad's best interest if Williams were defeated. His
informant "also felt that Williams was displaying excessive arrogance and
crudity in his talks to the electorate that was 'not becoming.'" A third white
man "with large agricultural interests" also expressed the hope that Wil-
liams would be defeated and accused members of his government of corrup-
tion. Christiansen believed that people such as his informants "represent a
white element of Trinidad comprised of older and senior members of the
Chamber of Commerce, but their views were not shared by "the younger,
more progressive types."
The American envoy, like so many others before and after him, could not
resist providing an assessment of Williams's character and personality, par-
ticularly as they related to his stance on race. Although he believed that the
premier "has a great potential as a genuine leader who could accomplish
much for Trinidad," he "is volatile and easily offended and he has a chip on
his shoulder and a smoldering resentment in his heart against colonialism
which, of course, means the whites." Christensen had known Williams for
eighteen years, having worked with him on the Anglo-American Commis-
sion and the Caribbean Commission. Williams was now "a more outgoing
and confident man" but "is capable of lapsing into irresponsible hate lan-
guage, and dredging words like colonialism, slavery etc., into his conversa-
tion, which of course is calculated to impress those who have nothing to
lose—and Trinidad has a disturbing number of these people." Clearly, Chris-
tensen wanted such unpalatable aspects of Trinidad's past forgotten, view-
ing any discussion of them as expressions of antiwhite sentiment. But he
understood Williams's pugnacity: "He is a black premier and he will, he
believes, be reelected and he will make them like it—and if they don't, they
can lump it."
Christensen feared both Williams's reelection and his defeat. Since Wil-
liams "had drunk the heady wine of political leadership his re-election could
make him into such a brash and arrogant semi-dictator that he would be diffi-
cult to deal with," the envoy predicted. On the other hand, defeat "would fill
him with such dangerous frustration which, on top of the ones he has lived
with all his life, could turn Trinidad into a dangerous racial cauldron that
could well spill over and cause trouble." Yet, "with proper handling," Wil-
liams could use his talents for the benefit of Trinidad and the West Indies.41


--- PAGE 292 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 279
Christensen correctly captured the fears of the white business community
in his report, but he caricatured Williams, continuing a familiar practice by
British and American diplomats. The December 1961 election campaign and
its aftermath produced great unease among whites. The premier did nothing
to lessen this anxiety as he singled out Europeans for sustained abuse during
the campaign. "These vagabonds . . . these people whose hands are at your
throats," he declared, "see your rising dignity and economic progress as
something to be destroyed so that they may enter and rule." He denounced
"the local business big-shot families, French Creoles in particular, [who are]
determined to control this country as they controlled it for several years,
[and who] are going all about the place irritating PNM members, saying
they don't want any black Premier."42
It was widely rumored during the election campaign that wealthy white
businessman, J. B. Fernandes, had contributed $160,000 to the DLP for the
avowed purpose of getting Williams "out." Ten days after Williams's elec-
toral victory, prominent whites received an anonymous letter recommending
that they leave the country. Two PNM functionaries also promised that
the party would "take care" of its friends and its enemies, a declaration
that Williams repudiated. Whites feared retribution, but, according to Harry
Phelan, "very few of these fears have been specifically identified in the con-
versations" he held with them. However, whites thought that the Williams
government lacked administrative talent and was given to "graft and corrup-
tion and they lacked confidence in the police and the courts." Despite the
"scare talk," there was no "concrete evidence" of the export of capital from
the island. But Phelan predicted that, given the "jittery nerves" of the white
community, "further threats by PNM leaders or any overt discriminatory
action on the part of the government prior to complete independence, could
seriously affect the confidence of the business community in the future of
the territory."43
Whites were not the only ones "jittery" about the future. The 1961 election
campaign, as did the campaign of 1958, exposed the festering racial tensions
in the country. The DLP, with its largely Indo-Trinidadian following, ada-
mantly
 opposed the new system of voter registration and the use of vot-
ing machines, which, it argued, would intimidate "unsophisticated" Indo-
Trinidadians and keep them from the polls. The DLP'S passionate opposi-
tion to voting machines was matched by the PNM'S equally strong defense
of them. The rhetoric on both sides was harsh and irresponsible. DLP leader


--- PAGE 293 ---
280 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Rudranath Capildeo urged his supporters to make bonfires of the voter
registration cards that they would be issued before the election and "smash"
the voting machines. Obviously annoyed by PNM hecklers when he ad-
dressed a meeting on October 15, Capildeo declared: "Arm yourselves with
weapons in order to take over this country. I have stood as much of this
nonsense as I can. We have to take measures in order to protect ourselves.
We can no longer stand up and allow people to trample on us anymore. We
are taking over this country whether they like it or not because for the
past five years this country has noted a decline, which has never been wit-
nessed before. Break up and destroy every PNM meeting; wherever Dr.
Williams goes, run him out of town; wherever Dr. Solomon goes, run him
out of town."44
The PNM spokespersons used similar inflammatory rhetoric. Minister of
Home Affairs Patrick Solomon threatened: "If Capildeo incites violence, I
will slap him in gaol fast... and he would not get out again. Nobody will be
able to bail him out. ... No tuppeny ha-penny dictator [is] going to walk
through this country and tell people to take up arms."45
These and other bombasts by both sides were unworthy of the politi-
cal leadership of Trinidad and Tobago. At another level, the DLP com-
plained bitterly about hooligans who broke up its meetings at will. On
November 27, 1961, Capildeo, accompanied by an unnamed "prominent
white businessman," called at the U.S. mission to discuss the political situa-
tion with William Christensen. He was also hoping to meet with the Ameri-
can ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, who was then
visiting Trinidad, to solicit his help in having a U.N. observer monitor the
elections. Capildeo complained to Christensen about the violence against
DLP supporters by "PNM hoodlums." He predicted that in a fairly contested
election, the DLP would win, since the PNM'S black support was con-
centrated in the urban areas, whereas Indians who supported the DLP were
distributed throughout the country. "They can't beat us in the country,"
Capildeo boasted.
Capildeo said that he was exercising restraint over his "extremist" sup-
porters who wanted to use violence against the PNM. But, he added, "if we
lose the elections, Trinidad is going up in smoke." He would not be respon-
sible for such a development, since "the decision would be forced" on his
supporters. Indians, Capildeo said, were not easily intimidated, and the
view among them as far as blacks were concerned was that "we can mash


--- PAGE 294 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 281
[match?] them [PNM] bullet for bullet and still have half to spare." Calling
Eric Williams a congenital liar, Capildeo maintained that he, Capildeo, had
no color or religious prejudices and that he was more at ease in the company
of non-East Indians than with his own ethnic group.46
Christensen, in reporting the conversation to the State Department, noted
that Capildeo spoke "lucidly," but he "gave the impression of being some-
what elusive and also displayed a penchant for exaggeration in order to drive
his point home." Christensen believed that "the intense preoccupation of Dr.
Capildeo with race, and the widespread talk on all sides of East Indians
versus the blacks with the whites caught somewhere in between, has ele-
ments of explosive trouble."47
"Explosive trouble" did not occur, however. During the campaign Wil-
liams courted Indo-Trinidadians and openly asked for their support, telling
them that they, like blacks, had been the victims of oppression.48 This ap-
peal, in effect, transcended race, but it met with little if any success. Williams
also assured his supporters that "the new society of the PNM is a dramatic
demonstration of the fact that we, all of us from Africa, from India, from
China, and from Europe, all of us who now know the contributions which
our respective ancestral home has made to the advancement of world civili-
zation, all of us, the amalgam of all these separate and distinct strains of
racial stocks, all of us, we too can take our place, our rightful place in the
sun."49 Such high-minded invocations of the virtues of Trinidad's multi-
racial society failed to ease the tensions, as the racial lines continued to
harden. In an ugly but interesting twist, the DLP published court records re-
lating to Eric Williams's alimony obligations in the United States, describing
him as "recalcitrant, hostile, contemptuous and mutinous to law," words
eerily reminiscent of Williams's 1958 "recalcitrant minority" speech.50
***** Williams's spectacular electoral victory did not allay the fears of
the growing Indian minority or those of the whites. Prior to the election
Capildeo had told the U.S. mission that the partitioning of the island be-
tween Indians and blacks was a strong possibility. Eric Williams had indi-
cated his opposition to such an action, but the issue did not disappear. This
was an extreme proposal, but it reflected the festering racial tensions and
fears. On January 16,1962, Capildeo, Ashford Sinanan, and Burnley Jardine,
a prominent businessman, presented William Christensen with a catalog of
complaints. The men charged that the Williams government was tapping


--- PAGE 295 ---
282 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
telephones and watching the houses of certain people, including Jardine's.
Indians were experiencing discrimination, and the police had committed
indecencies against Indian women during the recent election campaign.
Sinanan contended that Williams was on the way to making Trinidad and
Tobago a police state, and Castroism and communism were on the hori-
zon, an extraordinary charge given Eric Williams's avowed anticommunism.
Sinanan said that Spanish was being emphasized in the schools not because
of Venezuela's proximity, since "Venezuela does not welcome Negroes from
Trinidad." Rather, "it's all because of Cuba." He promised that he would
"stay and fight it out," but he was making preparations to send his family
out of the country. The men, according to Christensen, argued that Britain
had "sold the West Indies down the river, and that the United States must
stiffen the back of Britain."
The DLP delegation bemoaned the alleged emergence of a black aristoc-
racy in Trinidad and Tobago, comprised of such people as Eric Williams,
Patrick Solomon, and Ellis Clarke, the chief justice designate. The three men
hinted that an association with the United States might be a way out for their
nation. Capildeo assured Christensen that the vast majority of the people
would vote for political integration with the United States. Sinanan was even
more optimistic, predicting that "at least go percent of the voters would vote
for association with the United States." "Make no mistake about that," the
legislator emphasized.51
Their predictions did not materialize and the corrosive racial tensions
eased somewhat after 1962, although race still remained central to Trini-
dad's political culture. Governor Solomon Hochoy remained pessimistic
about the future of race relations in his native land. He feared what might
happen when the Indo-Trinidadians achieved majority status and assumed
power. As he lamented to American consul general R. G. Miner in March
1962, "I hope I am not around when the East Indians are in the saddle in
Trinidad . . . this may sound far fetched but believe me I know my peo-
ple." This was a tantalizing observation, subject to different interpreta-
tions. Hochoy may have been predicting a racial blood bath if the Indo-
Trinidadians came to power, or he may have been suggesting that once in
power, they would initiate reprisals against the blacks for allegedly discrimi-
nating against them. Only time would tell whether Hochoy's crystal ball was
accurate.52
Although there was an apparent racial modus vivendi in the mid-1960s,


--- PAGE 296 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 283
the language of race was still used as the elastic signifier for the problems
that bedeviled the young nation. African Trinidadians, especially those who
remained at the bottom of the economic ladder, began to use a racialized lan-
guage to articulate their grievances. Hoisting the banner of "Black Power,"
these people blamed the predominantly black Williams administration for
their condition, further complicating Trinidad's racial climate. Their lan-
guage was the language of race, but the roots of their problems were essen-
tially economic.
On assuming the post of chief minister in 1956, Eric Williams had com-
mitted himself to an aggressive program of economic development. His first
five-year development plan, which was financed largely by the country's own
revenues, represented a shift from concentration in agriculture to the estab-
lishment of an infrastructure to provide a hospitable environment for for-
eign capital. This meant, in practice, allocating funds to the repair and
construction of roads, an emphasis on education, the improvement of health
care, and so on. In many respects, the development plan was based on the
"industrialization by invitation" principle borrowed from Puerto Rico and
initiated by the previous administration. The results of this program were
impressive: between 1951 and 1961 the country's GDP experienced an annual
growth of 8.5 percent.53
Trinidad's economic growth was enhanced by its oil resources. Texaco
and Royal Dutch Shell contributed substantially to the development of the oil
industry by building sizable refineries. The economy also benefited from
the Commonwealth Sugar Agreement that the government signed with the
United Kingdom, guaranteeing it a market on favorable terms. In 1966, for
example, the raw sugar that Trinidad and Tobago exported to Britain, the
United States, and the other West Indian Islands averaged TT$227.72 per
ton, compared to the world prices of TT$62.00 to TT$76 per ton. The pro-
duction cost per ton was estimated at an alarming TT$200 per ton, a clear
indication that the Commonwealth subsidies were crucial for the health of
the sugar industry. Significantly, foreigners controlled the oil and sugar
industries.
Much of the white businessman's suspicion of the Williams government
waned after the nation achieved its independence in 1962 and Williams toned
down his verbal assaults on white privilege. In fact, the new prime minister
developed a rather cozy relationship with the big companies. He embraced
"free enterprise," an aggressive anticommunist stance, and passed the con-


--- PAGE 297 ---
284 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
troversial management-friendly Industrial Stabilization Act in March 1965,
creating an industrial court system that had the power to render binding
decisions in labor disputes.
The political stability of Trinidad and Tobago and an industrialization-
friendly government proved attractive to foreign investors. In 1965 Ameri-
can citizens had about US$350 million invested in the island; by 1970 the
amount had climbed to US$500 million, distributed among roughly forty
firms.54 Similarly, British investment amounted to £150 million in 1970.
Despite these expressions of confidence in the Williams regime, there were
some very disquieting signs of potential trouble. Per capita income, for
instance, had averaged an astonishing growth of 7.9 percent annually be-
tween 1956 and 1961, due mainly to an expansion in oil production. Such
growth could hardly be sustained indefinitely, and it fell markedly after 1963
to an annual average of about 2 percent. The unemployment rate for much of
the 1960s and in 1970 ranged between 14 and 20 percent, and the young
graduates of the schools felt its impact most keenly. A maldistribution of
wealth, a rather limited domestic market, an economic dependence on oil
and sugar, and their vicissitudes on the world market, in addition to an
annual population increase of 3 percent, exacerbated the nation's economic
and social problems. In 1964 Norman Costar observed that Trinidad "was
apparently politically stable and economically prosperous and welcoming
overseas capital," but it had "real problems in the field of unemployment
and labour-employer relations which need careful handling if disaster is not
to come."55
Solomon Hochoy, who later became the governor general of an indepen-
dent Trinidad and Tobago, recalled that he had told Eric Williams in 1956
that he had fifteen years (or three terms in office) to make fundamental
changes in the country or he would face "rejection." Fourteen years later, on
April 17, 1970, just three days before Williams requested a declaration of a
state of emergency in the nation, Hochoy "hinted broadly" to the acting
British high commissioner that "he was not himself satisfied with Williams'
achievements and that unless clear signs of progress became evident during
the next twelve months, senior civil service disenchantment would lead to
the withdrawal of their support from Williams."56
Hochoy was not alone in expressing some disenchantment with Wil-
liams's stewardship of the government. The ascendancy to power of the
Williams-led PNM in 1956 had created enormous expectations that the


--- PAGE 298 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 285
emerging nation would be radically transformed. The PNM was a national-
ist party par excellence led by a man who was intellectually gifted, who
understood the world and its power relationships, and who recognized the
necessity to educate his people politically and to shape their national con-
sciousness. Williams's lectures at the University of Woodford Square were
unparalleled as the former professor imparted his understanding of history
to the people, enjoining them to command their destinies. This experiment
in the political education of a people reflected Williams's view that a literate
and politically conscious citizenry constituted the foundations of the new
Trinidad and Tobago and the bedrock of the democracy that he envisioned.
His lectures, speeches, and other public statements helped to create,
arguably, the most politically informed and sophisticated citizenry in the
Anglophone Caribbean. Those Trinidadians who were in their teens in the
1950s and who came of age in the 1960s were socialized into an intellectual
climate of repeated condemnation of colonialism, human oppression, and
racism. Williams's speeches of the 1950s and after independence promoted
the gospel of self-determination, sacrifice, and nation building. His "Massa
Day Done" speech of March 1961 is the best known, but it was one of scores
he delivered in Trinidad and abroad. His Independence Day broadcast to the
nation on August 31,1962, invoked similar themes. When he pugnaciously
rejected the paltry sum that the British offered his new nation on the occa-
sion of its independence, the new leader spoke for much of the colonial
world, although no one followed his example. His challenge to the Ameri-
cans over Chaguaramas was another bold exercise in anticolonialism and an
assertion of the right of all nations, even one as small as Trinidad and
Tobago, to chart their own destiny.57
By word and action, Williams not only produced an informed citizenry
but also, by so doing, unleashed certain forces that he could not control and
that ultimately threatened to overwhelm him. The Trinidad and Tobago of
1970 was not the Trinidad and Tobago that Williams inherited in 1956. There
were fundamental differences in political consciousness, and many of those
who had been socialized by Williams into the need for change had become
impatient with the pace of that change. It is important to underscore the
fact that Williams's most vociferous critics in 1970 were in their twenties
and thirties, and, in some cases, in their teens. This included people like
James Millette, Geddes Granger, Carl Blackwood, and Dave Darbeau. Even
A. N. R. Robinson, who would play a seemingly ambiguous role in the events


--- PAGE 299 ---
286 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
of April 1970, had been a disciple of Eric Williams and was widely seen as his
heir apparent.
Lloyd Best, a university-based intellectual who became a caustic critic,
praised Williams for shaping the consciousness of his generation. When
Williams offered himself to lead the country in 1956, Best wrote, "it touched
a chord in the Anglo-Saxon personality. The time at last had come. Here was
a leader with technical command, with abundant energy and with roots
among the people. What mountains could not now be moved? Williams
evoked the whole past of Negro struggle not only in Trinidad and Tobago but
in the wider West Indies as well. The Negro population, moved to tears that
this, their most distinguished son, had come back to lead, gave him all the
trust they had. They trusted him blind; they trusted him almost without
question."58
Best showed himself to be a good student of Capitalism and Slavery by
noting that Williams's assumption of political power provided Trinidad with
"the long awaited chance to take the economy in its charge, to redress for
once and all the historical balance which had from the start been so heavily
weighted against the men from across the Middle Passage." Best admitted
that the Williams administration had made significant contributions to the
welfare of the country: "They have raised levels of material welfare for the
Negro as for everybody else; yes, they have wrought all manner of changes
across the face of the land." In this rendering, Eric Williams and the PNM
had produced major transformations in the texture of the nation's life, but,
according to Best, "The one thing that the PNM has not done is to redress
the historical balance and to give the Negro a sense of being master in the
castle of his skin." Yet the fault did not lie entirely with Williams. As Best put
it, "We have found it easier to rely on a Doctor than to take up our own beds
and walk."59 The kind of psychological remaking that Best and other critics
desired could not, of course, have been accomplished in eight years. Wil-
liams himself had repeatedly emphasized this imperative. But the prime
minister had other problems to confront, including the continuing task of
improving the standard of living for the citizens of a nation with limited
resources.
Critics of Williams's economic policy said that its reliance on foreign
capital constituted a form of neocolonialism. Lloyd Best maintained that
this dependence promoted "obsequiousness, servility, and in the last resort


--- PAGE 300 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 287
[represented] a shattering vote of no-confidence in the population of Trini-
dad and Tobago."60 Others complained that a white-dominated economy
was reminiscent of the days of slavery. George Weekes, the outspoken presi-
dent of the Oilfield Workers Trade Union, expressed this point of view at a
speech in Woodford Square on May 12,1966:
I am a man of color. I am a black man. This is a black man's country. We
have shed our blood for independence. Some of us have traveled thou-
sands of miles to fight imperialism. The people of Trinidad and Tobago
are determined to be free.... It is a struggle of the people of Africa, Asia,
and Latin America against white imperialism. Today as I stand here, I am
looking not at Dr. Williams' government. They are the visible govern-
ment. But what I look at is beyond that. There is an invisible government
of the country: the same people who are responsible for us being here as
slaves, who gave us the whip. . . . The invisible government of Trinidad
and Tobago is the Chamber of Commerce, the US and the UK.61
These were harsh words, indeed. But they reflected an emerging disen-
chantment with Williams, particularly among the young black youth who
previously had been his ardent supporters. Many of them had been influ-
enced by the ideology of Black Power, then being promoted by some African
Americans. To those who subscribed to its promise, Black Power meant the
control by blacks of their institutions, as well as political and economic
autonomy. As an ideology, it rejected white control and asserted the right of
peoples of African descent to chart their own destinies.
***** The ideology of Black Power resonated among blacks in various
parts of the diaspora. Although conditions in Trinidad and Tobago were not
an exact replica of those that existed in the United States, some of Black
Power's principles applied. The dispossessed groups in the nation were
black and brown, and economic power, in large measure, continued to wear
a white face. This was not new in a country that had seen slavery, indentured
servitude, and colonialism. But Williams had assaulted white power and
privilege, proclaiming an end to "Massa Day." To those who were still eco-
nomically deprived even as they watched the growing foreign economic
presence, Black Power had an immediacy that could hardly be restrained.
The proponents of Black Power, therefore, framed a large proportion of


--- PAGE 301 ---
288 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
their criticism of Williams in economic terms. Theirs was the language of
economic nationalism, the language of the poor who did not share fully, if at
all, in the economy over which Williams presided.
Eric Williams was not insensitive to the plight of the poor. In 1955, after a
visit to John John, a notoriously depressed area in Port of Spain, he had
recorded the following reactions:
John John is incredible... the conditions are incredible; among the worst
I have ever seen. After an hour, I could not distinguish between house and
privy in many cases. A house in John John can be a wooden crate no
bigger than the one in which I moved some of my books from the Carib-
bean Commission, or it is something at the angle of a hospital bed, one
has to walk gently beside it for fear that it will tumble down; or if it is a
building—the size of a two bedroom house but containing 25 "apart-
ments," and if this does not tear you apart, then there is the pitiful shed
with inhuman benches and a man's trousers hanging out to dry where
Sunday School is kept. The flies, the garbage, the "drain" which will
overflow even in an ordinary shower and flood all the houses around, the
dirt tracks with boulders so slippery that even in a mild shower, I had to
be assisted or I would have fallen; the distance that water has to be carried
in these conditions: all that is John John. Heaven help its inhabitants if
ever there is a serious fire, for no man can.... The clearing of John John
is simple justice to the suffering people of John John, our own people,
who like those of us do not live there, vote, work and pay taxes. John John
must go, now.
In view of such economic hardship and deprivation, he urged in the mid-
1950s the development of a welfare state. But "the social welfare state," he
cautioned, "cannot be kind only to be cruel. It cannot encourage birth only
to produce full unemployment from cradle to grave." Williams argued that
"welfare automatically demands production [and] amenities automatically
presuppose jobs." His prescient conclusion would return to haunt him in
1970: "A population which increases out of proportion to the exploitation of
economic resources is a standing invitation to revolution, disorder, or at
least, antisocial behaviour. The democratic right of life cannot be divorced
from the complementary right of the pursuit of happiness, that is to say, the
right to work. "62
Williams never lost his deep concern for dispossessed people like the


--- PAGE 302 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 289
residents of John John. He continued to use his considerable rhetorical skills
to shape their political consciousness: "Hold up your heads high, all of you,
the disinherited and dispossessed, brought here in the lowest states of
degradation to work on a sugar plantation or a cocoa estate for Massa. All of
you, don't hang your heads in shame. You are today taking over this country
from the Massa's hand."63 Such exhortations were important for the men-
tal regeneration of a people, but there were structural problems that im-
peded rapid and substantial change in their economic condition. Economic
growth, at least in the 1960s, had not kept abreast of demographic increase,
producing demands for radical transformations of the economy and admo-
nitions to Williams to fulfill his promise to create a new order.
Trinidad did not stand alone as far as Black Power-inspired assaults on
its economic structure were concerned. In October 1968, for example, Black
Power advocates rioted in Kingston, Jamaica, forcing a frightened govern-
ment to declare a state of emergency. Officials blamed Walter Rodney, a
young Guyanese lecturer in history at the University of the West Indies,
Mona, for stimulating the revolt. Rodney had given a series of lectures in the
ghettos of West Kingston advocating the "assumption of power by the black
masses of the islands." Misunderstanding the demands by Black Power
advocates for an end to imperialism and for economic power to be concen-
trated in black hands, Prime Minister Hugh Shearer dismissed them as
"irrelevant." He condemned "Black Power radicals" for "pushing causes
and voicing slogans that they have adopted from elsewhere. We have a black
government, we have votes for everyone, we have got rid of colour discrimi-
nation," the black prime minister asserted.64
The unhappy truth was that leaders like Hugh Shearer, and to some extent
the Eric Williams of the late 1960s, were not fully attuned to the strivings of
those at the societal margins and the young intellectuals who helped to give
them voice. On the other hand, the accumulated problems caused by cen-
turies of neglect could not be solved in a few years, despite governmental
will and the best of intentions. Williams, for one, never doubted his own
commitment to social transformation. This led him, at first, to ignore the
criticisms of Black Power advocates. He viewed the leaders of the movement
as "subversive" but not really dangerous, thinking that the public would
eventually become repulsed by their methods and deny them legitimacy. The
British high commissioner reported that "the Negro middle class (not to
speak of the East Indians) did quickly become disgusted, but they became


--- PAGE 303 ---
290 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
frightened by the violence and threats, and dismayed by Williams' inactivity
and failure to give a lead."65
That some Black Power activists in Trinidad and Tobago would resort to
violence in 1970 was neither anticipated nor predictable. In the preceding
years there had been considerable intellectual ferment led largely by mem-
bers of the New World Group, composed of intellectuals at the University of
the West Indies. Their critiques of various aspects of Caribbean life were
both trenchant and provocative. Founded in February 1969, the National
Joint Action Committee (N JAC) became the organizational expression of the
Black Power movement. Its membership consisted of university students,
graduates, trade unionists, various youth groups, and so on. This amor-
phous collection of individuals was united by its passionate demand for a
restructuring of Trinidadian society. Its members—articulate, energetic, and
noisy—exerted an influence on black urban youth, in particular, that far
exceeded their number.
Not all the leaders and supporters of the Black Power movement, to be
sure, were inspired by high-minded principles of social justice. Some were
motivated by a deep anti-Williams animus, others were political opportun-
ists, and still others were ideologically barren hangers-on attracted by a
chance to create mayhem in the society. British high commissioner Richard
Hunt would later report that "early on in the troubles, one of the NJAC
leaders was asked by a member of my American colleague's staff what he
really wanted, and he replied, 'I want to see the white man crawl.'" Hunt
added that "killing was a commonplace theme of speeches in Woodford
Square. . . . The NJAC leaders would, I imagine, like to frighten away the
white community—if necessary, or indeed for preference, by killing some of
them."66 This was undoubtedly an exaggeration and, to some extent, more a
reflection of white fears than an informed assessment of the intentions of
the principal leaders of the movement and their animating ideology.
There is no evidence that NJAC was planning to launch a frontal chal-
lenge to the Williams government, at least not so soon as early 1970. Its
leadership of what would come to be called the "February Revolution" was a
historical accident. On February 26, 1970, some NJAC supporters met in
Port of Spain to demonstrate in support of students from Trinidad and
Tobago who were on trial in Canada. The students had been accused of
damaging the computer center at the Sir George Williams University to
protest the alleged racism of some professors. With its vast investments in


--- PAGE 304 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 291
Trinidad and Tobago, Canada became, in the eyes of Black Power propo-
nents, a major example of white, foreign domination of the economy.
The demonstration was rather small, attracting about two hundred to
three hundred persons. Led by NJAC leaders Clive Nunez, head of the Trans-
port and Industrial Workers Union, Geddes Granger, a former president of
the Guild of Undergraduates at the University of the West Indies, and Dave
Darbeau, an undergraduate at the university, the demonstrators damaged
some Canadian-owned banks. They entered the Roman Catholic cathedral
and, according to one newspaper, "staged a sit-in which lasted just under
an hour. Chanting 'Power, Power,' and other revolutionary slogans, the
marchers swarmed into the Independence Square Cathedral, occupied the
pews, the pulpit and other chairs near and around the altar."67
The government apprehended nine demonstrators, charging them with
disorderly conduct in a place of worship, unlawful assembly, and conspiracy
to disturb the peace. Their arrest inflamed tensions, and on March 4 ten
thousand people demonstrated in Port of Spain to protest their detention.
Over the next several days sporadic acts of violence continued, as Port of
Spain descended into disorder. Matters took an ominous turn when six
thousand supporters of N JAC marched to Caroni, a sugar-producing belt, to
make common cause with Indian workers. Although Bhadase Maraj, the
Indian head of the All Trinidad Sugar Workers Union, opposed this invasion
of his terrain, his people gave the marchers a generally polite reception.
The bond that NJAC wanted to forge with the sugar belt workers did not
materialize, for years of suspicion between African Trinidadians and Indo-
Trinidadians could not be erased overnight. Racial divisions trumped an in-
cipient class consciousness. The tensions had been exacerbated by sporadic
acts of arson targeting Indo-Trinidadian stores and houses in such places as
San Juan. Most Indo-Trinidadians were convinced by actions such as these,
as well as by attacks on businesses owned by whites, Chinese, and Syrians,
that Black Power was inimical to their interests, despite NJAC'S rhetoric to
the contrary and the movement's efforts to enlist their active support.
Eric Williams responded to the developing threat to his administration by
addressing the nation on March 23. He admitted a failure in communication
between the government and the people and regretted that his administra-
tion had been tardy in implementing plans for economic reform. The prime
minister announced a number of new initiatives such as new taxes on banks,
industry, and higher incomes that would be earmarked to provide jobs and


--- PAGE 305 ---
292 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
technical training for the unemployed. He sought to assure the citizens of
Trinidad and Tobago that he understood the imperative behind the protests:
"The fundamental feature of the demonstrators was the insistence on black
dignity, the manifestation of black consciousness and the demand for black
economic power. The entire population must understand that these de-
mands are perfectly legitimate and are entirely in the interest of the commu-
nity as a whole. If this is Black Power then I am for Black Power."68
Williams's speech failed to satisfy the protesters and to restore order.
Perceiving his plans as inadequate to meet the problems that they were
highlighting, NJAC and its allies continued their efforts to destabilize the
regime. The weeks of protest had produced a heightened sense of political
consciousness among the dissidents, and their support was increasing. On
April 9, for instance, some thirty thousand mourners attended the funeral of
Basil Davis, who had been killed in a skirmish with the police. George
Weekes of the Oilfield Workers Trade Union told his members on April 13
that the union was "in the ranks of revolution." Geddes Granger urged his
supporters to cease paying their bills, purchase only the bare necessities, and
prepare to be soldiers. He asked the military to withdraw its support for the
government, a request that would take on a larger meaning as the crisis
intensified. "This is war," Granger declared.69
The leaders of the Black Power movement underestimated Williams's
developing resolve to restore law and order and to defend his administra-
tion. One anecdote provides a few clues to his subsequent response. During
his visit to Tanganyika in 1964, Williams had been surprised to learn that
President Julius Nyerere had shown signs of weakness when he faced a
coup. As the acting British high commissioner there reported, Williams
"asked me incredulously whether it was really true Nyerere had run away
during the army mutiny, and I could only confirm that this was so. I said that
anything he could do to put some stiffening into Nyerere would be of value.
Williams expressed amusement at the thought of "little Trinidad" stiffening
anyone, but said he would try."70 According to the British ambassador to
Ethiopia, Prime Minister Williams had told him that if he encountered a
similar situation in Trinidad and Tobago, namely "a threat to the welfare and
integrity of Trinidad from an unrepresentative and determined minority
group, he himself would not have the slightest hesitation to follow the same
course, in his case to call in the U.S. troops based in Trinidad. Why for
a paper scruple and his personal face, should he hand over his country


--- PAGE 306 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 293
to foreign subversion? He had offered President Nyerere the equation-
Zanzibar is to Tanganyika as Cuba is to Trinidad."71 Communists in Zanzi-
bar had been accused of subversive activities in Tanganyika, and Williams
feared that Cuba posed a similar threat to Trinidad. He undoubtedly learned
some enduring lessons from Nyerere's behavior.
As the crisis in his nation deepened, Williams not only had to pay more
sustained attention to the demonstrators who were growing in number and
gaining confidence, but he also faced threats to his leadership within his
administration and party. A. N. R. Robinson, the young, talented, restless,
and ambitious deputy leader of the PNM, enjoyed a certain degree of popu-
larity within the Black Power movement and, to some, appeared ready to
participate in an effort to depose the prime minister. The acting British high
commissioner reported that Eric Williams was aware that Robinson "was
plotting some kind of mischief against him." This suspicion had persuaded
him not to leave the country on April 12 to attend a meeting of Caribbean
heads of government in Kingston. He had not revealed his intention to skip
the conference and even went to the airport. Williams "spoke of unusual
telephone calls which suggested that Robinson was surprised to find that he
had not left." The acting high commissioner, who reported that "Dr. Wil-
liams did not elaborate," admitted that "I may have read more into his words
than was really there." But, the British official continued, "it is widely be-
lieved that he [Robinson] was engaged in a plot to oust Dr. Williams and
rumour, picturesquely, has Robinson sitting behind the Prime Minister's
desk when Dr. Williams came back from seeing the Trinidad delegation off
to the Kingston meeting."72
Six weeks later Richard Hunt, the new British high commissioner, seemed
more certain that Robinson was implicated in a plot to remove Williams from
office. Writing to T. R. M. Sewell of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
(formerly the Colonial Office) on May 29, he conjectured that Robinson
"having, it seems, failed in an attempted coup on April 12 ... will probably
aim to sap Williams' strength within the party [PNM] as a whole rather than
aim for another coup." Robinson, however, had resigned his ministerial post
on April 13, adding further fuel to the rumors. He later explained that he had
stepped down because he was concerned that Trinidad and Tobago should
not "move into a situation where political activity would be virtually sus-
pended and we would then rely on [a] naked police force... a grave danger to
all newly independent countries."73


--- PAGE 307 ---
294 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Williams was not unduly worried by Robinson's defection from the Cabi-
net. In a letter to his daughter and close confidante, Erica, on April 13, he
admitted that "it is a little too early to get the feel of the new situation, but the
first reactions from [the] party and [the] country are favourable." Williams,
in
 this very private letter, did not directly accuse Robinson of being involved
in a plot against him, but he noted: "It turns out to be a good thing that I did
not leave for Jamaica yesterday." He surmised that Robinson left the Cabinet
"because of our weekend action to call out the Special Reserve Police and the
Regiment Volunteers." Robinson, Williams speculated, "sees a confronta-
tion looming ahead and wants to be no part of it." The prime minister was
relieved that Robinson had resigned his Cabinet post. "People just cannot
see that Robinson's move strengthens me rather than weakens," he as-
serted, adding: "I won't fall into the trap he has set of getting me to dismiss
him as Deputy Political Leader. Leave him there where I tell him nothing, ask
his advice on nothing, and everyone knows I have no confidence in him. He
is just another George Brown. If the Party wishes him to be removed, that is
another matter. But I shall not initiate it, especially on the advice of two-
timers who were formerly his warmest supporters."74 Williams's contemp-
tuous reference to Robinson as "another George Brown" evoked memories
of the man who served in various capacities in the British Labour Party,
engaged in efforts to undermine its leadership, particularly in 1947, and
became ineffective by the time his active political career ended in 1970.75
Meanwhile, Williams reported to Erica on April 18 that the PNM'S Legis-
lative Group had met to "discuss the general situation" and those in atten-
dance had affirmed their loyalty to him and to the PNM. A. N. R. Robinson
spoke at the end of the meeting, but Williams characterized his remarks as
"unimpressive and [he] seems to have had no impact." He, however, awaited
a clearer assessment by the party's General Council. Williams stressed the
likelihood there of both an attack on certain ministers by supporters of
Robinson, as well as "demands for [Robinson's] ouster" by his own. "I am
trying to counter both," he asserted, assuring Erica: "In terms of strategy we
should not at this stage give Ray [Robinson] an opportunity or an alibi to
move [from the PNM]. He must make the jump himself." The party's view,
however, "was that we should resist all demands for resignation of other
Ministers."76
Although Williams thought that "the public seems reasonably satisfied"
with his "call up of reinforcements," he had written to Erica on April 14


--- PAGE 308 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 295
complaining that "the heaviest cross I have had to bear is the panic among
the Ministers, especially after Robinson's resignation and the call up of the
reservists." "[They] can't see," Williams continued, "that it is just a show of
force, to let Black Power know what they are up against and to reassure the
general population."77 The prime minister was gratified that "there has not
been a single incident since the calling up of the reserves," reassuring his
daughter that "whoever is losing his head, I am not one of them."78
Betraying the human side concealed by his confident, tough, and inscru-
table exterior, Williams confessed: "The only physical effect I can see of the
strain is a bad night on Wednesday. I had had a piece of bad news before
going to bed. I woke up at 3 and had trouble to get back to sleep. When I took
my pressure on Thursday morning it had dropped to no [Williams suffered
from low blood pressure all of his life]. But it may be a loss of weight. I was
down below 140 this morning. I have to step up on what I eat."79
Williams himself would not be forced into taking any precipitous action.
In his note to Erica on April 14, he had told her that he continued to "play it
cool." He reported that his calling up of the reservists "has put the Black
Power boys in a dither." He was of the opinion that many "are breathing fire
and brimstone but are probably as afraid as hell." Williams also indicated
that he was engaged in long-term planning to address the unemployment
situation and that he was implementing some short-term measures. More-
over, he was "moving in to take control of the party" by meeting with the
Youth League, the Legislative Group, the Chairmen and Secretaries of Con-
stituencies, and so on. He was, he added, "working now on a statement of
absolute priorities aimed at the unrest." But Williams recognized that there
were "clouds on the horizon," such as the impending trial of those who had
been arrested on February 26, the forthcoming May Day parade, whose lead-
ers were predicting the participation of 100,000 workers and Black Power
supporters, as well as the expected visit of Stokeley Carmichael, the influen-
tial American-based but Trinidadian-born Black Power leader, to Guyana.
An incendiary speaker, Carmichael had the potential to inflame tensions in
Trinidad, and Williams remained concerned about the possible disruptive
effects of such a visit. The prime minister predicted, however, that "with
God's help we shall overcome."80
In spite of possessing overwhelming confidence in his ability to control
and defeat the developing challenge to his administration, Williams took no
chances. He did not feel particularly threatened by the "Black Power Boys,"


--- PAGE 309 ---
296 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
assuring Erica that "I feel they are slowly losing ground, public resentment
is rising, and we are in control of the situation." In his judgment, a far more
serious threat was posed by "a deterioration of industrial relations." He
informed Erica that there had been "several stoppages and strikes."81 Al-
though the labor unrest had different imperatives from the Black Power
movement, the two forces fed off one another and were mutually reinforc-
ing. The strikes that were occurring, as well as the ones that were being
planned, threatened to paralyze the country, exacerbate tensions, and en-
hance the efforts of those who wanted to remove the Williams government
from office.
The prime minister recognized the serious implications of the work stop-
pages and understood the need to calm a jittery public. "The place as you can
expect is full of rumours," he told Erica on April 18. "As Trinidadians panic
easily, you can imagine the position," he confided. But Williams continued:
"More and more people are demanding that we call out the Regiment. The
present position ... is that the police are in full control of the situation."
Williams saw the hand of George Weekes behind the labor unrest. He
informed Erica of Weekes's "growing influence," adding that he "has long
been aspiring to take over all unions." Although the prime minister believed
that "the police can handle the situation," by April 18 he was beginning to
think about a firmer response to the labor- and Black Power-generated
unrest. He indicated to Erica that a declaration of a State of Emergency
would mean control by the army, and that would have two advantages. First,
"it would allow us to detain all the leaders, including Weekes," and second,
"it would assist in creating a climate of order and quiet in which one could
pass essential legislation, including a Public Order Act to control demon-
strations and an amendment to the Trade Union Act, limiting any union
to one particular industry," a move that would have been clearly aimed
at Weekes.82
Confirming the prime minister's resolve, the acting governor general
informed the British High Commission on April 17 that Williams would not
ask for a "proclamation of a state of emergency until he is surer than he is
now that the mass of the people had lost patience with the NJAC." Williams
did not wish to make martyrs of the Black Power leaders while they retained
the loyalty of their supporters. He also did not want to produce a "confronta-
tion between their supporters and the security forces, many of whose 'kith
and kin' would be on the other side."83


--- PAGE 310 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 297
But as Williams discovered, time was not on his side. On April 19 about
three hundred factory workers at Caroni's main sugar refinery went on
strike, and the next day NJAC marshaled two thousand sugarcane workers,
mostly Indians, to join them in a six-mile march. The situation intensified
when George Weekes and the NJAC leaders threatened to organize wide-
spread strikes affecting utilities. Irked by the Weekes-NJAC alliance, the
Trinidad and Tobago Labour Congress, an association of what its president
called "responsible unions," threatened, according to Williams, "to take
matters into their own hands" unless a state of emergency was declared.84
Williams was also beginning to fear the consequences of a march into
Port of Spain, planned for Tuesday, April 21. This demonstration, organized
by NJAC, was to be joined by some dissident sugar workers under Weekes's
direction. Bhadase Maraj, the leader of the cane field workers, publicly sup-
ported the actions of the sugar workers, but, the British acting high commis-
sioner noted, "privately he let it be known to Dr. Williams that Weekes
would be unstoppable unless a State of Emergency was imposed."85 Aware
of the worsening situation, the beleaguered prime minister asked the acting
governor general to declare a state of emergency, effective April 21. The
police quickly rounded up the leaders of the Black Power movement and
imposed a curfew.
***** The state of emergency was essentially a vulnerable govern-
ment's response to threats to its survival by civilians, not the military. Its
declaration, however, became the catalyst for a mutiny by about eighty sol-
diers at the Teteron Bay barracks. Some loyal officers, soldiers, and civilians
were held as hostages. The mutineers seized the armory, but quick action by
Captain David Bloom, the English-born commander of the Coast Guard,
prevented them from escaping, thereby containing the situation. Bloom
would later describe the mutiny as "a close run thing for the country."86
Williams responded to these developments by turning his official resi-
dence into his command headquarters. Acting British high commissioner
Charles Thompson described him as being "more animated than usual" on
April 20, in "bounding good spirits in fact overconfident" on the twenty-
second, but "preoccupied" on the twenty-third. American ambassador J. Fife
Symington told Thompson "that at no time during the several visits which
he paid to Dr. Williams was the latter anything but his usual self." Yet
Symington later informed the State Department that Carlos Irazabal, the


--- PAGE 311 ---
298 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Venezuelan ambassador to Trinidad and Tobago, said that during the crisis
"he thought Williams was completely out of his head (loco) and that he had
acted in a most irrational manner. He referred to frequent direct phone calls
during the day and nights of April 21 and April 22."87
When new British high commissioner Richard Hunt presented his cre-
dentials to Williams on April 29, eight days after the emergency had been de-
clared, he found him to be "very cordial and seemed wholly relaxed." He re-
ported that "when I commented on his untroubled appearance he remarked
with a laugh that somebody or other, and preferably the Prime Minister,
should remain calm in the present circumstances." At the end of their meet-
ing, "he observed jocularly that I should look after myself since it would be
unfortunate if 'they' captured the new British High Commissioner."88
Understandably, Williams's mood varied in accordance with his assess-
ment of the crisis and his chances of prevailing. The American ambassador,
despite his observation that Williams was his "usual self" during the early
days of the crisis, also noted the "tendency of [the] Prime Minister and
[Cabinet minister] Gerard Montano to fluctuate between war panic and
optimism." But the ambassador added: "We cannot overlook [the] pos-
sibility
 that Williams in normal times a very moody person, may have been
pushed by tension which he is under dangerously close to irrationality." The
prime minister "does not seem to grasp the basic fact that there can be no
compromise with the rebels if his government is to survive for long." Wil-
liams had not appealed for public support on television and radio but "in-
stead he has holed himself up in his residence."89
Confronting a major extralegal challenge to his administration for the
first time, Williams must have experienced moments of confidence as well
as deep concern. But there is no consensus among those who saw him in
action that he lost his nerve. He realized, however, that he needed exter-
nal help if he were to get control of the situation. The American ambas-
sador, among others, "urged him to take forceful action against the muti-
neers, even at some risk to the hostages, since in his view, the situation
demanded action and the majority of the country would support it." The
acting British high commissioner believed that Williams was not receiv-
ing good professional advice "on what reliable forces were available to the
government and how they could be effectively deployed against the muti-
neers."90 Based on his assessment of the military needs, Williams urgently
requested assistance from five countries: the United States, the United King-


--- PAGE 312 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 2QQ
dom, Venezuela, Jamaica, and Guyana. Each country would respond accord-
ing to its own interests.
Once he received word of the mutiny, Williams asked the United King-
dom for 12 light machine guns, mortars, 300-400 rifles, hand grenades,
and 6 scout cars.91 Her Majesty's government was somewhat disposed to
provide help, although members of the Cabinet wrestled with the propriety
of intervening in the internal affairs of an independent Commonwealth
nation. The government was willing to send weapons but not soldiers, even
if requested to do so. The Cabinet was mindful of the sizable British invest-
ment in Trinidad and Tobago and of the two thousand British citizens who
resided there. The chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, a Cabinet member,
reminded his colleagues that Williams was a "strong and effective leader,
who had considerable influence in the African Commonwealth countries,
and it was therefore important that we should do what we could to maintain
our relationships with him and avoid giving him any grounds of complaint
as regards our response to his appeal."92 National self-interest carried the
day, and the British government dispatched two frigates to Trinidadian wa-
ters, the HMS Jupiter and the HMS Sinus. They were both ordered to stay
safely out of sight, thirty miles off shore. The Sinus carried a detachment of
Royal Marines, ostensibly to protect British citizens and property. Williams
withdrew his request for weapons support a day after he made it, telling the
high commissioner that he was expecting an adequate supply of weapons to
arrive "very shortly," presumably from the United States.93
Williams also sought assistance from British prime minister Harold Wil-
son in conveying a request to the leaders of Nigeria and Tanzania to have one
thousand soldiers and their equipment standing by in case they were needed
to restore order in Trinidad. Wilson was somewhat disposed to intercede on
Williams's behalf but saw some potential difficulties if he did. He assured
the embattled prime minister of his concern "that you are faced with these
difficult problems." Wilson asserted that "no one is better qualified than you
to handle the situation," adding: "I am sure that your wise statesmanship
will enable you to overcome successfully this emergency."94 The British
prime minister informed Williams that he had instructed his high commis-
sioners in Lagos and Dar Es Salaam to stand by to convey his request for
armed support to their respective governments. He thought, however, that
"judging by our recent experience of a similar problem elsewhere in Africa, it
might be that the chances of getting an early and favourable reply to your


--- PAGE 313 ---
300 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
requests would be enhanced if your messages were transmitted by your High
Commissioner in London to the Nigerian and Tanzanian High Commis-
sioners." Wilson observed that the Nigerians were "very conscious of their
reputation as an independent African state" and were likely to be more
receptive to a request "that did not pass through our channels."
In asking for troops from the African countries (and from other Carib-
bean nations), Williams emphasized to the acting British high commis-
sioner that the help he needed could not come from white soldiers. Nor did
he want such assistance to fall under the auspices of the Organization of
American States, since that alliance was dominated by the United States.
Rather, the aid should come from the Commonwealth nations and might
best be offered by Nigeria or Tanzania or Zambia, in that order. In reporting
these views to his government, the acting high commissioner noted that
Trinidad had pursued "an absolutely correct attitude" over Biafra and main-
tained close relations with Nigeria at the United Nations; it was expected to
establish diplomatic relations with Nigeria shortly. He also indicated that
Williams hoped that the British government would provide the air transport
that would be needed, as the African nations were not equipped to do so.95
Williams's appeal to the United States received a rapid and to some extent
positive response. The American ambassador reported that the prime minis-
ter had telephoned him repeatedly on the afternoon of April 21 pressing for
any kind of assistance. Specifically, he requested troops, a warship, and
weapons. The Americans denied the request for troops and the warship but
quickly dispatched 50 general-purpose machine guns with 75,000 rounds of
9-mm ammunition, 10 81-mm mortars with 200 rounds of ammunition, 100
two-inch mortar smoke bombs, and 50 81-mm smoke bombs. They did
not provide the 8 scout cars and 10 antitank weapons that Williams also
wanted.96
Acting quickly, the Americans sent the helicopter carrier Guadalcanal to
the area and ordered five other vessels to stand by. These vessels were sent to
the territorial waters of Trinidad and Tobago "strictly as a precautionary
measure for the safety of US nationals," according to the British high com-
missioner. The Americans would justify their provision of arms "if neces-
sary, as a commercial sale to a constitutional government whose arsenal has
been captured by mutineers." Williams would later report to the nation that
Trinidad and Tobago had paid for those weapons.97


--- PAGE 314 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
Venezuela also supported the Williams government. The prime minister
had asked his neighbor for two warships, one to be sent to Port of Spain and
the other to the army barracks at Teteron Bay, as well as soldiers and am-
munition. In response to these requests, Venezuela sent a naval vessel to
Chaguaramas and flew twenty armed men to Trinidad to protect Williams.
The prime minister, however, rejected the "guards" that Venezuela was will-
ing to assign to his residence. Although Venezuela had had an uneasy rela-
tionship with Williams, its government, according to the British embassy in
Caracas, wanted Williams's "kind of government" to survive "against the
subversive threat of a Black Power kind."98
In contrast to the positive responses of the United Kingdom, the United
States, and Venezuela, the governments of Guyana and Jamaica were ambiv-
alent. Forbes Burnham, never on consistently good terms with Williams,
quickly decided against sending troops to Trinidad. Keenly aware of the
presence of Black Power advocates in Guyana, he did not wish to exacerbate
the tensions in his country. Meeting with the British high commissioner in
Guyana on April 22,1970, Burnham "made clear his deep anxiety about the
situation in Trinidad and the effects it may have on Guyana." He also had to
consider "whether he would be justified in backing a loser."99
The Jamaican reaction was similar. Prime Minister Hugh Shearer had
confronted disturbances inspired by Black Power advocates in 1968 and
had no desire to further alienate them. Accordingly, he sought to buy some
time when Williams made his request by dispatching his security chief to
Port of Spain to determine whether Jamaican aid was actually necessary.
Shearer's emissary reported that Williams had the situation well under con-
trol, thereby relieving the Jamaicans of the need to make any decisions on
the matter.
As it turned out, Eric Williams did not need the assistance of the Com-
monwealth governments to resolve his nation's crisis. The quick action by
his Coast Guard in containing the mutineers was of critical importance. The
appointment of the experienced Brigadier Joffre Serette to replace the in-
competent Colonel Stanley Johnson was a masterstroke: Serette brought a
fine reputation and energy to the tasks at hand, and he proved to be a skillful
negotiator. In explaining his success, Brigadier Serette noted that the rebel
leaders had proved unequal to the situation. He thought that their plans had
been "shaky," as was evident from the maps that had been discovered. The
301


--- PAGE 315 ---
302 ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE
heavy arms, he said, had been stacked in trucks on April 21 to be transported
to Port of Spain before the rebels were ready for action. None of them, for
instance, even knew how to use an 8-mm mortar.100
***** The events of February to April 1970 represented a watershed in
the political career of Eric Williams. The prime minister confronted a serious
extralegal challenge to his administration, one that he could hardly have
anticipated. Williams had predicted that Jamaica stood a better chance of
experiencing racial unrest than did Trinidad and Tobago.101 When compared
to the February Revolution, however, the disturbances in October 1968 in
Jamaica constituted an insignificant skirmish. For a leader who had spent
much of his political career condemning colonialism and affirming the dig-
nity of the peoples of African descent, the challenge from the Black Power
advocates must have been a psychological blow of inestimable proportions.
To the proponents of Black Power, Williams had become the enabler of
the imperial economic presence that he had denounced so persistently and
vehemently. Dismissing Eric Williams as "that bitch," Geddes Granger said,
"In Trinidad we have a black puppet in office presiding over the white
exploitation of the island."102 Such a pejorative comment must have been a
bitter pill for Williams to swallow. After all, he was largely responsible for
the high degree of political consciousness in Trinidad and Tobago, and
those who denounced him and sought his removal from office were his
progeny.
To end the crisis, Williams introduced a plan for national reconstruction
to increase "the degree of national control over the national economy." The
plan was also intended to expand "popular participation in all sectors of the
economy," permit its diversification, and achieve "full employment." In
addition, Williams accepted the resignation of two members of the Cabinet
described as "white." The business community did not greet this develop-
ment with any enthusiasm. Nor was Kamaluddin Mohammed, an Indian
member of the Cabinet, pleased, leaving High Commissioner Hunt to report
that he disliked "this concession to Black Power demands." Mohammed
indicated that "he might have to reconsider his own position in the Cabi-
net." He admitted, according to Hunt, that "the gap between the youth,
which had grown up since the PNM came to power ... and the middle aged
establishment—black, brown, and white—was very deep and the youth had
been heavily indoctrinated with racial hatred." This was certainly a judicious


--- PAGE 316 ---
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF RACE 303
observation on the political mood of some of the young, but Mohammed's
comments also showed that to the degree that Williams assented to some
demands of the Black Power advocates, he ran the risk of losing support
from other quarters.103
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office watched the emergence of Black
Power demands in the Caribbean with some trepidation. In the immedi-
ate aftermath of the February Revolution, an internal memorandum grudg-
ingly acknowledged that "Black Power could be an overdue and welcome
sign of a sense of national identity in the Caribbean." It speculated that Black
Power could bring about a measure of unity among the states and could
contribute to a "reduction of privilege." But, the memorandum cautioned,
Black Power's "racist bias is sinister and in its more extreme manifestations
its aims are inimical to our interests." The office feared that the spread of the
ideology either "as a destructive force overthrowing constitutional govern-
ments or in terms of political movement in favor of nationalization of for-
eign enterprises ... is bound at least to affect our commercial relations
within the region." Quite clearly, the representatives of foreign economic
privilege recognized the threat that Black Power posed to their interests in
Trinidad and elsewhere in the Caribbean.104
The ideology of Black Power notwithstanding, successive administrations
in Trinidad and Tobago pursued, with varying degrees of fervor, the eco-
nomic policy of industrialization by invitation. Much of the capital needed
for development continued to emanate from foreign sources and, in the
language of Black Power, remained white. That said, the term "Black Power"
was in many respects a misnomer in the Trinidad and Tobago of 1970. The
language of race was employed, but the power that its proponents sought
was one that would produce a restructuring of the economic arrangements of
the society. The beneficiaries, it was hoped, would be a racially amorphous
group of dispossessed peoples. Proponents of these changes used the lan-
guage of race to legitimize their claims, but the demon was a structural
oppression that knew no racial boundaries. Race, for some, became the
grammar of the competition between blacks and Indians for political power
and the spoils of office, simultaneously creating and exacerbating societal
tensions. Generally speaking, neither the PNM nor the DLP resisted the
temptation to exploit race to its advantage, and both parties were ultimately
diminished by their behavior. The racial specter continues to haunt the
nation, inflaming its tensions, heightening its fears, and corroding its soul.


--- PAGE 317 ---
EPILOGUE
***** Brilliant, brash, confident, buoyant and energetic, Eric Eustace
Williams burst into the political arena of Trinidad and Tobago in 1956. He
was fresh and idealistic when many other contestants, such as Tubal Uriah
Butler and Albert Gomes, had seen better years and were visibly tired. The
historian-scholar dominated that difficult arena for twenty-five years, and
over the long haul he, too, would become exhausted. But the years 1956-70
saw him at the peak of his vitality as he displayed both his considerable
talents and his limitations. For many, Williams the charismatic leader was
the unquestioned messiah—the relentless foe of colonialism, the harbinger
and enabler of change, and the architect of his country's independence. To
others, he was an enigmatic leader who was cantankerous and divisive,
contemptuous of opponents, and a harborer of dictatorial tendencies.
Williams was nothing if not a controversial figure throughout his long
tenure in office. Unaccustomed to dealing with a pugnacious West Indian
leader who was obviously their intellectual superior, colonial officials con-
demned him in the most pejorative terms. But Williams the historian knew
all too well that rebellious slaves and those who sought to claim their free-
dom throughout the Americas were also the objects of contempt by slave-
owners and the authorities. Those who challenged the status quo, and who
imagined and struggled to attain more equitable power arrangements, could
count on the opposition of the powerful and the privileged. The colonial
authorities' opposition to Williams and to his policies that were anathema to
them only fortified his sense of the righteousness of his cause. When Wil-
liams launched his campaign to reclaim Chaguaramas, an uncomprehend-
ing American counsel general recommended to the U.S. State Department
that steps be taken to remove him from office. The British and Americans
collaborated to contain an unyielding Williams, the British all the while
maintaining a public posture of principled neutrality.


--- PAGE 318 ---
EPILOGUE 305
The struggle for Chaguaramas provided Williams with his most dramatic
and significant political triumph. He had forced the Americans to abandon
their intransigence and their disdain for negotiating with West Indians and
to approach the conference table. Williams did not obtain all that he wanted
at the Tobago conference in 1960, but the Americans agreed to release
significant parts of the land occupied by the U.S. base to Trinidad and
Tobago and to pay US$30 million for the privilege of occupying the island's
soil. A small West Indian colony had contested American might and had
come away from the struggle, if not completely victorious, at least having
delivered some effective blows.
There were some obvious similarities between the Chaguaramas struggle
and the imbroglio with the United Kingdom over the size of the golden
handshake, or the parting independence gift. Williams, the leader of a small
territory, had engaged in a David and Goliath-like contest with two power-
ful adversaries. But though he forced the Americans to concede the justice of
his demands, the British, for the most part, remained imperiously stubborn.
Williams settled the dispute largely on the United Kingdom's terms, provid-
ing him with a grim lesson in the continued efficacy of imperial might.
The contests with the United States and the United Kingdom were both
symbolic and practical. It was not solely about the return of Trinidadian soil
or the size of the parting gift. Williams had served notice that the old
international order was crumbling and that even small colonies and fledg-
ling new nations were claiming themselves both physically and psychologi-
cally. They would not remain passive when their perceived rights were being
threatened or violated, regardless of the might of the perpetrator.
Williams's vituperative assaults on the colonial authorities and the Amer-
icans gained him few admirers among their ranks. But the bitter and accusa-
tory language of protest was the only effective weapon he had at his com-
mand. Its tone frightened some of his countrymen and other West Indian
leaders who feared retribution from the objects of Williams's criticism and
ire. His language was acerbic, unrelenting, and devastatingly sharp. To Wil-
liams, colonialism was the source of the ills in the Caribbean, and the
language he used befitted the enormity of the crime. He had proclaimed an
end to "Massa Day" and enjoined Massa's victims to command their future,
embrace a new definition of themselves, and act accordingly.
But this was easier said than done. While Williams lambasted the evils of
colonialism, he could be the aggressive supplicant for imperial favors. The


--- PAGE 319 ---
306 EPILOGUE
"golden handshake" imbroglio was one dramatic manifestation of this ap-
proach. The author of Capitalism and Slavery never saw Trinidad and Tobago
as a supplicant, however. To him, slavery and the slave trade had constituted
the foundations of Britain's wealth, and the colonies had a moral claim on
the imperial treasury. Williams made this argument with persistence and
intellectual vigor, but seldom to great effect. The imperial authorities were as
adamant in their resistance to it as Williams was in the consistency of its
articulation.
Eric Williams was, on the larger West Indian stage, the dogged propo-
nent of political federation and economic integration. He did not stand
alone in his advocacy of them, but he took second place to no one in the
power and urgency of his arguments. The failure to save the West Indies
Federation from its early death was a function of the triumph of a debilitat-
ing insularity over the interests of the common weal. Williams's insistence
on a strong Federal center was farsighted, rational, and entirely feasible. Its
adoption was the only way in which an effective union of the disparate
islands could be forged, their centrifugal tendencies curbed, and a coher-
ent, viable developmental policy implemented. His vision fell victim to the
groundless fears of the Jamaicans that a strong Federal center posed a threat
to the island's industrial development. Norman Manley's indecisive leader-
ship on the Federal question and Alexander Bustamante's myopia also guar-
anteed its failure. The Jamaicans never made a credible argument that the
Federal government wanted to stymie their island's economic growth or
stood to gain anything by doing so. The referendum that resulted in Ja-
maica's withdrawal from the federation and its collapse was fought more on
domestic issues and less on the advantages of federation to the polity and the
sister islands.
By advocating a strong Federal center, Williams stoked the fires of Jamai-
can secessionism. His eventual willingness to compromise on the issue was
an act of statesmanship, but as events unfolded it came to nought. That
Williams chose independence for Trinidad and Tobago over a new Eastern
Caribbean Federation should have been predictable. He had made it clear
that his country would not assume the economic burdens such a union
engendered absent substantial economic aid from Great Britain. It was more
an expression of national self-interest than a rejection of an association with
his neighbors.
The offer of unitary statehood to some of the other islands had little


--- PAGE 320 ---
EPILOGUE 307
resonance, except in Grenada. The islands feared the loss of their individual
identities, and there was a strong distaste for Eric Williams and his political
style. Unitary statehood required even more planning and psychological
preparation than a federation commanded; it could not be brought into
existence by the stroke of a pen. The ill-fated West Indies Federation was a
stark reminder of the centrifugal forces at work in the region and the in-
ability of the leaders to contain them. Williams also knew that unitary state-
hood had no prospect of survival without the injection of considerable eco-
nomic aid from a mother country anxious to abandon its impoverished
children.
The racial bogey provided yet another challenge for Williams at home and
elsewhere. Worried that British Guiana's racial virus would spread to Trini-
dad and Tobago and worsen its societal woes, the doctor offered his services
as mediator. It did not take him long to recognize the futility of his ef-
forts and that the country's leaders—Forbes Burnham, Cheddi Jagan, and
Peter D'Aguiar—were not genuinely interested in healing its wounds. Back
home, Williams as an African Trinidadian had an emotional connection with
blacks, one that deepened as a result of his immersion in their history. His
extended state visit to Africa in 1964 gave practical expression to his realiza-
tion that a positive embrace of Africa was an essential ingredient for the
development of a Trinidadian and West Indian consciousness and identity.
Ironically, the fundamental role that Williams played in raising the racial
consciousness of his people and proclaiming the death of Massa almost
became his political undoing. In 1970 a young, impatient, and racially con-
scious group of Black Power advocates defined him as the enemy and sought
his removal from office. His intellectual children, at least some of them,
were repudiating their father. It was a case of attempted patricide.
William's relationships with the growing Indo-Trinidadian minority were
equally complex. His description of the antifederation sector of that popula-
tion as a hostile and recalcitrant minority in 1958 became, for many, the
signifier of his attitude toward all Indians. But, as indicated in Chapter 8, the
colonial authorities were also alarmed by the opposition of some Indians to
the proposed federation and in 1955 asked for the recall of the commis-
sioner from India, a man charged with encouraging such a divisive stance.
Williams had made a colossal blunder, or so it seemed at the time, and
though he would later speak eloquently and passionately of a racially blind
nationalism, the damage had been done. Still, racial tensions ebbed and


--- PAGE 321 ---
308 EPILOGUE
flowed and the society functioned normally except during the heat of elec-
tion campaigns, when racialized passions were unleashed. On their part,
the people of European descent had an uneasy relationship with the black
leader, and the harsh invective he directed at them, at times, did little to
alleviate mutual suspicions. Inevitably, the colonial past remained a part of
the present, inflaming emotions and proving itself frustratingly tenacious to
Williams, who was imagining a new order and calling it into being.
Eric Williams, more than any other Anglophone politician of his time,
addressed the issues that were fundamental to the making of the modern
Caribbean in greater depth and with admirable consistency and passion. But
his success on the larger Caribbean stage was limited by the endemic in-
sularity of many of the region's leaders and weaknesses in his character and
political style that interfered with his ability to achieve his vision and to work
productively with others to realize those possibilities. Williams, then, was
unquestionably more effective in articulating a larger vision than in realizing
its actualization in a Caribbean-wide context. His personal limitations not-
withstanding, Eric Williams was the greatest leader his people produced in
the twentieth century. His domination of the political arena, though at times
halting and unsteady, was no historical accident.
A quarter century after his death, Williams continues to be a dominant
figure in the political culture of Trinidad and Tobago but much less so in the
West Indies as a whole. His imprint still remains on the societal landscape,
and his successors have struggled to escape his shadow and to establish
their own political identities. But the domestic issues he championed and
the larger Caribbean causes he advocated—with the possible exception of a
political federation—remain the essential concerns of the contemporary ad-
ministrations. The measure of a political leader should not be his or her
personal idiosyncrasies but rather the capacity to imagine a different and
better future for a people and the possession of the will to challenge and lead
them to achieve their possibilities. Seen in this light, Eric Williams's central
place in the history of the modern Caribbean is secure.


--- PAGE 322 ---
NOTES
ABBREVIATIONS
CO Records of the Colonial Office, Commonwealth and Foreign and
Commonwealth Offices, Public Record Office, London
CRO Commonwealth Relations Office
DO Records of the Dominions Office and of the Commonwealth Relations
and Foreign and Commonwealth Offices, Public Record Office, London
EW Eric Williams
EWMC Eric Williams Memorial Collection, University of the Westlndies, St.
Augustine, Trinidad
FCO Records of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Predecessors,
Public Record Office, London
FO General Political Correspondence of the Foreign Office, Public Record
Office, London
NA-DS National Archives, U.S. Department of State, Record Group 59, College
Park, Maryland
PREM Records of the Prime Minister's Office, Public Record Office, London
Report Report (Nos. 1-7) on African Tour, February 14-20,1964, EWMC, vol. 008.
RG Record Group
INTRODUCTION
1 EW, unpublished version of memoirs, EWMC, vol. 139. The information about
Williams and his childhood years comes from drafts of his memoirs (referred
to in this book as his "unpublished version of memoirs"), located in the
EWMC. These scattered nuggets, which are both typed and handwritten, and
sometimes unpaginated, do not appear in the published version. For the pub-
lished memoir, see EW, Inward Hunger: The Education of a Prime Minister (London:
Andre Deutsch, 1969).
2 EW, unpublished version of memoirs, EWMC, vol. 139.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Kelvin Singh, Race and Class Struggles in a Colonial State: Trinidad, 1917-1945 (Cal-
gary, Canada: University of Calgary Press, 1994), 13.
7 EW, "Life with Father," manuscript, EWMC, vol. 139.


--- PAGE 323 ---
3IO NOTES TO PAGES 9-2O
8 EW, Inward Hunger, 113-14.
9 Ivar Oxaal, Black Intellectuals and the Dilemmas of Race and Class in Trinidad (Cam-
bridge, Mass: Schenkman, 1982), 113.
10 Among those removed from the PNM were C. L. R. James, Williams's mentor
and at one time editor of the Nation, the party's official organ. Patrick Solomon,
Winston Mahabir, Elton Richardson, and Learie Constantine—all founding
members of the PNM—also fell out of favor with Williams.
11 Edwin Moline to U.S. Department of State, July 12,1961, Central Decimal File,
Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1670, folder 741F.00/6-261.
12 Sir Stephen Luke to Philip Rogers, January 1, 1957, CO 1031/2573.
13 Ibid.
14 R. C. C. Hunt to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, July 29,1970, FCO
63/594.
15 See Selwyn D. Ryan, Race and Nationalism in Trinidad and Tobago: A Study of
Decolonisation in a Multiracial Society (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972).
CHAPTER 1
1 EW, lecture on "The British West Indies in World History," Trinidad Public
Library, April 19,1944, EWMC, vol. 743.
2 EW, Inward Hunger: The Education of a Prime Minister (London: Andre Deutsch,
1969), 33.
3 Ibid., 35.
4 Ibid., 41.
5 Ibid., 33-34, 45-48.
6 EW, British Historians and the West Indies (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons,
1966), 37-58. For a discussion of these historians' views, as well as extensive
quotations from their works, see ibid.
7 Ibid., 233.
8 EW, lecture on "Intellectual Decolonisation," Howard University, Washington,
D.C., April 29,1964,13, EWMC, vol. 638.
9 Ibid., 17.
10 EW, British Historians, 13.
11 Ibid.
12 Quoted in EW, British Historians, 166-211.
13 EW, lecture on "The British Westlndies in World History," 10.
14 Ibid., 10-11.
15 EW, lecture on "IntellectualDecolonisation," 13.
16 Ibid., 8.
17 Ibid., 11.
18 Ibid., 13.
19 EW, "My Relations with the Caribbean Commission," in Selwyn Cudjoe, ed.,


--- PAGE 324 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 2O-2g
Eric E. Williams Speaks: Essays on Colonialism and Independence (Wellesley, Mass.:
Calaloux Publications, Amherst, distributed by University of Massachusetts
Press, 1993), 125.
20 Ibid., 116.
21 Ibid., 120.
22 Ibid., 121.
23 Ibid., 160. See also "Notes on a Conference of West Indian Writers," EWMC,
vol. 812.
24 EW, "My Relations with the Caribbean Commission," 164-65.
25 Ibid., 165.
26 William P. Maddox to U.S. Department of State, June 22,1955, Central Decimal
File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 3201, folder741B.00/6-1655.
27 Cudjoe, Eric E. Williams Speaks, 238.
28 Ibid., 239.
29 Ibid.
30 Ibid., 240.
31 Ibid., 254.
32 Ibid., 255.
33 Ibid., 247.
34 Ibid., 254.
35 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, March 24,
1961, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1670, folder 741F.00/
1-561.
36 Gerald Home, Ferdinand Smith, the Notional Maritime Union, and Jamaican Labor
Radicalism (New York: New York University Press, forthcoming), 405.
37 Alain Locke, Foreword to EW, The Negro in the Caribbean (1942; repr., Brooklyn,
N.Y.: A&B Books Publishers, 1994). For Williams's years at Howard, see
Heather Cateau and S. H. H. Carrington, eds., Capitalism and Slavery Fifty Years
Later: Eric Eustace Williams: A Reassessment of the Man and His Work (New York: Peter
Lang, 2000).
38 EW, Inward Hunger, 62.
39 Locke, Foreword to EW, The Negro in the Caribbean.
40 EW, The Negro in the Caribbean, 104.
41 Ibid.
42 EW, Capitalism and Slavery (1944; repr., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1994), ix.
43 Ibid.
44 Ibid.
45 Ibid., 210.
46 See Reginald Coupland, The British Anti-Slavery Movement, 2nd ed. (London:
F. Cass, 1964).
47 EW, Capitalism and Slavery, 178.
311


--- PAGE 325 ---
312 NOTES TO PAGES 29~39
48 Ibid., 169.
49 EW to W. T. Couch, March 14,1945, University of North Carolina Press Rec-
ords, subgroup 4, Southern Historical Collection, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill.
50 D. A. Farnie, "The Commercial Empire of the Atlantic, 1607-1783," Economic
History Review, 2nd sen, 15 (1962): 212.
51 FrankTannenbaum, book review, Political Science Quarterly 61 (1946): 247-53.
52 Carter J, Woodson, book review, Journol of Negro History 30 (1945): 93-95.
53 Lorenzo Greene, book review, Negro College Quorterly 3, no. i (March 1945):
46-48.
54 It is not my intention to offer a critique of Capitalism and Slavery here, but rather
to provide only a brief synopsis of Williams's arguments.
55 EW, lecture, University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, June 17,1964, EWMC,
vol. 007.
56 EW, lecture, Montreal, April 22,1964, EWMC, vol. 638.
57 Ibid.
58 Ibid.
59 EW, lecture, University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, June 17,1964.
60 Ibid.
61 EW, lecture, Montreal, April 22,1964.
62 Ibid.
63 EW, Education in the British West Indies (1950; repr., Brooklyn, N.Y.: A&B Books
Publishers, 1994), 10.
64 Ibid., 60.
65 Ibid., 61.
66 Ibid.
67 Ibid., 87.
68 Ibid., 107.
69 EW, lecture on "Intellectual Decolonisation."
70 Press release, CO 1031/4281; also printed in Trinidad Guardian, July 15,1961,
9,11.
71 EW interviews, PREM 13/2433 and Sunday Telegraph, October 19,1964, 32.
72 EW to Harold Wilson, November 28,1964, PREM 90/531.
73 Ibid.
74 Ibid.
75 N. E. Costar to Sir Arthur Snelling, September 1, 1962, DO 227/2.
76 Ibid.
77 R. G. Menzies to Harold MacMillan, January 16,1962, PREM 11/3653.
78 C. L. R. James, A Convention Appraisal: Dr. Eric Williams: A Biographical Sketch (Port
of Spain: PNM Publishing Co., 1960), 5.
79 EW, excerpts from a speech to Trinidad Legislature, January 5,1962, Central
Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder 741F.00/11-161.


--- PAGE 326 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 40-53 313
CHAPTER 2
1 Trinidad Guardian, June 18,1960.
2 The preceding remarks by Bustamante and Manley are from the Daily Gleaner,
January 8,1955,15, which reported the speeches made in Montego Bay on Sep-
tember 11, 1947.
3 John Mordecai, The West Indies: The Federal Negotiations (London: Allen and
Unwin, 1968), 39.
4 Ibid., 46-47.
5 Williams's quotations are from a summary of his views on the West Indies
Federation that he prepared for publication. See EW, "My Federation Record,"
EWMC, vol. 660.
6 Ibid.
7 EW, "Federation in the World Today," February 25,1955, EWMC, vol. 813; EW,
"The Proposed Federal Constitution for the British Caribbean," April 18,1955,
EWMC, vol. 635.
8 "Report of the British Caribbean Federal Capital Commission" (Mudie Report),
September 25,1956, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 3202, folder
7416.00/1-357.
9 Mordecai, The West Indies, 93.
10 Lord Hailes to Alan Lennox-Boyd, January 10,1959, CO 1031/2573.
11 Colonial Office to Alan Lennox-Boyd, "Progress and Present Position of the
Federation," November 1959, CO 1031/2574.
12 Sir Kenneth Blackburne to Philip Rogers, Decembers, 1958, CO 1031/2573.
13 Daily Gleaner, editorial, November 10,1960.
14 Sir Kenneth Blackburne to Philip Rogers, Decembers, 1958, CO 1031/2573;
British High Commissioner, Ottawa, Canada, to Lord Hailes, November 13,
1959, and Lord Hailes to British High Commissioner, Ottawa, November 30,
1959, CO 1031/2574.
15 Philip Rogers to Sir Hilton Poynton, October 20,1959, CO 1031/2574.
16 J. O. Moreton, memorandum, March 9,1959, and Iain McLeod, memorandum,
March 17,1961, PREM 11/3653.
17 Colonial Office, Note on Sir Grantley Adams, n.d., PREM 11/3635.
18 Doily Gleaner, editorial, October 11, 1960.
19 Ibid., Novembers, 1958.
20 Mordecai, The West Indies, 255-57.
21 Philip Rogers, minute, February 7,1959, CO 1031/2574.
22 Doily Gleaner, Novembers, 1958.
23 Mordecai, The West Indies, 127-41.
24 Ibid., 124-27,149-50. See EW, The Economics of Notionhood (Port of Spain: PNM
Publishing Co., 1959), 69.1 wish to thank Selwyn Carrington and Reginald
Dumas for helping to procure a copy of this publication for me.


--- PAGE 327 ---
314 NOTES TO PAGES 54-67
25 Mordecai, The West Indies, 161-65; EW, Economics of Notionhood, 11.
26 Ibid., 138-39.
27 EW, untitled manuscript, EWMC, vol. 736.
28 Mordecai, The West Indies, 173-80,197-98.
29 Ibid., 130.
30 Lord Hailes to Alan Lennox-Boyd, January 10,1959, CO 1031/2573; Sir Kenneth
Blackburne to Philip Rogers, November 30,1959, CO 1031/2574.
31 Note of a meeting with representatives of the JLP, June 4,1960, during the sec-
retary of state's visit to Jamaica, CO 1031/4269.
32 Extract from Address of the Honorable Norman Manley, Annual Conference of
the People's National Party, October 25,1959, CO 1031/2574.
33 Daily Gleaner, November 10,1960.
34 Philip Rogers to Sir Hilton Poynton, October 20,1959, CO 1031/2574, and Sir
Kenneth Blackburne to Philip Rogers, October 30,1959.
35 Lord Hailes to Sir Saville Garner, November 30,1959, CO 1031/2574.
36 Daily Gleaner, December 17,1955, p. 9, in EWMC, vol. 736.
37 EW, untitled speech, 1959, EWMC, vol. 736.
38 Sir Kenneth Blackburne to Philip Rogers, September 15,1959, CO 1031/2574.
39 Ibid.
40 Douglas Williams to J. E. Marnham, August 26,1959, and Lord Hailes to Philip
Rogers, August 11, 1959, CO 1031/2574.
41 Joint memorandum by the Colonial Office and the Jamaican delegation sum-
marizing talks on Federal matters in London, January 1960, CO 1031/4269. See
also Mordecai, The West Indies, 201.
42 Mordecai, The West Indies, 232.
43 Ibid.
44 Ibid., 273-74.
45 Ibid., 341.
46 Lancaster House Conference on West Indies Independence, May31-June 16,
1961, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1669, folder 741F.00/n-161.
47 The statistics in this and the preceding paragraph are from the text of a lengthy
speech that Williams gave prior to his departure for the Lancaster House Con-
ference. All amounts are expressed in West Indian dollars. See EWMC, vol.
739-
48 Lancaster House Conference; U.S. Embassy, London, to U.S. Department of
State, June 23,1961, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1670, folder
741F.00/6-261.
49 Sir Solomon Hochoy to Hugh Fraser, July 15,1961, CO 1031/4281; Memoran-
dum of Conversation between EW and William Christensen, September 29,
1961, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder 741F.00/1-462.
50 William Christensen, U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State,
November 9,1961, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder
741F.00/n-161.


--- PAGE 328 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 67-81 315
51 EW, excerpts from a speech to Trinidad Legislature, January 5,1962, ibid.
52 William Christensen, U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State,
November 3,1961, ibid.
53 Mordecai, The West Indies, 442.
54 R. B. Manderson-Jones, Jamaican foreign Policy in the Caribbean, 1962-1988
(Kingston: Caricom Publishers, Ltd., 1990), 4.
55 EW, BBC interview, August 9,1962, DO 200/95.
56 "Note of a Meeting in Mr. Fisher's Room,"July 23,1964, CO1031/5003. See
also "Personal for Sykes," July 22,1964, ibid.
57 "Dr. Williams' Proposal for the West Indies," n.d., ibid.
58 For an extended account of these discussions, see N. E. Costar to E. L. Sykes,
July 27,1964, ibid. See also Costar to Secretary of State for the Colonies, March
3,1964, ibid.
59 Costar to Sykes, July 27,1964, David Rose to W. I. G. Wallace, July 31,1964, and
Costar to CRO, September 1, 1964, ibid.
60 J. D. Murray to N. E. Costar, August 23,1965, and Costar to Murray, August 30,
1965, DO 200/171.
61 Manderson-Jones, Jamaican foreign Policy, 17.
62 Sir Grantley Adams, radio address, March 13,1960, Central Decimal File, Trini-
dad, NA-DS, box 1669, folder 741F.00/1-660.
CHAPTER 3
1 These and subsequent descriptions of the march are from the Trinidad Guardian,
April 23,1960,1-2. For the full text of Williams's speech, see EWMC, vol. 767.
2 Trinidad Guardian, April 23,1960. The Mudie Report disparaged Trinidad and
awarded the capital site to Barbados. Passed in 1939, the telephone ordinance
gave monopoly rights to a French Creole-dominated company.
3 EWMC, vol. 767.
4 Governor Edward B. Beetham to EW, April 9,1960, and Williams to Beetham,
[April 10?], in EW, Inward Hunger-. The Education of a Prime Minister (London:
Andre Deutsch, 1969), 227-30; Beetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
April 14,1960, CO 1031/3058.
5 U.K. Colonial Attache, Washington, D.C., to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
May 9,1957, CO 1031/3058.
6 Secretary of State for the Colonies to Governor of Trinidad and to U.K. Colo-
nial Attache, Washington, D.C., May 13,1957, ibid.
7 Sir Edward Beetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies, May ,11 1957, ibid.
8 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, March 25,
1957, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 3302, folder 7416.00/1-359.
9 U.K. Colonial Attache, Washington, D.C., to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
May 14,1957, CO 1031/3058. See also Colonial Office memorandum, May 18,
1957, ibid.
81


--- PAGE 329 ---
316 NOTES TO PAGES 82-94
10 Mr. W. J. Alexander was the other delegate from Trinidad and Tobago.
11 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, June 3,1957,
Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 3202, folder 7416.00/1-357. See
also Governor of Trinidad to Secretary of State for the Colonies, May 16,1957,
CO 1031/3058. The members of the SFC delegation included the chief minis-
ters of Jamaica and Trinidad; the premier of Barbados; Robert Bradshaw, the
minister of trade and production in St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla; and F. A. Baron,
the minister of trade and production in Dominica.
12 Sir Edward Beetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies, May 22,1957, and
U.K. Colonial Attache to Secretary of State for the Colonies, May 23,1957, FO
371/126085.
13 U.K. Colonial Attache, Washington, D.C., to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
June 21,1957, FO 371/26083.
14 "United States Memorandum on U.S. Naval Base, Chaguaramas, Trinidad,
BWI," July 6,1957, FO 371/126083.
15 F. Cooper to Under Secretary of State, Foreign Office, July 10,1957, FO
371/126084.
16 U.S. Embassy, London, to U.S. Department of State, July 15 1957, Central Deci-
mal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2895, folder 711.563416/1557.
17 John Whitney to U.S. Secretary of State, July 13,1957, ibid., box 3895, folder
711.563416/1159.
18 "Opening Statement by Mr. Manley," July 16,1957, Chaguaramas Conference,
Foreign Office, London, July 16-23, J957> FO 371/126085.
19 Record of Meeting to Discuss Federal Capital Site, July 16,1957, ibid.
20 Alan Lennox-Boyd to Philip Rogers, July 17,1957, CO 1031/2024.
21 EW, "The Memorandum by the Chief Minister of Trinidad and Tobago Sub-
mitted to the Conference on the Federal Capital Site," FO 371/126083.
22 Secretary of State for the Colonies, memorandum on "United States Activities
in the West Indies and Other 6ritish Dependencies," FO 371/2615 2.
23 Foreign Office to Mr. 6utler, January 2,1941, FO 371/27152.
24 EW, Proposal by the Trinidad Delegation, FO 371/126085.
25 U.S. Ambassador, Statement at the FirstMeeting of the Chaguaramas Con-
ference, Foreign Office, London, July 16-23, J957> Annex D, ibid.
26 EW, Report on the Chaguaramas Conference Held at the Foreign Office, Lon-
don, July 16-23, J957> FO 371/126086.
27 Ibid.
28 Doily Gleaner, August 14,1957, inFO 371/126085.
29 Government of Trinidad, Statement on Construction of Missile Tracking Sta-
tion at Chaguaramas, CO 1031/2025.
30 F. J. Leishman to E. G. Andrews, January 22,1958, ibid.
31 U.S. Statement on the Tracking Station, FO 371/126085.
32 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, October n,


--- PAGE 330 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 94-106 317
1957, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2892, folder 711. 5
1557-
33 EW, "My Federal Record," EWMC, vol. 660.
34 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, August 15,
1957, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2891, folder
711.563416/1557.
35 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, August 15,
1957, ibid., box 3892, folder 711. 563416/1557.
36 Ibid., August 27, 1957.
37 U.S. Consul General, Kingston, to U.S. Department of State, November 4,
1957, ibid., box 2892, folder 711. 563416/1557.
38 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, November 4,
1957, ibid., box 2891, folder 711. 563416/1557.
39 U.S. Consul General, 6arbados, to U.S. Department of State, August 29, 1957,
ibid.
40 EW, statement, July 5, 1959, quoted from ibid., box 2894, folder
711.563416/1557.
41 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, December 30,
1957, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2892, folder
711.563416/1557.
42 R. W. Jackling to H. A. A. Hankey, April 30, 1958, FO 371/131855.
43 H. A. A. Hankey, "The Chaguaramas Dispute," March 17, 25, 1958, FO
371/131854.
44 Foreign Office to Sir Harold Caccia, March 21, 1958, ibid.
45 6ritish Embassy, Washington, D.C., to Foreign Office, March 29, 1958, ibid.
46 Foreign Office to Sir Harold Caccia, April 3, 1958, ibid.
47 Walworth 6arbour to Selwyn Lloyd, April 3, 1958, ibid.
48 Memorandum by P. Dean, April 5, 1958, ibid..
49 Selwyn Lloyd to John Jay Whitney, April 7, 1958, ibid.
50 Report of the Chaguaramas Joint Commission, March 25, 1958, 6, Central
Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2893, folder 711. 563416/1557.
51 Ibid., ii.
52 Ibid., 18.
53 Ibid., 32.
54 See various letters by colonial authorities, FO 371/131855.
55 Ibid.
56 Ibid.; United Kingdom Information Office, Port of Spain, to Secretary of State
for the Colonies, May 15, 1958, FO 371/131855; U.S. Consul General, Port of
Spain, to U.S. Department of State, May 15, 1958, Central Decimal File, Trini-
dad, NA-DS, box 2893, folder 711. 563416/1557; Doily Gleaner, May 27, 1958.
57 John Foster Dulles to Selwyn Lloyd, June 14, 1958^0371/131856.
58 Philip Rogers to H. A. A. Hankey, October 17, 1958, FO 371/131858.
6341B/


--- PAGE 331 ---
318 NOTES TO PAGES 106-18
59 Speech Mode by the Honourable Chief Minister during the Debote on the Choguoramas
Joint Commission Report, June 6,1958 (Trinidad: Government Printing Office,
1958),!.
60 Ibid., 2-7.
61 Ibid., 9,13-14,16-17.
62 Ibid., 24.
63 Ibid., 29.
64 Stotement by the Honourable Chief Minister on the United Stotes Leosed Areos in
Trinidad and Tobago, June 20,1958 (Port of Spain: Government Printing Office,
1958),!.
65 Ibid., 3-4.
66 Ibid., 4.
67 Ibid., 8.
68 SirEdward Beetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies, June 20,1958, and
Colonial Office to Governor of Trinidad, June 1958, FO 371/131856.
69 D. H. T. Hildyard, memorandum, August 25,1958, FO 371/131857. Williams's
Legal Commission never submitted its report.
70 SirEdward Beetham to Philip Rogers, January 18,1958, CO 1031/2060.
71 SirEdward Beetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies, February 13,1958,
ibid.
72 Alan Lennox-Boyd to Sir Edward Beetham, n.d., ibid.
73 W. I. J. Wallace to Sir Edward Beetham, February 22,1958, ibid.
74 Colonial Office, departmental minute, June 26,1958, ibid.
75 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Secretary of State, July 14,1958,
Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2893, folder 711.563416/1557.
76 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Secretary of State, March 12,1958,
ibid., folder 711.563416/1557.
77 Walter Orebaugh to Willoughby, Dale, Swihart, and Burn, July 1959, ibid., box
3202, folder 7416.00/1-357.
78 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, May 29,1958,
ibid., box 2893, folder 711.563416/1557.
79 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, October 7,
1958, ibid., folder 711.563416/1557.
80 Douglas Williams to J. E.Marnham, August 6,1958, CO 1031/2028.
81 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, October 29,
1958, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2893, folders
711.563416/1358 and 711.563416/2159.
82 U,S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, July 14,1959,
ibid., box 2894, folder 711.563416/1259.
83 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, June 14,1960,
box 1670, folder 74^.00/6-1760.
84 See the charges and countercharges in Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS,
box 1669, folder 74iF.oo/i-66o.


--- PAGE 332 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 118-31
85 EW, speech on "Perspectives for the West Indies," San Fernando, May 30,1960,
EWMC,vol. 643.
86 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, December 23,
1960, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2894, folder/n.563416/1259.
87 On the dispute, see ibid., box 2892, folder 711.563416/1457, and box 2894,
folder 711.563416/1295.
88 See ibid., box 3892, folder 711.563416/1457.
89 Extract from Trinidad Monthly Intelligence Report for Late June and Early July
1959, CO 1031/3060.
90 Winston Mahabir, In and Out of Politics: Tales of the Government of Dr. Eric Williams
from the Notebooks o/o Former Minister (Trinidad: Inprint Caribbean Ltd., 1975),
83. In this volume, Mahabir ridicules Williams's claim that a radiation threat
existed. He notes that when Williams made the charge at the University of
Woodford Square, he "did not know whether to laugh at him or cry for the
gullible crowd that was being ultraviolated."
91 D. H. T. Hildyard to D. A. Logan, August 10,1959, FO 371/139791.
92 Ibid.
93 Acting Governor of Trinidad and Tobago to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
July 31,1959, CO 1031/2069.
94 D. H. T. Hildyard to D. A. Logan, September 17,1959, FO 1031/2069.
95 For Evans's "Report of Chaguaramas Visit," n.d. (but stamped as received in
the Archives on September 19,1959), see FO 371/139791.
96 Sir Edward 6eetham to Secretary of State for the Colonies, January 7,1960, CO
1031/3060.
97 Secretary of State for the Colonies to Governor of Trinidad and Tobago, Janu-
ary 8,1960, ibid.
98 H. A. A. Hankey to D. A. Logan, December 18,1959, FO 371/131855.
99 R. H. G. Edmonds to D. A. Greenhill, January 12,1960, CO 1031/3060.
100 Secretary of State for the Colonies to Governor of Trinidad and Tobago, Janu-
ary 19,1960, ibid.
101 Governor of Trinidad to Secretary of State for the Colonies, January 16,1960,
ibid.
102 Ibid.
103 Notion, December n, 1959, in CO 1031/2069.
104 Ibid.
105 U.S. Consul General, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, December 12,
1959, Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 2895, folder
711.563416/1159.
106 Ibid.
107 EW, Inward Hunger, 238.
108 U.S. Department of the Navy, "Strategic Appraisal of Trinidad, 6.W.I., October
19,1960," Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1674, folder
7411.00/3-860.
319


--- PAGE 333 ---
320 NOTES TO PAGES 131-46
log EW, Inward Hunger, 239.
no Ibid., 239-40; AnnexE, Trinidad and Tobago, DO 200/263.
in U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, January 18,1962, Cen-
tral Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder 74^.00/1-462.
112 Memorandum of Conversation between EW and William Christensen, January
25,1962, ibid.
113 Trinidad and Tobago Political and Economic Assessment, Subject Decimal File,
1964-66, NA-DS, box 2744.
114 U.S. Department of State to McGeorge Bundy, memorandum, August 28,1965,
Central Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box 2745.
115 For a summary of James's dispute with Williams, see "C. L. R. James Critical of
Eric Williams and Peoples National Movement," U.S. Consul General, Port of
Spain, to U.S. Department of State, August 10,1960, Central Decimal File, Trin-
idad, NA-DS, box 1670, folder 74^.00/1-561.
116 E. B. Ashmore to Commander, British Navy Staff, Washington, D.C., Novem-
ber 18,1964, DO 200/263.
117 N. E. Costar to D. M. Cleary, November 16,1965, ibid.
118 British High Commissioner, Port of Spain, to CRO, February n, 1966, ibid.
119 EW, speech on "From Slavery to Chaguaramas," Arima, Trinidad, July 17,1959,
EWMC, vol. 008.
CHAPTER 4
1 EW to Harold MacMillan, November 26,1962, DO 200/86; United Kingdom
Office of Financial Assistance to Trinidad and Tobago, DO 200/19.
2 "Financial Assistance to Various Commonwealth Countries," n.d., DO 200/86.
3 EW to Secretary of State for the Colonies, March 22,1962, DO 200/85.
4 Ibid. An Exchequer loan was to be used solely for development purposes.
5 EW, "Equipment for Independence," June 18,1962, DO 200/86.
6 EW to Colonial Office, July 9,1962, ibid.
7 E. L. Sykes to Deputy High Commissioner, Trinidad and Tobago, July 12,1962,
ibid.
8 Trinidad Guardian, July 14,1962.
9 E. L. Sykes to L. B. Walsh Atkins, July 26,1962, DO 200/85.
10 Memorandum: Brief no. 12, United Kingdom Delegation Only, Trinidad Inde-
pendence Conference, May 1962, DO 200/85.
n The Colonial Development Welfare Fund provided grants to the colonies for
development projects.
12 J. D. Higman, departmental minute, DO 200/85.
13 Duncan Sandys to John-Boyd Carpenter, August 22,1962, DO 200/85.
14 John-Boyd Carpenter to Duncan Sandys, n.d., DO 200/85.
15 H. A. F. Rumbold to Duncan Sandys, September 5,1962, DO 200/85.


--- PAGE 334 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 147-65
16 H. A. F. Rumbold to N. E. Costar, December 10,1962, DO 200/86. The "Little
Eight" referred to the potential federation of the eight Windward and Leeward
Islands.
17 Colonial Office to EW, aide-memoire, November 30,1962, DO 200/86.
18 British High Commission to CRO, January 9,1962, DO 200/85; E. L. Sykes to
Secretary of State for the Colonies, November 2,1962, DO 200/86.
19 EW to Harold MacMillan, November 5,1962, DO 200/86.
20 E. L. Sykes to H. A. F. Rumbold, November 13,1962, ibid.
21 EW, excerpts from speeches on November 20 and 25, London Times, November
26,1962.
22 Harold MacMillan to EW, December 2,1962, DO 200/86.
23 Trinidad Guardian, December 6,1962.
24 S. J. G. Fingland toE. L. Sykes, April 31,1962, DO 200/95.
25 Sykes to Fingland, September n, 1962, ibid.
26 R. L. Baxter to J. E.Marnham, April 16,1958, CO 1031/2490.
27 U.S. Embassy, London, to U.S. Department of State, January 20,1960, Central
Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1669, folder 74iF.oo/i-66o.
28 N. E. Costar, "Trinidad and Tobago: Dr. Williams and His Policies," May 8,
1963, DO 200/95.
29 N. E. Costar to L. B. Walsh Atkins, March 7,1963, DO 200/87.
30 P. Farquhar, "All Fall Down," Statesman, April 26,1963.
31 P. Farquhar, "Selling the Dummy," Statesman, May 3,1963, in CO 1031/4438.
32 N. E. Costar to Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, "Trinidad and
Tobago, after Two Years of In dependence," November 22,1964, CO 1031/5003.
33 EW, Inward Hunger-. The Education o/a Prime Minister (London: Andre Deutsch,
1969), 29.
34 Ibid.
35 EW, "Life with Father," unpublished version of memoirs, chap. 3, EWMC,
vol. 139.
36 EW, unpublished version of memoirs, chap. 2,1911-32, ibid.
37 N. E. Costar to H. A. F. Rumbold, November 10,1962, DO 200/86.
38 EW, unpublished version of memoirs, chap. 2, EWMC, vol. 139.
39 N. E. Costar to H. A. F. Rumbold, November 10,1962, DO 200/86.
40 Ibid.
41 Patrick Solomon, An Autobiography (Port of Spain: Imprint Caribbean, 1981),
151.
42 N. E. Costar to H. A. F. Rumbold, November 10,1962, DO 200/86.
43 EW, BBC interview, August 9,1962, DO 200/95.
44 Ibid.
45 N. E. Costar, memorandum to CRO, November 22,1964, CO 1031/5003;
Richard Hunt to T. R. M. Sewell, May 29,1970, FCO 63/594; Costar, "Trinidad
and Tobago: Dr. Williams and His Policies," May 8,1963, DO 200/86.
321


--- PAGE 335 ---
322 NOTES TO PAGES 165-78
46 L. B. Walsh Atkins to Minister of State, May 3,1963, departmental minute, DO
200/95 (Bukhurst); J. A. Murray to Duke of Devonshire, September 19,1963,
00200/15 (Lewis).
47 Costar made the suggestion repeatedly to colonial officials. See, e.g., "Note of
Discussion on Relations between Britain and Trinidad and Tobago Held at
Government House, Barbados, Tuesday, January i, 1963," DO 200/86.
48 N. E. Costar to CRO, ibid.
49 "Financial Assistance to Various Countries," n.d., ibid.
50 N. E. Costar to CRO, December 10,1962, ibid.
51 "Note of Discussion on Relations between Britain and Trinidad and Tobago
Held at Government House, Barbados, Tuesday, January i, 1963," ibid. In his
letter to Profumo regarding his failure to meet with him, Williams offered
what could be taken as a weak apology. "The circumstances surrounding your
visit," he said, "were unfortunate. But that is behind us now.... I look forward
to seeing you again soon." EW to Secretary of State for the Colonies, May 7,
1963,00200/87.
52 N. E. Costar to L. B. Walsh Atkins, March 2,1963, DO 200/86.
53 Denis Williams to N. E. Costar, May 13,1963, DO 200/87.
54 Note of a meeting held in CRO, March 12,1963; S. E. Luke, Note for the Rec-
ord, March 9,1963, DO 200/4.
55 N. E. Costar to L. B. Walsh Atkins, March 19,1963, DO 200/87.
56 Costar to Walsh Atkins, March 28, April 19,1963, ibid.
57 "Suggested Approach by the U.K. High Commissioner to the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago," memorandum, DO 200/19.
58 EW, "United Kingdom Offer of Financial Assistance to Independent Trinidad
and Tobago, 1962," white paper, ibid.
59 Ibid.; "Suggested Approach by the U.K. High Commissioner to the Govern-
ment of Trinidad and Tobago."
60 EW, "United Kingdom Offer of Financial Assistance to Independent Trinidad
and Tobago, 1962," white paper, DO 200/19.
61 Internal memorandum, DO 200/89.
62 Colonial Office to Sir Stephen Luke, December 7,1962, ibid.
63 EW to Harold MacMillan, December 5,1962, DO 200/19.
64 Colonial Office to British High Commissioner of Trinidad and Tobago, n.d.,
ibid.
65 "Trinidad Finance," internal memorandum, March 26,1963, DO 200/89.
66 N. E. Costar to E.L. Sykes, May 4,1963, 00200/87.
67 Costar to L. B. Walsh Atkins, June 25,1963, ibid.
68 Costar to Sykes, May 18,1963, ibid.
69 E. L. Sykes to Mr. Lynch, Department of the Treasury, August 14,1963, ibid.
70 E. L. Sykes to L. B. Walsh Atkins, December 9,1963, DO 200/88.
71 Sykes to Walsh Atkins, November 27, December 9,1963, ibid.
72 EW, "Perspectives for the West Indies," May 30,1960, EWMC, vol. 007.


--- PAGE 336 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 179-89 323
CHAPTER 5
1 EW, History of the Peoples o/Trinidod and Tobago, 256.
2 Report of Meeting between Grantley Adams and Harold MacMillan, December
4,1961, PREM 11/4074.
3 Memorandum for the Prime Minister, September 27,1961, PREM 13/2999.
4 Ian McLeod to Harold MacMillan, September 22,1961, PREM 11/4074.
5 Acting Administrator of St. Kitts to Secretary of State for the Colonies, Septem-
ber 24,1961, Administrator of Dominica to Secretary of State for the Colonies,
September 22,1961, and Administrator of Antigua to Secretary of State for the
Colonies, September 25,1961, PREM 11/4074.
6 Colonial Office Brief to Harold MacMillan on the Occasion of Grantley
Adams's Visit, December i, 1961, PREM 11/3653.
7 "Report of the Economic Commission," January 1965,1-2, CO 1031/4440.
This survey was commissioned by the leaders of Grenada and Trinidad.
8 Record of Discussion between Duncan Sandys and EW, September 21,1962,
CO 1031/3242.
9 Ibid.
10 Secretary of State for the Colonies to Herbert Blaize, ca. October 19,1962,
reprinted in "Keeping the Faith: A Record of Progress towards Union of Gre-
nada with Trinidad and Tobago" (a publication of the Chief Minister's Office,
St. George's, Grenada), CO 1031/4439. As late as November 1964, the secretary
of state told the administrator of Grenada: "I should like to assure you that if
union with Trinidad remains the wish of your government, and if satisfactory
terms acceptable to all three governments can be worked out, the British gov-
ernment would hope to facilitate it." Secretary of State Anthony Greenwood to
Administrator of Grenada, November 24,1964, CO 1031/4440.
11 "Keeping the Faith," 3.
12 Ibid.
13 CRO to S. J. G. Fingland, October 31,1962, CO 1031/3242.
14 Report on EW's Address to West Indian Students in London, November 28,
1962, ibid.
15 British High Commission, Port of Spain, to CRO, November 26, December 14,
1962, ibid.
16 Colonial Office, "U.K. Policy towards a Federation of the Eight and Grenada's
Proposal to Enter into Negotiations for a Unitary State with Trinidad," memo-
randum, October 15,1962, ibid.
17 British High Commission, Port of Spain, to CRO, November 24,1962, ibid.
18 Ibid.
19 Ibid., November 21,1962; Edward B. Rosenthal to Department of State, July 15,
1964, Central Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box
2745-
20 Administrator of Grenada to Secretary of State for the Colonies, March 17,


--- PAGE 337 ---
324 NOTES TO PAGES l8g-2O1
1964, CO 1031/4438; Extract from Notes of Discussion between Secretary of
State for the Colonies and Members of the Opposition of Grenada Legislature,
December 31,1962, CO 1031/3242; Departmental minute, CO 1031/4440.
21 Petition to Secretary of State, February 3,1965, CO 1031/4440.
22 Record of Discussion between Secretary of State and EW, September i, 1962,
CO 1031/3242.
23 Note for Secretary of State on Trinidad/Grenada Union, November n, 1964,
CO 1031/4439.
24 Brief no. 52, Secretary of State's Visit to Westlndies, January-February 1965,
CO 1031/4440.
25 British High Commission, Port of Spain, to CRO, December 10,1962, CO
1031/3242.
26 "T" to Secretary of State, April 4,1965, CO 1031/4439.
27 D. Williams to Mr. Thomas, internal memorandum, January 22,1963, CO
1031/3242.
28 Ibid.
29 M. Z. Terry to D. Williams, November 12,1963, CO 1031/4438.
30 S. J. G. Fingland to E. L. Sykes, June 26,1963, ibid.
31 D. Williams to L. A. Pinard, July 2,1963, ibid.
32 "Keeping the Faith," 6.
33 Ibid.
34 N. E. Costar to CRO, May 4,1964, DO 227/2.
35 Costar to CRO, November 13,1963, ibid.
360. Williams to Sir Hilton Poynton, November n, 1964, CO 1031/4439.
37 Ibid.
38 Reports of Commission on the Development Program for Grenada and Eco-
nomic Commission, Unitary Statehood for Trinidad and Tobago and Grenada,
CO 1031/4440.
39 Ibid., 34-35.
40 Ibid., 34.
41 Ibid.
42 Secretary of State to Administrator of Grenada, December 21,1965, CO
1031/4440.
43 "The Secretary of State's Visit to the Westlndies, January/February 1965," ibid.
44 N. E. Costar to Administrator of Grenada, June 3,1964, CO 1031/4439.
45 Brief for Secretary of State, April 22,1964, CO 1031/4440.
46 N. E. Costar to Administrator of Grenada, August 17,1965, ibid.
47 Departmental minute, January 1965, ibid.
CHAPTER 6
i Cheddi Jagan, Forbes Burnham, and Peter D'Aguiar to Secretary of State for the
Colonies, October 25,1963, FO 371/173552.


--- PAGE 338 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 2O1-11 325
2 Brief for Prime Minister Harold MacMillan's Talks with President John F. Ken-
nedy, July 4,1963, CO 1031/4402.
3 Joint Assessment by U.S. and British Officials [on Guiana], June 25,1963, ibid.
4 Brief for Prime Minister MacMillan's Talks with President Kennedy.
5 Joint Assessment by U.S. and British Officials [on Guiana], June 27,1963, CO
1031/4402.
6 U.S. Embassy, London, to U.S. Department of State, March 19,1960, Central
Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1669, folder 7410.00/9-2861.
7 N. E. Costar to CRO, September i, 1962, DO 227/2.
8 EW, Trinidad and Tobago and the British Guiana Question, (Trinidad and Tobago:
Government Printers, n.d.), pamphlet, 5 (speech in House of Representatives,
November 22, 27,1963).
9 Ibid., 6.
10 Ibid.
11 EW to Errol Barrow and Alexander Bustamante, telegram, April 24,1963, CO
1031/4402.
12 Alexander Bustamante to EW, telegram, April 26,1963, ibid.
13 British High Commissioner, Kingston, to CRO, April 26,1963, ibid.
14 N. E. Costar to CRO, April 24,1963, ibid.
15 "Trinidad and Tobago and the British Guiana Question," 7-8.
16 Sir Ralph Grey to Secretary of State for the Colonies, April 26,1963, CO
1031/4877.
17 S. J. G. Fingland to CRO, April 21,1963, ibid.
18 N. E. Costar to CRO, June 7,1963, DO 227/2.
19 E. L. Sykes to L. B. Walsh Atkins, June 13,1963, DO 200/85.
20 N. E. Costar to CRO, November 12,1963, DO 227/2.
21 EW, Trinidad and Tobago and the British Guiana Question, 10.
22 Ibid., ii. The Big Four Conference was established to permit the leaders of the
four major Anglophone countries—Trinidad, Jamaica, Barbados, and British
Guiana—to discuss common concerns.
23 Ibid., 10-13.
24 E. L. Sykes to Mr. Huijsman, October 23,1963, CO 1031/4877.
25 EW to Secretary of State, ibid.
26 Secretary of State to EW, November i, 1963, ibid.
27 S. J. G. Fingland to CRO, November 2,1963, ibid.
28 Ibid.
29 Doily Gleaner, January 14,1964,14.
30 Alec Morley to CRO, February 6,1964, DO 200/141.
31 Ibid.; Report of Press Conference, January 17,1964, CO 1031/4405.
32 "Statement on British Guiana," n.d., DO 200/142.
33 Park F. Wollam to U.S. Department of State, February 12,1964, Central Foreign
Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box 1947,1964-66.
34 Ibid.


--- PAGE 339 ---
326 NOTES TO PAGES 211-31
35 British Embassy, Monrovia, to Foreign Office, March 6,1964, FO 371/173668.
36 Acting British High Commissioner, Tanganyika, to Secretary of State for Com-
monwealth Relations, April 7,1964, ibid.
37 N. E. Costar to Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, May 6,1964,
00200/248.
38 U.S. Embassy, Cairo, to U.S. Department of State, March 23,1964, Central For-
eign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box 2745.
39 U.S. Department of State to EW, February 27,1962, Central Decimal File, Trini-
dad, NA-DS, box 1669, folder 7410.00/9-2861.
40 "Eric Williams Report on Mediation in Guiana," n.d., CO 1031/4408.
41 U.S. Consul General, Georgetown, to U.S. Secretary of State, May 7,1963, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy Files, British Guiana, Political, NA-DS, box 1949.
42 Ibid.
43 "Eric Williams Report on Mediation in Guiana."
44 Ibid.
45 U.S. Ambassador, Port of Spain, to U.S. Secretary of State, May 27,1964, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box 1948.
46 The preceding discussion is based on Williams's written report to Jagan on his
assessment of the crisis in British Guiana. See "Eric Williams Report on Medi-
ation in Guiana." In those instances where Williams provides no documenta-
tion, the discussion is his recollection of his conversations with Jagan and
others.
47 Cheddi Jagan to EW, June 29,1964, CO 1031/4818.
48 R. G. Miner, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, December i, 1962,
Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1668, folder 7410.00/1562; E. L.
Sykes to L. B. Walsh Atkins, June 13,1963, DO 200/87.
49 R. G. Miner, Port of Spain, to U.S. Secretary of State, May 25,1964, Central For-
eign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political, NA-DS, box 1949.
50 "Eric Williams Report on Mediation in Guiana."
51 Sir Hilton Poynton to Secretary of State for the Colonies, July 7,1964, FO
371/173553; Secretary of State for the Colonies to Richard Luyt, July 9,1964,
DO 200/199.
52 British High Commission, Port of Spain, to CRO, May 9,1963, DO 200/87.
53 Secretary of State for the Colonies to Richard Luyt, July 9,1964, DO 209/199.
54 Sir Hilton Poynton to Secretary of State for the Colonies, July 7,1964, FO
37I/I73553-
55 British High Commissioner, Kingston, to CRO, July 23,1964, DO 200/171.
56 N. E. Costar to CRO, September 23,1964, DO 200/199.
57 Notion, March 5,1964.
58 British High Commission, Port of Spain, to CRO, June 30,1965, DO 200/199.
59 N. E. Costar to Governor of British Guiana, March 12,1965, DO 200/199.
60 "Report by the Prime Minister on the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Con-
ference, July 23,1965," EWMC. See also CO 1031/4409.


--- PAGE 340 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 232-42 327
61 David Rose to Colonial Office, October 16,1965, DO 200/199; U.S. Consul Gen-
eral, Port of Spain, to Secretary of State, April 10,1962, Central Decimal File,
Trinidad, 50x1672, folder 74iF.oo/i-n62.
62 David Rose to Colonial Office, October 16,1965, DO 200/199; N. E. Costar to
Richard Luyt, August 20,1965, ibid.
63 N. E. Costar to CRO, January 26,1966, ibid.
64 D. M. Cleary to N. E. Costar, January n, 1966, ibid.
65 N. E. Costar to CRO, February 4,1966, ibid.
66 D. M. Cleary to N. E. Costar, February 14,1966, ibid.
67 N. E. Costar to CRO, April 22,1966, ibid.
CHAPTER 7
1 EW, speech at McGill and Sir George Williams Universities, Montreal, April 22,
1964, EWMC, vol. 007.
2 P. Olisanwuche Esedebe, Pan Africanism: The Urn and Movement, 1776-1963
(Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1982), 45-49.
3 EW to Governor Muiioz Marin, November 8,1951, EWMC, uncataloged.
4 EW, lecture at Hansberry College, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, February 21,
1964, EWMC, vol. 008.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 EW, address at Haile Selassie University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, March 16,
1964, EWMC, vol. 008.
8 EW, lecture at Hansberry College.
9 Trinidad and Tobago Debotes of the House o/Representotives, vol. 3,1963 (Trinidad:
GovernmentPrintery, 1969), 558.
10 EW, speech at Woodford Square, Port of Spain, September 5,1962, EWMC,
vol. 0005.
11 EW, address at University of Dakar, Senegal, March 16,1964, in Paul K. Sutton,
ed., Forged jfom the Love of liberty: Selected Speeches o/Dr. Eric Williams (Port of
Spain: Longman's Caribbean, 1981), 224-25; Report No. 1-7.
12 EW, address on "Impressions of Africa," Oxford University, April 13,1964,
EWMC, vol. 162.
13 EW, radio broadcast to Trinidad and Tobago, February 7,1964, EWMC, vol.
809.
14 Ibid.
15 EW, private address at Oxford University, April 13,1964, EWMC, vol. 162.
16 Report No. i.
17 Report No. 2.
18 Ibid.
19 Report No. 3.
20 Ibid.


--- PAGE 341 ---
328 NOTES TO PAGES
21 Ibid.
22 Report No. 4.
23 Ibid.
24 Report No. 5.
25 Report No. 6.
26 Report No. 7.
27 Ibid.
28 Report No. 6.
29 EW, private address at Oxford University.
30 Ibid.
31 Report No. 7.
32 Report No. 6.
33 Report No. 7.
34 EW, private address at Oxford University.
35 Ibid.
36 EW, address at Haile Selassie University.
37 EW, private address at Oxford University.
38 Ibid.
39 Report Nos. 5 and 6.
40 Report No. 5.
41 Ibid.
42 Report No. i.
43 Report No. 2.
44 EW, private address at Oxford University.
45 EW, address at Haile Selassie University.
46 Report No. i.
47 EW, private address at Oxford University.
48 EW, address at Haile Selassie University.
49 EW, private address at Oxford University.
50 EW, lecture at University of Ife, Nigeria, March 4,1964, EWMC, vol. 008.
51 British Embassy, Monrovia, Liberia, to R. A. Butler, Foreign Office, March 6,
1964^0371/173688.
52 British Embassy, Dakar, Senegal, to R. A. Butler, March 9,1964, FO
371/173688.
53 D. J. C. Crawley, Freetown, Sierra Leone, to R. A. Butler, February 27,1964,
ibid.
54 John Russell, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to Secretary of State, March 29,1964, FO
371/178524.
55 F. S. Miles, Tanganyika, to Secretary of State, April 7,1964, FO 371/173688.
56 N. E. Costar to Duncan Sandys, May 6,1964, DO 200/248.
57 Ibid.
58 Ibid.
59 EW, speech at McGill and Sir George Williams Universities.
243-53


--- PAGE 342 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 253-67 329
60 Daily Gleaner, September i, 1964.
61 British High Commissioner, Kingston, to E. L. Sykes, CRO, November n, 1964,
DO 200/171.
62 EW, lecture at Fourah Bay College.
CHAPTER 8
1 EW, Internationa! Perspectives/or Trinidad and Tobago, pamphlet, Office of the
Prime Minister (Port of Spain, 1964), 7-8.
2 Patrick Solomon, An Autobiography (Port of Spain: Imprint Caribbean, Ltd.,
1981), 73-77-
3 EW, BBC interview, August 9,1962, DO 200/95.
4 EW, manuscript, EWMC, vol. 139.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
10 D. G. Rose to W I. J. Wallace, October 16,1965, DO 200/199.
11 N. E. Costar to Duncan Sandys, August 9,1962, DO 200/86.
12 EW, BBC interview, August 9,1962.
13 EW, Capitalism and Slavery (1944; repr., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1994), 5.
14 EW, "The West Indian National Character and the Problems of Today," 19, n.d.,
EWMC, vol. 643.
15 Ibid.
16 Brinsley Samaroo, "The Race Factor in the Independence Discussions at Marl-
borough House, 1962," Caribbean Issues 8, no. i (March 1998): 119-35 (speech at
Woodford Square); EW, "The West Indian National Character."
17 EW, speech at McGill and Sir George Williams, Montreal, April 22,1964,
EWMC, vol. 007.
18 EW, lecture on "Federation in the World Today," February 25,1955, EWMC,
vol. 813.
19 Ibid. See the later discussion in this chapter of the activities of the Indian
commissioner.
20 Ibid
21 EW, Inward Hunger: The Education o/a Prime Minister (London: Andre Deutsch,
1969), 154-55.
22 Selwyn D. Ryan, Race and Nationalism in Trinidad and Tobago: A Study o/Decolonisa-
tion in a Multiracial Society (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972), 161.
23 Ibid., 185
24 EW, speech on "The Danger Facing Trinidad and Tobago and the West Indian
Nation," April i, 1958, CO 1031/2490.


--- PAGE 343 ---
330 NOTES TO PAGES 267-77
25 Ibid.
26 Winston Mahabir, an Indian and the minister of health in Williams's admin-
istration, later wrote that when he visited Williams after his address at Wood-
ford Square, he found him "in an exuberant, gloating, hypomania mood of tri-
umph. He had obviously gained exquisite emotional satisfaction from his
diatribe against the Indians." Mahabir contemplated resigning from the gov-
ernment. Mahabir, In and Out of Politics: Tales of the Government of Dr. Eric Williams
jfom the Notebooks o/a Former Minister (Port of Spain: Imprint Caribbean, Ltd.,
I975). 79-8°-
27 "Meeting with the Secretary of State Profumo and Gomes and Sinanan,"
22 April 1958, CO 1031/2490.
28 Legislative Council Debates: Trinidad and Tobago, Vol. 8, October 25,1957 to June 24,
1958 (Trinidad: Government Printing Office, 1959), 1787-90.
29 Draft report on "East Indians in the West Indies," December 30,1955, CO
1031/1954.
30 This account is taken from Fitzroy Andre Baptiste, "The Emergence of Eric
Williams and the People's National Movement [PNM] in Trinidad and Tobago
Politics as Gleaned from U.S. State Department Records, 1952-56," unpub-
lished paper. The comment by Gomes is found in RG 59, folio 74iF.oo/
12-3054, and that by Maddox on the federation debate in RG 59, folio 74iF.oo/
12-1554, both located in Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS.
31 "Note of a Meeting in Mr. Rogers' Room on 19/1/55 to Discuss the Activities of
the Indian Commissioner to the West Indies," ibid. Two days after this meet-
ing, R. C. Ormeond of the Colonial Office informed a colleague that the
seriousness of Nan da's activities resided in the fact that he had "intervened
directly and effectively against a major matter of British policy—the encourage-
ment of the West Indian territories to federate." Office correspondence, DO
35/5226.
32 Departmental minute, CO 1031/1954.
33 Report on "Activities of the Commissioner for the Government of India in Brit-
ish Guiana," February 1955, DO 35/5226.
34 Lord Lloyd to SirHughFoot, November^, 1955, CO 1031/1703.
35 EW, speech on "Perspectives for the West Indies," San Fernando, May 30,1960,
EWMC, vol. 643.
36 N. E. Costar to Secretary of State for the Colonies, "Trinidad and Tobago after
Two Years of Independence," November 12,1964, CO 1031/5003.
37 Duncan Sandys to EW, October 29,1963, DO 200/62.
38 Edwin Moline to U.S. Department of State, September 14,1960, Central Deci-
mal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1670, folder 74iF.oo/6-i6o.
39 U.S. Consul General, Barbados, Political Notes from Conversations with Bar-
badian Political Leaders, April 7,1967, ibid., folder 74^.00/1-561.
40 U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, January 10,1962,
ibid., box 1671, folder 74^.00/1-462.


--- PAGE 344 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 278-89 33!
41 U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, November 24,1961,
ibid., folder 74iF.oo/n-i6i.
42 Ryan, Race and Nationalism, 272-73.
43 Harry M. Phelan to U.S. Department of State, January 10,1962, "Malaise in the
White Community," Central Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder
74iF.oo/i-46i.
44 U.S. Mission to Department of State, October 24,1961, ibid., folder
74^.00/9-561.
45 Ryan, Race and Nationalism, 269.
46 William H. Christensen to U.S. Secretary of State, November 27,1961, Central
Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder 74iF.oo/n-i6i.
47 Ibid., December i, 1961.
48 Ryan, Race and Nationalism, 275.
49 EW, "Address to Party Supporters before the December 1961 Elections,"
EWMC,vol. 005.
50 U.S. Mission, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, January 6,1962, Cen-
tral Decimal File, Trinidad, NA-DS, box 1671, folder 74iF.00/1-142.
51 Ibid., January 16,1962.
52 R. G. Miner to U.S. Secretary of State, March 25,1962, ibid., box 1668, folder
7410.00/3-162.
53 Ryan, Race and Nationalism, 385.
54 Central Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political 23-9, NA-DS, box
2631.
55 Political 2-3, box 2744, ibid.; N. E. Costar to CRO, October 19,1964, DO
200/248.
56 British High Commissioner, Trinidad and Tobago, Colonial Office, April 17,
1970, CO 63/590.
57 Selwyn Cudjoe, ed., Eric E. Williams Speaks: Essays on Colonialism and Independence
(Wellesley, Mass.: Calaloux Publications, Amherst, distributed by University of
Massachusetts Press, 1993), 265-69.
58 Lloyd Best, Block Potoer and National Reconstruction (San Fernando, Trinidad and
Tobago: Tapia Pamphlet, n.d.), 4, in CO 63/594.
59 Best, Block Potoer and Notional Reconstruction, 4.
60 Ibid.
61 U.S. Embassy, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, May 24,1966, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy Files, Political Parties, Trinidad and Tobago, NA-DS, box
2744.
62 EW, "Impressions of John John," June 27,1955, EWMC, vol. 812, and "An Eco-
nomic Blueprint for Trinidad and Tobago," [ca. 1955], EWMC, vol. 766.
63 Ryan, Roce and Nationalism, 280.
64 Colin Palmer, "Identity, Race, and Black Power in Independent Jamaica," in
Franklin Knight and Colin Palmer, eds., The Modern Caribbean (Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1989), 119.


--- PAGE 345 ---
332 NOTES TO PAGES 2gO-g6
65 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, May 29,
1970, FCO 63/594.
66 British High Commissioner, Port of Spain, to Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, May 29,1970, FCO 63 / 5 94.
67 Brian Meeks, "The 1970 Revolution: Chronology and Documentation," in Sel-
wyn Ryan and Taimoon Stewart, eds., The Block Power Revolution 0/1970: A Retro-
spective (St. Augustine, Trinidad: f.S.E.R, 1995), 140.
68 Ibid., 159.
69 "Black Power in Trinidad and Elsewhere in the Caribbean," April 27,1970,
FCO 63/593.
70 British High Commissioner, Tanganyika, to Foreign Office, March 16,1964, FO
371/173688.
71 British Ambassador, Ethiopia, to Foreign Office, March 29,1964, FO
31/178524.
72 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, June 26,
1970, FCO 63/594. Robinson never admitted to any involvement in a conspir-
acy to remove Williams from office, and there was no smoking gun. On June 26
the high commissioner reported that an informant had told him that had the
military coup succeeded, Stokely Carmichael was to be the new prime minister
and Cabinet posts would be offered to A. N. R. Robinson, Geddes Granger,
and George Weekes. This may have been a wild fantasy.
73 In a report to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office that he wrote on May 29,
1970, the high commissioner speculated that the "mutineers of 21 April would
"very likely" have installed Robinson as prime minister. He was worried, how-
ever, that if Robinson became prime minister, "we [whites?] should all need to
watch out, though if he did so constitutionally, the transition would not neces-
sarily be an occasion for violence." Richard Hunt to T. R. M.. Sewell, May 29,
1970, FCO 63/594.
74 EW to Erica Williams, April 13-14,1970, in the author's possession.
75 1 thank Clare Newstead for helping me understand the allusion to George
Brown. 1 am also very indebted to Erica Williams Connel for allowing me to
use selected excerpts from her father's letters, which remain a part of her pri-
vate collection.
76 EW to Erica Williams, April 18,1970, in the author's possession.
77 Ibid., April 13-14,1970.
78 Ibid., April 18,1970.
79 Ibid.
80 Ibid., April 14,1970.
81 Ibid., April 18,1970.
82 Ibid.
83 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, April 17,
1970, FCO 63/594.


--- PAGE 346 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 297-303 333
84 "Acute Emergency in Trinidad," R. C. C. Hunt to Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, July 27,1970, FCO 63/594.
85 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, April 29,
1970, FCO 63/594.
86 "Black Power Disturbances," British High Commissioner to Foreign and Com-
monwealth Office, April 25,1970, FCO 63/593; Record of call by Brigadier Ser-
rette on the British High Commissioner, June 5,1970, FCO 63/594.
87 U.S. Embassy, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, July 31,1970, Central
Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political 23-9, NA-DS, box 2631.
88 R. C. C. Hunt to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, April 29,1970, FCO
63/594.
89 U.S. Embassy, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State, April 30,1970, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political 23-9, NA-DS, box 2631.
90 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, April 26,
1970, FCO 63/593.
91 British High Commissioner to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, April 22,
1970, FCO 63/591.
92 "Extract from Cabinet Minutes, Held 23/4/1970," FCO 63/593.
93 Ibid.
94 Harold Wilson to EW, April 21,1970, FCO 63/591.
95 Acting British High Commissioner, Port of Spain, to Foreign and Common-
wealth Office, April 20,1970, PREM13/3530. In the ig6os Williams had opposed
Biafra's secession from Nigeria, a position the British government welcomed.
96 British Ambassador, Washington, D.C., to Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
April 22,1970, FCO 63/591.
97 Ibid.; Central Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political 23-9, Intel-
ligence Note, April 22,1970, NA-DS, box 2631.
98 British Embassy, Caracas, to Foreign and Commonwealth Office, August 28,
1970, FCO 63/594; U.S. Embassy, Port of Spain, to U.S. Department of State,
July 31,1970, Central Foreign Policy Files, Trinidad and Tobago, Political 23-9,
NA-DS, box 2631.
99 British High Commissioner, Guyana, to Colonial Office, April 22,1970, CO
1031/2580.
100 Acting British High Commissioner, Port of Spain, to Foreign and Common-
wealth Office, April 22,1970, FCO 63/591.
101 M. J. Moynihan to E. L. Sykes, August 29,1964, DO 200/171.
102 Michael Field, "Black Power Turns on Negro Rulers," Doily Telegraph, March 3,
1970.
103 Prime Minister's Broadcast on National Reconstruction, June 30,1970, FCO
63/600; R. C. C. Hunt to T. R. M. Sewell, May 15,1970, FCO 63/594.
104 "Black Power in Trinidad and Elsewhere in the Caribbean," April 27,1970,
FCO 63/593.


--- PAGE 347 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 348 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRIMARY SOURCES
This study is based almost entirely on manuscript sources located in St. Augustine,
Trinidad; London; and College Park, Maryland. I consulted the papers housed in
the Eric Williams Memorial Collection at the University of the West Indies, St.
Augustine, Trinidad. The manuscripts found in the Public Record Office, London,
were particularly valuable since they contain the reports from the High Commission
in Port of Spain and Eric Williams's communications with British officials. The
National Archives in Maryland provided important sources on the relationships
between the government of Trinidad and Tobago and the United States.
Manuscript and Archival Material
Eric Williams Memorial Collection, University of the West Indies, St. Augustine,
Trinidad
Volumes 005, 007, 008, 015, 016, 028,123,139, 451, 550, 635, 637, 638, 644, 648,
663, 668, 671, 736, 739, 740, 741, 783, 813,1339,1380, and 1636
National Archives of the United States, College Park, Maryland
Department of State, Record Group 59, Decimal File, and Intelligence Reports
Public Record Office, London
General Political Correspondence of the Foreign Office
Records of the Colonial Office, Commonwealth and Foreign and Commonwealth
Offices
Records of the Dominions Office and of the Commonwealth Relations and
Foreign and Commonwealth Offices
Records of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Predecessors
Records of the Prime Minister's Office
Southern Historical Collection, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Newspapers
Caribbean Issues Nation
Daily Gleaner (Jamaica) Star
Daily Telegraph Statesman
London Times Trinidad Guardian


--- PAGE 349 ---
336 B I B LIOG RAPH Y
Published Sources
Cudjoe, Selwyn, ed. Eric E. Williams Speaks: Essays on Colonialism and Independence.
Wellesley, Mass.: Calaloux Publications, Amherst, distributed by University of
Massachusetts Press, 1993.
Legislative Council Debates: Trinidad and Tobago, Vol. 8, October 25,1957 to June 24,1958.
Trinidad: Government Printing Office, 1959.
Sutton, Paul. Forged from the Love of Liberty: Selected Speeches of Dr. Eric Williams. Port of
Spain: Longman Caribbean, 1981.
Trinidad and Tobago Debates of the House of Representatives. Vol. 3,1963. Trinidad:
Government Printery, 1969.
Williams, Eric. British Historians and the West Indies. 1964. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1966.
. Capitalism and Slavery. 1944. Reprint, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1994.
. The Economics of Nationhood. Port of Spain: PNM Publishing Co., 1959.
. Education in the British West Indies. 1950. Reprint, Brooklyn, N.Y.: A&B Books
Publishers, 1994.
. From Columbus to Castro: The History of the Caribbean, 1492-1969. London: Andre
Deutsch, 1970.
. The History of the Peoples of Trinidad and Tobago. London: Andre Deutsch, 1962.
. International Perspectives for Trinidad and Tobago. Pamphlet. Office of the Prime
Minister, Port of Spain, 1964.
. Inward Hunger-. The Education of a Prime Minister. London: Andre Deutsch, 1969.
. The Negro in the Caribbean. 1942. Reprint, Brooklyn, N.Y.: A&B Books
Publishers, 1994.
, ed. Documents of West Indian History, Vol. i, 1492-1655: From the Spanish Discovery
to the British Conquest of Jamaica. Port of Spain: PNM Publishing Co., 1963.
Williams, Eric, and E. Franklin Frazier, eds., The Economic Future of the Caribbean.
Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 2004.
SELECTED SECONDARY SOURCES
Ayearst, Morley. The British West Indies: The Search for Self Government. New York: New
York University Press, 1960.
Baldwin, David A. Economic Development and American Foreign Policy, 1943-1962.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966.
Boodhoo, Ken. The Elusive Eric Williams. Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 2002.
. Eric Williams: The Man and the Leader. Lanham, Md.: University Press of
America, 1986.
Brereton, Bridget. A History of Modern Trinidad, 1783-1962. Kingston: Heinemann,
1981.
. Race Relations in Colonial Trinidad, 1870-1900. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979.


--- PAGE 350 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 337
Carrington, Selwyn H. H. "Capitalism and Slavery and Caribbean Historiography: An
Evaluation." Journal of AfricanAmerican History 88, no. 3 (Summer 2003): 304-12.
Gateau, Heather, and S. H. H. Carrington, eds. Capitalism and Slavery Fifty Years Later:
Eric Eustace Williams: A Reassessment of the Man and His Work. New York: Peter Lang,
2000.
Coupland, Reginald. The British Anti-Slavery Movement. 2nd ed. London: F. Cass, 1964.
Desoran, Ramesh. Eric Williams: The Man, His Ideas, and His Politics: A Study of Political
Potoer. Port of Spain: Signum Publishing Co., Ltd., 1981.
Drescher, Seymour. "Eric Williams: British Capitalism and British Slavery." History
and Theory 26, no. 2 (1987): 179-96.
Esedebe, P. Olisanwuche. Pan Africanism: The Idea and Movement, 1776-1963.
Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1982.
Farnie, D. A. "The Commercial Empire of the Atlantic, 1607-1783." Economic History
Review, 2nd sen, 15 (1962): 205-18.
Fraser, Gary. Ambivalent Anti-Colonialism: The United States and the Genesis of West Indian
Independence, 1940-1964. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1994.
Gaspar, David. "They 'Could Never Have Too Much of My Work': Eric Williams and
the Journal of Negro History, 1940-1945." Journal of African American History 88, no.
3 (Summer 2003): 291-303.
Gosine, Mahin. East Indians and Black Potoer in the Caribbean-. The Case of Trinidad. New
York: Africana Research Publications, 1986.
Greene, Lorenzo. Book review. Negro College Quarterly 3, no. 1 (March 1945): 46-48.
Home, Gerald. Ferdinand Smith, the National Maritime Union, and Jamaican Labor
Radicalism. New York: New York University Press, forthcoming.
Jagan, Cheddi. The West on Trial: My Fight for Guyana's Freedom. London: Michael
Joseph, 1966.
James, C. L. R. Beyond a Boundary. New York: Pantheon Books, 1983.
. A Convention Appraisal, Dr. Eric Williams: A Biographical Sketch. Port of Spain:
PNM Publishing Co., 1960.
Knight, Franklin W., and Colin A. Palmer, eds. The Modern Caribbean. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1989.
Locke, Alain. Foreword to Eric Williams, The Negro in the Caribbean. 1942. Reprint,
Brooklyn, N.Y.: A&B Books Publishers, 1994.
Mahabir, Winston. In and Out of Politics: Tales of the Government of Dr. Eric Williamsjrom
the Notebooks of a Former Minister. Port of Spain: Imprint Caribbean, Ltd., 1975.
Manderson-Jones, R. B.Jamaican Foreign Policy in the Caribbean, 1962-1988. Kingston:
Caricom Publishers, Ltd., 1990.
Martin, Tony. "Eric Williams and the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission:
Trinidad's Future Nationalist Leader as Aspiring Imperial Bureaucrat, 1942-
1944." Journal of African American History 88, no. 3 (Summer 2003): 274-90.
. Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of Marcus Garvey and the
Universal Negro Improvement Association. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1976.
Meeks, Brian. "The 1970 Revolution: Chronology and Documentation." In Selwyn


--- PAGE 351 ---
338 B I B LIOG RAPH Y
Ryan and Taimoon Stewart, eds., The Block Power Revolution 0f 1970, 135-75. St.
Augustine: Multimedia Production Centre, 1995.
Millette, James. The Genesis of Croum Colony Government: Trinidad, 1783-1810. Curepe,
Trinidad: Moko Enterprises, 1970.
Mordecai, John. The West Indies: The federal Negotiations. London: Allen and Unwin,
1968.
Monroe, Trevor. The Politics of Constitutionol Decolonisation: Jamaica, 1944-1962.
Jamaica: University of the West Indies, 1984.
Oxaal, Ivar. Block Intellectuals Come to Potoer: The Rise of Creole Nationalism in Trinidad and
Tobago. Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman, 1968.
. Block Intellectuals and the Dilemmas of Race and Class in Trinidad. Cambridge,
Mass: Schenkman, 1982.
Pemberton, Rita, and Brinsley Samaroo, eds. Eric Williams: Images of His life, Volumes 1
and 2, Journal of Caribbean Issues. Special ed. St. Augustine, Trinidad: School of
Continuing Education, University of the West Indies, March 1998, March 1999.
Ryan, Selwyn D. Race and Nationalism in Trinidad and Tobago: A Study of Decolonisation in
a Multiracial Society. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1972.
Ryan, Selwyn, and Taimoon Stewart, eds. The Block Potoer Revolution of 1970: A
Retrospective. St. Augustine, Trinidad: Institute of Social and Economic Research,
University of the West Indies, 1995.
Samaroo, Brinsley. "The Race Factor in the Independence Discussions at
Marlborough House, 1962." Caribbean Issues 8, no. 1 (March 1998): 119-35.
Singh, Kelvin. Race and Class Struggles in a Colonial State: Trinidad, 1917-1945. Calgary,
Canada: University of Calgary Press, 1994.
Solomon, Patrick. An Autobiography. Port of Spain: Imprint Caribbean, 1981.
Solow, Barbara!., and Stanley L. Engerman, eds. British Capitalism and Caribbean
Slavery: The Legacy of Eric Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Tannenbaum, Frank. Book review. Political Science Quarterly 61 (1946): 247-53.
Woodson, Carter J. Book review. Journal of Negro History 30 (1945): 93-95.


--- PAGE 352 ---
INDEX
Adams, John Quincy, 91
Adams, Sir Grantley: as advocate for
West Indies Federation, 40; photo-
graph of, 46; and Bustamante, 47, 51;
and Chaguaramas Naval Station, 47,
82, 95, 97-98, 104, 105, 117, 118, 129;
as West Indies Federation prime min-
ister, 47, 48-54, 58-60, 63, 68, 82;
and Williams, 47, 51, 52-53, 59, 68,
74-75, 82, 118, 179; British attitude
toward, 50-51, 59; health problems
of, 50; and Manley, 51-52, 179; and
oil refinery in Jamaica, 52-53; and
independence for West Indies Federa-
tion, 58-59; and Lancaster House
Conference, 66; and Trinidad's pos-
sible secession from West Indies
Federation, 68; and capital of West
Indies Federation, 82, 118; compared
with Williams, 165; and defense force
for West Indies Federation, 171; and
options for West Indies Federation
after Jamaica's secession, 180, 181
Africa: independence of British colonies
in, 19, 95, 138, 237; nationalist move-
ments in, 19; compared with West
Indies, 31-33; and Conference in
Berlin (1884-85), 31; Williams's trip
to, 31, 33, 211, 235, 240-54, 292-93,
307; universities in, 36, 246-47; and
Organization of African Unity (OAU),
70, 238-39, 240, 247; per capita
income in, 139, 166, 167; and British
Guiana's political crisis, 211-12; and
African diaspora, 235-38; research
on, 237-38; Williams's criticisms of,
242-43, 244, 247-48, 250; West
Africa compared with East Africa,
243-45; technical assistance for,
from Caribbean, 244-45, 248; and
African unity, 245-47; Arabs in, 245-
46; boundary disputes in, 245; and
communism, 245, 251, 293; and neo-
colonialism, 245, 252; and slavery
and slave trade, 245, 247-48; West
Indians in governments of, 245; cur-
rencies used in, 246; British reports
of Williams's trip to, 248-53; and
Jamaica-Trinidad joint diplomatic
relations overseas, 253; and Teteron
Bay mutiny in Trinidad, 299-300. See
also specific countries
African diaspora, 237-38
Aiken, George, 99
Airlines, 71, 72, 141, 142, 145
Algeria, 19, 211, 241, 245-46, 252
Allen, Edwin, 96
Allfrey, Phyllis, 49
Anglo-American Caribbean Commis-
sion. See Caribbean Commission
Anticolonialism, 15-39, 76-78, 136,
138-39, 148-49, 178, 277, 305. See
also Colonialism
Anticommunism, 71, 74, 133, 134, 139,
189, 205-6, 211, 252, 282
Antigua: Bustamante on development
of, 41; British capital grants to, 65;
and Williams's plans for economic
integration of Caribbean, 73; U.S.
military base in, 119; and West Indies
Federation after Jamaica's secession,
181; Williams's lack of interest in


--- PAGE 353 ---
340 INDEX
unitary statehood with, 183; and
CABJFTA, 230
Arab League, 240
Arden Clarke, Sir Charles, 100, 103
Ashenheim, Neville, 57
Atlanta Compromise, 21
Australia, 36, 38
Bahamas, 74
Barbados: university in, 34; Bustamante
on development of, 41, 47; as possi-
ble capital of West Indies Federation,
45; Adams as leader in, 47; poverty
in, 47; per capita income of, 48; and
economic integration of Caribbean,
71; and British West Indian Airways
(BWIA), 142; and Westlndies Federa-
tion after Jamaica's secession, 180;
and unitary statehood with other
Caribbean islands, 183, 193; potential
federation of Leeward and Windward
Islands and, 186; independence for,
193; and British Guiana's political
crisis, 203-4, 205 and Big Four
Conferences, 207, 209, 325 (n. 22);
and CARIFTA, 230. See also specific
leaders
Barbour, Walworth, 103
Barrow, Errol, 203-4, 205, 207,209,
210, 233
Baxter, R. L., 152
Beetham, Edward B., 10, 78-82, 108,
109-12, 268
Ben Bella, Mohammed Ahmed, 211, 212,
252
Benn, Brindley, 212, 225
Best, Lloyd, 286-87
Biafra, 300, 333 (n. 95)
Big Four Conferences, 207, 209, 211,
229-30, 325 (n. 22)
Blackburne, Kenneth, 49, 55, 57, 59
Block Jacobins (James), 30
Black Power movement, 283, 287-97,
301, 302-3, 307. See also Race
relations
Blacks. See Race relations; Slavery and
slave trade
Blackwood, Carl, 285
Blaize, Herbert, 182-85, 190-92, 196-
97
Bloom, David, 297
BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corpo-
ration), 142
Boos, Werner J., 117
Boyd-Carpenter, John, 145
Bradshaw, Robert, 48-49, 117
British Caribbean Association, 70
British Guiana: Bustamante on develop-
ment of, 41; and economic integra-
tion of Caribbean, 70-71; Western
policy on, 133; Williams's policy on,
133; Soviet influence in, 139; and
Eastern Caribbean Federation, 180;
People's Progressive Party (PPP) in,
180, 198, 199, 215, 228-29; commu-
nist threat to, 198, 199, 206, 209, 211-
12, 215; Crown Colony status for,
198; ethnic groups in, 198, 202; geo-
graphic area of, 198; Jagan govern-
ment in, 198, 199-202; People's
National Congress (PNC) in, 198-99,
215, 228-29; population of, 198; elec-
tions of 1961 in, 199; independence
for, 199, 201-3, 205, 209, 217,221,
226-29, 231, 233, 234, political crisis
in, 199-204; United Force in, 199,
215, 228-29; labor movement in,
200, 206, 220, 223, 225; proportional
representation for, 200-202, 207-8,
213, 216, 220, 223, 228, 232; strikes
in, 200, 206, 225; and United States,
200-202, 214, 217, 221, 222, 224,
232; race relations in, 202, 204, 219,
223, 231, 275; Williams's attempts to
resolve crisis in, 202-34; Labour
Relations Bill in, 204, 206; constitu-


--- PAGE 354 ---
INDEX 341
tion for, 206, 207, 220; and United
Nations, 206, 207, 216, 217, 220, 222,
223, 226-28, 231; Williams's recom-
mendations for, 206, 207; and Big
Four Conferences, 207, 209, 211, 325
(n. 22); Williams's declaration of
principle on, 209-11; African leaders'
views of, 211-12; Williams's official
mediation of political crisis in, 212-
25, 307; Burnham's recommenda-
tions on, 215-16; D'Aguiar's recom-
mendations on, 215; violence in, 219,
225-26, 227; Williams's report on,
221-23; emergency powers used by
governor in, 225-26; elections of
1964 in, 228-29; Burnham-D'Aguiar
administration of, 229-30; and
CARIFTA, 230, 233; trade between
Jamaica and, 230; border dispute
between Venezuela and, 233; Nanda's
activities in, 272-73. See also Guyana;
and specific leaders
British Honduras, 8
British Overseas Airways Corporation
(BOAC), 142
British West Indian Airways (BWIA),
141, 142, 145
"British West Indies in World History"
(Williams), 15
Bryan, Victor, 116, 275-76
Bunche, Ralph, 26
Burnham, Forbes: as critic of colonial-
ism, 25; Williams's dislike of, 133,
228, 229-30, 231, 232-33; founding
of People's National Congress (PNC)
by, 198-99; and election of 1961, 199;
and political crisis in British Guiana,
199, 201, 202, 207, 210, 213, 214-16,
218-22, 224, 226; and Williams's
mediation on British Guiana, 213,
214-16, 218, 219-22, 224, 226, 307;
U.S. support of, 222, 224; as pre-
mier of British Guiana, 229-34; and
CARIFTA, 230, 233; and Teteron Bay
mutiny in Trinidad, 301
Bustamante, Alexander: and strikes in
Jamaica, 8-9; on self-government for
Jamaica, 25; and West Indies Federa-
tion, 40-42, 52, 54-56, 59-61, 306;
and economic development of West
Indies, 41, 70; and Adams, 47, 51; and
Williams, 55, 72-73, 75, 253; and
European Economic Community
(EEC), 70; compared with Williams,
165; and British Guiana's political cri-
sis, 203-4, 205, 207, 209, 210, atBig
Four Conferences, 207, 209, 211; and
Jagan, 207, 209, 211; and Jamaica-
Trinidad joint diplomatic relations
overseas, 253
Butler, Tubal Uriah, 8, 304
BWIA (British West Indian Airways),
141, 142, 145
Caccia, Sir Harold, 102
Canada, 36, 38, 44, 51, 235, 261, 290-91
Capildeo, Rudranath, 116, 188, 274, 276,
280-82
Capildeo, Simbhoonath, 117
Capitalism and Slavery (Williams), 13, 15,
16, 20, 28, 29-31, 38, 148, 151, 260-
61, 286, 306
Caribbean: map of, 2-3; national histo-
ries of, 18-19; economic integration
of, 70-74, 192-93; and Williams's
Pan-Caribbean vision, 70-74, 192-
94, 197, 206; ethnicity of, 239-40. See
also Colonialism; West Indies; and spe-
cific countries
Caribbean Commission, 8, 9, 20-21, 43,
278
Caribbean Free Trade Association
(CARIFTA), 74, 230, 233
Carlyle, Thomas, 17, 18
Carmichael, Stokely, 295, 332 (n. 72)
Carsen Field, 125


--- PAGE 355 ---
342 INDEX
Castro, Fidel, 74, 133, 199, 249, 252. See
also Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency, U.S., 115, 200
Chaguaramas Naval Station: U.K.-U.S.
agreement (1941) on, 22, 47, 77, 79,
81, 85-89, 93-94, 106-9; and United
States, 22, 47, 79-94, 96-107, 112-
16, 118-26, 130-37, 304-5; and
Williams, 22, 76-137, 285, 304-5;
choice of, as location for capital of
West Indies Federation, 46, 47, 79-
82, 90, 94; and Adams, 47, 82, 95,
97, 104, 105, 117, 118, 129; "march in
the rain" (1960) during fight for, 76-
78; Williams's support for U.K.-U.S.
agreement on, 77, 79, 81, 85; and
Beetham, 78-82, 109-12; location of,
79; and U.S. State Department, 79-
80, 82, 93, 97, 102-3, 105, 112-I4,
119, 121, 123, 126, 130-31, 304; and
U.S. Defense Department, 80, 81, 82;
Waller Field versus, as capital site, 80,
81, 94-95; employment at, forTrin-
idadians, 81, 100; London conference
(1957) on, 81-91; importance of, for
defense of Western Hemisphere, 82-
83, 84, 131; and United Kingdom,
82-85, 101-6, 108-12, 121-29; cost
for U.S. of relocation of, 83, 87;
Williams's support for U.S. evacua-
tion of, 85-94; and Young, 85-88;
Joint Commission on, 90, 91, 93,
100-106; guided missile tracking sta-
tion at, 92-93, 101, 127-28, 135; and
Manley, 92, 93, 95-96, 97, 104-5;
and Orebaugh, 93-94, 98-100, 112-
16; Trinidadian and other Caribbean
leaders' opinions on, 94-100; eco-
nomic benefits of, to Trinidad, 100;
South Atlantic Command headquar-
tered at, 101; questions on legality of
U.S. lease for, 106-9; and land reg-
ulations of Trinidad, 107; fraudulent
dispatch on, from Colonial Office,
109-12; and colonialism, 114, 136;
and race issue, 114-15; domestic
opposition to Williams's position on,
116-18, 132-33; Moline's recommen-
dations on, 118-20; and immigration
law violations, 120; and sale of citrus
fruits to Trinidadians, 120; and smug-
gling, 120; Williams's tactics promot-
ing controversy on, 120-26; and radi-
ation threat, 121-28, 319 (n. 90);
Williams's proposed steps concern-
ing, 125; tripartite conferences (1960)
on, 129-33; Tobago Agreement
(1960) on, 131-33, 305; U.S. with-
drawal from major portion of, 134-
35
Christensen, William H., 66, 132-33,
277-82
Churchill, Winston, 162
Cipriani, Arthur A., 40, 75
Clarke, Ellis, 66, 172-73, 226-27, 282
Cleary, D. M., 233-34
Cold War, 133-34, 139,199. See also
Anticommunism; Cuba; Soviet
Union/Russia
Colonialism: Williams's anticolonial-
ism, 15-39, 76-78, 136, 138-39,
148-49, 178, 277, 305; education of
colonial subjects, 16, 33-34; general
impact of, 16-17; psychological im-
pact of, 16-17, 39; socialization of
colonial subjects, 16; European schol-
ars on, 17-18; and national histories
of West Indies, 18-19; and "Massa
Day Done" speech by Williams, 19,
20-25, 153,285; in Negro in the Carib-
bean by Williams, 19-20, 26, 27-29;
West Indian leaders' opposition to,
25-26; and neocolonialism, 32-33,
38, 245, 252, 286-87; "march in the
rain" (1960) against, 76-78; United
States' anticolonialism, 91; and Cha-


--- PAGE 356 ---
INDEX 343
guaramas Naval Station, 114, 136; and
golden handshake dispute, 178;
imperialism and racism linked to, 261
Colonial Office. See Colonialism; Neo-
colonialism; United Kingdom
Communism. See Anticommunism;
Cold War; Cuba; Soviet Union/Russia
Conference in Berlin (1884-85), 31
Constantine, Learie, 310 (n. 10)
Cooper, Anna Julia, 235
Costar, Norman: and British economic
assistance (golden handshake) for
Trinidad, 37, 160, 166, 168, 170-71,
176-78; and British relations with
Trinidad after its independence, 37-
38; and Williams's relations with
Jamaica, 72-73; and Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 134-35; on Williams's
personality and leadership style, 152-
55, 162-64, 166, 167-68, 170, 176;
and Williams's interest in unitary
statehood with other Caribbean
islands, 192-93, 197; and unitary
statehood for Grenada and Trinidad,
196, 197; and Williams's attempts to
resolve crisis in British Guiana, 203,
206-7, 212, 228; and Williams's view
ofBurnham, 231, 232-33; and Burn-
ham's relations with Trinidad, 233;
on CARIFTA, 233; on African trip by
Williams, 251, 252; on Williams's
sensitivity to racism, 260; on Capil-
deo, 274-75; on race relations in
Trinidad, 274-75; on economy of
Trinidad, 284
Coupland, Reginald, 17, 28
Couve de Murville, M., 72
Crawley, D. J. C., 249-50
Cuba: and Williams's anticommunism,
71, 74, 133, 211, 212, 251, 293; and
Williams's ideas for Caribbean eco-
nomic union, 71, 74; Castro in, 74,
133, 199, 249, 252; and Soviet Union,
139, 199, 212; and Pan-Caribbean
vision of Williams, 193; and British
Guiana, 215, 226; Sinanan on, 282
Customs union, 60, 63, 71
Cyprus, 138, 166, 167
D'Aguiar, Peter, 199, 201, 202, 207, 210,
213-20, 222, 226, 307
"Danger Facing Trinidad and Tobago
and the West Indian Nation"
(Williams), 265-69, 273-74
Darbeau, Dave, 285, 291
Davies, R. Trevor, 16
Davis, Basil, 292
Daysh, Florence, 276
Dean, P., 103
Defense Department, U.S., 80, 81, 82
De Gaulle, Charles, 162
Democratic Labour Party (Trinidad and
Tobago): and Indo-Trinidadians, 10,
264, 265-69, 281-82; and "Massa
Day Done" speech by Williams, 22-
23; and elections of 1961, 67-68,
279-81; and West Indies Federation,
67-68; and Chaguaramas Naval Sta-
tion, 95, 103, 105, 116, 117, 132, 135-
36; opposition of, to integration of
Grenada and Trinidad, 187-88, 197;
and elections of 1958, 264-65;
founding of, 264-65; charges against
PNM hecklers by, 268, 280; and white
business community, 279; complaints
against Williams by, 281-82
DIP. See Democratic Labour Party (Trin-
idad and Tobago)
Dominica, 65, 181, 183
Dominican Republic, 71, 74, 193, 212
Dorman, Maurice, 271, 272
Du Bois, W E. B., 26, 235, 237
Dulles, John Foster, 105
Eastern Caribbean Federation, 70, 179-
81, 194, 306


--- PAGE 357 ---
344 INDEX
Economic aid: and developing coun-
tries, 33, 37-38, 166, 167; and British
capital grants to West Indies, 65; to
Trinidad from U.S., 131-32, 133, 136-
37; by Britain to colonies at their
independence, 138, 166, 167; to Trin-
idad (golden handshake) from Brit-
ain, 138-51, 165-78, 285, 305, 306
Economic integration of Caribbean, 70-
74, 192-93. See also West Indies
Federation
Economics of Nationhood (Williams), 53-
54, 69, 70
Edmonds, R. H. G., 127-28
Education: and Williams's lectures, 9-
10, 15, 19, 20-25, 76-78, 136, 285,
330 (n. 26); colonial education sys-
tem, 16, 33-34; and mental decoloni-
zation, 18-19; universities in newly
independent countries, 18, 34-36;
external examinations for students in
secondary schools, 33-34; Common-
wealth universities, 36; universities in
Africa, 36, 246-47; universities in
United Kingdom, 36, 37; budget for,
65, 143; of immigrants, 65; in Trin-
idad, 250. See also Woodford Square
lectures; and specific universities
Espinet, C. S., 66
Ethiopia, 15-16, 236, 238, 241, 245, 250
European Economic Community (EEC),
7°
Evans, D. R., 121, 126-27
Evans Report, 126-27
Farnie, D. A., 29-30
Farquhar, Peter, 154-55
February Revolution, 14, 290-302
Federal Capital Commission of West
Indies Federation, 44-46
"Federation in the World Today" (Wil-
liams), 261-63
Fernandes, J. B., 279
Financial aid. See Economic aid
Fingland, Stanley). G., 151-52, 191,
205-6, 208-9
Fisher, Nigel, 71
Foot, Sir Hugh, 273
Fraser, Blache, 50
Fraser, Hugh, 66, 143-44, 183
Frazier, E. Franklin, 26
From Columbus to Castro: The History o/the
Caribbean (Williams), 30
Gairy, Eric, 165, 182-83, 188-91, 197
Gaitskell, Hugh, 152
Galbraith, Francis, 66
Garvey, Marcus, 7, 235, 236
Ghana: independence for, 19, 95, 138,
237; and neocolonialism, 32-33,
245, 252; Williams's visit to, 33, 237,
241, 243, 246, 252; and Jagan, 211-12
Golden handshake dispute: Costar on,
37, 160, 166, 168, 170-71, 176-78;
between Britain and Trinidad, 138-
51, 165-78, 305, 306; compared with
experiences of other British colonies,
138, 166, 167; Williams's rejection of
proposed financial settlement, 138,
149-51, 285, 305, 306; and defense
debt for West Indies Federation, 146,
148, 171-73; and housing debt for
Federal officials' housing, 146, 148,
171, 173-77
Gomes, Albert, 95-96, 123, 268, 270-
71, 273, 304
Granger, Geddes, 285, 291, 292, 302,
332 (n. 72)
Greene, Lorenzo, 30
Greenwood, Anthony, 323 (n. 10)
Grenada: Bustamante on development
of, 41; British capital grants to, 65;
immigrants from, 65; and unitary
statehood with Trinidad, 181-97,
307, 323 (n. 10); Blaize administra-
tion in, 182-85, 190-92, 196-97;


--- PAGE 358 ---
INDEX 345
economy of and economic assistance
for, 182, 194-95; Gairy administra-
tion in, 182; migration to Trinidad
from, 182; population of, 182; unem-
ployment and under-employmentin,
182; opposition in, to union with
Trinidad, 188-89
Grenada Labour Party, 183
Grenada National Party, 182-83
GSWU (Guiana Sugar Workers Union),
200
Guiana Sugar Workers Union (GSWU),
200
Guinea, 241
Guyana, 74, 299, 301. See also British
Guiana
Habib, Philip, 115, 117
Hailes, Lord, 48-51, 55-59
Haiti, 15-16, 71, 74, 193, 236
Hankey, H. A. A., 101-3, 127
Herter, Christian, 102
Higher education. See Education; and
specific universities
Higman, J. D., 145
Hildyard, D. H. T., 108-9, 123-24, 126
History qfthe Peoples of Trinidod and Tobago
(Williams), 30, 151-52
Hitler, Adolf, 237
Hochoy, Sir Solomon, 66, 94-95, 109,
154, 167, 268, 282, 284
Housing: for immigrants in Trinidad,
65; budget for, 141, 143; debt for Fed-
eral officials' housing, 146, 148, 171,
173-77
Howard University, 7, 26, 34-35, 42, 238
Hunt, Richard C. C., 12, 164-65, 290,
293, 298, 302
Iceland, 119
Immigration: within West Indies
Federation, 60, 62, 63, 64-65; to
Trinidad, 65, 255; Chaguaramas
Naval Station and violations of Trin-
idad's immigration laws, 120
Imperialism. See Colonialism
Income tax for West Indies Federation,
52, 53, 54
India, 19, 35, 149
Indo-Trinidadians, 10, 264-76, 281-82,
307
International Labor Organization, 239
Inward Hunger (Williams), 156
Irazabal, Carlos, 297-98
Ishmael, Richard, 220-21, 223
Ivory Coast, 246
Jackling, R. W., 101
Jagan, Cheddi: as critic of colonialism,
25; Williams's dislike of, 133, 208,
224, 231, 248-49; compared with
Williams, 165, 275; and Eastern
Caribbean Federation, 180; British
attitude toward, 198, 202; founding
of People's Progressive Party (PPP) by,
198; and Marxism, 198, 199, 206, 209,
211-12, 215; as premier of British
Guiana, 198, 199-202, 204; photo-
graph of, 200; and proportional rep-
resentation for British Guiana, 200,
201, 213, 216, 223; and Williams's
attempts to resolve crisis in British
Guiana, 205, 206, 207, 211-25; atBig
Four Conferences, 207, 209, 211; and
Bustamante, 207, 209, 210, 211; and
Williams's declaration of principle on
British Guiana, 209-11; African lead-
ers' view of, 211-12; and Williams's
official mediation of British Guiana's
political crisis, 212-25, 307, and
attack on D'Aguiar's property, 217;
and Williams's report on British
Guiana, 221-24; dismissal of, as pre-
mier of British Guiana, 229
Jagan, Janet, 198, 199, 216, 220, 222,
225


--- PAGE 359 ---
346 IN D EX
Jamaica: strikes in, 8-g; People's
National Party in, 10, 41, 103; inde-
pendence of, 25; university in, 34;
Bustamante on development of, 41;
economy of, 41, 48, 53; as possible
capital of West Indies Federation, 45;
land area of, 47; population of, 47,
167; gross national product of, 48;
per capita income of, 48, 139, 167;
revenue of, 48; oil industry in, 53; and
West Indies Federation, 54-57, 59-
64, 66-68, 171-73; secession of,
from West Indies Federation, 60-61,
66, 67, 68, 172, 179, 306; and eco-
nomic integration of Caribbean, 70-
71; and European Economic Commu-
nity (EEC), 70; U.S. military base in,
119; economic assistance to, 167; and
defense fund for West Indies Federa-
tion, 171, 172; and unitary statehood
with Leeward Islands, 193; and Brit-
ish Guiana's political crisis, 203-4,
205; constitution of, 206; and Big
Four Conferences, 207, 209, 325
(n. 22); and British Guiana's indepen-
dence, 209, 228; trade between Brit-
ish Guiana and, 230; and joint diplo-
matic relations overseas with Trini-
dad, 253; Black Power movement in,
289; and Teteron Bay mutiny in Trin-
idad, 299, 301; racial unrest in, 302.
See also specific leaders
Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), 56, 70, 96,
103
James, C. L. R.: and anticolonialism, 25;
as intellectual and writer, 26, 30; as
Williams's mentor, 26; on St. Do-
mingue slave revolution, 30; as editor
of Notion, 38, 134; on Williams's
commitment to West Indian national-
ism, 38; and Chaguaramas Naval Sta-
tion, 97, 117, 132, 134; Williams's
break with, 134; at British Guiana's
Independence Day, 234; Williams's
dislike of, 234; and Pan-African
Movement, 236; removal of, from
PNM, 310 (n. 10)
Jardine, Burnley, 281-82
Jefferson, Thomas, 91
Jenkins, Douglas, Jr., 81
JLP (Jamaica Labour Party), 56, 70
Johnson, Charles S., 26
Johnson, Stanley, 301
Joint Commission on Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 90, 91, 93, 100-106
Jonckheer, Efraim, 72
Jones, Arthur Creech, 40
Jones, Claudia, 236
Kenya, 19, 212, 241, 243-45, 251
Kenyatta, Jomo, 212, 243-44, 251
Labor movement: in Caribbean, 8-9;
and strikes, 8-9, 200, 206, 225, 229,
256, 296-97; in British Guiana, 200,
206, 220, 223, 225; in Trinidad, 229,
256, 284, 287, 296-97; and Black
Power, 291, 292, 297
LaCorbiniere, Carl, 49
Lancaster House Conference (1961), 63-
67, 69
League of Coloured Peoples, 26
Leased Bases Agreement (1941), 22, 47,
77, 79, 81, 85-89, 93-94, 106-9
Leeward and Windward Islands: and
West Indies Federation, 63, 68,
69; and British West Indian Airways
(BWIA), 142; and Eastern Caribbean
Federation, 180-81; and unitary
statehood with Trinidad, 183; po-
tential federation of, 186, 189, 197;
and unitary statehood with Jamaica,
193
Leishman, F. J., 93
Lennox-Boyd, Alan, 47, 48-54, 85, no
Lewis, Arthur, 68, 69


--- PAGE 360 ---
INDEX 347
Lewis, J. O'Neil, 165
Liberia, 15-16, 236, 241, 242-43, 244,
246, 248
Libya, 119
Lightbourne, Robert, 56
Little Seven/Eight islands, 183-84, 186-
87, 189-90, 193, 194
Lloyd, Jimmy, 184
Lloyd, Lord, 273
Lloyd, Selwyn, 103, 105
Locke, Alain, 26, 27
Logan, D. A., 122, 127
Logan, Rayford, 26
London conference on Chaguaramas
Naval Station (1957), 81-91
London University, 34
Long, Edward, 17
Luke, Sir Stephen, 11, 12, 44, 148, 169-
71, 174-76
Macaulay, Lord, 17
MacMillan, Harold, 50-51, 138, 148,
150, 180, 181, 276
Maddox, William P., 22, 270-71
Mahabir, Winston, 122, 268, 274, 310
(n. 10), 319 (n. 90), 330 (n. 26)
Manley, Norman: and People's National
Party in Jamaica, 10; as critic of colo-
nialism, 25; and West Indies Federa-
tion, 40, 41-42, 52, 54-57, 59-66,
69-70, 306; photograph of, 46; and
West Indies Federal Labour Party
(WIFLP), 46-47; and Adams, 51-52,
179; and economy of Jamaica, 53; and
oil refinery in Jamaica, 53; and Wil-
liams, 59, 61-63, 65-66, 75, 179; at
Lancaster House Conference, 64-66;
at London conference on Chaguara-
mas Naval Station (1957), 84; and
Chaguaramas Naval Station, 92, 93,
95-96, 97, 104-5; and U.S. installa-
tion of guided missile tracking sta-
tion at Chaguaramas Naval Station,
92, 93; compared with Williams, 165;
and British Guiana, 228
Manpower Citizens Association
(MPCA), 200
Mara], Bhadase, 95, 268, 291, 297
"March in the rain" (1960) for Chagua-
ramas Naval Station, 76-78
Margai, Albert, 249
Margai, Sir Milton, 249
Marryshow, T. Albert, 7, 40, 75
Marxism, 198, 199, 206, 209, 211-12,
215
"Massa Day Done" speech (Williams),
19, 20-25, 153, 285
Mathieson, Mr., 271
Mathieu-Perez, Sir Joseph, 116-17
Mayle, N. L., 272
McLeod, Iain, 62, 180, 202
Menzies, R. G., 38
Metternich, C. von, 100, 162
Miles, F. S., 251
Millette, James, 285
Miner, R. G., 221, 224, 282
Mohammed, Kamaluddin, 302-3
Moline, Edwin, 11, 118-20, 275-76
Montano, Gerard, 95, 268, 298
Montego Bay Conference, 9, 40-42, 256
Montserrat, 47, 65, 183, 186
Mordecai, John, 50
Moreton, J. O., 50
Morley, Alec, 209
Morne Pierre, 126-28
MPCA (Manpower Citizens Associa-
tion), 200
Mudie, Sir Francis, 44
Mudie Report, 44, 76
Muiioz Marin, Luis, 72
Nanda, Shri Badir Nath, 269-74, 330
(n.31)
National Joint Action Committee
(NJAC), 290-92, 296-97
Navy, U.S., 97, 101, 130-31, 134, 135


--- PAGE 361 ---
IN D EX
Negro in the Caribbean (Williams), 19-20,
26, 27-29, 42
Nehru, Jahawarlal, 266
Neocolonialism, 32-33, 38, 245, 252,
286-87. See also Colonialism
Netherlands Antilles, 71, 72
New World Group, 290
Nigeria, 138, 139, 167, 237, 241, 243,
245-46, 299-300, 333 (n. 95)
NJAC (National Joint Action Commit-
tee), 290-92, 296-97
Nkrumah, Kwame, 211, 212, 243, 244,
250, 251
Nunez, Clive, 291
Nyerere, Julius, 251, 292-93
O'Halloran, John, 121, 170-71, 227
Oilfield Workers Trade Union, 287,
292
Oil industry, 8, 52-53, 283
Orebaugh, Walter, 93-94, 98-100, 112-
16
Organization of African Unity (OAU),
70, 238-39, 240, 247
Organization of American States, 35,
300
Ormeond, R. C., 330 (n. 31)
Oxford University, 6, 7, 16, 36, 165, 240,
244, 245, 260
Padmore, George, 25, 236
Pan-African Movement, 235-37
Panama, 132
Panama Canal, 43
People's National Congress (British
Guiana), 198-99, 215, 228-29
People's National Movement (Trinidad
and Tobago): founding of, 10, 263-
64; structure of, 10; philosophy of,
10, 24, 285; Williams's leadership of,
10-11; attempted resignation of
Williams from, 14; and West Indies
Federal Labour Party (WIFLP), 46-47,
59; and independence for West Indies
Federation, 58; and elections of 1961,
67-69, 279-81; and economic inte-
gration of Caribbean, 74; and Cha-
guaramas Naval Station, 81, 95, 97,
99, 107, 129, 130; and elections of
1958, 103; and honors for Williams,
132; and Notion, 134; and Burnham
administration in British Guiana,
229-30; and race relations, 263-65,
268, 281, 286, 303; and elections of
1956, 264, 273; and February Revolu-
tion, 294; removal of Mahabir from,
310 (n. 10)
People's National Party (Jamaica), 10,
41, 103
People's Progressive Party (British
Guiana), 180, 198, 199, 215, 228-29
Phelan, Harry M., 277, 279
Philippines, 119
Piarco Airport, 120, 125
Pinard, L. A., 191
PNC. See People's National Congress
PNM. See People's National Movement
PPP. See People's Progressive Party
Pollydore, H. H., 220-21
Poverty, 47-48, 257, 284, 288
Poynton, Sir Hilton, 226, 227-28
PPP. See People's Progressive Party
Profumo, John, 167, 168, 268, 322
(n.51)
Proportional representation, 200-202,
207-8, 213, 216, 220, 223, 228, 232
Puerto Rico, 8, 20, 71-72, 74, 283
Race relations: and Indo-Trinidadians,
10, 264-76, 281-82, 307; in England,
16, 260; and Carlyle on blacks, 18;
and "Massa Day Done" speech by
Williams, 19, 20-25, 153, 285; and
apartheid in South Africa, 38, 239,
261; in British Commonwealth, 38;
and Chaguaramas Naval Station, 114-


--- PAGE 362 ---
INDEX 349
15; in United States, 114; and unitary
state of Grenada with Trinidad, 188;
in British Guiana, 202, 204, 219, 223,
231, 275; in Trinidad and Tobago,
255-303, 307-8; and cultural differ-
ences among ethnic groups in Trin-
idad, 257; economic basis for racial
tensions in Trinidad, 257-58; Wil-
liams's writings on slavery and rac-
ism, 260-61, 306; colonialism and
imperialism linked to racism, 261;
and Williams's lecture on "Federation
in the World Today, " 261-63; and
People's National Movement (PNM),
263-65, 268, 281, 303; and Wil-
liams's commitment to interracial
solidarity, 263-64, 274-75, 281; and
Williams and Indo-Trinidadians,
265-69, 273-74, 281; and Williams's
speech on "The Danger Facing Trin-
idad and Tobago and the West Indian
Nation, " 265-69, 273-74; United
Kingdom and, in Trinidad, 268-75;
and Nan da affair, 269-74; Costar on,
274-75; and white business commu-
nity in Trinidad, 277-81; and Black
Power movement, 283, 287-97, 301,
302-3, 307; in Jamaica, 302. See also
Slavery and slave trade
Radiation threat, 121-28, 319 (n. 90)
Ramphal, Shridath, 233
Richardson, Edgerton, 173
Richardson, Elton, 310 (n. 10)
Ricketts, Frank, 49
Robinson, A. N. R., 285-86, 293-95,
332 (n. 72)
Rodney, Walter, 289
Rogers, Philip, 50, 52, 57, 85
Rose, Andrew, 49, 233
Rose, David, 73, 232, 260
Rumbold, H. A. F., 146, 147
Russell, John, 250-51
Ryan, Selwyn, 13
St. Domingue slave revolution, 30
St. Kites, 8, 41, 65, 181, 183
St. Lucia, 65, 119, 183, 193
St. Vincent, 8, 41, 65, 183, 186, 193
Sandys, Duncan, 145, 146-47, 201, 207-
8, 275
Sangster, Donald, 55, 72, 73, 228
Scarborough, Tobago, 141, 142
Sealey, K. F., 167
Sealey, Theodore, 55
Selassie, Haile, 236
Senegal, 239, 241, 243, 246, 248-49
Senghor, Leopold, 249
Serette, Joffre, 301-2
Seukeran, Lionel, 67, 132, 268, 269
Sewell, T. R. M., 293
SFC. See Standing Federation Committee
(SFC) of West Indies Federation
Shearer, Hugh, 289, 301
Sherlock, Philip, 37
Shipping service, regional, 71, 72-73
Sierra Leone, 138, 166, 167, 241-44,
246, 249-50
Sinanan, Ashford, 116, 117, 187, 232,
260, 268, 276, 281-82
Slavery and slave trade, 17, 18, 245, 247-
48, 254, 256, 260-61, 306. See also
Capitalism and Slavery (Williams)
Smith, Ian, 253-54
Solomon, Patrick, 77, 121, 162, 184, 188,
231, 280, 282, 310 (n. 10)
South Africa, 38, 239, 252, 253, 261
Southern Rhodesia, 207, 246, 252, 253-
54
Soviet Union/Russia, 33, 133-34, 199,
212, 215, 226, 245
Standing Federation Committee (SFC)
of West Indies Federation, 44-46, 47,
79-82, 90
State Department, U.S.: and Chagua-
ramas Naval Station, 79-80, 82, 93,
97, 102-3, 105, 112-1I4, 119, 121, 123,
126,
 130-31, 304; and Williams's


--- PAGE 363 ---
350 INDEX
relations with Soviet Union, 133-34;
and Jagan government in British
Guiana, 212; and Williams's interest
in communism in British Guiana and
Dominican Republic, 212; and
Teteron Bay mutiny, 297-98
Stevenson, Adlai, 280
Stow, Sir John, 168
Strikes: in Caribbean, 8-9, 256; in Trin-
idad, 8, 229, 296-97; in British
Guiana, 200, 206, 225. See also Labor
movement
Suffrage, 9, 256
Sugar industry, 225, 229, 283, 291, 297
Suriname, 71
Sykes, Edwin L., 134, 144, 151-52, 177,
206, 208
Symington, J. Fife, 297-98
Tanganyika, 138, 167, 211, 241, 244, 251,
292-93
Tannenbaum, Frank, 30
Tanzania, 299-300
Taxation: and West Indies Federation,
52, 53, 54
Telephone service, 141, 142
Terry, Ms. M. Z., 191
Teteron Bay mutiny, 297-302
Thomas, A. R., 168
Thomas, J. J., 25
Thompson, Charles, 297
Tobago Agreement (1960), 131-33, 305
Toynbee, Arnold, 17
Trinidad and Tobago: ethnic groups in,
6, 239-40, 250, 255-58; population
of, 6, 167, 255; black working-class
consciousness in, 7; labor movement
and strikes in, 8, 229, 256, 284, 287,
296-97; relations between United
States and, 35-37; economic devel-
opment of, 37-38, 65, 100, 140-44,
283, 285-87, 291-92, 302, 303; self-
governance for, 37, 256-57; Busta-
mante on development of, 41; as capi-
tal of West Indies Federation, 45-46,
47, 79-82, 90, 94; land area of, 47;
economy of, 48, 139, 144, 166, 167,
182, 257-58, 283-84, 286-87; per
capita income of, 48, 139, 144, 166,
167, 257, 284; and West Indies
Federation, 59, 61-63, 67-69, 146,
147, 148, 171-73; housing in, 65, 141,
143, 146, 148, 171; immigration to,
65, 182, 255; independence for, 68,
69, 77, 133, 179-80, 181, 306; and
unitary statehood with other West
Indies islands, 68, 69, 179-86, 306-
7; secession of, from West Indies
Federation, 69, 75; and economic
integration of Caribbean, 70-74; land
regulations of, 107; U.S. economic
assistance for, 131-32, 133, 136-37;
foreign policy of, 133-34, 139, bud-
get for, 141-43; defense force for,
141; and debt to West Indies Federa-
tion, 146, 147, 148, 171-77; and uni-
tary statehood with Grenada, 181-97,
306-7, 323 (n. 10); opposition in, to
union with Grenada, 187-88, 197;
and trade with Europe, 241; constitu-
tion of, 256; poverty and unemploy-
ment in, 257, 284, 288; business
community in, 277-81, 283-84; for-
eign investment in, 284; state of
emergency in, 297-302; Teteron Bay
mutiny in, 297-302. See also Cha-
guaramas Naval Station; Democratic
Labour Party (Trinidad and Tobago);
People's National Movement (Trin-
idad and Tobago); Race relations;
Williams, Eric Eustace; and other spe-
cific leaders
Trinidad and Tobago Labour Congress,
297
Trinidad Guardian, 77, 96, 150-51
Tubman, William, 242-43


--- PAGE 364 ---
INDEX 351
UF. See United Force
Uganda, 138, 139, 167, 241, 243, 244,
246
Unions. See Labor movement; Strikes
Unitary statehood of Grenada and Trin-
idad: and Blaize, 182-85, 190-92,
196-97; and Williams, 184-97, 306-
7; and Britain, 185-91, 193-97;
opposition to, in Trinidad, 187-88,
197; constitutional amendment re-
quired for, in Trinidad, 188, 191; and
Gairy, 188-91; opposition to, in Gre-
nada, 188-89; and race relations, 188;
commissions on, 192-96; Williams's
fears about, 193; and economic assis-
tance for Grenada, 194-95; economic
objectives of, 194-95; failure of, 197
United Arab Republic, 241, 245-46
United Force (British Guiana), 199, 215,
228-29
United Kingdom: abolition of slavery by,
17; relations between Williams and,
35-37, 51, 109-12, 128-29, 138-56,
165-78, 208-9, 233, 284, 304, 305,
universities in, 36, 37; and West
Indies Federation, 44, 50-51, 55, 57,
58, 60, 171-72; per capita income of,
48; capital grants to West Indies, 65;
and Chaguaramas Naval Station, 82-
85, 101-6, 108-12, 121-29; and eco-
nomic aid (golden handshake) to
Trinidad, 138-51, 165-78, 285, 305,
306; independence and golden hand-
shake for colonies of, 138, 166, 167;
Williams's rejection of economic
assistance (golden handshake) from,
138, 149-51, 285, 305; and Trinidad's
housing debt for West Indies Federa-
tion officials, 146, 148, 171, 173-77;
and defense funds for West Indies
Federation, 171-72; exports of, to
Trinidad, 176; and Eastern Caribbean
Federation, 180-81, 194, 306; and
unitary statehood of Little Eight
islands with Trinidad, 183-84; and
unitary statehood of Grenada and
Trinidad, 185-91, 193-97; and
federation of Little Eight or Little
Seven islands, 186-87, 189-90, 193;
and Jagan administration in British
Guiana, 198; and British Guiana's
independence, 199, 201-2, 217, 227-
28; and proportional representation
for British Guiana, 200-202, 213,
216, 223; and Williams's attempts to
resolve crisis in British Guiana, 204-
9; and African trip by Williams, 248-
53; and Southern Rhodesia, 254; and
race relations in Trinidad, 268-75;
and Indo-Trinidadians, 269-75; and
foreign investments in Trinidad, 284;
and Teteron Bay mutiny in Trinidad,
297-99; and Black Power movement,
303. See also Colonialism
United Nations: and British Guiana,
206, 207, 216, 217, 220, 222, 223,
226-28, 231; Janet Jagan's appear-
ance before, on proportional repre-
sentation in British Guiana, 216, 220,
222; African diplomats to, and Trin-
idad, 240, 300; and Trinidad elec-
tions, 280
United States: and Chaguaramas Naval
Station, 22, 47, 79-94, 96-107, 112-
16, 118-26, 130-37, 304-5; Wil-
liams's relations with, 35-36, 35-37,
94, 96-99, 112-17, 120-26, 131-37,
277, 278-79, 300, 304-5; per capita
income of, 48; and London con-
ference on Chaguaramas Naval Sta-
tion (1957), 83-90; and Joint Com-
mission on Chaguaramas Naval
Station, 90, 91, 93, 100-106; and anti-
colonialism, 91; and guided missile
tracking station at Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 92-93, 101, 127-28,


--- PAGE 365 ---
352 INDEX
135; and charges against Williams for
anti-Americanism, 94, 96-99, 117,
131; base agreements between other
countries and, 107, 119; segregation
and racism in, 114, 260; and tripartite
conferences on Chaguaramas Naval
Station (1960), 129-33; economic
assistance to Trinidad by, 131-32,
133, 136-37; and Tobago Agreement
(1960), 131-33, 305; withdrawal of,
from major portion of Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 134-35; economic
assistance to developing countries by,
166; and British Guiana, 200-202,
214, 217, 221, 222, 224, 232; and Lib-
eria, 242; and Indo-Trinidadians,
281-82; and foreign investments in
Trinidad, 284; and Teteron Bay
mutiny in Trinidad, 298, 300. See also
Chaguaramas Naval Station
Universal Negro Improvement Associa-
tion (UNIA), 7, 235, 236
Universities. See Education
University College of the West Indies,
34-37
University of the Westlndies, 35-36,
131, 141, 142, 147, 238, 290
Venezuela, 139, 233, 301
Virgin Islands, 20
Wallace, W I. ]., 272
Waller Field, 80, 81, 94-95, 125, 131
Washington, Booker T., 21
Weekes, George, 287, 292, 296, 297,
332 (n. 72)
West African Students' Union, 26
Westlndies: national histories of, 18-
19; compared with Africa, 31-33; uni-
versities in, 34-35; Bustamante on
development of, 41; land area of, 47;
population of, 47; poverty of, 47-48;
gross national product of, 48; per
capita income in, 48, 139, 144, 166,
167; revenue of, 48; economic inte-
gration of, 70-74, 192-93; ethnicity
of, 239-40; Indian commissioner to,
269-72. See also Caribbean; Colonial-
ism; and specific countries
West Indies Federal Labour Party
(WIFLP), 46-47, 59, 265
Westlndies Federation: and Marryshow,
7, 40, 75; founding of, 9, 40-42, 256;
Montego Bay Conference on creation
of, 9, 40-42, 256; and Bustamante,
40-42, 52, 54-56, 59-61; and Man-
ley, 40, 41-42, 52, 54-57, 59-66, 69-
70; constitution of, 42, 63-67; and
Williams, 42-47, 52-54, 57-70, 74-
75, 94, 179-80, 306; and Caribbean
Commission, 43; and economic
development, 43-44, 48; and Britain,
44, 50-51, 55, 57, 58, 60, 171-72;
capital of, 44-46, 47, 79-82, 90, 94,
118; Federal Capital Commission of,
44-46; Standing Federation Commit-
tee (SFC) of, 44-46, 47, 79-82, 90;
Adams as prime minister of, 47, 48-
54, 58-60, 63; land area of, 47; popu-
lation of, 47; poverty of, 47-48; prob-
lems of, 47-54, 56; Bradshaw as
finance minister of, 48-49; budget of
and revenues for, 48, 60, 63, 181;
gross national product of, 48; minis-
ters of, 48-49; per capita income of,
48; and income tax, 52, 53, 54; and
power over individual territories, 53-
54; independence for, 54, 58-60, 63-
67; and representation in Federal Par-
liament, 54-55; dominion status for,
58; and Williams's political ambi-
tions, 59; Williams's thoughts of
secession from, 59, 63, 66-67, 94,
118; central administration of, 60; and
control of currency, 60; and customs
union, 60, 63; defense program and


--- PAGE 366 ---
INDEX 353
defense budget for, 60, 146, 148, 171-
73; diplomatic organization for, 60;
immigration and freedom of move-
ment within, 60, 62, 63, 64-65; and
international treaties, 60; Jamaica's
secession from, 60-61, 66, 67, 68,
172, 179, 306; meetings between
Manley and Williams on, 61-63; and
Antigua pact, 62-63; Jamaica's veto
power in, 62, 63, 64; responsibilities
of federal government versus unit ter-
ritories, 62; Lancaster House Con-
ference on, 63-67, 69; options after
Jamaica's secession from, 68-70,
179-81; collapse of, 69, 73, 179, 306;
Trinidad's secession from, 69, 75;
inaugural festivities of, 104; and
Williams's approach to Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 117-18; and Chagua-
ramas Naval Station tripartite con-
ferences (1960), 129-33; housing for
officials of, 146, 148, 171, 173-77;
Trinidad's debt to, 146, 147, 148, 171-
77; Indo-Trinidadians' opposition to,
269-74, 307
Whitney, John Jay, 83-85, 103
WIFLP (West Indies Federal Labour
Party), 46-47, 59, 265
Williams, Denis, 169, 190-91, 193-94
Williams, Douglas, 59, 115-16
Williams, Erica, 294-95
Williams, Eric Eustace: birth of, 5; par-
ents of, 5-6, 156-57, 159, 258, 259-
60; education of, 6, 7, 16, 26, 165,
260; career of, 7-8, 26; Howard Uni-
versity teaching position for, 7, 26,
238; as Caribbean Commission dep-
uty chairman, 8, 20-21, 43; photo-
graphs of, 8, 32, 45, 46, 78; Wood-
ford Square lectures by, 9-10, 19, 23,
25, 76-78, 121-22, 150-51, 152, 153,
205, 261, 265-68, 273-74, 285, 330
(n. 26); and People's National Move-
ment (PNM), 10-11, 263-64; person-
ality of, 11-12, 20, 73, 75, 99, 151-56,
161-62, 166, 167-69, 170, 176, 178,
205, 278, 281, 295, 304; writings by,
13, 16, 19-20, 26, 27-31, 42, 53-54,
151-52, 260-61, 306; death of, 14,
156; and anticolonialism, 15-39, 76-
78, 136, 138-39, 148-49, 178, 277,
305; influences on, 25-26; as Univer-
sity of West Indies pro chancellor, 35;
and West Indies Federation, 42-47,
52-54, 57-70, 74-75, 94, 179-80,
306; honors for, 132, 165; childhood
and adolescence of, 156-61; hearing
aid for, 156; siblings of, 156, 157-58,
258-59; as historian and scholar,
237-38, 254; racial ancestry of, 258-
59; marriages of, 259, 260; health
problems of, 295; significance of,
304-8
-as chief minister of Trinidad and
Tobago: positive attributes of, 10-12;
critics of, 11, 22, 132-33, 134, 277-
81, 285-87, 302; attempted resigna-
tion, 14; and February Revolution, 14,
290-302; "Massa Day Done" speech,
19, 20-25, 153, 285; Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 22, 76-137, 285, 304-
5; African trip, 31, 33, 211, 235, 240-
54, 292-93, 307; relations with Brit-
ain, 35-37, 51, 109-12, 128-29, 138-
56, 165-78, 208-9, 233, 284, 304,
305; relations with United States, 35-
36, 94, 96-99, 112-17, 120-26, 131-
37, 277, 278-79, 300, 304-5; uni-
versity mission, 35-37; economic
development, 37-38, 65, 100, 140-
44, 283, 285-87, 291-92, 302; West
Indies Federation, 43-47, 52-54, 57-
70, 74-75, 94, 179-80, 306; and
Adams, 47, 51, 52-53, 59, 68, 74-75,
82, 118, 179; and Bustamante, 55, 72-
73, 75; and Manley, 59, 61-63, 65-


--- PAGE 367 ---
354 INDEX
66, 75, 179; secession of Trinidad and
Tobago from West Indies Federation,
59, 63, 66-67, 69, 75, 94, 118; Lan-
caster House Conference, 64-67, 69;
elections of 1961, 67-69, 279-81;
independence for Trinidad and To-
bago, 68, 69, 181, 306; options for
West In dies Federation after Jamai-
ca's secession, 68-70, 179-81; uni-
tary statehood for Trinidad with other
West Indies islands, 68, 69, 179-86,
192-93, 197, 306-7; Pan-Caribbean
vision, 70-74, 192-94, 197, 206; and
anticommunism, 71, 74, 133, 134,
139, 189, 205-6, 211, 252, 282; sup-
port for U.K.-U.S. agreement on
Chaguaramas Naval Station, 77, 79,
81, 85; London conference on Cha-
guaramas Naval Station (1957), 81-
82, 85-94; support for U.S. evacua-
tion of Chaguaramas Naval Station,
85-94; U.S. installation of guided
missile tracking station at Chagua-
ramas Naval Station, 92-93, 101; and
charges of anti-Americanism, 94, 96-
99, 117, 131; Joint Commission report
on Chaguaramas Naval Station, 106-
9; legality of U.S. lease for Chagua-
ramas Naval Station, 106-9; Ore-
baugh's plans for removing Williams
from office, 112-16; tactics for pro-
moting controversy on Chaguaramas
Naval Station, 120-26; radiation
threat, 121-28; economic assistance
from U.S., 131-32, 133, 136-37;
Tobago Agreement (1960), 131-33,
305; foreign policy, 133-34, 139, rela
tions with Soviet Union, 133-34; U.S.
withdrawal from major portions of
Chaguaramas Naval Station, 134-35;
golden handshake dispute, 138-51,
165-78, 285, 305, 306; rejection of
Britain's economic assistance
(golden handshake), 138, 149-51,
285, 305, 306; budget for economic
development, 141-43; West Indies
Federation debt, 146, 147, 148, 171-
77; administrative and leadership
style of, 153, 155, 161-65; housing
debt, 171, 173-77; unitary statehood
of Grenada with Trinidad, 184-97,
306-7; and British Guiana, 202-34;
and Big Four Conferences, 207, 209,
229-30, 325 (n. 22); declaration of
principle on British Guiana, 209-11;
official mediation of British Guiana's
political crisis by Williams, 212-25,
307; and Burnham administration in
British Guiana, 229-33; African pol-
icy, 237-41, 253-54; race relations,
255, 263-303, 307-8; and Indo-
Trinidadians, 264-76, 281-82, 307;
and business community, 277-81,
283-84; state of emergency in Trin-
idad, 297-302; Teteron Bay mutiny,
297-302, 332 (n. 72); summary of
significance of, 304-8
Williams, Henry Sylvester, 7, 25, 235
Wilson, Harold, 35, 37, 299
Windward and Leeward Islands. See
Leeward and Windward Islands
Wollam, Park, 210
Woodford Square lectures, 9-10, 19, 23,
25, 76-78, 121-22, 150-51, 152, 153,
205, 261, 265-68, 273-74, 285, 330
(n. 26)
Woodson, Carter J., 30
Working class. See Labor movement
World Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment, 252
Wright, Gerald, 101
Young, Sir Hubert, 85-88
Zambia, 300
Zanzibar, 251, 293

