=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Finding of the Third Eye (Paperback).pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 149
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:47:18.237276
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Finding of the Third Eye (Paperback)
by Vera Stanley Alder (Author)
THE FINDING OF THE THIRD EYE
CONTENTS
Preface
Introduction
Part One
Things as They Are
What Modern Science Says
The Secret Knowledge
How We are Made
How We are Classified
Male and Female
Birth, Sleep and Death
Secrets of Breathing
Secrets of Colour
Secrets of Sound
The Science of Numbers
Diet and Exercise
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 2 ---
Part Two
The ‘Third Eye’
First Steps to Mastery
Meditation
History of the Wisdom
The Present Awakening
Dangers in the Path
The Summing-up
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 3 ---
PREFACE
These are days in which the spirit of inquiry is perhaps more alive than at
any other time in the history of humanity. They are days also in which the
orientation of humanity towards spiritual realities and towards the higher
values is more pronounced than ever before, in spite of many opinions of the
pessimistically inclined to the contrary. The masses are becoming
increasingly sensitive to the world of ideas and to the vision of truth.
Hitherto it has been the advanced men and women who have so responded,
but today it is the many. The spirit in man has always been divinely alive,
but today men everywhere are inquiring with one voice: Which is the WAY
that we should go? How far have we travelled towards our goal?
This book is an attempt to trace in brief and simple language the progress
man has made as he has travelled along the way of truth and thus answer that
question. It seeks to penetrate behind the outer world of seeming to the
world of spirit, and to find, behind the external forms, that which gives them
life.
The subject is necessarily so vast that it is safe to say that it can only be
handled in three ways. First by the production of volumes which would
embody the erudition of the ages and which would be read, therefore, only
by the erudite and selective few. Secondly, by specializing in some one or
other of the many aspects of the Ageless Wisdom, and writing on a chosen
subject, appealing consequently only to those attracted to that subject and
that particular presentation of a part of the truth. Thirdly, by writing simple
‘bridging’ books which (selecting the highlights in the history of truth and
the basic foundational realities) will make the teaching real to the average
man in the simplest terms. In this way the man of average intelligence, busy
with the affairs of everyday life, can get some understanding of that
enlightenment which has ever poured forth over humanity from the heart of
God Himself, and thus regain that confidence and that belief in love and
immortality which is our divine heritage. This we have somewhat lost
through the activity of living, the press of the economic situation, the fear
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 4 ---
and suspense engendered by the world situation, and the bewilderment
aroused in many minds by the warring theologies of the great religions.
As I have read this book, it has seemed to me that the intent of the author is
to present to the man in the street (who is now awake and demanding such
information) a picture of the two lines of continuity which the history of the
past reveals to the attentive student. There is, first of all, the continuity of the
Wisdom Teaching, which, down the ages, has come forth from God and
thrown the needed light upon the ways of men. It has taken the form
outwardly of the world religions (living or dead), but has always presented
to those whose eyes were open those esoteric truths and those clear
instructions whereby man can find his own soul and his way back to the
centre of life. There is, secondly, the continuity of Messengers from the
Most High – Revealers of Divinity, culminating for us in that supreme Son
of God Whom Christianity recognises.
These two interwoven golden threads of light can be seen passing –
unbroken and untarnished – down through the history of the race. They are
the product of human aspiration and divine response, of human effort and
divine transmission. They constitute the way to the goal. The form the Path
which all must tread. The way to Those Who have journeyed ahead of us
upon the selfsame Path. It is a practical way; it has the endorsement of
history and the example of the foremost and the most enlightened who have
walked the ways of earth. It is the history of the WAY in contradistinction to
the many ways.
There is need for such books as this in the world today, for bridging books
which all people can read, which can evoke their interest and lead them to a
closer and a more earnest search. This book should find immediately a real
field of usefulness and serve and help many. The field of esoteric truth is so
large and its departments so many and so varied that the neophyte is apt to
be confused and bewildered by the extent of the horizon which opens up
before him and the many types of knowledge which presumably he is
expected to master. Mysticism, occultism, esoteric psychology, astrology,
numerology, theosophical doctrines, Kabbalistic lore, Rosicrucian truth,
comparative religion, symbolism and the conflicts between creeds all
clamour for his attention. We need simple synthetic presentations, which
eliminate the non-essentials and give a clear picture in clear outline and clear
language. Such a book is this, and, as a forerunner of many more, I wish it
Godspeed and a wide field of service.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 5 ---
AUTHOR’S NOTE 1968
Thirty years have passed since this little book was published. During that
time the book and its successors have brought me much rich experience and
many friends.
Together we are watching the transition from the old age into the new age,
and we are offering our thought and our prayers for the expected event of the
‘Second Coming’.
Time rushes by. The old civilization is burning itself up in a crescendo of
confusion. But, even before its ashes are formed, the Phoenix can be seen
arising, emerging as the new revolting youth of today, in every land – an
unprecedented event – universal revolt, seeking, however instinctively, for
the Will of God.
If to these new crusaders everywhere could be introduced the Plan of
Evolution as it has emerged from all the great Wisdom teachings, they might
find an anchor and a purpose by means of which they could lead the world
into a new era of both sanity and fulfilment.
It is to this end that this book and its successors are dedicated. The emblem
on the cover is a reminder of the instruction from Christ: ‘Be ye wise as
serpents and harmless as doves!’
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 6 ---
INTRODUCTION
Are human beings potential gods, as they have been told, or are they merely
the least of worms?
The world today is a seething mass of contradictions. Life does not become
simpler with each new achievement, and the average man, kept busy with
the urgent process of existing, has little time for thought.
Yet there are moments when, looking out upon a world which appears drab,
cruel, confused, and very ugly in many ways, man wonders…….
If there are great heights for him to attain why does he seem to know so
little about them? What has man been doing all these centuries? Why do
disease, difficulties and dangers appear to have increased the more
civilization ‘progresses’?
There comes a time in the lives of many people when they earnestly desire
to find an answer to these questions. They would know why they are here,
what it is all about, and if they can learn to master circumstances instead of
continually being a prey to them. They begin to make an individual effort to
find out for themselves if there is really any rhyme or reason, any justice in
life, anything to hope for or to work for.
When a man arrives at this stage in his life it marks a very important crisis in
his development. It is the moment at which he changes from a puppet into an
individual and joins the honoured company of the seekers.
To his surprise he finds that the number of these seekers is increasing
rapidly, and that, in fact, they are beginning to make their impact felt upon
social consciousness.
He soon sees the significance of this. True socialism becomes possible when
people recognize themselves as individual units of power, capability and
thought; then there will inevitably follow a correspondingly important and
congenial position in life for each one of them. There is an unfailing demand
for either the competent worker or for those able to wield constructive
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 7 ---
influence, and all can fill one of these needs. There is no other way to
individual happiness.
The general apathy and ignorance which has existed for so long has reduced
living conditions to a chaos in which there has been undernourishment in the
midst of plenty, barbaric wars and cruelties taking place under the wing of
so-called religion, and a system of education which results neither in mental
power, physical fitness, good looks nor happiness.
Now, however, humanity is waking up in a wonderful manner to a
recognition of its own failures. Everywhere there is widespread effort and
intensive seeking going on in manifold directions. This effort is to be found
not only among the leaders and teachers of the people but among the people
themselves. The public interest in health, diet, physical culture, spiritualism
and hundreds of other cults and movements shows the beginning of a
powerful wave of progress which may sweep humanity upwards to the peak
of a new Renaissance of a kind the world has never known before.
There are many today already caught in the throes of the birth of this coming
Renaissance. They are tormented by the desire to know more of the inner
meaning of life and the hidden issues to which they are so swiftly moving.
One after another they take up the challenge of Life’s Riddle, and join the
ever-growing band of seekers.
It is significant that this seeking should press into the realms of ‘religious’,
‘psychic’, ‘spiritualistic’ and ‘occult’ thought – in other words, the inner
unseen world of causes. Man realizes that ‘science’, which had dealt so
successfully with physical phenomena, has not yet succeeded in giving
humanity any measure of happiness or safety. So he is at last determined to
try to find his happiness by getting in touch with causes instead of effects, by
seeking for the laws or truths, if any, which may lie behind the reactions of
living things. He begins to sense the difference between knowledge and
wisdom.
Knowledge is the result of an accumulation of facts, and its tendency is,
through specializing, to isolate subjects one from another.
Wisdom is the deduction from these facts of useful laws, a process which
can only take place by comparing the facts in one compartment with those in
all the others, thus giving a vision of the whole.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 8 ---
When man becomes an individual seeker his first effort is to discover what
he can of ‘facts’ connected with the fundamental truths of life. He wants
proofs.
There are many people ready to admit him into the world of inner research.
He is faced with a long and complicated pilgrimage. Wonderful promises are
held out to him, he is assured of becoming a superman, with health,
happiness, and power hitherto undreamt-of and hard for him to comprehend.
He asks himself if all this can be true. If so, why is humanity still wallowing
in such helplessness? In bewilderment he hesitates on the threshold of
philosophy, Spiritualism, Christian Science or a dozen other cults and
‘isms’!
His inexperienced eyes are unable to detect the true from the false, and he is
at the mercy of many people who seek to enlist him for their own pet cult, or
who wish to make profit for themselves by trading upon his virgin curiosity
and yearning. If he has a tendency to emotionalism or a love of the
sensational, he will be an easy prey.
How, then, is he going to escape the many pitfalls and manage to keep upon
the true path to an understanding and mastery of life?
These chapters have been written in an effort to provide the seeker with a
simple guide-book for his pilgrimage to Truth, a concise and bird’s-eye view
of the new universe which he is about to explore. It endeavours to help him
to place each new discovery into its relevant position so that he, while
gathering his store of knowledge, may develop wisdom, also, and learn those
few essential secrets through which he may attain the poise, power and
creativeness which will ultimately develop him into a superman.
The seekers who acquire and use this knowledge will be the builders of the
new and promised Golden Age.
In this book an effort will be made to sort out, summarize and compare the
ancient knowledge with modern science. Most of the statements made are
capable of world-wide and extensive corroboration by trustworthy
authorities, and can be verified by any reader who will care to give the time
to it. He can satisfy himself by as many proofs as he has the patience and
energy to seek and the intelligence to judge and sift.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 9 ---
The quest after Truth opens up an unimagined and wonderful new world to
the seeker, so thrilling and so full of reward and interest that it is not within
the power of human speech to portray it. Only the fringe of this absorbing
search has been touched in these few pages, but even so this book contains
the recipe for turning an ordinary human being into a superman, one who
commands the means of success, happiness or personal fulfilment always
within himself, and irrespective of all circumstances.
PART ONE
1
THINGS AS THEY ARE
Our first concern will be to take a survey of the present position with
unprejudiced eyes.
The unprejudiced eye is a much more difficult thing to cultivate than we
may imagine. In fact, to most of us it is an impossibility. For generations,
indeed for centuries, we have been brought up in certain grooves of thought,
certain traditions and habits, until our brains become wedged into a confined
rut and are unable to look at things from a new angle.
When, however, after finishing our survey of the present position, we see
around us the result of thinking in these grooves, and realize to what a state
of unhappiness, chaos and muddle this has brought us, we may, in sheer
desperation, make the effort needed to jerk our brains out of their ruts and
guard them against ever slipping back again.
Truth can only be understood by one in a state of attention. Therefore Truth
is not available to those in a slack condition of mind – they could not take it
in. Truth is only to be found ‘at the bottom of a well’; it must be struggled
for and sought after and come upon through earnest effort, through the
stimulation brought about by suffering or striving, whereby the mind is
prepared to recognize it.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 10 ---
That is why Truth appears always to be hidden, veiled and guarded.
Let us, then, try to look with new eyes at the struggling mass of
inconsistencies which we are in the habit of calling civilization.
Man has striven always for happiness, and he has sought to attain it mostly
in one of three ways – comfort, entertainment, and religion. But he has
sought these things only in their outward form. Comfort for the body has
been the first aim, while a comfortable state of mind has been the last thing
considered, until the lack of it has reduced the victim to despair. Cleanliness
has also been studied outwardly, but seldom in its inward form – we do not
understand how to keep our minds wholly free from rubbish and poisoning
material. Religion likewise has come to be mostly an external observance,
while as for entertainment it is poured in from outside, the mind being
required to make no effort to obtain it.
All the same, we are told that Mind over Matter constitutes our real power!
Therein is one of the inconsistencies! Let us find some more!
In some countries the State supports a Church which tells us, ‘thou shalt not
kill’, but is not averse to sending us out to war in order to slaughter our
possibly blameless fellow-men. For this we are called heroes. Yet is we kill
someone for a reason which seems good enough for us we are no longer
heroes, and we are hanged!
Many of us are asked to believe in Church teaching and the Bible, both of
them containing a mass of contradictions which no one attempts to explain.
For example, Christ asked His disciples to carry on the work as He had
done, saying: ‘He that believeth in me, the woks that I do shall he do also;
and greater works than these shall he do.’ These words referred to healing,
prophesying and clairaudience, which, with the ‘gift of tongues’ (power to
be understood by all nationalities), the power to work miracles, to interpret
dreams and symbols, and to have wisdom, were the seven gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Yet the State, which supports the Church’s teachings, may imprison
one for prophesying, and the clergy, who should be cultivating these gifts,
leave them mostly in the hands of those whom they consider ignorant and
superstitious.
Calling ourselves civilized, we produce a race which cannot compare with
many of the most savage tribes in health and physique. Look around at the
members of an average crowd of today and compare them with the Greek
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 11 ---
ideal, or the early Egyptian or Assyrian bodies. Through unbiased eyes we
shall see that we are mostly misshapen travesties of what a human being
should be; we cannot deny the prevalence today of imperfect bodies,
unlovely vacant faces, ugly clothes and primitive conversation.
Surely a modern crowd’s appearance shrieks of the wrongness of our present
mode of living?
We know the hospitals are full; so are the asylums – who dares to tell us
how full?
Consider also that we are at present in imminent danger of a world war
which would let loose as much beastliness and cruelty as has ever existed in
history.
But even without war man is being murdered daily in various ways by the
terrible Robot which he has reared under the name of Civilization. This
Robot is running amok; it has mastered its creator for the time being and
produced a clever system of keeping him in slavery. Much that is really
enlightening in knowledge is gradually being eliminated from man’s
education, which is given to him in odd spoonfuls having no apparent
relation to each other. Through no fault of his own he is under an economic
system which causes him to spend all his days in the terror and anxiety of
being without means of support. If he works at all he must drudge the whole
week through, while many of his comrades are refused employment, and he
is obliged to pay for their support; there is ‘over-production’ and yet a
difficulty in obtaining cheap food, even in some countries the danger of
starvation; honesty and purity are preached to him from one side, while
pornography and sensationalism are showered upon him from the other.
Every effort is made to soak him through and through with an interest in sex
– by means of cinemas, theatres, books, newspapers and through the type of
food most cheaply obtained. He is never told the plain truth – that a
preoccupation with sex is one of the greatest deterrants to brain
development. He is surrounded with mind-destroying noise, rush and
anxiety, until even the doctors are beginning to say that modern life will
soon exterminate itself!
As if this were not enough, he is furthermore at the mercy of the war-lords,
who can send him out to murder and mangle his fellow-man even if he has
the kindest character; and, escaping this last horror, he is daily slaughtered in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 12 ---
his own streets by his brother road-hogs, while they, in turn, pay millions
into the hospitals to put him together again!
Life altogether seems to have been expressly planned to prevent him from
creative thought; he has been, until quite recently, offered no problems to
solve; his entertainment has been put before him in the form of predigested
sensationalism – mental baby-food.
Weary and half drugged by this intensive treatment, man has largely ceased
to recognize the heritage of his wonderful mind. He no longer knows why he
should think – or what there is to think about.
Here then is a pessimistic picture of life as it is today!
Ought we to be satisfied with this state of affairs? Is this indeed the whole
picture, or is there a brighter side to it?
Let us not forget the claim that man is a marvellous creature, in spite of
much that appears to the contrary. This claim seems not to be entirely
without foundation. On every hand we find clues to strange and tremendous
forces hidden within us, forces that when properly understood and developed
could certainly lead us to unimaginable power and achievement. We glimpse
these powers in such people as the imaginative genius, the child prodigy, the
thought-reader, the healer and the clairvoyant. We hear of them on every
side and their existence is too well known to be disputed.
There are many great men alive today whose achievements stand out in
sharp contrast to the average. Is it that they are supermen, or that the rest of
us are lagging far behind the point of development we should have reached?
If we were to lay any of them upon the dissecting table we should certainly
find nothing about them that differs in any degree from the average person.
Where, then, is the key to the wonderful power and omnipotence that
apparently may be every man’s birthright? There is nothing to prove that we
could not all attain complete mastery over our lives and fortunes, and reach
ideal happiness, were we given this key, and had the will and the
determination to use it. Had we this secret, instead of being, as we are,
slaves to life, to our possessions, our environment, ill-health, ‘bad luck’ and
the rest, we could be master and controller of all our circumstances, and
welcome with content and understanding everything that life brings to us.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 13 ---
We are told that the secret lies in the use and understanding of a certain
knowledge through which is given an insight into the inner laws and forces
of life, and the manner in which to use them. This knowledge has always
existed, but it remains hidden for ever from all but the earnest seeker.
For the last few hundred years humanity has been passing through its Slough
of Despond – Ignorance.
The hour has already struck which marks the beginning of humanity’s
emergency from that blackness. Men have suffered so much and for so long,
through ignorance, that at last the inevitable reaction has set in. We can feel
this change beginning to play in subtle ways through all phases of life.
We have reached the time when we demand to know, and to know for
ourselves and through ourselves, and to wield that knowledge irrespective of
authority. We refuse any longer to dance like puppets to the drugging jazz
tunes of incompetent authority. And soon authority will have to pull itself
together and follow the lead of the seekers.
For there is widespread seeking going on everywhere now for the happiness,
freedom and power which we instinctively feel will be ours when we have
gained the requisite knowledge.
And the knowledge is to be found – hidden, waiting, wonderful!
Our first clue to this knowledge lies in the study of what is known as the
Secret Wisdom. This teaching was always in the charge (in the early days)
of those who were well equipped both to govern and teach. But in time they
neglected their deep knowledge in favour of the easier way – power through
money, superstition and material pomp. This resulted in laziness and effete
degeneration. Their only hope of retaining hold on the people was to plunge
them into ignorance also. Therefore a systematic persecution of certain
knowledge began, by edicts, inquisitions and massacres. Finally their end
was so thoroughly attained that from the highest to the lowest the wisdom
had apparently faded out.
Fortunately, however, there are now, and always have been, those who
would give their whole lives to the guarding and hiding of a treasure so
precious. Such people were the alchemists, hermits, early freemasons and
many more. So the knowledge was not really lost, but only concealed and
safely guarded from desecration.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 14 ---
Humanity is fast approaching the day when, through patient struggling, it
will have earned the right to this wisdom; in fact, some years ago it was
given out in part for those earnest seekers in the vanguard of progress to
discover. Let us make all speed to gain for ourselves this rich heritage.
Whether we approach the subject from a purely scientific viewpoint, from a
common-sense one, or from a religious one, we will find that science, logic
or the root-form of any of the principal religions will lead us finally to
identical truths. We will realize that if we are able to accept these truths we
will obtain a very satisfactory understanding of the ‘workings’ of Nature’,
and of certain rules which will enable us to control ourselves and our
circumstances in a manner hitherto impossible.
We cannot gain such valuable knowledge without making worthy effort, but
if we persevere there is no limit to the benefit we shall obtain.
The earliest results achieved will be, firstly, a considerable improvement and
control of health and looks, a growing capacity for happiness, an inability to
worry or fear; a gaining of popularity, and freedom from boredom.
In time, when greater strides are made, there will be immunity from disease,
conquering of fatigue, and prolonging of youth. There will be a growing
capacity for helping others, a mastery of sorrow and pain, and the
development of healing power. A growing inner force will be felt, both for
creating ideas and the carrying of them out.
Neither does the tale end here. Very advanced students, such as are the
Yogis, become unaffected by heat or cold, wounds and poisons. They are
able to perform feats usually considered as miracles, and they appear to have
access to regions of wisdom and felicity undreamt of by us. People of this
type move about among us unsuspected. They do not advertise themselves;
they are under a Law which forbids them to help unless help is asked, or to
give out knowledge unless it is sought and will be properly understood. They
are ready and waiting for the time when a growing number of people sense
their secrets and beg their help.
When the general public have sufficiently advanced they will insist on being
governed by persons of such attainments, and then indeed will begin the
coming Golden Age.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 15 ---
Meanwhile those who are anxious to forge ahead and prepare for the future
will find in this book a broad survey of many sides of the subject, together
with the first simple rules for the beginning of attainment.
They are asked only to keep an open mind as they read, for only an open
mind is big enough to contain the secrets of the universe.
2
WHAT MODERN SCIENCE SAYS
Before we begin studying the ancient wisdom we will find it very helpful to
prepare our minds by taking a survey of the ground covered by modern
science today. It will be fascinating to see how identical facts can be known
under different names and reached by different methods.
Both the ancient sages and modern scientists are agreed that everything in
life is formed of vibrations. So that, as we shall be obliged often to use this
word, we can begin by defining it.
We are told that vibration is the result of force or energy, concentrated in
some mysterious way and caused to vibrate, shake or oscillate at different
speeds. The composition of an atom, according to some scientists, is, first of
all, a tiny vacuum, round which this force or energy revolves as a vortex,
just as the circle of the sun’s aura or zodiac revolves round it. The zodiac
contains the planets revolving within it, and the minute ‘zodiac’ of the atom
contains also its planets, or electrons as they are called.
The difference between one object and another is ultimately a question of
rate of vibration. It is the number and arrangement of the electrons within an
atom, and the varied cohesions of atoms into molecules, which go to make
up these vibratory differences.
The disturbance in the atmosphere caused by a vibration sends out a ripple
or air-wave in all directions. As an illustrative simile of this we can throw a
stone into a pool of water. At first we see the hole which the stone makes,
corresponding to the vacuum in the centre of the atom. Then we see the
disturbance in the water created by the hole, a circle of energy which sets up
waves or ripples which spread out to an unlimited distance. Drop other
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 16 ---
stones in nearby, and their circle of waves will flow over and through the
others, none, however, being destroyed although they affect one another
slightly. The distance between one ripple and the next is called the ‘wave-
length’.
We have in this a rough picture of what happens in the atmosphere, and of
the waves set up by light, sound, or any kind of object – anything, in other
words, that vibrates.
Low rates of vibration form the more static or visible objects; we might say
that they send out only slow ripples; higher rates of motion, between the
rapidly flying particles, form less tangible things, such as gas. These
particles intermingle rapidly with the air, but often they do not move
sufficiently quickly to penetrate through solids.
I would like to say here that the statements in this chapter are not intended to
be scientific accuracies, but roughly suggestive for the purposes of our
argument. As the ‘facts’ of science are continually having to be modified or
changed we need not take them too seriously. The last word has never been
said!
Vibrations of a relatively low frequency are known to us as sounds. Higher
ranges are known as heat.
Sound and heat are fine enough to pass through certain solids. We know all
about the ripples or waves caused by sound. So also we know about the
electrical impulses, through the wireless, and we call them wave-lengths,
and know all their measurements. Some of the wireless wave-lengths are as
much as three miles long.
We might picture the scale of vibrations as a vast keyboard, on which there
are many octaves and different types of vibration and motion. One range of
motion expresses itself as solid, liquid and gaseous forms. Other ranges are
perceived as sound, heat and those intangible things about which we know
little.
Above the octaves of sound would come those of light and colour vibrations.
The colours range from red – the lowest (which vibrates at 451 million
million times per second, and has a wave-length of one 36,918th of an inch)
– up to violet. We see this order of colours in the rainbow and in the
spectrum.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 17 ---
Above the violet, colour can no longer be seen by the eye, and we find the
ultra-violet rays and the X-ray. Now at last we have reached vibrations fine
and rapid enough to penetrate through most solids. Higher up on the scale
we come to the magnetic vibrations and their wave-lengths, such as those
that issue from the mind of the hypnotist. These can go through denser solids
than the X-ray can, which accounts for the hypnotist being able to produce
the effect of a deep trance upon a person seated in an adjoining room.
Apparently the vibrations of the mind can travel instantaneously many
hundreds of miles, as in thought telepathy, passing through all solids which
intervene. They have an intimate connection with electricity which, as we
know, can travel round the world in a flash.
Each thought is a vibration having a set wave-length! When, however, we
consider the vastness of the scale of vibrations with which we have to deal it
will be seen that there are enough and to spare for everything.
Now, having placed sound, light and heat in their respective order as we
know it, we must ask what they are and how we know they exist.
Had we and the animals no ears, what would sound be?
What we know as sound is that tiny section of octaves on the scale of
vibration which can be transmitted to the brain by the receivers in the ear.
The human ear is successful up to a certain point, beyond which it can
receive no more; but many animals hear vibrations which to us are no longer
sounds at all.
Higher up on our keyboard than sound comes heat. Our skin contains the
little receivers to transmit these vibrations, to which the ear is no longer
sensible.
Farther up the scale still we come to light and colour. We only have one tiny
marvellous organ to register this set of vibrations to the brain – the optic
nerve. The eye is made to react up the scale of colour to the violet vibration.
After that, as already stated, the oscillation is so minute and rapid that it can
inter-penetrate solids, so these ultraviolet vibrations pass right through the
eye lens.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 18 ---
The question now arises – have we any organs which can deal with those
higher vibrations, or the very subtle substance of which they are composed,
and in what form are these contacted?
These last vibrations are so fine that they use the ether as their vehicle
instead of the heavier air particles. The ether is the indefinable substance in
which this earth and all the atoms of the air are supported. Scientists are on
the verge of discovering that there is more than one kind of ether, in fact
even perhaps three or four. The finest vibrations which we have yet
considered are within the realm of electrical and magnetic phenomena.
These are the forces which man also contains within himself, and which can
be utilized through the mind.
We must now inquire what organs man has with which to register these
particular vibrations, embracing the radiations and emanations, which come
under the general term ‘psychic’. There are two small glands in the head
which give doctors much cause for speculation. I refer to the Pituitary Body
and the Pineal Gland.
The former is a tiny, double bean-shaped body situated behind the root of
the nose. It is posed so that it is very sensitive to vibrations. We know that it
is in some way connected with nurture, body-building, and the nervous
system. If it is removed all organic function ceases. If overdeveloped it
produces giantism, which if underdeveloped dwarfism is the result. The
Pituitary Body has been called the seat of the mind. Its frontal lobe is
concerned with emotional thought, of the type which produces poetry and
music, while the anterior lobe is connected with more concrete intellectual
concepts.
The Pineal Gland is a tiny cone-shaped body in the middle of the head,
behind and just above the Pituitary. It contains pigment similar to that found
in the eyes, and is connected by two nerve cords with the optic thalmi; it is
said to control the action of light upon the body, and for these reasons
scientists have suggested that it is the remnant of a third physical eye. Men
of learning, such as Descartes, have pronounced it to be the point in the
human being where soul and body meet, the seat of intuition.
It is said that when, for specific reasons, the Pituitary Body and the Pineal
Gland have become fully developed and stimulated, their vibrations fuse and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 19 ---
stir into life the mysterious 'Third Eye’ of man, the eye of the soul.
Apparently this activity provides the mind with a perfect instrument with
which to work, a transmitter by means of which vibrations of very differing
types can be translated, interpreted and rearranged. This gives him personal
access to much knowledge, of which we will speak later.
Man can also become sensitive to the finer chemical and magnetic
emanations in the ether, and can ‘see’ the numberless thought-forms, entities
and creatures, the endless complexities and types of life which make up a
vast world of teeming energies which the limited capacity of ordinary
physical sight is unable to register.
In a few people there is a slight involuntary functioning of these latter
activities, and we call them either clairvoyant or crazy, according to our
understanding. They can literally see the radiations and ‘photographs’ in the
ether which are given off by almost any kind of body. We will study these in
a later chapter. But, just as the muscles and brain need developing in an
average person, so these organs of ‘second sight’ need their own particular
training. Many, however, are born with a ‘knack’ for their use, in the way of
any other type of prodigy.
When a psychometrist holds an article to his forehead against the awakened
‘Third Eye’ it tunes in to and commingles with the vibrations emanating
from the article, and as these vibrations represent a certain picture, just as do
our thoughts, he is able to describe the associations attached to it. The
emanations from an object are often so fine and numerous that they continue
to be given off for thousands of years, just as with radium.
The Egyptians knew all about the ‘Third Eye’, and indicated it on the statues
of their gods by a knob on the forehead. They trained the people in the use of
this psychic centre in the temple of Ma-at. The god Ma-at was vulture-
headed, because the vulture has a sight so keen as to be almost clairvoyant.
When people responded to this training they became ‘seers’, or psychic, as
we should say now. They could see with the trained ‘Third Eye’ right
through a body, as the X-ray does, and diagnose disease. All over the East
we find statues of historic men or women of wisdom with a knob or other
mark upon the forehead indicating this type of achievement.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 20 ---
Of course there are some people who have this power today, but we do not
understand its use now how to train them properly, consequently their
development has been left to chance.
We have now reached the most subtle portion on the scale of vibrations
which we are discussing. The question arises as to whether we have quite
exhausted its possibilities, or whether there are still finer ones than those that
exist in the ether, and, if so, have we any means of contacting them?
The sphere of thought next occurs to us. We are told that ‘thoughts are
things’! We know that each thought has its definite vibration, because this
has been proved. An instrument has been invented by Dr. Baraduc of
Bordeaux which records thought vibrations. When an intelligent person
approaches this instrument it registers a high-speed and strong vibration.
When a low type or imbecile approaches it the vibration is correspondingly
feeble and slow.
It has also been proved by experiment that by an act of will the mind can
cause objects such as metal levers to move (see experiments by Sir William
Crookes in Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science). We have also heard of
numberless cases of fakirs and people of that kind having been able to
prevent themselves from burning by fire, from suffocating when buried
alive, from bleeding from wounds, and from other normal reactions. They
can do this by being able to bring into action the power that the finer
vibrations of the mind have over the lower ones of chemical matter. The
same thing is done in chemistry through the use of electrical heat to split up,
reorganize or control chemical compounds.
Sometimes people use these powers without knowing exactly what they are
doing, nor what the result will be, as in the cases of some forms of mental
healing, based on ‘blind faith’. Such cases are a wonderful proof of existing
possibilities, but at best they are uncertain (sometimes only ‘flukes’), and
often much harm is done through lack of a fuller understanding.
In curing some diseases, either by self-treatment or by a mental healer, the
fine vibrations of the mind act on the lower vibrations of the disease tissue.
This can be performed at the same rate at which that particular mind is able
to visualize and concentrate – it may take hours, days or weeks, according to
the condition of patient and healer.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 21 ---
However, we know that there have occurred many cases of ‘instantaneous’
healing, diseased and broken tissues being rendered whole in a flash of
times. We have heard of such things throughout history, and they are said to
happen at the present day in places such as Lourdes. In these cases we have
at last touched upon the finest and subtlest ‘vibrations’ of all, those of the
‘spirit’ or the highest creative force. Such vibrations, being unhampered by
the processes of the brain, and operating at a terrific speed, can go through
the whole process of cure so quickly that we cannot possibly follow its
course, and the result seems to us to be instantaneous.
With a great spiritual healer such as Christ was, works of this kind are
possible, especially if the sufferer can tune in, through ‘faith’ or through the
medium of his own ‘spiritual’ vibrations, to the healer’s actions. Christ
encouraged us to strive for these powers of healing, which are not really
‘supernatural’, but the result of an intensive development and an
understanding of the laws of the universe.
The mind has power over everything that it can understand and visualize.
Therefore the first step of all is to study these arguments and theories, and
those facts which are supported by adequate testimony, with a perfectly open
and logical mind.
If and when we become convinced of any argument or concept, we must
tabulate it carefully, and pass on to a study of the next. In this way we will
begin gradually to discover what we really can know and believe.
For instance, we may feel that it is impossible for us to prove for ourselves
the truth of Christ’s miracles, or of any others in the past. But actually such
things are happening every day, in every guise and form, and a little inquiry
will soon put us in touch with them. Our own common sense will then
enable us to separate the true from the false.
The object of this chapter is to show that, although we may approach this
subject from the angle of pure chemical and mechanical science, we shall
still be able to work through to the final result that there is a certain force
controlled by our minds which can act more powerfully over solid matter
than anything else; and that there is a still stronger force, apparently outside
of mind, which can act instantaneously and ‘miraculously’.
It is not enough to go on any longer weakly tabulating these things as
‘hypnotism’, ‘thought-reading’, or ‘imagination’. They must be better
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 22 ---
understood for what they really are. We must have an explanation for the
changes in tissue and matter which occur. The old alchemists claimed that it
was possible to direct a mental force to change the composition of atoms by
altering their vibrations, and that thereby it would be possible to make gold.
They believed it was so, but already materialism had stepped in, and they
often endeavoured to accomplish it by chemical means alone.
The only real power to do such things lies within ourselves, but we must first
learn to use our own highest vibrations.
These powers can only work if they are undisturbed by the inharmonious
heavy vibrations which enter into our composition if we live out of harmony
with the laws of Nature.
The athlete knows that alcohol, smoking, unbalanced diet, worry and lack of
sleep upset his health and undermine his stamina, so that even the low
vibrations of physical strength and steadiness cannot gain control.
The mental worker knows that he has to steady down all his bodily
disturbances and vibrations before he can concentrate at all. He needs not
only to be able to ignore the vibrations all around him, which he can only do
if they are steady and balanced (a hum of traffic disturbs many much less
than odd drops of falling water), but also he must have steadiness and
balance of every activity of his own body – so that he can ignore it.
If, however, he is seeking neither athletic nor mental expression, but
‘inspiration’, he can only obtain that by steadying down the brain itself, so
that, balancing its vibrations to the same state of poise as those of his body,
he can ignore the brain and reach for the subtler forces of the mind. The
greatest inspiration will flash suddenly into the brain at a moment when it is
quiet and receptive.
Therefore, although the highest vibrations are the most powerful, we cannot
get in touch with them within ourselves when our bodies and brains are a
mass of struggling, fighting inharmonious vibrations, as is usually the case.
Though the highest forces are there within us, we give ourselves little chance
of linking up with them, and consequently are unable to utilize them.
The yogis and fakirs spend hours in ‘meditation’, or the effort to quieten
down every activity in the body and brain, so that the aforementioned
portions of the latter, the Pineal Gland and the Pituitary Body, can ‘tune in’
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 23 ---
to those highest powers. When this is accomplished these men can, while in
that state, cure their own and others’ bodily or mental ills, obtain inspiration
or wisdom, and attain a high state of physical fitness and strength without
our methods of ‘exercise’.
The first thing for us to do, therefore, is to eliminate all inharmonious
vibrations from our bodies and brains. We must throw them out one by one
as we discover them. Every unnecessary act, thought, emotion and fear must
go! We must build into the fabric of our lives only those things which will
balance, strengthen, and beautify them. We will find that there is a
tremendous amount of accumulated rubbish to cast away! Those things
which remain will give us all the greater joy and interest through being
intensified.
The simple methods for doing this will be explained later.
Before closing this chapter let us give a thought to the modern scientists.
Having followed a long trail in their efforts to discover the difference
between matter and the life which pours through it, they have finally arrived
at the perplexing result that there is no difference at all! They now know that
solid matter in its final analysis is merely energy in a certain state of motion.
They also know that our thoughts are also energy in a certain state of
motion!
In other words, the world appears to be made up of the energy of the Being
or Mind behind it, whose idea it was!
The scientists do not put it this way – yet!
From a scientific point of view they have come up against a blank wall, and
their present attitude is probably that of a big question-mark.
3
THE SECRET KNOWLEDGE
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 24 ---
Having studied our world according both to the modern matter-of-fact
scientist and the less orthodox modern ideas, let us now turn and plunge into
the past, and see what our ancestors knew, and how their knowledge helped
them.
They prophesied the long dark Age of Ignorance from which we are at
present emerging. That ignorance has engendered in us the habit of scoffing
at everything which is not ‘ordinary’, ‘normal’ or able to be weighed and
measured by scientists.
The scientists themselves have reached a point where they are no longer
dealing with purely physical or chemical things – they have pushed upwards
through the great scale of vibrations until their heads are in the clouds of
conjecture. Perhaps they dare not speak of the possibilities they conceive.
Let us leave them hesitating in that exciting position, and start a tour of
exploration on our own.
In a universe full of trillions of stars, of constellations and solar systems,
there is one minute speck of matter which we call our earth. This speck of
matter is covered with millions of microcopical creatures called human
beings. The strange thing is that these microscopical creatures consider
themselves important. Each minute one of them is able to feel that he is
more important than the whole universe upon ;which he is but a speck.
Are these creatures really important, and if so, why?
Looking at them dispassionately, we can see that there is at least one
remarkable thing about them. Almost any one of them, by training his
microscopical brain, is able to visualize the past, present and future, not only
of his own little person, country or planet, but of the whole universe. Within
his tiny personality there is locked a power which will give him unlimited
understanding of things quite beyond his physical reach, a dynamic capacity
to wield the forces of Nature with a mind of which he knows not the limits.
Man is an animal, but he is an animal embodying a god. The ancients were
much more alive to his potentialities than we are now. As we explore, it will
take us some time to decide whether man knew more thousands of years ago
than he does today, and whether he was a finer being.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 25 ---
This planet is infinitely older than most of us imagine, and so is the history
of mankind. Archeologists are continually having to push back their dates
further into the past. Much learnt in history books by the last generation is
obsolete, and must now be unlearnt! Civilizations had been rising, falling
and disappearing aeons before the men who owned the paleolithic skulls
were born.
All these things are revealed to us in the Ancient or Secret Wisdom, which is
a collection of teachings handed down from the very earliest times,
explaining man, his origin, his composition and destiny, and also the
purpose of the Universe. The Wisdom has come to us in unchanged form,
concealed and taught throughout the world under the garb of many of the
ancient religions. We will trace this in a later chapter, but begin now by a
study of the Wisdom itself as it is still to be found in the East.
This teaching professes to expound to us the few great fundamental laws
upon which are founded the life and progress of man and the universe.
Let us endeavour to shake off the habits of thought imposed upon us by the
generations of a Dark Age, and consider with an open mind the heritage
bequeathed to us by our earlier ancestors.
The Great Laws can best be named for us in English as follows:
Repetition: The Microcosm and the Macrocosm
Evolution.
Cause and Effect, or ‘Karma’ and Rebirth
The Plan of Creation, or the Seven Planes.
The principle of the first of these laws is: ‘As in the Microcosm (man) so in
the Macrocosm (the universe)’. It asserts that the same system of form, time
and motion runs through the whole universe, so that if we properly study an
atom or a cell we will obtain the key to the workings of a man, a planet, or a
constellation. In that way, through a knowledge of periodicity – or the
regular periods of time which occur on a small scale in nature – the ancient
mathematicians were able to calculate the stars, their movements, and
thereby the evolutionary stages in history on a large scale, and to prophesy
conditions and influences thousands of years ahead.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 26 ---
It is disconcerting to find that the conceptions of the very ancient sages tax
the modern man’s mind to the utmost. Even to understand their meaning and
visualize their ideas takes effort and practice – much less could modern man
originate such profound theories himself. And the ancients accomplished
these things without, so far as we know, any of our modern mechanical aids.
This great Law of Repetition declares that there is an ordered arrangement
within the universe, with certain periods of time and patterns of form
repeated up the scale and governing the tiniest to the greatest. It asserts that
the little things are a mirror of the larger ones, and everything is not only a
replica but intimately connected with everything else. For instance, if you
want to study a solar system you can study an atom. And if you want to
study animal, plant, mineral or even solar life you will find it all represented
in the body of man himself.
‘Man, Know Thyself’ was the ancient command written above the temple
door. If we persevere with this fascinating study we will find that in the form
of every human being the universe is presented to us; we can inspect the
solar systems of his atoms, the mineral world in its most active and creative
form in his interior laboratory, and the physical development of animal life
from its lowest to highest form in his embryo. In his nature we will find a
mixture of the passions and peculiarities of all living creatures. We can also
trace an intimate relationship with all the planets through the interplay going
on in his body with the cosmic and planetary rays, and a connection with the
world of magnetism and electricity as well. Finally we will discover that
man has in his puny frame the capacity to connect his mind with the highest
unseen cosmic intelligence – the mind of ‘Nature’.
This first great Law, then, that of the Macrocosm and the Microcosm, gives
us at once a much more comprehensive outlook on life, and therefore the
capacity of brining vision and breadth into our creative work.
The second great Law is that of EVOLUTION:
Everything in life is evolving upwards and onwards to a higher and more
perfect state, having had its beginning in an uncreative, unconscious and
elementary form, and growing and progressing through striving, sacrifice
and struggle to a condition of creative selfconscious potent strength.
Beginning at the lowest end of the scale with the minerals, we know that
they have an elementary consciousness or mentality; that they strive,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 27 ---
struggle and become tired, and that they are ‘sacrificed’ to or absorbed by
the kingdom above them, the vegetable kingdom which lives upon them.
The vegetable kingdom has a higher consciousness or vibration than the
mineral kingdom, and a greater power for struggling and adapting itself; in
its turn it is sacrificed to the animal kingdom who feed upon it. The animals
may seem to the plants to be some kind of deities, with wonderful and to
them ‘miraculous’ powers of movement.
The sum of vegetable and mineral experience is absorbed by the animals,
who depend on this for their life and evolution. In return, it is said that the
animals provide, by their breathing, the carbon dioxide upon which plants
exist during the day. Some of the animals are becoming extremely advanced
in consciousness, and are full of what can be described as (for them)
spiritual aspiration. Mankind are their deities, and they strain and strive to
attain, in such things as speech and work, to the miraculous activities of their
gods. The adoring eyes of a dog and his efforts to talk, and the keenness and
pride of an elephant at work, are instances in point.
Animals in their turn offer up their sacrifice of adoration, emulation and
service to man. Whereas the vegetable kingdom should adequately sustain
the body of man, the animal kingdom should feed his emotional needs only,
through his function of guardianship (‘domain’) over them. This relationship
of loving, learning and teaching is the true one, instead of the prevailing
extraordinary exploitation, slaughter and cruelty enacted towards animals,
which forms the basis of similar attitudes towards all the other kingdoms,
producing the predatory world which we have today.
We continue up the scale and find that in the kingdom of man the same
process is going on. The more advanced type of human being is sacrificing
his lower nature, and striving to reach and copy a higher kingdom of beings
than his own. He calls these beings angels, gods or deities, and has as much
difficulty in understanding their wonderful capabilities as the animals have
in understanding his own. But just as the animals depend upon man for the
final development of their intelligence, so man depends upon the subtler and
more inspiring minds of the ‘angels’ for his own awakening.
We are told, also, that, just as man depends for his sustenance and progress
upon the lower kingdoms of nature, so the ‘angel’ world depends upon the
offering and sacrificing of man’s ‘soul-force’ for its own nourishing and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 28 ---
development. Mankind and the angels can only reach greater heights of
realization through the interplay of mutual service.
In accordance with the first great Laws of Repetition we realize that the
process must continue, and therefore we are bound to infer that the angels
are also sacrificing to, and striving to reach, a higher kingdom of Beings
than themselves.
The Ancient Wisdom has mapped out for us the pattern of these angel
communities and Hierarchies. An amazing vista of worlds ahead of us is
thereby opened up for our consideration.
The third great Law is that of KARMA AND REBIRTH. This states that
nothing in life is wasted, and all things share alike the chance of gaining
ultimate perfection and of going through the full course of experience and
development. We see that in the physical world as soon as a plant or other
living creature has had its particular span or life it dies or withers. The cells
which formed it disintegrate, but their chemical constituents come together
at a later period to form a future plant or animal, closely resembling the
former one, but plus, always, a stage of further adaptability, and change,
showing that the consciousness and memory of the former plant has been
reborn too.
When we come to a highly specialized consciousness like that of a human
being we are told that it is being continually reborn upon the earth, and that
it struggles and strives upwards perfecting and developing itself through
numberless hard lessons and inevitable mistakes, until finally it reaches the
stage of creative and conscious power which we call ‘superhuman’.
The method by which experience and progress is assured is expressed in the
ancient law of KARMA. This word has not even an equivalent in the
English language. Its meaning is ‘cause-and-effect’, or ‘action-and-reaction’.
We are told that all of life is built upon the law of opposites, as in the
negative and positive poles of electricity, day and night, heat and cold,
summer and winter, good and evil. The constant friction between these
opposites causes development, change, adjustment – in other words
originality, or the free-will which functions throughout all creation, and
through which creation itself learns eventually to become creative.
All this happens so slowly (to us) that at times we don not realize that there
is progress, because we become confused by the backward crouch of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 29 ---
wave of progress before a further push forward. Probably we are living at
the time of a backward crouch now, and perhaps that is why so much that is
bad in humanity seems to be driven to the surface, so that to some the world
appears at present to be deteriorating.
The Laws of Rebirth and Karma work hand in glove, so to speak. We are
told that mankind came into being because Spirit, or the life-force behind
everything, wished to develop more creative power. This development could
only be accomplished by Spirit being so imprisoned and confined in matter
(flesh) that It forgets Its oneness with Wisdom, and has to find everything
out afresh through fighting and experience. So we are told that Virgin Spirit
divided itself up into fractions and, by ensouling the egos of man and all
other forms of life, sank itself into the heavy imprisoning matter of this
world, and is slowly and patiently fighting its way back to Truth and Light
and Power. The human egos evolve steadily, each undergoing constant
rebirth, until it gradually attains to a knowledge of the laws of the universe
through Karma – or the effect of its own acts and thoughts, achieving power
and strength through the mastery of one law after another until at last it
reaches omnipotence both physical and spiritual. We might say that the
friction between the opposite poles of spirit and flesh causes, as in
electricity, light or energy, which is creative force-power! The planets, the
earth, the races of mankind, the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms
also reincarnate, all being under the same law. (We must mention here that it
is not possible, according to the Secret Teaching, for man to be reborn as an
animal, because however low he might sink in his own kingdom he could
not retrogress into a slower vibration. This theory, called Transmigration of
Souls, is held by certain peoples who have allowed their former knowledge
to become distorted.)
Many persons here in the West find it rather difficult to accept this theory of
reincarnation, because it has been stamped out for thousands of years. It
therefore requires a great deal of unaccustomed mental exercise to obtain a
real picture of it to hold in the mind. It is accepted quite naturally by most of
the Eastern peoples, and has been for untold centuries, so that whether we
believe in it or not we should go into the theory as fairly and impartially as if
we were studying their ideas on art or agriculture.
As a rule human beings are unable to remember anything about any past
lives they may have had. Of course there are exceptions, and many people
have collected a great deal of evidence of such memories, which evidence is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 30 ---
extremely interesting. In fact, I think we would find it impossible to deny
that some people, at least, have lived before. When we consider that we are
unable to remember a great deal of our present life, especially things which
have affected our characters deeply, until they are laid bare by a
psychoanalyst, it is not surprising if we do not remember past lives. But we
are told that the experience gained in such lives is retained by us in those
qualities which we describe as ‘having a conscience’, an ‘instinct’ or a
‘knack’.
According to this, then, a child prodigy is the result of continuous effort in
past lives along some particular line. It might reasonably follow that
imbecility is the result of a continuous refusal to use the brain and make
effort; that to be a dwarf or cripple is the Karma of one who in previous lives
neglected his body; and that an epileptic is probably discharging the debt of
continuous immorality in a past life. In the light of this reasoning we could
feel that there is no injustice or inequality in life, because the egos are
choosing their own ways of learning life’s lessons, which can only be learnt
through experience and suffering. Believing this, then, we could blame our
parents for nothing since we are the masters of our own fate, and reap
exactly as we have sown in the past – the effect of the cause – Karma!
We are told that certain groups of people incarnate together at intervals. In
this way old injuries and insults must be recompensed, old enmities finally
adjusted, and old loves allowed to continue and to grow and beautify.
Nothing is lost, nothing is wasted, everyone finally reaches the same goal of
perfection, although they are all in such different stages and classes now. No
man becomes perfect or attains his goal so long as there is a single feeling of
enmity between him and another, or until a score has been settled and wiped
out by service and friendship. This is what Christ meant when He gave us
that difficult injunction to ‘turn the other cheek’ and to ‘offer thy cloak also
to him who shall take thy coat’. If we ‘love our neighbour as ourselves’ we
cannot mind to whom the coat belongs! These conceptions are very difficult
for a selfish world to grasp as yet, and few of us have the pluck to try them
out.
We limit ourselves by being possessive. The greatest things we can have –
wisdom, health and power – are all-pervading, and cannot be divided. They
can only develop and be shared. Possessiveness, on the other hand, causes
wars, cruelties, jealousies and sufferings. It can never do any good, and
usually despoils the most beautiful thing in life – Love.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 31 ---
Therefore, if we can once believe in Reincarnation we would realize that
Fear is wasted effort, because though we have suffered death and pain often
before we are here again! Fear is something of our making, and it paralyses
us and renders us stupid.
Also we can see that it is better not to think evil, unkind or worried thoughts,
because by doing so we are causing effects which we will have a lot of work
in putting right again – Karma! Thoughts are things, and when we unloose
an ugly or harmful thing into the world we shall be obliged to remove it.
Thoughts persist in the ethereal regions, and are connected with the one who
made them until they are disintegrated through his effort.
The fourth great Law is that of the PLAN OF CREATION which teaches us
about the Seven Planes. We learn that the whole of the solar system is built
upon an orderly numerical system, and a set of seven definitely graded types
of matter, substance, or, as the mystics and occultists call them, planes.
These planes meet one another in a delicately graded sequence of
interpenetrating vibrations with which the modern scientist is experimenting
today and which we discussed in Chapter 2. The scope of his discoveries lies
roughly between the phenomenon of sound (with its lowest vibration at
about sixteen to the second) to that of X-ray (whose highest vibrations are
estimated at 2,305,843,009,213,693,952 per second). These vibrations
constitute a portion of what is known as the chemical or physical world or
plane. The ancients were able to understand and tabulate seven times as
much as this, because they postulated seven worlds of different kinds of life,
interpenetrating and influencing one another, through which were
functioning the various life-forces, currents, rays, thoughts, emotions, and
archetypes of form which combine to produce life as it is, with all its
different complexities. They had all this thoroughly worked out, and
understood just how these different forces were concentrated into man’s
body through the channels of his various glands. The doctors of today are
still struggling with the ‘unknown’ functions of some of these glands
because they have not had the inspiration to refer to the ancient knowledge
and unravel the symbolism in which it was presented.
This symbolism was arranged and used both to awe the public and keep
them from a knowledge which might be dangerous when in the hands of the
ignorant and unprincipled, in much the same way as Latin is employed today
by doctors. In times of high national morale more and more of the secrets
were given out and understood by the public. But in periods of decadence
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 32 ---
and materialism the priests and rulers themselves deteriorated, and the
knowledge was hidden away and guarded by the few remaining initiates or
sages.
We are emerging from a long period of such materialism at present, and that
is why doctor, priest and public are confronted with the task of learning a
great deal all over again, and revising the knowledge of their ancestors
before they can carry things a step further.
This revision was begun at the end of last century by such people as
Madame Blavatsky through the Theosophists, by the Christian Scientists, by
Mesmer, and a host of others, who aroused the public desire to penetrate
once more into the fundamental meaning of Life and its ultimate purpose.
Since then modern methods have been used to unearth the Ancient Wisdom
and once more reinstate it.
Some people say, ‘What do we want with the past? Let us go forward and be
practical!’ But as we have not yet been able to improve in some respects
upon the conceptions of art, architecture, mathematics, ethics, and science of
some of those very ancient civilizations to any degree, it will surely be worth
our while to study the foundations upon which their mentalities were built.
The four Great Laws which we have enumerated in this chapter were a part
of those foundations.
We hear people say, ‘Oh, the East is degenerate and effeminate, and social
conditions there are terrible – therefore, of what use has that Ancient
Wisdom been? People like this should think further, realizing that the higher
one mounts the lower one can fall. Degeneracy is the result of laziness,
slackness and subsequent distortion of teaching, and has nothing whatever to
do with the pure teaching of a religion in its original form, which is nearly
always fine. We have only to consider the original teachings of Christ,
observing how we have degenerated that, with our long history of
bloodshed, greed and oppression, to feel that we cannot point any finger of
criticism at the East. Also, the East is now the prey of old age, and feminine
in character, as compared with the vigorous, youthful, masculine Western
civilization.
The four Great Laws are hidden in the Christian religion, and can be
revealed with a little study, in spite of the mistranslation and censorship to
which it has been subjected.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 33 ---
It is very necessary to see life as a Whole, and realize that we can obtain a
high state of mental balance and vision only when we attempt to link
together the past, present and future, and all the sciences, into one
comprehensive and comprehensible picture.
4
HOW WE ARE MADE
The secret knowledge explains to us in quite a scientific way how we are
made.
We have seen that modern scientists have worked out the whole of physical
or chemical life to a scale of atoms vibrating at different speeds. The
Ancients called this great scale the Physical Plane.
A Plane meant a complete series or world of substances under one Law.
The Physical Plane includes solids, liquids, gases and the ethers of which we
are told there are four. That totals up to seven ‘states of matter’, which go to
make up the densest or chemical expression of life called the Physical Plane.
We must remember that these ‘states of matter’ are mostly able to
interpenetrate each other, as we saw in Chapter 1.
The Physical Plane includes, of course, our Solar System, with its solids,
gases and chemical rays.
Now, the Ancient Wisdom teaches that life is made up of Seven Planes or
states of matter, of which the Physical Plane is only one – the densest or, in
wireless parlance, the one of lowest frequency.
We are told that each of the Seven Major Planes is divided into seven sub-
planes or strata, just as is the Physical Plane, each Plane and each Stratum
being a mirror or counterpart of one of another series. Take the seven
colours of the spectrum and split them up into seven shades of each colour,
and you have a simile. Let the seven darkest shades represent the Physical
Plane, and the seven palest and most luminous represent the Spiritual Plane.
You will see how closely they are all connected with each other, even taking
into account the complementary colours.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Planes are neither above nor below one another, but interpenetrating,
those which we think of as ‘above’ being of higher frequency from the
standpoint of vibrations. (Bear in mind that all these things are very difficult
to put into words.)
Everything in life, from a planet to a fly, from a cloud to a grain of sand, is
interprenetrated by all these seven planes or worlds, and in most cases has a
‘body’ with which to function in each of them.
Man possesses a body made up of the material of the physical plane world, a
body containing chemicals in liquid, solid and gaseous state. This body is
interpenetrated by another body, which is its counterpart, and is made up of
the four ethers. This is called his ‘etheric’ body, and constitutes a fine web
through which the electric and radiating life-forces are fed into his physical
body from the outer universe. This completes a man’s physical plane
equipment.
The next of the Seven Planes is called the Astral World. It is called by some
the Desire World, as it is the sphere of emotions or desires. It contains the
substance that stirs or motivates us. It is the world of attraction and
repulsion.
Man has a body of this astral material, which is in full action when he is
roused, excited, afraid, or full of desire – these feeling being, as we know,
sometimes quite divorced from and stronger than our reasoning minds. It is
possible for man, the individual, to separate his astral body from his physical
body and wander about in it. Such an astral body can be seen by the astral
eyes of another person, who will speak of it as a ‘ghost’.
Everything physical has its counterpart in astral substance, so that a man
wandering in his astral body can see chairs and tables, or, rather, their astral
counterparts. The counterparts of physical things are made up of the lowest
and densest stratum of the astral material, whereas the counterparts of
thoughts and feelings are made up of the subtle and malleable kind of astral
stuff. This has been described by clairvoyants as a moving and shimmering
kaleidoscope of swiftly interchanging colours.
The Astral World is therefore almost impossible to visualize by anyone who
has not been able to see it, but a vague idea of it can be obtained by a study
of the various descriptions given to us by clairvoyants of all times.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 35 ---
The third of the Seven Great Planes is the world of thought or mind. The
densest stratum of this Plane contains our own more worldly and material
thoughts. The finer strata are used by cosmic intelligences for planning the
archetypes and activities of the universe. That is why if we can contact the
higher strata of the mind-world or Mental Plane by training the
corresponding parts of our brains (as all the sages have endeavoured to do),
we shall gain inconceivable knowledge. The world of thought is even more
difficult for us to picture than the Astral World, but as a beginning let us
realize that it is said to interpenetrate all of life, like a sort of forceful ‘gas’.
It is not confined to the brain, which latter acts more like a kind of telephone
switchboard to all the thoughts which pass through it.
The Fourth Plane is that of the Will or Life-spirit, and it is of this world that
the real individual, the Ego, is a part. It is the Ego who uses the physical,
astral and mind bodies as tools with which to achieve his purpose. When
they are completely under his control and in harmony and balance one with
another he becomes omnipotent and has achieved conquest over matter. He
can, after careful training, shed his physical body like a coat and, leaving it
safely in the nourishing care of its etheric web, continue his activities in his
other bodies, or ‘vehicles’ as they are called.
When he wishes to return he slips back into the cramping and restricting
burden which is his outer coating of flesh. We call this waking up, or
returning to consciousness, as the case may be. He has often brought back
useful knowledge which would benefit mankind, but the jar of contact once
again with the heavy earth vibrations is so harsh that it usually snaps the
thread of memory of the preceding activities, unless the person has been
specially trained.
We have now come to a point where words are no longer even of the
slightest help, so we will not attempt to describe the remaining three of the
Seven Great Planes, those three which carry the consciousness through to a
contact with the world of the Divine Creator Himself. It takes courage even
to think, let alone speak, of such untranslatable wonders – but we do need
such courage, and man is therefore obliged to reduce them to tiny Physical
Plane conceptions able to be grasped by his five limited senses. Daring,
however, is not without its reward, provided the motive is sincere, so man
soon learns that he is more than an animal.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 36 ---
The Seven Planes, then, comprise the material of which the whole evolving
universe is made. The Physical Plane, or solid world, takes up the smallest
space, because it is condensed and we can see it everywhere with our
physical eyes. The etheric counterparts protrude an inch or two outside all
living objects, and can be seen with the help of the Kilner glass screens.
The astral body protrudes to a still further extent, and is described by the
clairvoyant who can tell a great deal about the individual by looking at it.
Our earth also has an astral body, of course, which stretches very far out
from its circumference. Incidentally, we shall have to accustom ourselves to
the idea that the earth is a living creature, as are also the planets.
The Astral World is the world wherein the Fourth Dimension is to be found
and understood. If you can imagine having eyes that see right through
everything in all directions at one, you are visualizing your condition when
functioning in the Astral World!
The thought-world, or Mental Plane, or that part of it which is the thought-
body of our earth, extends still further outwards into interplanetary space. It
presents a marvellous field of exploration for the mystic and the occultist.
The worlds of spirit occupy still larger space. The finest stratum of these, in
the final world of Divine force, embraces all and flows uninterruptedly
through everything. By this we can see what is meant when we are told that
God, or heaven, is within us. We are each able to contact the world of spirit
within our own little bodies, because in the final analysis it is the life of that
world which is interpenetrating and sustaining us.
We have taken but a superficial glance at the Law of the Seven Planes. It is
open to us to reject or accept such a hypothesis, as we choose. But the
exhaustive way in which all the workings of these Planes have been
analysed gives us a most interesting and suggestive field of study, full of
amazing and thrilling conceptions.
Let us summarize some of the main points once again.
According to this teaching, then, man has for his use first of all his solid
physical body of low-frequency vibrations (an instrument or switchboard
through which he contacts physical things).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 37 ---
Secondly, he owns a body of ether, interpenetrating this first body by reason
of its higher and finer vibrations, and acting as an intermediary between it
and the outer ether, a channel through which all the magnetic life-forces are
fed to it.
Thirdly, he owns an ‘astral’ or ‘ghost’ body, interpenetrating the other two,
and having much the same high speed of movement as electricity, at which
speed he can travel when polarized entirely in the astral body (as in sleep).
Fourthly, there is his mental body, and well-known instances of though
telepathy travelling right across the world in the space of a few seconds
prove to us the speed at which we can function while in this body. We often
hear of cases of people appearing to their friends at the moment of their
death, although living in a distant land.
Man’s spiritual body is composed of the finest and most high-frequency
vibrations of all, and can for that reason take control of all the lower ones. It
can travel so fast that it can appear to be ‘everywhere at once’. When man
can consciously function in his spirit-body he is able finally to conquer time
and space, which only belong to a seventh part of the universe, the Physical
Plane.
It is very hard for present-day materially minded man to visualize these
‘planes’ and ‘bodies’. But he must not allow his brain to remain inferior to
that of the early races. The Egyptians, for instance, were quite at home with
this knowledge, and drew and named the different ‘bodies’ of man on tombs
and frescoes.
According to some authorities they symbolized them as follows:
They called the physical body KAT, a dead fish! The symbol was a curled-
up dead fish, perhaps the most physical of all creatures.
The etheric double was called KA, and symbolized, as the vehicle or
holder of the body, by a breast and two upstretched arms.
They called the astral body BA, symbolizing it by a human-headed
bird, a bird being a ‘traveller through space’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 38 ---
The spirit was represented by a lotus, which is able to rise out of the
darkness and mud to reach the light.
The knowledge of these early peoples was astonishing. They understood so
completely the power of mind over matter. One outstanding instance of this
is seen in their feats of building, still incomprehensible to us.
It is said that they were able to wield the spirit-force over astral and physical
substance and create entities to attach to the tombs, to guard them for
centuries.
Present-day scientists are busy exploding the atom with magnetic and
electric force, but so far the results of their efforts have been dubious,
because of the poisonous by-products produced. Perhaps they are doing
things the wrong way round, using physical-plane instruments of low
vibrations to try to control higher vibrations. They might do better if they
could train the only high-powered instrument they possess – the mind – as
did the ancient scientists. The true alchemists tried to use the burning force
of the concentrated mind as the crucible in which they could distil the elixir
of life from gold.
Fire can burn up anything of lower vibration than itself. The mind can
control fire, being of higher vibration. There are many authentic cases of
people who can contact fire without being burnt and can be pierced by
knives without shedding blood.
The mind can act very quickly on matter, but the spirit can act
instantaneously, rearranging the vibrations and re-forming them. This fact is
probably the basis of the performance of ‘miracles’ and ‘faith-healing’.
Many people are testing these things out, through mesmerism, hypnotism,
thought-reading, psychometry, and other methods.
The explorer along such lines will find that the etheric body has been
weighed by scientists; that the aura can be seen through a glass prepared by
psychic researchers; that numberless people have had experience of the
astral body; that the vibrations of the mental body have been recorded by
instruments; and the power of the spirit-body demonstrated by innumerable
‘miracles’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 39 ---
It is natural to be sceptical about many of these things, but he who is wise
will keep an open mind until he has fairly tested the various proofs available
to him.
5
HOW WE ARE CLASSIFIED
We are told that the attainment of wisdom and power can only be acquired
through study and knowledge of ourselves. We have seen also that the same
laws govern the whole universe, and that if man can understand some of the
laws governing himself or the tiniest atom he will have a clue to those which
govern the solar systems and the greater system to which they belong.
Scientists have discovered that an atom closely resembles a miniature solar
system in its turn is one of millions of atoms forming the body of some great
Being too vast for us to picture. Such a Being might feel small compared to
the world which He in turn finds surrounding Himself.
Let us carry this idea a little further. The atoms (the starts) forming the cells
(constellations) of the body of this vast Being would not appear to be far
apart to Him; seen by Him they would be intimately connected with each
other, there being strong chemical reactions and influences between them,
just as with the cells in our own bodies. When an atom from one of our own
cells is examined it is found to be composed of a proton (or sun) surrounded
by various numbers of electrons (or planets) all vibrating at set speeds. Now,
we are told that the proton is so small a part of the atom that it can be
compared with a bee buzzing inside a cathedral! So that if we could become
small enough to cling to that proton we should certainly feel as if we were
clinging to a star in a mighty space, and it would be difficult to believe that
our star was part of an atom in the cell of a very solid body.
Some scientists now claim that the ether itself is denser than the planets that
swing through it, so you see we must reserve ideas about solidity until we
are a little better informed. The point made in this case is that through
visualizing our vast giant we can better understand the intimate relation in
which the stars stand to each other. Composed of chemicals held together by
force or energy, the radiations from each star and planet strongly affect each
other, carrying with them chemicals in a very fine and subtle form. Thus
from the planet Mercury we should expect to receive rays of the wave-length
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 40 ---
that belongs to Mercury, and containing mercury itself in a fine form; also
certain other chemicals which are contained in the planet to a lesser degree.
As our solar system is believed to have been formed from the splitting up of
one star, every planet, every man and every atom within it must still be held
and connected one with another by the interplay of identical chemical
radiations. As an example, it is said that a ruby is actually a fragment of that
part of the original star which finally broke away to form the planet Mars.
The astrologer makes careful calculations of the chemical and spiritual
influences set up by the continual changing of the relative positions of the
planets and luminaries (sun and moon), and of their effect upon the
microcosm or tiny replica which is man. The macro-microcosmic law comes
into play also in the question of time. A man’s whole life is said to be
mirrored in the moment of his birth.
According to one school of astrologists a person’s individuality, his positive
side, his character, are determined by the zodiacal sign in which the sun is
found at his birth. His personality, or negative side, is determined by the sign
in which the moon is found at his birth. When he is born he is ‘tuned in’, as
it were, to the play of the planetary influences at the time, and the vibrations
set up within him rule him all his life, determining his reactions both
chemical and characteristic, and the environment which they attract.
It is in this way that people are classified.
There are at present scientific experiments in progress whose object is to
indicate the differing results of inaugurating the same chemical mixtures at
various phases of the planets, and also the different reactions at such times in
plants and animals.
The ancient sages had a great knowledge of this fascinating subject and
considered it of paramount importance. First of all they conducted endless
studies about the planets, and we call the results of their research
Astronomy. They next made extraordinarily complicated and exhaustive
studies of the combined influences of the planets on both the earth and
human beings, according to their different positions in the heavens at various
times. The results of this particular research have come down to us
embodied in another science which we call astrology.
Astrology divides the heavens into twelve portions, rather like the divisions
of an orange. These divisions, called the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 41 ---
correspond roughly with the twelve months of the year. Each of these Signs
is governed by one of the planets. According to the month of the year in
which you were born you can tell which Sign rules your life, and
consequently what sort of health you may expect to enjoy, and what your
characteristics will be.
Astrology is such a lengthy study and so difficult a science that there are few
really expert astrologers in the world. Those few who do exist usually
belong to a family of astrologers, whose teaching has been handed down for
generations. A genuine astrologer must make complete calculations of the
interplay of influences, chemical and otherwise, of every planet upon the
person or subject under consideration.
But anyone can make a beginning with a simple study of the Twelve Signs
of the Zodiac, and although the information gained is only generalization, it
is close to the truth and therefore helpful and can be used by those who have
not learnt to cast a horoscope.
To attain his final development, man is supposed to be born under the Signs
of the Zodiac one by one, to learn the lessons they teach. Sometimes he is
obliged to learn one of these lessons for the third time, perhaps for the
thirtieth!
This has all been beautifully expressed in the Twelve Labours of Hercules,
which was written with a profound knowledge of both astrology and
symbolism, and contains deeply occult meaning.
The ancients declared that the whole history of the evolution of mankind, the
solar system, and the universe is described and foretold by the start, grouped
in a kind of mystic shorthand, and capable of perfect translation. Such
translation are contained in many of the hidden archives.
In respect of our year, one Sign of the Zodiac, with its planet, is ruling from
about the 21st to the 21st of each month.
The influences of the Signs overlap each other slightly, so that a person born
between about the 15th and 25th of the month is influenced by two Signs
(being born near to their junction). This gives him a more complex
character. The most composite influence takes place on the 22nd of the
month, so we find many prominent characters born on that date, such as
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 42 ---
Wagner, Van Dyck, Byron, George Washington, Hitler, Conan Doyle,
Baden-Powell, Faraday and Rider Haggard.
A person born during the first half of the month comes under the unmixed
influence of the sign, and would therefore be of a more definite type.
It must be understood, however, that in dividing the whole of humanity into
only twelve types we are merely taking the first step. We are only
generalizing, and although we have made an important beginning we must
not take it as the final word.
The birth of Christ took place at a rare and wonderful conjunction of the
stars, by which they announced (in the aforementioned shorthand) that
tremendous event.
The Three Wise Men, who were Astrologer Kings of Chaldea, had been
waiting for this conjunction to occur, and when they saw its approach they
set off to journey to Jerusalem, over which town it was apparent that it
would take place. They arrived and told King Herod, who at once realized
the significance of the conjunction, which heralded a new ‘King’. Herod
called all his wise astrologers together and ‘inquired of them diligently what
time the star appeared’. They were all much troubled.
History is full of stories illustrating the immense importance given to
astrology, of which astronomy was but the foundation. All priests and
governors in olden days had to be well versed in the science of the stars and
in the science of numbers, and we find that this knowledge existed all over
the then known world.
We have only time here to take a superficial glance at the way in which we
can apply astrology to the understanding of ourselves, and also of racial and
world conditions.
By means of this science it is considered possible to map out the whole of a
person’s life. This is done in the first place by using the law ‘As in the
Microcosm so in the Macrocosm’, and therefore by postulating that the plan
of a person’s threescore years is mirrored in the first day, and even in the
first moments, of his life. In the same way the history of a race or country
can be determined by the influences under which it had its inception.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 43 ---
These things can, of course, only be believed through the study of proofs.
The way to obtain these proofs is first of all to study astrology (!) and then to
consider the hundreds of horoscopes of famous people which are available,
as well as the annals of history itself.
In Astrology the great law of cause and effect (Karma) plays a big part. If,
for instance, a man is greedy, it is not magical to predict that at a future date
he will suffer from a digestive trouble, or if he is rash and impetuous that an
accident is very sure to befall him. The average astrologer will predict the
accident, but if instead he would study the cause, and persuade the man to
cure his rashness, Karma would be defeated or adjusted, and the accident
need not happen. ‘The wise man is master of his stars, the fool is ruled by
them.’
A conscientious astrologer always tries to show a person what tendencies he
has to master, instead of playing upon his love of sensation by describing
future events. What does a man need with his future before he has any idea
of how to deal with the present? Today contains all possibilities for those
who know how to strive for them.
Astrology has been sadly neglected as a science, but lately it is beginning to
come into its own again, under the patient research-work of hard-headed
scientists who are quite unsuspecting of that which they are about to unearth.
One of the principal uses to which Astrology can be put is the thorough
diagnosis of a patient, bringing to light the chemical deficiencies or
maladjustments in his internal laboratory, and the planetary rays which he is
able to assimilate and use, or those which are causing him trouble. This
method will do away with all guesswork, it is claimed, as we are assured that
it is an exact science and will play a large part in the future of medicine.
Some of the biochemical experts have declared that the twelve principal cell-
salts found in the human body are ruled by the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.
They affirm that a person uses up more of the cell-salt belonging to the Sign
under which he was born, as that chemical is connected with the key-note of
his activity. Therefore the fist deficiency that occurs in his internal
laboratory is this cell-salt, his ‘birth salt’, and the various symptoms of his
ills may be traced primarily to this depletion. All this was apparently known
to the ancients, but as they gave to the cell-salts the names of gods, and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 44 ---
described their activities in mythical parables, we are only just beginning to
understand what they meant.
Let us now take a rapid glance at the major general classifications of
astrological characteristics:
The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac represent the twelve lessons of human
existence, the twelve qualities to be developed in the formation of the perfect
man. It is said that these qualities are gradually achieved by every human
being, life after life, but not necessarily Sign after Sign. That is where man’s
free-will comes in. If he chooses to work under some particular Sign more
often than the others, or repulses the lesson of one Sign altogether, a one-
sided character results, such as a genius with evil tendencies.
The Zodiacal year begins at the vernal equinox on March 21st, with the Sign
of Aries. The symbol of Aries is a Ram, because the ram pushes his head
into the wintry stubble and ploughs it up with his horns to expose the new
budding green upon which his family can feed. Aries represents the first
crude uprush of life, the beginning of the human journey, and therefore
bestows extreme physical activity, daring and impulsiveness upon its
natives. Aries rules the head, and therefore the Arian, or person born
between march 21st and April 21st, uses the brain intensively, although
without much experience of life to back him. Aries is ruled by Mars, the
warlike planet. So man, at the beginning of his journey, spoils for a fight, is
a born leader, eager, brave, with quick-working brain. Keen to help, he is a
poor judge of character, and often deceived. He makes a bad subordinate,
and although plucky, he is full of fears, because he has not yet developed
much faith or philosophy. These Arians should be guarded from
overworking the brain and given plenty of sleep. Hans Christian Anderson
was an Aries born, although a very advanced type.
From April 21st to May 21st we have the second Sign, that of Taurus. Its
symbol is a bull, and those born under it partake of the nature of that animal.
They are very strong but quiet and plodding, until, if suddenly roused, they
plunge ruthlessly to their goal. They are ruled by the planet Venus, and so
love is a part of man’s second lesson; he can love devotedly and work the
earth patiently. It is among the Taurians that we find many of our great
agriculturists and lovers of nature, also our singers and poets. Often they
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 45 ---
serve their fellow-men with courage and devotion. Sir James Barrie and
Florence Nightingale are examples of this Sign.
Taurus folk are very strong, and easily over-nourished. Their chief ills arise
from too-luxurious living.
Having learnt both activity and service the next lesson which man has to
tackle is how to use the brain for practical matters and for reasoning. This is
the work of those born under the third Sign, Gemini, May 21 st to June 21st,
whose symbol is ‘The Twins’. This symbol represents a dual type of mind,
one who can see both sides of a question, and jumps with keen interest to
every new idea presented. Such people, apparently changeable and
ambitious (without knowing exactly for what), and whose brains race like
chattering birds from branch to branch of the tree of knowledge, have
difficult characters to govern. They are ruled by the planet Mercury, which
gives quickness and brilliance, and through an intensive study of life they
learn to develop a logical reasoning mind. This brilliance and rapidity of
thought depends upon the nervous system more than on the brain, so these
people must be guarded against overworking their nerves.
Advanced types will have attained to a very broad vision, and we can take as
examples Elgar and Dean Inge.
Our human being has by now gained much experience, and so his next
lesson is to learn how to apply it. The fourth Sign, Cancer, June 21 st to July
22nd, bestows great patience and tenacity, and a genius for parenthood and
family life. As we develop, however, we of course become more complex,
and so Cancer people are sometimes restless and love to travel. The symbol
of Cancer is the Crab, who carries his house on his back, and moves through
life in a curious zig-zag way, suddenly going backwards again when least
expected. Cancer people are like that. Just when about to achieve success
they will turn back, or begin something else, and so in spite of their industry
they have a life of ups and downs. Sir Joshua Reynolds ruined many of his
pictures through continually changing his method of painting. Cancer people
are ruled by the Moon, which makes them deeply sensitive and passionate.
They badly need a life of discipline and order.
Henry VIII is a good example of a Cancer type who became undisciplined,
and John Calvin of one who went to the other extreme.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 46 ---
Now we come to the point where man has learnt a great deal of the human
side of life and is able to produce very fine results. His next task, therefore,
is to stand forth as a powerful and well-developed human being, capable of
high achievements.
The fifth Sign is Leo the Lion, July 22nd to August 23rd. We sometimes find
born under it the kings of men – people of power, large-hearted, strong both
mentally and physically, proud, ambitious and popular. They have not yet
touched the Divine Intuition, and so as a rule they misunderstand and
despise those weaker than themselves, although they attract many
sycophants. They often suffer cruel disillusion in their friendships, through
their own inadaptability. They are ruled by the Sun (the heart of the solar
system) and are therefore liable to high blood pressure and other affects of
the heart and circulation.
We expect to find famous people born under this Sign, and sure enough
among them are Napoleon, Mussolini and H.P. Blavatsky.
Having risen to great heights through impulsiveness, forcefulness and the
talent for self-expression, the next quality to be acquired is that of
discrimination, of taste, the lack of which brought Leo into many unhappy
relationships. Therefore we find that the sixth Sign, Virgo, August 23 rd to
September 23rd, whose symbol is the Virgin, teaches this lesson.
Virgo people are born with a natural fastidiousness and critical faculty. They
are ruled by Mercury, who also held sway over the people of Gemini, but
whereas in that Sign great energy was expended in the collecting of facts
from all quarters, the Virgo people have all that experience to draw upon,
plus the fruit garnered in Cancer and Leo. So they are able to take up life
from the angle of the critic rather than the man of action. They are adaptable
to almost any pursuit, make excellent subordinates, are plodding, and
generally successful. Their exquisite taste is evident in many walks of life.
From their ranks are drawn both restaurant-keepers and art critics!
Journalism and hygiene also attract them.
They rely on the material side of life, and because Mercury rules the nerves
they often suffer from ills due to worry, hypersensitiveness and imagination.
Nevertheless, they can be controlled, practical and resourceful. We can study
one of the higher types of the Sign in Elizabeth, the Virgo or Virgin Queen.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Sign of Virgo ends at the autumnal equinox on September 23 rd, so we
have therefore traversed the first half of man’s journey round the Zodiac. He
has learnt how to be the complete human being; but yet only half his journey
is accomplished! The remaining half will be taken up in learning to give
over the reins of power to the spiritual man, and live in both worlds at once,
with feet firmly planted on the earth, but with mind in communion with the
Divine. The man has now become the aspirant, realizing that there is a world
for his conquering worth infinitely more than the physical world. His task
now becomes harder to understand, but the first thing that such a man must
achieve is balance. And so the symbol of Libra, September 23rd to October,
23rd, the seventh Sign, is the Balance.
The Libran seeks balance all through his life. In fact, he misses many
opportunities through too much weighing and balancing in his mind –
through ‘second thoughts’! In his case these are not always the wisest. He
has reached the stage where man is becoming psychic and intuitive, and he
would do well to act on his first impressions. Librans are ruled by Venus,
and so are full of love, but their love has become more mental than physical.
They are able to love abstract things such as harmony, justice and beauty,
and they shrink from all disharmonies in life.
Some of them will do anything to avoid a row. This desire for harmony and
balance deprives them of the more direct energy and impulsiveness of the
preceding Signs. The refining process has begun, but those who do not
understand may think Librans cowardly and weak. They may sometimes be
condemned to rather colourless lives. We find among their ranks many
lawyers, judges and specialists, also architects and research-workers, as all
these require the qualities of care and balance. Their personal life is often
unhappy, through their being too analytical of other people and afraid to let
themselves go. So we can be sure that they must guard against loneliness
and depression, which feelings often cause them to overwork themselves.
As examples of the advanced types of Librans we can take Faraday, Sarah
Bernhardt, and Annie Besant.
Having begun to learn how to transmute the tender passion of love to higher
planes, man’s next step is to bend the warlike force of Mars in the same
direction. So we see that the eighth Sign, Scorpio, October 23rd to November
22nd, is ruled by Mars, giving to its natives a strong, forceful and magnetic
personality. We are coming now to the types who are so stored with
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 48 ---
accumulated magnetism and experience, so full of ‘character’ that they
exercise great fascination, and sometimes call forth fanatical devotion from
their friends.
The Sign of Scorpio has produced more saints than almost any other, and
probably more villains too. These people are capable of the best or the worst,
but never of being negative or unnoticed. Therefore, Scorpio has three
symbols, firstly the scorpion – the animal who bites itself with its rail,
representing the man who is his own enemy; secondly, the Serpent,
representing the birth of wisdom, and thirdly, the White Eagle soaring to the
sun, showing the final rising upwards from earthly ties and attaining the
spiritual sunlight. The Scorpio native usually passes through the fire of the
temptation of sex in all its forms. He has to learn that it is his sex-force
which he needs for use in higher channels, and no other. He is usually
versatile, full of ideas, a leader who can sway audiences, a mental fighter,
proud, ambitious, sensitive and a good organizer. He is capable of intense
and enduring feelings. The higher types are the humanitarians, peacemakers
and philosophers.
The Scorpio native should be guarded against evil companions and always
allowed to wield authority. We can take as examples Saint Augustine,
Mahomet, Martin Luther and Edward VII.
By this time man has become a very potential being, though still extremely
self-centred. The ‘I’ dominates everything. So that in the next stage of
development we find the beginnings of unselfishness taking shape. The ninth
Sign is that of Saggitarius, November 22nd to December 21st. Its symbol is
the archer shooting straight into the sky, representing the quick, strong mind
leaping at its goal, Truth. These people instinctively grasp the fact that Truth
is beautiful and joyful, and translate that realization into a keen wish to
spread joy and beauty around them. They are the lovers of life, full of kindly
humour. They may be domineering, egotistical and stubborn; but they
cannot live without attempting to make their companions happy. They are
therefore usually the souls of hospitality. They give great encouragement to
music, the arts, and all the pleasures and luxuries of life. Containing as they
do the qualities of all preceding signs, they are extremely versatile, but as
they are ruled by Jupiter, music and ceremonial make a special appeal to
them. Their love of life makes them an easy prey to self-indulgence, and
they are very excitable and emotional.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 49 ---
Most of their ills come from these two characteristics. Their agile minds and
prophetic instinct cause them to jump to results without patient study, and
this is a snare to their undoing. They often fail to appreciate the worth of
slower folk.
As they are high-powered people, Saggitarians must always be actively
employed, but they should have short intervals of complete rest in which to
relax their tenseness. Because of their zest for life they are very popular. We
can take as examples Lord Beaconsfield, Queen Alexandra, Heine and
Winston Churchill.
We have arrived at the stage where man has at last realized the wonder of
spiritual accomplishment, and has bent his will to attain it. His challenge is
at once accepted, and Saturn or Satan, the great tester and trainer of
humanity, steps in to help. So we find that the tenth Sign, Capricorn,
December 21st to January 21st, is ruled by the planet Saturn, whose metal is
lead, and who exerts a heavy crushing influence, holding his victim down to
earth, pressing and pressing upon him until all the dross in his nature is
forced out.
The symbol of Capricorn is the Goat. Man has ceased to be the sheep,
listening and following others’ lead; he has decided to stand on his own feet
and work out his own salvation. He wants proof of all that he may hitherto
have believed. So the Capricornian is, above all, thoughtful and practical,
outwardly perhaps a materialist, yet with a worship of intellect and an
interest in the sciences and in the occult. He is independent, proud and
domineering, happiest when leading and organizing. Although he lacks the
kindly humour of Saggitarius and the brilliant enthusiasm of Leo, he has
more tact, pity and patience than either, and with these he is beginning to
earn his Godhead. He is learning to see outside of himself, using his own
sufferings to identify himself with the feelings of all humanity. Such a one is
likely to become a Communist, a Socialist, or fighter for some ideal. The
difficult personal adjustments he is making often cause him to be hard to
understand, complex and peculiar in some of his reactions. Nevertheless, in
spite of the stern discipline of his life he is usually long-lived and rarely is
obliged to call in the doctor.
We can take as examples of the higher types Joan of Arc, Woodrow Wilson,
Benjamin Franklin and Gladstone.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 50 ---
Saturn’s intensive work on man is not complete by the end of the Sign of
Capricorn, so he carries it right through the next Zodiacal month, The Sign
of Aquarius, January 21st to February 21st, which follows, is also ruled by
that planet. By now, man has lost much of his crudity, and having had some
of his pride knocked out of him, he is less egocentric. He feels that he is a
part of the Whole, and has made a great step forward in that he is beginning
to give more importance to others than to himself. The Symbol of Aquarius
is the Water-Carrier pouring out the Waters of Life upon mankind and the
child of this Sign loves to merge himself with people, in gatherings and
functions; he loves to work in intimate relation with the masses. He is
visionary and inventive and has a great desire for the public welfare. No
longer ambitious for the self, he is apt to remain in the background unless
inspired to work for a cause, in which case he can rise to great heights and
can then push forward quite impersonally. The Aquarian mind is learning to
be non-attached, clear-cut, honest, with a love of freedom, and a sympathy
with human weakness. He is still over-sensitive. He reads character
instinctively, ‘seeing through’ people, and this gives him intense likes and
dislikes. He has already developed some of the finer subtle qualities of the
soul, and this causes him to be very delicately balanced. For this reason he
often feels frail in health, although in reality he has great reserve force.
As examples of the higher types we can take Abraham Lincoln, Charles
Dickens, Swedenborg, Darwin, Ruskin and Voltaire.
The merging of the self into other peoples’ lives produces genius for the
stage, so we also find such people as Nell Gwynne, Pavlova, and Sir Henry
Irving under Aquarius.
We have now arrived at the last Sign of the twelve, the one therefore under
which the most perfected type of spiritual man can be born. This Sign is
called Pisces and lasts from February 21st to March 21st. Its symbol is the
Fish, which is also the symbol of Christianity. The lesson of Pisces is a final
letting go of the self, the complete merging into the lives and feelings of
others. Therefore under this Sign are born our most brilliant actors. The
inspiration which the people of Pisces have earned produces also fine poets,
dramatists and musicians. The strongest and the weakest types are born at
this time. The force which flows through the Piscean is difficult to handle,
and unless he turns it to good account it may drive him to drugs, drink and
other excesses. The Sign is a dual one, so the two Ways are open. The native
may rise, if inspired, to any heights of self-denial and attainment, but he
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 51 ---
needs encouragement and confidence in himself. As with all the later Signs,
his character is complex and versatile. His past training gives him a ‘natural’
understanding; he absorbs knowledge rather than studies it. Pisces is ruled
by Jupiter, who bestows brilliance and a love of ceremony, as we saw in
Saggitarius. So our Piscean contributes much to the decorative and romantic
in life, and this arouses intense and sometimes fanatical devotion in his
friends. If these friends push him in the right way he can become a great
public servant, but he depends upon co-operation with others – he prefers to
work in brotherhood. He has identified himself with the universe, and this
gives him a great love of travel and the sea.
From the advanced types in this Sign we can choose Chopin, Michael
Angelo, David Livingstone, David Garrick and Ibsen.
We have now completed our initial review of the types born under the
twelve Signs. We must, however, remember that astrology subdivides them
ad infinitum, and that the laws of rebirth, Karma and free-will arrange for
numberless variations of the order in which people progress through these
Signs. The number of times they have accomplished the full round will
determine whether they are ‘old and experienced souls’ or ‘new souls’. The
old souls are of course becoming more rounded out as they approach the
state of perfect man, who is a blend of the best in all the Signs. The
examples which we have given of famous people are therefore the older
souls, and not really very typical of their Sign, but the mediocre and simple
types rarely leave their mark in history.
With regard to the twelve cell-salts which are the principal agents of activity
in the human body, let us note the interesting relation they are said to bear to
the Signs of the Zodiac.
Aries, the Ram, the brain worker, uses up very much of the Potassium
Phosphate which nourishes the brain fluid and produces the highest rate of
vibration in the body. A deficiency causes brain-fag and lack of
comprehension.
Taurus, the Bull, ruling the liver, governs the cell-salt Sulphate of Sodium,
which eliminates excess water from the body, due to the abundant intake of
the luxury-loving Taurian. A deficiency of this salt causes such ills as
diabetes and quinsy.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 52 ---
Gemini, the Twins, ruling the nervous system, governs that cell-salt
Potassium Chloride, which forms fibrin in the blood and so builds the
nerves; while a deficiency causes thickening of the fibrin, and therefore
bronchitis, asthma and other nervous diseases result.
Cancer, the tenacious Crab, rules the spleen, and governs the salt Fluoride of
Lime, which builds the tenacious elastic fibres holding the body together. A
deficiency of this causes sagging throughout the organs, with many attendant
ills, from depression to dropsy.
Leo, the Sun, ruler of the heart and vitality, governs the salt Phosphate of
Magnesia, which regulates the muscular spasms such as those controlling the
heart-beats. A deficiency causes cramps, lack of muscular force, palpitations
and meningitis.
Virgo, ruler of the solar plexus and stomach, governs the salt Potassium
Sulphate, which makes the oil necessary to keep the machinery going
throughout the body. A deficiency causes thickening of the oil, which clogs
the pores and produces various forms of stagnation.
Libra, the Balance, ruler of the kidneys, governs the cell-salt Carbonate of
Sodium. This salt holds the balance between the acids and the fluids in the
system, and produces harmonious life. A deficiency engenders acidity, with
hate, jealousy, depression and their attendant ailments, such as headache and
lumbago.
Scorpio, the Scorpion, ruler of the sex organs, governs the cell-salt Sulphate
of Lime. This needs to be transmuted by water to form the white plaster of
Paris; this strengthens the whole system and gives tone to the grey matter of
the brain. A deficiency demoralises the brain, destroying the power of
elevated thought, and renders the body prone to infectious diseases.
Saggitarius, the archer, rules the thighs, and governs the cell-salt Silica,
which is really quartz. This is formed of strong minutes arrow-shaped
pieces, which stiffen the walls of hair, nails nerve sheaths and cells, and
pierce a way outwards to the surface for necessary eruptions. A deficiency
produces weakness of the cell-walls, leading to various forms of self-
poisoning such as rheumatism and other inflammations.
Capricorn, the Goat, rules the bones, and governs the cell-salt Calcium-
Phosphate. This uses albumen to make cement for bones. A deficiency
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 53 ---
causes diseases due to overflow of albumin, which upsets the gastric juices
and brings on such inflictions as Bright’s Disease and other digestive
troubles.
Aquarius, the Water-Carrier, rules the white corpuscles, and governs the
cell-salt Sodium Chloride, which acts as water-carrier to the human system.
A deficiency causes general frailty and such diseases as jaundice.
Pisces, the Fish, rules the feet, the foundation of the body, and the red
corpuscles, and governs the cell-salt Phosphate of Iron, which is the
foundation of the blood. A deficiency gives bad circulation, chills and
fevers.
Here, then, we have a rough idea as to how the planetary rays are said to
affect the chemicals within us and our own reactions. Much research work
along these lines by certain of the bio-chemists and other scientists is in
progress at present. Naturally the reactions of the cell-salts overlap and
interplay with great complexity, and the science would appear to be a deep
one.
How much truth there is in all this, and how much study it would take to
produce useful results, are questions which we must leave to the student who
feels disposed to investigate.
We cannot leave this science of Astrology without applying the Micro-
Macrocosmic Law to it, and observing how it works out on a larger scale.
According to its findings, then, our own sun with its planets is in its turn
revolving round a parent sun. The Signs of the Zodiac repeat themselves in a
still greater cycle, during which our sun takes about 2500 years to pass
through each Sign, but as this greater movement is in the opposite direction
from the smaller one, the Signs follow one another in reverse order. Each of
these great periods is called an ‘Age’. During 2000 years of the Jewish
Dispensation the sun was passing through Aries, the Ram, which animal
figures very largely in sacrifice and symbol of the time.
Before that Period there was the Age of Taurus, wherein the winged bull
(representing the Taurian capacity for rising to spiritual heights) was
worshipped and sculptured by such people as the Chaldeans and Assyrians.
The Sphinx would appear, in this light, to have been built during the Age of
Leo, somewhere before 10,000 B.C., as it has a lion’s body.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 54 ---
Following the Jewish came the Christian Dispensation, under the Sign of
Pisces, the Fish. The fish is the symbol of Christianity, and some of us are
required to eat it every Friday. The 2000 years of the Piscean Age drew to a
close with the nineteenth century, and we are now coming gradually into the
new Age. This is the Aquarian Age, when the ‘waters of life will be poured
out to all mankind’. During this period we are told that Universal
Brotherhood will become an accomplished fact and a Golden Age will be
brought to birth.
According to these calculations, then, it must be about 34,000 years since the
previous Aquarian Period, containing also a Golden Age. Historians who
study this particular question proclaim that this took place on the lost
continent of Atlantis, whose submergence caused the spread of its culture to
other lands.
There have been several hundred books written on Atlantis, many founded
on geological and biological research.
The subject is one which is apt to stir racial memory and enlarge man’s
viewpoint. It enables him to understand the inevitable succession of cycles
and therefore to prepare hopefully at this time for the Golden Age which is
promised to us soon by the shorthand in the skies.
6
MALE AND FEMALE
Let us see what part the much-tormented question of Sex plays in this deeper
conception of life that we are trying to reach.
We must follow our usual procedure and first try to get at the roots and
underlying causes, taking as broad and as scientific a view of the subject as
we can.
We find the male and female are really the positive and negative aspects in
nature – that is to say, that male is the positive or electrical quality and
female is the magnetic, receptive or negative quality. When the two fuse,
creative action occurs. The word ‘negative’ is here used in its electrical
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 55 ---
application, and means that which does not act but holds power. It does not
represent futility or weakness, but reserve force.
The whole of the universe is built upon this fusion of ‘male’ and ‘female’.
From the greatest planet to the tiniest chemical cell the same process goes
on. It is really as if the world were an electric pole containing vast numbers
of other electric poles of all sizes down to the most minute. Let us consider
this question of electricity for a moment. Quite simply, you have a current of
electricity passing down a ‘pole’ or straight line – the pole can be a bar or
iron, a planet or a person; one side of the pole is the ‘positive’ or electrical
side, and the other side is the ‘negative’ or magnetic side.
The magnetic side draws to itself, absorbs and retains power. When it
contacts the positive – i.e. the action, or electrical – side of the pole, it gives
off this power, combustion occurs, a spark is lit, and force is generated. It is
exactly this process which causes a planet to rotate, moves a car, creates a
child, or makes a plant grow.
The positive electrical male side of nature is represented by the acids, and
the passive female magnetic side of nature is represented by the alkalis.
Before a planet or a car moves, the right constituents of acid and alkali must
be assembled, to create the little explosions of electrical life-force which
brings action about. It is also this identical driving-force which motivates
our bodies. The tiniest cell in our bodies is an electric battery in a state of
combustion; just as our whole body is also electrically polarized.
The acid part of our bodies is the action part, the muscles; the alkali part of
us is the blood, which holds and carries the power to those muscles. When in
a state of health the two are rightly balanced, but at death the power which
holds them apart (the pole) is withdrawn and the acid floods the alkaline
blood, causing the whole mechanism to become static.
In chemistry you must take an alkali element and combine it with an acid
element if you want to create a compound which is strong and useful. If you
want to make a bomb (which is only condensing the production of force into
a small space) you must also bring together an acid and an alkali – when
they are allowed to meet the bomb explodes.
The same thing happens when a well-matched man and woman meet –
attraction leads to combination and then action!
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 56 ---
It must not be inferred, however, that a man is all electrical and a woman all
magnetic. On the contrary, these two qualities run in juxtaposition through
every cell and atom. But all existing things are pre-eminently of one sex,
although containing both interiorly in various degrees. The planet Mars, for
instance, is pre-eminently masculine, but of course is held in manifestation
by its pole of positive and negative. Our earth has its pole running through it,
called North and South at its two ends, and, of course, one side of the earth
is electrical and the other magnetic.
So also a man and a woman, though pre-eminently male-electric and female-
magnetic, have each what we might call their poles running through them.
The right side of our bodies is electric and the left side magnetic – the right
side the side of action and the left the female or heart side.
The subdivision of these two continues to infinity in our bodies, until each
tiny cell has its pole, and even each atom, as we know, is revolving round its
pole or axis.
Thus throughout the whole of life from the greatest to the tiniest we have the
same process going on. The female magnetic power attracts the male electric
force and creation and action takes place.
Now, as this process runs throughout everything we may expect to find an
expression of it in our own brain, and we do! The human brain has a shape
curiously like the human embryo, and it contains a part which is male and a
part which is female. When these two parts are co-ordinated by mental
training and concentration, and made to co-operate, a most wonderful
development takes place, and the mind becomes inspired, forceful and
creative.
This was well known to the very ancient peoples. In their own remarkable
way they worshipped the means by which a human being can contact ‘God’
within his own brain. They worshipped those symbols of the male-female
power in the head.
Succeeding generations, in their ignorance, debased this worship into the
Phallic worship of sex in its physical sense. Our ideas about the things that
matter have grown smaller and smaller down the centuries, until at present
they are almost non-existent!
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 57 ---
We can now begin to glimpse the truths lying behind the worship, in many
ancient civilizations, of the great Trinities of Life, The Christians adopted
them, and gave us God (the Life-force), the Virgin or Mother (the wisdom or
stored power), and the Son, the result of that blending, the One who acts and
achieves. In most ancient religions we can trace an appreciation of this
Trinity.
The alchemists expressed the Triangle in their own way, as Mercury,
Sulphur and Salt (our cell-salts being that which builds and acts within our
won bodies).
Then there is also our Sun, the male electrical positive force whose rays
strike the magnetic female Moon; the combination of both rays reaching the
earth causes fertilization, movement and growth.
For a long time we have been accustomed in our little limited way to think
of sex only in the primitive terms of our power of physical procreation, not
as the vase process on which the whole universe is built. Infinitely petty and
restricting taboos have shamefacedly locked up the entire question in a
secret box in our minds. We muddle along in complete ignorance, oblivious
that the box contains our greatest jewels.
Let us now take out these jewels of ours and study their value.
We are confronted throughout history with certain symbols. One of them is
the serpent, which was always much in evidence wherever the ancient
temples devoted to wisdom flourished. Since the old story of Adam and Eve,
the serpent has represented two things – Knowledge and Sex – thus hinting
at a close connection between them. And the secret is that the Creative Force
within us is one single force, whether it be used for physical or mental ends.
We have the choice as to which way we shall direct this force, upwards or
downwards.
In material-minded or primitive man it continues to be used purely for
procreation or sensual gratification. But as man aspires to higher ideals, as
he yearns to create mentally and live in the spirit, the force is gradually
drawn upwards to the creative principles in the brain.
This force is called by the Easterns the Kundalini, and is likened to a serpent
of fire lying coiled at the base of the spine. If man steadily purifies his mind
and nature through living chastely and moderately, he is able to magnetize
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 58 ---
the Kundalini serpent upwards through the channel of his spine, until finally
it reaches the Masculine-Feminine principles of the brain and fires them into
co-ordination. The man is then filled with inspiration and becomes attuned
to the inner world of Wisdom. This can only be accomplished with the help
of the ‘Kundalini serpent’. Perhaps Christ gave a hint of this when he said:
‘Be ye wise as serpents.’
Men and women have, therefore, the choice as to what they will do with this
power within them. Shall they exhaust it in the various self-indulgences of
sex-life, both mental and physical, or shall they use it to become creative in
the realms of the spirit and higher mind – a force for good? It is this
tremendous choice which every human being has to face. Usually they face
it unconsciously or in the dark, because of the utter helplessness of present-
day education in these matters. Hardly one of the many pitfalls surrounding
them is properly explained.
It is easy to convince ourselves of the fact that it is one and the same force
which feeds either the procreative organs or the brain. The gland specialists
have brought much to light proving this. They tell us that the Pineal Gland in
the head acts as a brake upon sex development. As we have said, it was once
a third eye. Now it regulates the action of light upon the body. If it is
diseased or inactive we get precocious sex-development. The Pituitary Body,
in the head, is the gland of intellectuality, promoting the mathematical and
artistic powers. When it is deficient sexual abnormalities result.
We also have the evidence of our numberless lunatic asylums, peopled
largely with those whose brains have deteriorated through sex excesses of
various kinds.
On the other hand we have many cases of people who apparently have gone
made as the result of fanatical piousness.
This needs another explanation. Here we have com up against the result of
what might be termed SPIRITUAL GREED. A person who is greedy and
self-indulgent on the physical plane will naturally not change his character
just because he decides that more benefit will accrue from a pursuit of
spiritual assets. It is possible to be greedy for spiritual food which is as yet
undeserved. Very often people attempt to make in a few years the spiritual
progress for which they should have been patiently working for all their
lives. The result is that the body has not had time for its vibrations to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 59 ---
become purified and raised to a higher tempo, and the brain is still full of the
dregs of worldly and impure thoughts. When, therefore, by a forcing
process, the Kundalini serpent of fire is prematurely driven up the spine,
burning away all dross as it goes, and it arrives within a brain unfitted to
receive it, parts of the brain cannot stand this bath of fire and perish with the
sudden burning of the dross they still contain, and various forms of
derangement ensue.
Many highly dangerous breathing exercises originating in the East are
designed with purpose of arousing the Kundalini. They bring disastrous
results when used by ignorant or materially minded people. Sometimes the
same issue is achieved when those with mixed motives fling themselves
violently into the various religious cults and ‘isms’; we hear that their final
foal turns out to be a mental home.
Yet another mishap can befall the aspirant who is not sufficiently whole-
hearted. If he once arouses the 'serpent’, and then subconsciously repents of
his endeavours, the serpent rushes downwards and plunges his owner into
the worst of orgies and excesses. Unfortunately this sometimes happens to
saintly men who have been just a little too ambitious for spiritual gain.
We have to realize that steady, patient, even and balanced progress is the
surest way; we must not expect to come to results too easily. Greed of the
mental or spiritual body will produce a congestion and sickness on those
planes as surely as its counterpart will be on the physical. To try and attain
mental expansion while still the victim of inhibitions and repressions is like
expecting to become a ballet-dancer while still refusing to use certain limbs
or muscles. We have so fully to realize the glories of possible attainment that
all lesser desires simply fade out – they do not have to be repressed. It is
only in the purity of a one-pointed mind (the root-meaning of pure is
‘complete’) that we can welcome as one of the greatest events of our life the
safe awakening of the Kundalini serpent.
The same truth applies in the relation between the sexes, where again
sincerity of purpose and wholeheartedness are the determining factors of
resulting happiness. When a spiritually minded man and woman fall in love
with each other there occurs a blending and a union between the seven-fold
bodies of each of them, culminating in spiritual as well as physical creation.
This gives an ecstasy and fulfilment seven times greater than that which the
average physical union can bring. Force and power are engendered an
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 60 ---
hundredfold more on all planes through having been conserved instead of
frittered away. Both the children and all creative work resulting from such a
union would be incomparably superior to the average.
If every child were brought up with understanding and ambition focused
upon such an ideal we should soon have a heaven upon earth.
As it is, the subject of sex is so little understood that any irregularities in its
manifestation consign the victim to suffering in ignorant and misunderstood
wretchedness.
The interplay of the masculine-feminine positive-negative principle
throughout out bodies is not yet fully grasped. The ancient wisdom teaches
that man, having a positive masculine physical body, has a feminine
negative etheric body. This may be why he has in some ways much less
staying power in the matter of pain and endurance than woman, who owes
her endurance to the fact that in spite of her negative feminine physical body
she has a positive or male etheric body.
Man’s astral or emotional body is masculine, and therefore active and under
his control, whereas woman’s astral is negative and absorbing. It is at the
mercy of outside influences, and that is why she can be dragged down to
lower depths in some ways than a man can. A drunken woman is more
terrible than a drunken man.
It would seem to follow, then, that man’s mental body has a preponderance
of the feminine quality and woman’s of the masculine, and perhaps that
explains why wise men have always considered that woman can actually
take the lead and inspire them from the mental level if she but realizes it and
fits herself to do so.
Man is meant to learn sensitivity and intuition from woman, and woman is
meant to learn steadiness and honesty from man. A perfect man or a perfect
woman must be a complete blending of the qualities of both. That is why we
are told that at the end of evolution there will be no differentiation of the
sexes. Meanwhile, the process of this integration brings about temporary
aberrations which result, through misunderstanding, in homosexuality and
other irregularities.
We are taught that men and women change their sex at various incarnations.
This change sometimes produces a masculine woman or a feminine man,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 61 ---
until the readjustment is complete. It is necessary that these things are better
understood. Then people, instead of giving way helplessly to any
abnormalities which they discover within themselves, and living a life of
shame-faced yet defiant indulgence, will learn to master such tendencies and
turn them to good account.
When we consider that, from the greatest to the smallest, all progress and
evolution depends upon the interplay of the male-positive and female-
negative principle, and how this especially applies to the mental and spiritual
creative powers to which mankind is dedicated to strive, we begin to see
how much futile stagnation is caused either by people who refuse any
relationship with the opposite sex, such as nuns and monks, or by those who
indulge in homosexuality. The seven bodies of man and woman merge
creatively when they work or play together, entirely irrespective of the
sexual act, and stimulate and nourish one another in a way which is essential
to the bringing through of creative inspiration. In the temples of ancient
wisdom, before their degeneration, the priests worked with their female
oracles to achieve their greatest results.
When men and women are brought up to be sensitively alive to this interplay
of the forces between them, they will obtain so much fulfilment from them
that the act of procreation will fall back quite naturally to its normal use.
Sex-antagonism and other inhibitions will disappear. There will be produced
the perfect working unit, built up of Woman-Wisdom-Strength and Man-
Power-Action.
It is upon such units that the Golden Age will be founded.
7
BIRTH, SLEEP AND DEATH
As we have proceeded to explore life along these lines, it has appeared to
grow more and more complicated. Indeed, many people will draw back with
a feeling of resentment. They will say: ‘It is not necessary to know all these
things! So far I have managed very well without them. The simple Christian
faith is sufficient for me.’
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 62 ---
Such people will probably hate the idea of living again on this earth. They
are interested neither in the future development of mankind nor in the
service which they might contribute to it. In this way they show us that they
are possibly still the victims of moral laziness. They are not yet prepared to
think deeply or to seek new ways of helping and achieving. They wish to be
left in peace in the groove in which they have been brought up.
Nor is it good to endeavour to persuade them otherwise. They are probably
doing very well at their present stage, even, possibly, better than those who
are so anxious to teach them other ways.
There are plenty who are eager for further knowledge and who need no
persuading!
Let us continue our explorations with these latter ones, and consider more
deeply the phenomena of man’s existence – his birth, his growth, his sleep
and finally his death.
It has been said that man is born unfinished! He is born at the ninth month,
the ‘finished number’ being twelve. And certain it is that the young of the
human are the most helpless of all.
Throughout this chapter we will study the human being in his fullest sense,
that is to say with his seven interpenetrating ‘bodies’ as before explained.
We are told that the birth of the physical body precedes that of the other
‘bodies’, each one of which is intimately connected with one of the seven
principal Endocrine Glands.
We can do no more than touch on this intricate subject here, in order to give
point to our argument. Up to the age of seven the average child has only
complete control of its physical body, the rest of its faculties being imitative
or dormant. In a court of law a child is not considered punishable until after
seven years of age.
After the first cycle of seven years we are told that the ‘etheric body’ is
‘born’, or comes under positive control. The ethers govern growth and
memory. These are the two functions most prominently active during the
next seven years.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 63 ---
At the age of fourteen the astral or ‘emotional’ body is said to ‘come into
birth’. This governs the emotions and desires, so this is the age of puberty,
and unrestrained emotions. Up to fourteen years the child has been
dominated by the Thymus Gland in which was bequeathed a store of red
blood corpuscles by the mother. This gland should become recessional by
the age of puberty, at which time the child has begun to manufacture its own
blood. The blood is known to be the seat of the ego, which can then begin to
control the young person, who becomes conscious at this time of his
individuality. From now on guidance instead of authority must be the rule.
The Adrenal Glands, which come into dominance at puberty, help to develop
the individual driving-force as well as the brain power. They are said to be
the ‘glands of fight and fright’. Under their government there is extreme
sensitivity to fear and anxiety. These tendencies arouse a need for some kind
of religious belief to give reassurance. So we find that during these years
there is often great emotional piety.
The end of the third cycle of seven years sees the ‘birth’ of the ‘mental
body’, so that by twenty-one years of age the individual has reached an
important epoch in his life. He has accomplished the completion of the three
lower ‘bodies’ of man, the physical, emotional and mental. He has
developed into the complete human being (from ordinary standpoints) and is
considered to have reached his majority and the state of manhood. From then
onwards, if man develops as he could and should do, every further seven
years will see the birth of a new quality or power, of a kind more subtle and
less easily described here.
Finally, we come to the magic number of seven times seven and man has
reached the age of forty-nine. It is here, therefore, that we can expect the
flowering of his greatest power and quality. Sure enough we are told that it
is at this age that his ‘Higher Mind’ should come into birth, giving him a
subtle capacity for the highest and loftiest achievement. The Pituitary Body
and Pineal Gland should now co-operate to use the sum of his life’s
experience for new creative ideas, deductions and philosophies.
Therefore, at this age, it would indeed be well if man could retire from all
mechanical routine work and concentrate on giving to the world his
contribution in the way of schemes for the betterment of mankind and the
various inspirations resulting from his experience. As he could still have
expectation of life for another fifty years, this would allow him close on half
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 64 ---
a century of potent fulfilment in living. Such would be the programme of the
perfected man or woman who was able to live up to his or her potentialities.
But at the present time many people dissipate their energy and strength to
such an extent while young that they never reach the flowering of their
greatest faculties at all. They live and die without ever tasting the ultimate
joys and triumphs of human existence. They are never able to feel that they
have made any knowledge really their own – that they know any one
fundamental fact of life – what they are, why they are here, or to what
progressing! They live always like the man who said, ‘The only certain thing
in life is doubt!’ They admit their dark ignorance by scoffing at the bare
possibility of such knowledge, refusing to see that right down the ages there
has been a vast accumulation of ‘circumstantial evidence’ compiled for their
own heritage and benefit. They continue to muddle along interminably in
their stagnant grooves.
Such laziness makes man willing to be blind to the fact that his greatest
contribution of value to the world can be expected after he is fifty. Therefore
he does not husband his mental and his physical strength to that end. He
should realise that the inspired productions of the higher mind give the
intense joy of fulfilment, than which there is no greater glory.
The fact that many people are half-exhausted wrecks by the age of fifty, and
others much before that, is a disgrace to ‘progress’ and modern education;
and one more proof of the prevailing ignorance is that people are not
sensible of this disgrace.
When healing the sick Christ said, ‘Thy sin is forgiven thee’, pointing out
very definitely that disease is the outward manifestation of wrong thinking.
But we have not yet taken the hint. We are still proud to tell of our disease,
unaware that we are giving away the unclean and unkempt condition of our
minds. In the future people will feel ashamed of letting down the community
by becoming unwell. A man will be as unwilling to admit to having a cold as
he now is to confess to a theft.
The present general ill health is responsible for many irregularities in the
development of the glands. Some of them do not recess when they should,
and so a childish and unmoral state continues in the growing youth.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 65 ---
Unbalance of the glands causes some of them to predominate too early, to
compensate for weakness in others. This produces geniuses, who are, for
that reason, often prone to epilepsy and other abnormalities.
The ancients understood the connection between the glands and the subtle
worlds of nature. It will be a happy day when that knowledge is revised by
modern scientists.
Let us next consider the common but marvellous phenomena of sleep.
There is a vast accumulation of data proving that the ego or individual can
and does leave the body during sleep. The blood recedes from the brain,
which can then no longer function. Yet much mental activity may take place,
together with many authentic experiences of far-away places. A person can,
during sleep, solve intricate problems which have beaten him during the day.
He can also tell the time and awaken at any hour decided upon. He can
function in a complex world of happenings which he calls ‘dreams’.
We are told that if the ego leaves the physical body during sleep he does so
clothed in his mental and astral ‘bodies’, in which he is as mobile as
electricity. The physical body is left enveloped in its etheric body or couble,
that counterpart of the human being formed of ‘condensed ethers’, through
which the life-forces are fed to the tissues from the surrounding ethers.
Man’s various ‘bodies’ are linked together by a vital elastic cord, operating
rather like an electric current without the wire. This cord is a kind of
umbilical cord which joins the ego and his vehicles to that part of Mother
Earth which is his physical body. When it snaps he is born into the ‘after-
life’ and we say that he is dead. This cord is referred to in the Bible as the
‘Silver Cord’. As long as it is intact the travelling ego is able to get back into
his body as surely as a telephone message can travel along the wire.
We are told that the only difference between ‘life’ and ‘death’ is the
sundering of this subtle link which binds a person to his physical body.
A strong desire to see a friend may often take the sleeper to see that friend,
who may be either awake in his physical body or himself travelling, while
‘asleep’, in the astral realms.
In this way, it is said, many important meetings and actions are rehearsed by
the people concerned days before they occur. This would explain why one
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 66 ---
often has the feeling of knowing just what is going to be said or done. It is
possible in that way that many prophecies are given.
In this connection we should notice the extreme significance which all
ancient nations attached to dreams. The power clearly to remember one’s
dreams was cultivated assiduously by the priesthood, as was also the ability
to interpret the dream. An adept in these matters was held in highest esteem
by the nation, whose affairs were regulated according to the instructions or
prophecies so given. Joseph of the Old Testament was such a case. Cheating
or incompetence in these matters was a heinous crime. Josiah of the bible
was told that false dreamers should be put to death. Alexander the Great
spoke of dreams as the greatest chance man has of acquiring knowledge.
Martin Luther said that the correct translation of ‘He giveth His beloved
sleep’ is ‘He giveth to His beloved during sleep.’
The whole history of the Bible, as well as many other ancient histories,
revolves round the importance of visions, prophecies and dreams.
What are we doing now about this interesting activity which takes up nearly
a third of our living hours?
The first step would be to obtain through concentration and practice a clearer
recollection of our dreams. To do this it is necessary to try to visualise the
Astral Plane as it really is. This is difficult because once we are free in the
Astral World conditions are utterly different. Then around us pulsates the
living malleable astral stuff, which is free from the laws of gravitation, and
which moulds itself at once into form under the impetus of our minds. If we
want a horse, for example, we involuntarily and rapidly build one with our
thoughts, and it is only such a horse as our powers of visualisation and
observation can produce! So we are told that at night the astral realms are
peopled with sleepers surrounded by their ‘dreams’ or creations, which are
sometimes ludicrous in the incompleteness of their conception. Apparently a
person can, therefore, either actually meet his friend in sleep or converse
with his own conception of his friend, which he has created. How near he
gets to his desire depends on the extent of his concentration and will-power.
Another condition of the Astral World is that many things can be happening
in the same spot without being aware of one another, as it were, the different
grades or vibrations of astral stuff flowing through and interpenetrating
without losing their separate identities (in much the same was as we when in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 67 ---
physical bodies can walk right through in ‘ghost’). Here we enter the realm
of the Fourth Dimension. If we have had no personal experience of it, we
can only understand it by studying the thousands of descriptions given to us
throughout history by those who had.
The jar of returning from those subtler realms into the heavy vibrations of
our physical bodies, at the moment of awakening, usually shatters the
memory of our experience. We retain at best a jumbled and inconsequent
translation of our dream. This is where the need of training comes in. We
should concentrate on exercising a strong grip upon ourselves at the instant
of awakening. By this simple expedient we may soon learn consciously to
profit by our nightly experiences.
Also, before sleeping we should tune our minds to our highest aspirations, as
this will determine the realms we are able to reach. If the mind is clogged
with petty earthly considerations, such as the price of food or a quarrel with
a neighbour, its owner is naturally drawn to the same type of vibration when
asleep in the astral world.
Let us now consider what is said to happen when Death has snapped the
Silver Cord, and the person is finally separated from his physical body. We
are told that often it may take a little while for the individual to realise that
he is ‘dead’. But for some time prior to this he has been building in the astral
stuff the kind of Heaven or after-life to which he aspires.
Of course, thousands build a Heaven with golden streets and angels playing
on harps. These numberless living ‘thought-forms’ cohere by the law of
attraction into one great whole, so that the conventional ‘Heaven’ is actually
there awaiting its owners.
Those who expect, because of their guilt, hell-fire and goblins, have created
that charming reception for themselves also!
The miser will probably have made for his use a heaven full of nothing but
gold pieces. The Eastern pasha will certainly get his Paradise of Houris. The
disbeliever in after-life will have created for himself a horrible blank abyss.
We are told, then, that people remain imprisoned in their self-constructed
Paradises until they become so weary of the limitations of their own desires
that they are gradually freed from them, and the mind is able to expand and
aspire to fresh ideals. Eventually the ego is free to pass through these lower
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 68 ---
astral realms, known as Purgatory, purged finally of petty wishes and
conceptions, and enjoy the higher states of Paradise to which it has learnt to
orient itself.
We have heard of the Third Heaven and the Seventh Heaven, without
probably giving a second thought to those terms. There are apparently vistas
of amazing worlds ahead of us which only open up to our understanding in
measure as we develop our minds and our aspiration to meet them.
We must realise that life on the Physical Plane is but a fraction of the whole
and that the Sage or Yogi of both East and West is endeavouring to train his
mind to a state of continued unbroken consciousness throughout waking,
sleeping, death, and onwards to the next incarnation upon this earth.
In this way does a man finally become a god.
8
SECRETS OF BREATHING
Continuing our study of the phenomena of life we can next consider the
universal activity of breathing.
This very strange process is indeed much more widespread than we would at
first suppose. We are told that the creation of the world was begun when the
Creator ‘breathed upon the waters’.
And again, the symbolical explanation of the creation of man tells how he
was formed out of dust, into which was breathed the ‘Breath of Life’.
The tremendous importance of Breath could hardly have been more
definitely emphasized, but we have paid little attention to the invaluable
hints bequeathed to us by those ancient savants in their veiled language. We
know that plants breathe, and lately have discovered that metal breathe also.
Scientists are busy studying the long-drawn-out rhythms of the sun. if we
apply to the mystics on this point they tell us that the sun breathes regularly,
each breath taking eleven years, and causing at its fullness the appearance of
‘sun-spots’ upon its surface. The sun is called the heart of the Solar System.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 69 ---
We may suspect that it really is the heart of a very vast living Being in
Whose breath we have our own breathing and living.
We are familiar with the main chemical aspects of the act of breathing as
applied to ourselves.
Primarily, we must contain a definite amount of air, to counter-act the law of
gravitation which pulls us to the earth. At sea level the pressure is about
sixteen pounds to the square inch, and this must be equalized by the intake
of air. That is why the lungs never empty all the air they contain. Their total
capacity is said to be 250 cubic inches, but they only empty 150, so that thee
always remains 100 cubic inches of air within them. For this reason, if it is
desired to clean and refresh the lungs, very prolonged outward breathing is
the most efficacious. Nature’s way of refreshing us is to cause us to collapse
limply into a chair and sigh out a long breath.
In breathing we absorb the Oxygen from the air into our lungs to be used for
the production of heat and energy through combustion with the substances
contained in our food, and we exhale the (to us) poisons as Carbonic Acid
Gas.
The animal breathe in the same way, but plants, on the other hand, need to
breathe in the Carbonic Acid Gas for their sustenance. Here we have one of
the secrets of the give-and-take existing in Nature and the reason why
animals and plants could not live without each other.
In an normal human being there are approximately sixteen to eighteen
breaths per minute, each taking in thirty cubic inches of air. Each breath
consists of inhalation, exhalation, and a pause, the whole process taking up
the time of four heart-beats. Our artificial methods of living have gradually
ruined the natural quality of our breathing and hardly one person in fifty
breathes as Nature intended.
The correct muscular action is as follows:
The lungs are contained within the basket of the ribs, the whole resembling a
balloon, which inflates at the intake of breath and deflates at the exhaling.
There is a muscle at the base of the lungs which should contract them
upwards at the inhalation, but in must people the muscle is inactive.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 70 ---
Many breathe downwards into their abdomens, pressing down the already
sagging internal organs.
In correct breathing the whole chest is uplifted at the intake of the breath,
and this raises up all the internal organs from their stagnant position. At the
exhalation the diaphragm muscle aforementioned contracts again upwards,
dragging up still farther the organs below.
Correct breathing in this manner will of course exercise a continuous gentle
massage and stimulation of the digestive organs, thereby ensuring perfect
action of the alimentary canal and eliminating the need for pills and drugs.
The second important aspect of breathing is the rate at which we breathe, the
‘frequency’, as we should say in wireless parlance. We have seen that the
whole of life is built up by means of different speeds of vibration, and
therefore the rate of motion of anything is the most important factor about it,
determining what it is. Therefore, we cannot overestimate the significance of
the speed and rhythm of our breathing.
‘Show me how you breathe and I will tell you what manner of man you are!’
The Yogis and Eastern Sages make a very deep study of breathing and have
evolved a profound science from it. By means of this science they profess to
accomplish many things, such as prolonging their youth and their years of
living, and attaining to various degrees of trance and clairvoyance, by means
of which they gain access to knowledge. This science has been handed down
from teacher to pupil for thousands of years, and is only accessible to and
possible for the very few. But it is said to be a forerunner of the attainment
of all humanity in the dim future.
Certain it is that all who wish to obtain any degree of control of their health,
characters, or circumstances, must first begin at the very foundation of their
lives – their breathing.
Having put in order the mechanical muscular action of breathing, the next
thing to consider is the rhythm. We have now to realize that, as not only
physical things but also thoughts, feelings and various forces exist all around
us by reason of their particular number or rate of vibration, so we are all the
time tuning in to this or that according to our own rate of vibration, which is
adjusted by our breathing. We can think of ourselves as wireless receivers,
and it is up to our ego or will to tune us in and decide what we shall receive.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 71 ---
I have said that normally there are sixteen to eighteen breaths per minute.
It is said that if the breathing is changed to about twenty-six light breaths per
minute it will be impossible after a short time to feel pain!
That is why in the heat of battle terrible wounds can be received without
feeling them at all. It is also why many great feats are accomplished under
the stress of excitement. The breath quickens, the blood heats up, and this
drives the ego slightly out of the body, so that sensations are little felt.
Extreme indulgence in alcohol has the same effect. That is why intoxicated
persons seldom hurt themselves. We can do and suffer things in ‘hot blood’
which we can never achieve in ‘cold blood’.
There is an interesting story in the Bible in connection with this.
When Amalek drew the Israelites into battle Moses went to the top of a hill.
He held up his arms, using his great hypnotic powers to prevent the enemy
from working themselves up to the fighting frenzy in which they would
partly leave their bodies. He prevented them from quickening their
breathing, and so they had to fight in cold blood and could not prevail.
Directly Moses dropped his arms from fatigue the battle would go against
the Israelites.
Martial music is designed to quicken the breath and the emotions. So is the
colour red on flag and uniform.
It is quite impossible to become excited if one breathes slowly. That is why a
person in a rage is asked to ‘stop and count ten’; the breathing inevitably
slows down and excitement drops.
Some of the sages believe that we have a definite number of breaths allotted
to us for our lives. Those who waste them and speed them up in excitability
and emotionalism shorten their span. Those who become philosophers in the
true sense of the word, balanced, measured and contented, will be able to
live to a very ripe old age with unimpaired faculties.
By quickening the breath the body loses its powers of self-protection and
exhausts and injures itself without feeling it at the time.
By slowing the breathing down to ten or twelve per minute it will be found
impossible to feel excited, irritable or ‘nervy’. This is a useful and invisible
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 72 ---
little exercise with which we can protect ourselves from those states of mind
which tend to poison our systems.
If the breathing is reduced to a deep slow rhythm of ten per minute, for five
minutes, the brain will become marvellously clear and ready for work. This
can be done before taking up any study, the result lasting for some hours.
Many of the conflicting vibrations and ‘thoughts’ which we allow to pass
haphazard through body and brain will have been cancelled out by the
rhythmic powerful beat brought about by the slower breathing.
If the breathing can be dropped to an even three per minute all the bodily
vibratory activities will become so subdued and harmonized that the more
delicate psychic perceptions will be discernible, giving us what we call
‘inspiration’, instinct or premonition; for they are the instigators of all great
achievement.
The above-mentioned rates of breathing can be used without danger, if
practised gradually and intelligently. But it is extremely dangerous for the
average person to attempt any of the more complicated systems sometimes
unwisely given out, which might lead them into a mental home or worse.
Yogis can slow down the breath to one per minute, which allows them an
intensity of concentration resulting in experiences beyond our imagination or
comprehension. Finally they are able to suspend the breathing altogether and
allow themselves to be buried for weeks at a time without coming to any
harm.
Breathing must always be performed through the nose, quite silently,
steadily, regularly and without strain. It should preferably be practised in a
quiet place and not just after eating. While breathing the mind should be
focused on the highest ideals and aspirations. Remember that we are
breathing in, besides oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen, a host of subtle and
powerful elements and forces. It is the mind which subconsciously directs
the selection and utilization of these powers. We breathe in Life, we breathe
in God, according as to what we aspire.
Slow, deep, gentle breathing will cure insomnia, nerves, blood-pressure,
fear, brain-fag and bad temper.
The Easterns apparently know many things about breathing with which the
Western world is not yet familiar. They believe, for instance, that in correct
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 73 ---
breathing only one nostril is actually used at a time. This is said to be caused
by tissues in each nostril which swell alternately at intervals, thus allowing
full use of only one nostril. There are said to be two currents which pass up
and down the spine, the one on the right side being positive and the one on
the left side negative.
The breathing, therefore, is performed alternately along an electrical current
indrawing ‘positive sun-ruled’ particles; and a magnetic current indrawing
‘negative moon-ruled’ particles. It is said that by using this knowledge the
temperature of the body can be regulated.
Astrologically, a Sign comes up on the Ascendant every two hours,
alternately a positive and negative sign, and this is connected with the
breathing.
It is said that Indian doctors always study the patient’s breathing first of all,
being in this way able to determine the condition of the magnetic and
electrical areas in the body at the time.
Apparently, after a meal or during the change-over both nostrils are used, so
that it takes a little time to determine the exact state of affairs.
An expert in these matters would, however, know the quality of his powers
of achievement at any given hour, being thus able to ensure the maximum of
creative output with the minimum of expended energy. Whereas all we now
know is that we are either ‘in the mood’ for work or not, and this results in
an indifferent and uneven output.
The much-discussed power of levitation, in which a yogi is said to be able to
conquer the laws of gravity and rise in the air, appears to have a strong
connection with breathing.
A simple little experiment will point this out.
Let one person lie down straight and stiff on a couple of chairs. Let four
persons stand round him, one at each shoulder and one at each knee, each
one placing a finger beneath their prone comrade. All must then breathe
steadily and in unison for a minute or so. Finally, after the intake of breath,
raise the prone man into the air upon the tips of the fingers. He will seem to
weigh nothing at all.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Egyptians and earlier races could life might stones by some agency
which still puzzles scientists. Were they perhaps able to overcome the laws
of gravity by concentrated scientific breathing on a large scale? If four
people can lift say twelve stone without feeling it, by breathing in unison,
what could a thousand do?
It has been found in some factories that the output of work is much
improved by allowing the workers to sing. After all that has been said about
breathing it will be realized at once what an enormous power for good
singing could be if properly used and understood. There is no end to the
benefit to be obtained by combining breathing, rhythm and sound as in
singing.
A person who is timid, cowardly or shy narrows his chest and breathes
feebly. Diseases such as asthma are probably the direct result of nervous
breathing. If we are calm, confident and courageous we breathe deep and
slow. As an aid to attaining these qualities we must first correct our
breathing.
Everyone should breathe in the divine Breath of Life with all his heart and
sing his song of thanksgiving no less regularly than do the birds.
9
SECRETS OF COLOUR
Some poet has said, ‘Colour is not in the rose but in ourselves.’
What is colour?
In Chapter 2 we stated that out of the vast scale of Nature’s vibrations a tiny
octave is registered by the optic nerves. Our physical eyes respond to these
particular vibrations with a reaction which we know as colour. If we had no
eyes those vibrations would still exist – but as what?
Medical science has proved that different colours have definite and varied
effects upon our nervous systems and that they act upon us quite
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 75 ---
independently of our eyes or mings. Their influence is particularly marked in
the case of lunatics.
It has been suggested that Colours are really Rays radiating down to this
earth at their specific rates of vibration. A red rose reflects back all the
colour rays except red, which it absorbs. Our optic nerves react to its
vibrations and we say, ‘The Rose is red.’
The perfect blending of the seven colour rays in the bright daylight gives us
a white light. If the rays are split up by being passed through a glass prism
they are at once visible as colours. In the same way a rainbow is produced
by the minute prismatic effects of rain in the sky. If you walk round a
fountain in the sun, at a certain point you will see a rainbow.
The colour rays are pouring down on the earth night and day. Every object
and every atom responds to them, thereby announcing its own quality to
those who are able to decipher the language of colours.
Where do these rays come from and what are they?
We have noted that the seven major planets of our solar system are radiating
their various forces outwards, so that they reach this earth at considerable
strength. As there are also seven primary colour rays radiating to the earth
we may suspect a definite connection here, and suggest that colours are
really an expression of the planetary rays, observable by us as they are
absorbed and held by different objects.
The planets are composed of minerals and chemicals. In each planet one
particular metal is said by astrologists to predominate. In Mars it is iron, and
in Mercury it is that metal. Just as radium radiates off minute particles of
itself for hundreds of years, so do those enormous planets radiate subtle
emanations of their own chemical constituents in infinitely fine form. A
human being also radiates subtle emanations of everything of which he is
composed. A clairvoyant (or person with extra-sensitive sight) is able to see
the colours of these rays at a certain angle, and speaks of them as the
person’s ‘aura’.
Let us name the colours in the order in which they appear in the spectrum.
We take red first because it has the lowest vibration, being therefore the
coarsest and most physically vitalizing; its place on the scale is just above
the heat vibrations, and it is heat-giving in itself. As the vibrations increase
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 76 ---
in speed up the scale we come to orange, then to yellow, then green, blue,
indigo and violet, the violet leading us on up into the extraordinary
penetrating and rapid vibrations of the ultra-violet ray.
Let us see if we can connect up any of the information which astronomers,
astrologers and scientists give us about colour and the planets. Astrologers
tell us that the ‘planetary colour’ of Mars is red, and that Mars ‘rules’ or has
dynamic power over iron. Now, it is iron which is responsible for our red
warm blood – without it we should have some sort of cold pale liquid in our
veins. Mars is the home of the god of war, giving a martial spirit to all those
born under his Sign, giving quick strength and force, vitality, power and
leadership.
If we suppose that the properties of this planet are to be found in its rays
which filter downwards and reach this earth as the colour red, then we are
not surprised when we find that the effect upon patients of red-coloured
electric lamps is to stimulate, warm, excite and cheer; to increase the activity
of the arterial blood; to counteract physical inefficiency, paralysis and
rheumatism; that red glass windows have much the same effect, and also red
walls and decorations to a lesser degree. By the same token red should be
avoided by those who contain too much iron, or who are in any condition of
heat or inflammation. Red-haired people, excitable lunatics, and bulls should
be surrounded by the cooler colours if peace is to prevail!
Proceeding with our investigations we find that red is the chief spectroscopic
colour in any herbs or medicines, having a hearing and stimulating effect,
such as cayenne, cloves, or musk. Finally, we can turn to the discoveries of
the famous Dr. Babbitt in chromotherapy, or healing with colours. He
proved that plain water hung up in the sunlight in a sealed chromo-lens of
red glass becomes impregnated with certain chemicals in a pwerfully healing
form, the chief of which is iron! Such water when swallowed has,
apparently, the same effect as an iron tonic.
Let us, therefore, when using or thinking of the colour red, bear in mind the
following attributes with which scientists or sages have connected it. It is the
colour of Mars, whose stone is the ruby and whose metal is iron.
It is the lowest of the seven of the colour scale, and it belongs to the lowest
of the seven notes of the musical scale, which is C. When C is played certain
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 77 ---
sensitive people see the colour red; and most martial music is in the key of
C.
Red when predominating in herbs, coloured lights or glass, and
surroundings, gives warmth, increased circulation, vitality and energy to the
body, and cheerfulness, stimulation and excitement to the spirit. The red flag
has been used throughout history for incendiarism. Finally, if dark red is
seen in the aura it indicates passion and a fighting spirit!
The second colour in the spectrum is orange. This beautiful colour is
associated with the Sun, and has also a warming and invigorating effect. But
whereas red is stimulating to the body and the blood, orange is stimulating to
the emotions. It cures those states of paralysis which are often due to
emotional reaction. It should be avoided by extremely emotional types, who
should acquire balance through its complementary colour, blue. Its note is D
in the musical scale. Melodies in that key have a strong emotional appeal.
The metal belonging to the Sun is gold, from which the alchemists believed
they could obtain the Elixir of Life which rendered man immortal. Used as a
medicine gold has a very purifying effect.
The third colour in the spectrum is yellow. We are told that this colour
belongs to the planet Mercury. Mercury confers a quick intellect by
stimulating the nervous system. To be quick-witted the nerves should be in
an active condition throughout the body; so nothing can remain stagnant
under the beneficial influence of this planet. Wisdom is said to be conferred
by Mercury and its colour yellow. Therefore Buddha always clothed his
priests in yellow, which colour has stood for wisdom and intellect
throughout the ages.
Yellow electric lamps or glass windows stimulate the nerves of the brain and
the body and cure a stagnant condition of the internal organs. They should
not be used for highly nervous subjects.
We find that yellow predominates spectroscopically in all herbs which are
purgatives or nerve-stimulants, such as senna, sulphur, fig juice, tartar,
phosphorus and castor oil. An extreme amount of yellow has a disastrously
over-stimulating effect upon the nerves, causing death, as with prussic acid
and strychnine, which are very yellow. Dr. Babbitt proved that plain water,
hung in the sunlight in a sealed lens of yellow glass, becomes impregnated
with very nerve-animating properties such as phosphorus and sodium, and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 78 ---
that it will have a purgative action if drunk, where possibly other drugs have
failed. This lens must not be entirely filled, as it will absorb such highly
expansive chemicals from the yellow rays that it would burst if full. It is
interesting to learn that the water so treated goes bad in a few days.
Yellow is the third of the colour scale. It corresponds to the musical note of
E. Its jewel is the yellow topaz, and it represents luminosity. When seen in
the human aura yellow, if dark and crude, it tells of deceit, treachery and
cowardice (we have all heard of the ‘yellow streak’!), but if pale, pure and
luminous it shows high wisdom and intellectuality.
Our fourth colour is green, standing in the centre of the scale of seven. It is
the meeting-ground between the thermal or heating and expanding colours
of red, orange and yellow, and the electrical, contracting, cooling colours of
blue, indigo and violet. Green gives stability, endurance and quietude. We
are allowed much of it to look at in nature and to partake of as nourishment.
Its action is to cool the blood and animate the nerves. It belongs to the planet
Saturn, whose metal is lead. Saturn rules the spleen which makes the white
corpuscles of the blood. These harmonize the building and destroying going
on in the human organism. So people with the luminous green of Saturn in
their auras are the harmonizers and pacifiers of the world. They stand for
social stability. If the green is dark and crude it tells that its owner, so
concerned with the affairs of others, has become ‘green with envy’.
Green belongs to the fourth of the musical scale F, whose melodies, usually
in a minor key, sing of the melancholy always associated with Saturn. Its
stone is the emerald, which bestows peace of mind. Therefore whether
through lights, coloured glass or herbs, greed gives an all-round steadying
and quietening influence. The green flag and lamp represent safety and
speak of the guardianship of those in authority. We are told that on the
planet Saturn live our guardian spirits.
Now we leave the heating colours and pass upwards to the cooling,
contracting ones – blue, indigo and violet.
These rays have a soothing, narcotic and antispectic action. They act as
sedatives to the vascular and nervous system, subdue mania and angry
passions, inflammations, sunstroke, insomnia, eyestrain and all irritated
conditions of mind and body.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 79 ---
Sedatives, antiseptics and narcotics contain much of these colours; narcotic
flowers are blue and purple; blackberries are valued for their astringent
qualities.
Blue belongs to the planet Venus, the giver of love, devotion and harmony.
Its stone is the amethyst, the super-sacred of the seven sacred jewels. Pale
blue in the aura represents devotion, while dark blue shows fanaticism. One
can either be ‘true blue’ or have a fit of the ‘blues’, according to one’s
outlook!
Dr. Babbitt says that blue lenses filled with water and exposed to sunlight
become impregnated with chlorine, cobalt, manganese and other properties
having soothing and antiseptic action. This water will never putrefy. It acts
as a sedative and an antiseptic, and is cooling, especially to the blood.
The musical note of blue is G, a favourite key for the composer of romantic
music.
Indigo is the sixth of the colour scale. It is, like green, a meeting-ground for
all the colours. Its action through herbs and chemicals is intermediately
between blue and violet, soothing both nerves and blood. Its planet is said to
be Uranus and its stone is jet. In the aura it shows dignity and high
aspirations.
Violet is the seventh and last of the colour octave. It represents the seventh
and highest quality which man attains – noble spiritual aspiration. Therefore
it has always been connected with the priestly ceremonies. Its musical note
is B, in which key much sacred music is written. Its planet is Jupiter, ruling
the metal tin and the jewel sapphire. In its medical action it approaches the
realm of the violet-ray. It cools the nerves, is magnetic and antiseptic.
Violet-lens water keeps indefinitely, and greatly benefits the hair, eyes and
the digestion.
Violet in the aura speaks of honour, spirituality and self-esteem.
Above the violet we begin a new octave of higher and more ethereal colours
mostly unseen to the average human eye.
The first is rose, which is the red of Mars transmuted to its higher octave,
where it speaks of optimism, hope and spiritualized love. The colours
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 80 ---
continue in octaves which become more and more sublimated, luminous,
pure, and pale until in the end they blend back again into the glorious white
light from whence they sprang. When the character of a human being is
sublimated and perfected the colours of his aura also resolve themselves into
a white spiritual light. In the olden days people were able to see this. They
represented it as the halo shining around the head of a saint.
Colours, therefore, are of the very deepest significance to us throughout all
phases of our life. They have more influence upon us than we can possibly
imagine. If we can use them intelligently, they are the greatest of friends,
strengthening, soothing and inspiring.
Dark, drab and dingy colours harm our spirits, morals and health; they
encourage crime, inhibitions, inferiority complexes, suicide and stunted
development. They actually prevent the radiation of personal magnetism, the
give and take between human beings. They inhibit optimism, inspiration and
therefore success.
A glance at some of our streets with their dingy dark bricks and shrieking
posters will at once show us one reason why apathy, dullness and poor
health are still prevalent.
Brown is the colour of earth and holds us to the earth and to material
thoughts. Grey is neutral and useful as a background to other colours. White
reflects back all the rays and is therefore cooling and restful. Black absorbs
them all and is therefore warm, although neutralized.
The modern trend towards plain, pale pastel shades shows a promising
awakening to a new and uplifting colour sense.
A colour campaign intelligently launched would do much to cheer, inspire
and invigorate humanity.
10
SECRETS OF SOUND
‘In the beginning was the Word.’
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 81 ---
Thus is the importance of sound emphasized to us, although so simply and
directly that it is easy to miss its significance.
The universe was created by speech – the Creator did not act. He spoke. He
said: ‘Let there be light’, and there was light.
Let us not pass over these words with a shrug, as if they were charming
fairy-tales designed to enthral the naïve people of old. The deepest scientific
knowledge of all times was always thus veiled by symbolism and by myth,
and rich is the reward of every effort at interpretation. Certain of the ancient
peoples made a profound study of chemistry. The fact that they chose to give
to their chemicals the names of gods and goddesses and to describe their
reactions under the guise of myths and ‘legends’ does not in the least detract
from their actual knowledge. On the contrary it may show how much deeper
and further they penetrated into the realms of ultimate Causes than men of
science do today.
We are told by those teachers of antiquity that the formation of this universe
out of chaos was brought about by the Breath and Word of the Creator – by
Sound! Certain sounds produced differing sets of vibrations in the ether.
Some of these were of such low frequency that they formed particles of what
we call ‘matter’ or physical substance. There could not be Light, as we know
it, without minute specks of matter in the ether to reflect it.
We learn that later these particles of matter collided, coalesced, the force of
their mutual attraction (or gravity) causing them to commence spinning. The
endless arrangements thus formed produced this Solar System and all that is
therein. We can gain an idea of the infinite number of these arrangements by
considering the vast scale of vibrations with which we dealt in Chapter 2.
The little section of oscillations on this scale, to which the ear can react, and
which we know as Sound, are of comparatively low frequency. They occur
below the heat vibrations. A vibration of sixteen per second gives the lowest
note heard by the human ear, and the scale of sound runs up to nearly 40,000
vibrations per second. This speed is the highest which we can register as
sound.
Higher up on the scale, vibrating at about seventy million million million
times per second, begins the vibrations which we know as heat, and to which
the heat-centres in our skin react. Above these come the Light and Colour
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 82 ---
vibrations and above those are the X-ray and the subtle vibrations of the
mind.
Below the Sound vibrations come those of chemical substances which make
up the physical world.
It is said that the whole scale of vibrations is divided up into Octaves of
Seven. Each octave is a replica of the others, only functioning at a doubled
or trebled speed of vibration. Thus, merely as a simile, supposing the first
note of the octave C to vibrate at twenty per second, we might find that a
certain number of octaves lower down – the vibrations of the first note of an
octave at say perhaps twenty per minute – would be apparent to us as, for
instance, the metal iron. The first note of an octave several hundred times
higher up on the scale would be apparent to us as the colour Red, and far
higher up still, as the emotion of anger or passion. All these different
expressions of one note or vibration, as well as many others in between, are
ruled, controlled, or emanated from the planet Mars according to certain
schools of thought, and express the good and bad qualities which are
associated with that planet.
By studying such theories we can realize the intimate connection between
Sound and all other expressions of life. Sound is low down on the scale and
comes just above Form. Therefore Sound is the intermediary between the
‘abstract’ idea and the ‘concrete’ form.  Sounds mould the ether into shapes,
and through these shapes the corresponding Power is able to play and make
its impress on physical matter.
The clairvoyant primitive peoples actually saw the shapes produced in the
ether by sounds. They represented these shapes as the letters of their
alphabet. So most words and sounds of the early languages actually
controlled and represented that which they expressed. When those peopled
called on the god ‘Ra’ they established a connection just as definitely as we
do when we tune in our wireless to Paris or London.
Throughout history we can learn of the deliberate and effective use of sound.
Priests have always employed it, creating certain definite reactions on the
people by the use of chanting and intoning. In the Ancient Mysteries and
Magical Ceremonial Rites words, sounds and shapes were combined to gain
certain ends. Each one of us is intensely affected by sound-waves, which of
course pass right through our bodies.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 83 ---
Every object and every person has a key-note – in other words the sum of
their vibrations responds to one particular note or chord of the musical scale.
If a person’s note or chord is sounded gently and melodiously it has a
healing and constructive influence upon him. If it is sounded loudly, harshly
and continuously it has a correspondingly destructive influence, making that
person ill and unhappy. If you can discover the note belonging to a particular
wine-glass and sound it loudly into the glass for a little while you will
shatter the glass to pieces. It is said that the walls of Jericho fell because of
this same law, as the key-note of the wall was purposely sounded with
continuous harshness by the trumpets, under the instructions of someone
with a knowledge not uncommon in those days.
An instrument has lately been invented called the eidophone. It contains a
tightly stretched drum surface upon which a paste is spread. Sounds and
words are then uttered underneath this drum. They cause beautiful shapes to
form in the paste, exact replicas of trees, ferns and flowers as they are in
nature.
If sand is spread on the drum instead of paste the sounds will produce
geometrical designs instead of plant forms. It is even said that ugly and
obscene words will produce ugly and displeasing patterns, and the reverse!
This experiment proves the creative aspect of sound and helps us to visualize
the definite forms and radiations set up in the ether by our own words.
The sounds with which we are surrounded in present-day city life are mostly
harsh, monotonous and unbeautiful. If the roar of the traffic were suddenly
to cease as we walked down the street we should find that we had been
screaming discordantly at our companion to make ourselves heard. Our
pleasures also are mostly crudely noisy. At the average cocktail-party
everyone shouts at once. The hostess is disappointed if it is not so, while
some of the dance music is harsh beyond words. Tube, train and bus all add
their quota to the barrage of hideous noise which we have to endure. People
who are obliged to listen day after day to sounds which are a discordant
offence to Nature’s laws will inevitably become sick or depleted, and soon
be suffering from one of those innumerable nerve complaints which are the
order of the day.
The only way to counteract these bad effects would be by healing the
damaged nerve centres with soothing harmonies or with the blessed balm of
complete silence for a short period every day. If a person is able to discover
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 84 ---
his own key-note or chord and to play it over gently to himself he will revive
as if by magic. One’s key-note can be ascertained by listening to some good
orchestral music. When the note is played it will send a thrill right through
its owner.
If a person’s life is in some way inharmonious or destructive this can be
detected at once in his voice, which will often jar upon the listener’s nerves;
whereas one who is living in accordance with divine law will have a
melodious, pleasing voice. The more advanced types of people have
resonant voices, while primitive types have the flat ‘chest’ voices such as are
heard among natives, gypsies or the apaches of Paris.
The creative use of sound can be observed on all sides. The baby cries to
promote its own growth. Until the little one has uttered its first cry its
progress is not assured.
It is said that the birds set up the vibrations which promote the growth of the
young leaves by their singing in the early spring. When the leaves are all full
out the birds’ songs cease, except at twilight and at dawn, at which times the
chemical activities of the plant life change. At night plant life breathes out
carbon dioxide, although during the day it breathes out oxygen. The times of
the change-over are heralded by the birds.
The ancient Japanese mystics such as the Zen monks were said to be able to
bring the dead or dying back to life by uttering a certain loud cry. An
interesting description of this can be found in the novel The Garden of
Vision.
Some people assert that in order to connect ourselves with power and
wisdom we should go apart to a quiet place and call our own Christian name
over and over very gently. Uttering a noun or name creates a form in the
ether which acts as a ‘receiving station’ to certain powers which then play
through it. Tennyson declared that he could leave his own body consciously,
and gain much experience, by calling his own name. He describes this in the
‘Ancient Sage’.
The potent action of sound has always been recognized and applied
throughout history; but at the present time a stringent tackling of the Sound
problem is urgently needed.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 85 ---
An anti-noise campaign is actually in existence, but its efforts are not much
in evidence as yet, and have not received the whole-hearted public support
which they deserve.
The medical profession is experimenting with the healing properties of
sound. But it is up to every individual to take a personal interest in this vital
problem and all the infinite possibilities connected with it.
Those who really wish to get the best out of life should shun inharmonious
noises and all superfluous chatter; they should feed their spirit and nerves
with music; they should sing often, aiming more at rhythm and resonance
than at loudness and high notes; they should study the tones of their own
speaking voices to gain an insight into their own characters. They should
watch and guard their own words, remembering that in speaking they are
building definite forms for good or for evil, which will persist in the ether,
connecting their owner permanently with good or evil influences, and
attracting to him much that he may ignorantly consider he has not deserved.
Lastly, they should remember that, as all the sages and wise ones are aware,
the greatest inspiration and wisdom has been bestowed upon humanity
during periods of profound and complete silence.
11
THE SCIENCE OF NUMBERS
The world is built up of thousands of differing rates of vibrations, all these
having their origin in the One original vibration of the mind of the Creator –
or the sum, essence or single number of the Whole.
We learn from the ancient teachings that the One original mighty Creative
Power, wishing to make further manifestation, and to exercise His creative
ability for a purpose which it is beyond us to understand at present, divided
Himself (by the power of the Word) into Three, thus forming that great
Triangle which originated Life and Action as we know it.
The Triangle, known as Father-Mother-Son, or Positive-Negative-
Combustion, or Mercury-Sulphur-Salt, as we have seen, has always been
studied all over the world.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 86 ---
We begin, therefore, in this science, with the number One, the Creator, who
divides into Three in the act of creating. The scientist will describe this
formation as Polarity. As Schopenhauer put it: ‘Polarity, or the sundering of
a force into two quantitively different and opposed activities, striving
reunion …. Is a fundamental type of almost all the phenomena of Nature,
from the magnet and the crystal to man himself.’ The Hindus describe it
thus: ‘Brahma, that the world might be born, fell asunder into man and
woman, became name and form, time and space.’
In a further definition of the origin of this Solar System we are told that the
Creator, a Great White Light, divided into Three – Red, Yellow and Blue
(the primary colours which correspond with the primary notes of the scale,
C, E and G). After the division into Three, the second great division into
Seven took place, and the Seven Spirits Before the Throne, inhabiting the
Seven Sacred Planets of this Solar System, came into being. From them
radiated the seven colours of the spectrum. There are also the seven notes of
music, the seven planes of matter, seven days of the week, the seven ages of
man and his seven glands – in fact, as we have seen, the tremendous scale of
Nature’s vibrations runs in an infinity of octaves of seven.
In history we can trace man’s appreciation of the significance of the number
Seven when we think of the ‘Seven days of Creation’, Seven Cardinal
Virtues, Seven Deadly Sins, Seven Wonders of the World, Seven Towers of
Constantinople, Seven Hills of Rome, Seven Plagues of Egypt, the Seven-
branched Candlestick – and even the Seven-league Boots!
Seven, therefore, is the number of the condition of man’s physical existence
upon the earth as it is at present. But humanity is imperfect, unfinished,
unevolved, so seven is not the final number. Mankind, as well as all of
Nature, is to rise out of the imperfect state, to become complete and creative,
and to develop the full quota of qualities and capacities, which run up to the
finished number of twelve.
To this end man has to evolve under the discipline of the Twelve Signs of
the Zodiac as described in Chapter 5.
These signs circle round the Sun and represent the twelve great lessons and
qualities of living. We therefore find this number Twelve playing a
significant part in Nature also, as well as in mythology and history. We can
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 87 ---
at once call to mind such divisions as the twelve hours of the day and the
twelve months of the year.
There were also the twelve sons of Jacob, symbolizing the climax of a past
period, and the Twelve Apostles, representing the climax of the present era.
When humanity has taken its degree in the school of earthly life, and
graduated through all the twelve great tests, becoming thereby master of
itself and all conditions, and therefore creative, it turns ‘back to the Father’
as in the tale of the prodigal son. It has exhausted the possibilities of matter,
has realized the illusion of the infinite divisions of nature, and retraces its
steps back to the one original great White Light of Omniscience. Man has
become One in understanding with the Creator.
The farther we go back in history the more profound seems the
understanding of these definitions of life. The ancients arrived at a deep
knowledge of astronomy, astrology and world history without apparently
possessing any of our instruments of science. We are told that they obtained
this knowledge through the subtler senses, by meditation. They discovered
many things about the formation, quality and meaning of the universe which
could not be expressed in words but only in numbers and symbols, and many
of the vital truths of life are still only to be found in this way. Numbers and
symbols play a very large part in all the Bibles and sacred writings of the
ancients. We should gain much by being able to decipher them.
Everyone who was allowed to study the Mysteries with the learned
priesthood of Egypt and Chaldea was initiated into the meanings of numbers
and symbols. It is said that first Moses and then Jesus studied in this way.
Pythagoras studied thus with the priests for twenty-five years in Memphis,
Thebes and Babylon and, as a result, founded his famous school of
philosophy. He called his pupils ‘mathematicians’. He said ‘God
geomatrises’. He studied the numerical relationships of all the phenomena of
the universe and was able finally to classify and sum them up.
Numbers rule nature, not only in the classification of objects but in periods
of time. The Moon plays a large part in this, moving in periods of four
weeks, or four sevens, ruling woman also in these cycles, and governing the
tides and seasons, fertility and growth.
The Moon passes through one of the Zodiacal Signs every two hours. The
earth herself, moving on a grander scale, passes through one of the Great
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 88 ---
Zodiacal Signs about every 2500 years. Certain influences are therefore
radiated down to earth by the Moon in miniature changing every two hours,
and by the Sun in magnitude changing about every 2500 years. The
scientists or astrologer who can decipher the lesser influence can be sure of
the greater one. It was in this way that the ancient peoples were able to
‘prophesy’ the trend of civilizations and races 2000 or 200,000 years ahead.
Much of this knowledge is wrapped up in the mistranslated symbolism of
the Revelations.
It is therefore apparent that one way of learning many of the secret processes
at work in the universe and in our own natures lies in the understanding of
numbers and symbols. To do this we must study the output of those early
peoples and understand the foundation and origin of their knowledge, and
the way in which they were able to tap the ‘Universal Mind’.
If a doctor, knowing the periods of crisis and the duration of a certain
disease, were to tell a company of the microbes just what would happen to
them in three days’ time, that would seem an impossible and wonderful feat
of prophecy to the microbes; and as they only live from a few minutes to a
few hours the prophecy would apply to their far-distant descendants in the
dim future. If, however, the microbes could train their mentalities (and
science has now proved that even a cell or a microbe has a mentality) they
could obtain telepathic contact with the mind of the doctor, and themselves
discover his ideas and knowledge of their future development.
Mankind may be said to bear an analogous position to the microbes. We are
little more than microbes upon the body of a great Being, which body we
call the earth. Just as we depend for our future health, comfort, peace and the
development even of our wisdom upon the well-being and co-operation of
the cells in our body, so, we may imagine, does that Being depend upon us
for His own progress and in helping ourselves we help Him! If we make
progress He is possibly just as grateful to us as we are to our own hands,
eyes or brain as they improve in their capacity to serve us well.
Having visualized man as a microbe upon the living body of the earth, let us
go further. The Sun is called the Heart of the Universe – why? Because, we
are told, it is a great heart, the heart of a Being too vast for us to conceive of,
and in whose structure our earth plays the part of a gland or organ.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 89 ---
This Gigantic Being is He whom some of us call God, just as we ourselves
are a vast inscrutable all-knowing God to the little creatures whom we know
as the cells of our own bodies.
In all reverence we might try also to realize that the glorious Being whose
heart is the Sun may also be worshipping and striving to reach a still
mightier God even further from our power to comprehend. So life repeats,
up and down the scale of size, forwards and backwards upon the scale of
time, periods and cycles. It is only by having the clue to the octaves and their
numbers that we are able to link up and connect and interpret the manifold
different expressions of the few fundamental qualities of evolving creation.
These hidden truths constitute some of the Mysteries which the Initiates and
Adepts are able to reach, one by one, as they graduate upwards through the
school of life, taking one Initiation after another. In olden days certain
people were carefully selected to be trained to this end in the temples,
although now the road is open to all.
Those early scholars realized that certain sounds linked them up with certain
creative principles in nature and that every sound and quality had its number
which was the sum total of its vibrations.
The science of numbers, or numerology, has, like much of the ancient
knowledge, become through disuse misunderstood and debased to the rank
of superstition. It is only used now from the limited personal viewpoint, but
even so it can be both interesting and helpful.
It is said that before birth we are drawn to our names, birthdates and parents
by an irresistible affinity with those vibrations which compose our own
characters and aspirations, and that a numerologist by studying the former is
able to tell us what we are and wherein lie our potentiality, our hopes and
our hazards. Each letter and date represents a number. The right reading of
these numbers will describe our character and type of life. Each number
represents a planet, colour, quality and experience in either its good, bad, or
negative aspect. We can map out the life according to the relation in which
all its numbers are standing to each other.
Those who believe in this science declare that it is extremely useful in the
choosing of vocations and partnerships and that with its help the handicap of
incompatibility can be avoided. Like everything else it must be used with
moderation and common sense and not in a spirit of idle superstition.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 90 ---
The famous American physician Dr. Abrams invented an apparatus which
measures the vibrations of all the reactions of the human body. He
ascertained that every disease has its own numerical value, and that the cure
can also be determined by means of numbers. Much, of course, has to be
learned and proved about this science, but here again the fundamental
importance of a number is brought to light.
The meanings of the primary numbers have been described throughout the
ages as follows:
The number One represents the first necessary qualities of evolving life, the
pioneer fighting spirit, leadership and force. A person born on the first of
any month will be given chances of exercise these qualities.
The number Two represents the second stage in man’s developing nature –
sociability, and includes affection and all the give-and-take qualities, such as
diplomacy and home-making.
The number Three represents self-expression. Man has fought and made
friends. Now he wants to give entertainment, beauty and joie de vivre.
People with this birthdate should not be expected to be very orderly or
reliable.
The number Four stands for the solid framework of life, the foundations.
People attuned to this number will be called the ‘backbone of the country’.
They are patient, reliable plodders.
The number Five represents the Five Senses – Experience. It gives travel,
variety and drama to life, and progress.
The number Six represents Family Life, but on a much broader scale than
the retiring number Two. Six stands for Guardianship, when a man begins to
sense his higher destiny and responsibilities, to care for all families as well
as his own, and to offer world-wide hospitality and help.
The number Seven represents the final turning of man inwards to the
spiritual life, to the study of sciences and truths, discipline and organization.
It is the number of loneliness.
In number Eight, man, having found his own soul and the power within him,
must turn to earth-life once more and learn to combine the two. So eight
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 91 ---
gives power, organization, and constructive leadership, backed by spiritual
inspiration.
The number Nine represents the perfect and completed man, who having
fully developed himself, must now forget himself in Sacrifice and Service.
Here we have the great lover, humanitarian and artist. Through this number
beats the most high-powered of human vibrations, which has great force to
be used for either good or evil.
To write all that is known about numbers would fill volumes. We have not
space to do more than take this glance at the primary numbers. They, of
course, each belong to their Colour, Planet and Sound. When, after some
study, it is seen how completely all these facets of life dove-tail and fit into
their places like an intricate vast Chines puzzle it will be realized that these
marvellous ‘theories’ are too perfect and too near to the truth to have been
invented by the brains of human beings. This indeed is the reward of a study
of these matters - a gradual realization of the amazing fact that there really is
a whole universe of marvels and of sublime promise for those who seek.
The science of numbers is exhaustive, instructive, and useful if applied with
an honest desire for progress and understanding. Modern scientists are busily
expressing the ancient beliefs in their own manner. They are measuring the
vibrations of diseases, of thoughts, of will-power and of many other
activities and getting them all numbered. They are numerologists in their
own way, although they still turn their backs rigidly upon the ancient
sciences. Nevertheless, they are bringing to light one fundamental fact, and
that is that everything exists through the formation of a different number,
and therefore that numbers must constitute a language, a key, and a clue to
many secrets in life, if we can learn to decipher them.
There are various systems of numerology. The sifting of the true from the
false will do much to develop the student’s own powers of deciphering
numbers.
12
DIET AND EXERCISE
People all over the world are becoming more and more health-conscious.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 92 ---
Very much is being thought, written and tried out in the realms of Diet and
Exercise.
At one end of the scale we have those who continue deliberately to ‘dig their
graves with their teeth’, living grossly, carelessly and unnaturally, and
indeed ‘selling their birthright for a mess of pottage’.
At the other end of the scale we find the ‘cranks’, people who may end in an
asylum or a nursing-home through overdoing things and lacking moderation
in their search for the perfect state.
In the middle of the scale we find the people who are as much put off by the
cranks as they are by the slovens, and continue in doubt as to how seriously
they should treat the whole subject.
It will be well, therefore, to take a comprehensive glance at the question of
physical fitness and decide what are the few essentials necessary for its
maintenance. It is of paramount importance to realize that the body is built
by the mind or ego. We are what we think. It is the ego which drives the
machinery, which directs the habits of the brain, and which selects from the
elements of food and air just what it chooses to use. That is why one person
will keep healthy and happy on a few grains of rice while another will perish
of ‘undernourishment’ on a quite fair diet. No amount of food, air or
exercise will help anyone unless he has the will to be well and the will to be
happy, and if he has these qualifications then he will be comparatively
independent of his air, food or exercise! This is the first fundamental truth to
realize about health. We are as healthy and as happy as we wish to be. If we
know how to live, how continually to adore and accept the Divine Will in
whatever guise it is working out, and never to act contrary to the tide of
Nature, then health and joy will abundantly flow through us, irrespective of
accidental man-made conditions.
Most people have not a living faith. Even a quite sincere Christian goes
about in a perpetual state of worry, about himself, others and the world in
general.
We can only progress through painful experiences, therefore we should
welcome such events with keenness!
If we believe that death is a gate to a brighter life then we should never fear
it.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 93 ---
We are not logical, and we only half believe things. Therefore our minds are
divided against themselves, and this constitutes an inner conflict which
naturally poisons and undermines our systems.
The first essential to health, therefore, is to believe – to believe in ourselves,
our power over ourselves and our destinies.
The second thing to recognize is that we are meant to be happy. We have not
been given the wealth of beauty and wonder which surrounds us on all sides
merely to ignore it. We have not been given bodies capable of a hundred
enjoyments merely to deny them. For centuries thwarted and jealous kill-
joys have been busy misinterpreting religion and human nature, insulting
and slighting the very works of their Creator in the natural human functions.
If only they had taught Love and Love and again Love in its fullest sense,
people’s hearts would have become too full and too broad to need to resort
to petty physical indulgencies for the capturing of a faint reflection of the
Universal Union.
The body should not be disdained, misunderstood or driven to death. It is our
wonderful servant, our intricate tool, and the sacred temple of our
inspirations. Therefore we must cherish it and nourish it, remembering that
joy is the greatest of all nourishment.
We must learn how to enjoy, and that this faculty lies within us, not without
us. A blind man chained in a dungeon has yet the capacity for infinite joy
within himself. And we who are free can drink in joy from a little square of
blue sky, a twinkling star, a budding leaf, or a flake of snow; we can find a
world of wonder in the eye of a fly or the instinct of a building swallow.
We must also enjoy the many delicious things which constitute man’s food.
We must make of eating a sacrament, not a grossness, nor a dull necessity.
When we eat we are performing a miracle, but the miracle is only as
complete as the enthusiasm which we apply to it.
From a physical point of view we are the result of what we eat and how we
eat, so we must never forget to treat our period at the table as an event
entirely unto itself. Those people who gobble hurried, over-large or meagre
meals while screaming with laughter or frantic with worry, and with their
minds in a state of rush or restlessness, are committing sacrilege and suicide
in subtle form.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 94 ---
It is not of much use to concern ourselves with diet until these primary
matters are attended to. We can easily sum up the first essentials as follows:
Deep, slow breathing produces a supply of oxygen for the combustion of
food. One should never eat while breathless, hurried, worried or upset. Calm
down first, remembering that nourishment taken by a person in such
condition turns to poison – in fact, it is much better to miss a meal
altogether, waiting until the system has recovered.
Many people do not realize what a large part of the digestive process should
take place before the meal is swallowed. That is why the importance of slow
and thorough mastication is always emphasized. A very necessary part of the
nourishment can best be absorbed through the walls of the mouth. People
who bolt their food have to exist without this primary stage of the digestion.
While in the mouth most of the vital living forces of the food are meant to be
abstracted; but, once swallowed, the acid digestive juices neutralize these
forces and part of the potency of the food is lost. Quick eaters do not obtain
the stimulation to the brain and nerve-forces which is the reward of eating
slowly.
It is a mistake to drink with meals. Food should be taken as dry as possible,
without being drowned in liquid or sauces, as this prevents the digestive
juices from contact the food. Drinking should take place before eating or in
between meals. Animals do not drink and eat at the same time. Remember
always to eat too little in preference to too much. This will be easy once the
speed is reduced!
Many people eat an appallingly complicated mixture of foods at one meal,
most of which are incompatible. Adults should be very sparing with starchy
foods, which are no longer so necessary to them. They should not take starch
with acid-making foods such as meat, as this causes fermentation. The
famous British lunch of roast beef is ruined by its accompaniment of bread,
Yorkshire pudding, potatoes, peas and pastry tart, which array of starch turns
the meal into an outrage! Instead of starch we should concentrate upon those
foods which give us mental and nervous energy, containing phosphorus and
‘vitamins’, such as green vegetables, fruits and salads. We should remember
that everything which we are able to eat in its raw state is more than twice as
strengthening as cooked food.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 95 ---
Another primary necessity for health is the complete natural elimination of
all waste matter from the body. Lack of this achievement is the fundamental
cause of almost all disease. It can be assured by correct breathing ( see
Chapter 8), sparing diet containing roughage, an intensive chewing of all
food, and naturally induced perspiration.
If these few simple rules are followed and whatever changes to be effected
in the diet are made gradually, a sure foundation for physical fitness will be
built up, without the individual becoming a crank or a pest to himself or
others. But the most important of all is thorough mastication.
A twenty-four hours’ fast taken every three or four weeks will be of extreme
benefit, and can do no possible harm, as long as the faster does not wish to
think that it is killing him! If he is really too terrified of the extreme danger
of this proceeding, he might bring himself to miss one meal occasionally.
These little attentions give a chance to the internal organs to perform a
much-needed ‘spring-clean’, which they are always anxious and willing to
do if given the chance.
A great many people are perturbed by the question as to whether or not to
eat meat. An authority stated in the newspaper recently that the consumption
of meat is falling rapidly, and that the choice seems to be whether to return
to meat-eating and the strong warlike nature of our forefathers or to give it
up and become more peaceable and gentle. As the whole world is crying out
for peace and brotherliness, the latter course would certainly seem to be the
more desirable.
No idealist or advanced person really likes the idea of eating meat. Many
believe that it is a barbarism which will gradually disappear with the passing
of the ‘Dark Age’. It is quite possible to be strong and active, as many are,
on a meatless diet, but after half a lifetime of meat-eating many systems may
find a temporary difficulty in readjustment. Here again ‘crankiness’ must be
avoided. Meat may gradually be relinquished until there is a sound
knowledge of the necessary substitutes, such as nuts and cheese. But apart
from any question of principle, most people would improve in health in
measure as they gave up all flesh foods.
The question of alcohol and smoking naturally arises at this point. There
again it must be an individual concern for each person. Alcohol is an
artificial stimulant and a poison. Its action if taken any quantity is to drive
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 96 ---
the ego partly out of the body. The ego can only use the body when it is of a
certain temperature. Extreme cold forces the ego out, and unconsciousness
ensues. Overheating has the same effect, resulting in fainting or the delirium
of fever.
Constant driving out of the ego through alcoholism loosens its grip upon the
body and allows outside entities or influences to gain admittance, with the
various and dire results, such as obsessions and deliriums while the victim is
still partly conscious of the lower astral world (alas, those snakes and rats
are not ‘imagination’!).
No self-respecting and earnest person will care to indulge unduly in any
stimulant, drug, sedative (such as smoking), excitement or emotionalism
which prevents him from being entirely himself and the captain of his own
soul.
Nevertheless, a sudden violent reactionary effort towards complete
abstention in any of these matters may have, of course, an equally over-
balancing effect upon the individual. Common sense, moderation, and a love
of the natural joys of living will keep the situation under control. For
instance, discrimination between raw spirits and delicate wines is a case in
point.
Hand in hand with the question of diet comes the problem of exercise.
It is recognized now that men and women have no longer strenuously to hunt
for and prepare their food, that they need a substitute for the exercise they
would obtain if living in a ‘natural’ state. In other words, human beings have
a tendency, unless otherwise obliged, to sink into habits necessitating only
those few movements which the routine of their lives demands. They mostly
move of necessity and not from pleasure. True, we are learning to ‘take
exercise’, but the same exercises, such as tennis or cycling, are liable to be
taken by any and everyone, irrespective of their particular nervous or
muscular condition. There have been many cases of an overstrained
business-man dropping dead at his game of golf for the simple reason that
additional concentration was the last thing he needed. College rowing also
sometimes results in an overstrained heart, which may handicap the
unfortunate youth for the rest of his life.
It is a magnificent thing that physical culture is claiming public attention and
enthusiasm, but it is not quite such a simple wholesale affair as may be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 97 ---
imagined. A little individual knowledge and intelligence applied to it will do
much to aid the authorities. In the pressure of modern life many of us get
quite a lot of movement. We rush from one place to another, anxious and
hurried, with our muscles tensed up rigidly most of the time. In this case our
exercises should be relaxing ones, designed to counteract the tension of our
lives and give our nerves and muscles a rest. Most people are quite unable
entirely to relax their brain, nerves and muscles. If they could once learn to
do so for a short time each day they would rapidly grow young again!
The second thing to consider is our habitual position, according to what our
work is. Those people who spend many hours bent double over a desk are
not helping themselves by bending again over a golf-club. They must choose
a form of exercise which bends the spine in the opposite direction. It will be
seen that serving at tennis has somewhat this effect, although actual back-
stretching exercises are better. Swimming is a fine exercise for the spine.
If we turn to Nature, we can see at once the exercises which animals take.
Cats and dogs stretch themselves, shake themselves and roll upon the
ground. We cannot do better than learn from Nature. After sleeping or
working we should stretch and stretch and stretch again, in every direction
we can think of, both lying down and standing upon our toes. Particular
attention should be paid to relaxing the back of the neck, as that is the
portion of the spine which is kept most continually an unnaturally tensed. It
is tensed in thinking. Sleep is only possible when complete relaxation at the
back and base of the skull takes place.
After having stretched until every single ligament in our bodies has had its
turn, then let us shake ourselves. Stand up in bare feet and relax every
muscle loosely. Then shake yourself about, imagining that you are both
intoxicated and boneless! Continue this until you are sure that every single
muscle has relaxed. Then lie down and try to relax the whole of the legs and
feet. Follow this with deep, slow breathing.
These exercises may sound strange to those who are accustomed to Swedish
drill. Drilling has also its advantages for strengthening and using the
muscles, but relaxation correctly performed achieves a release and
refreshment for the nervous system not to be found in any other way.
The Western idea of exercise seems mostly to consist of violently agitating
every limb of the body in turn, until reduced to a state of exhaustion.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Easterns exercise in such a way as to conserve instead of expend
energy. It is said that those who join the sacred schools of physical culture
and are trained by the Yogis learn to exercise while sitting still in one
posture and concentrating upon each nerve and muscle. They use special
postures to stimulate any given nerve in the body or brain. It is said that in
this way they can cure any disease, acquire a fine physique and live a
phenomenally long life. The modern osteopath is beginning to discover
possibilities of this nature also, but, of course, he works from the outside.
Rolling on hard ground is an excellent form of massage which tones up the
muscles and disperses soft fat.
The finest exercises, then, are those in which the animals indulge. Next in
order comes the equally natural exercise of swimming.
Other more violent forms of sport may not always be beneficial. In any case,
their drawback is that directly they are discontinued the muscles suffer from
the changed conditions and the victim may grow plumper than ever, or
develop rheumatism. It is often remarked how champion athletes are liable
suddenly to succumb to diseases which do not defeat the weedy little man!
The question of exercise must therefore be approached individually and not
collectively, bearing in mind that our chief object should be to counteract the
tensions and postures of our daily life, and to cultivate a simple joy in the
suppleness of our bodies and the ecstasy of free and rhythmic movements.
PART TWO
13
THE ‘THIRD EYE’
In the preceding chapters a bird’s-eye view has been taken of the conditions
surrounding developing humanity.
The possible fruits of a deeper understanding of various aspects of life have
been considered, such aspects, for instance, as the planetary influences by
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 99 ---
whose aid we develop, and which we can study through astrology and
numbers, and by their manifestations through Colour, Sound and Form. A
little research has brought to light the possibility that the discoveries of men
of science today may coincide with the knowledge of the mystics of all
times, with a difference only of presentation and nomenclature, and the fact
that the Mystics always postulated an ultimate Cause and Law behind all
phenomena, while present-day scientists seem afraid to link up with such big
issues.
Finally we have considered the perfecting of our physical life through more
intelligent control of diet, exercise and the human relationships.
Let us now draw away the Veil still further and take a peep at what may be
the future awaiting man when he struggles out of the rut of materialism and
finally takes the reins of his life into his own hands. It looks as if the Powers
that Be are tantalizing humanity into making this effort, because they are
allowing hints and bits of knowledge to filter through in a more general way
than ever before. We find all sorts of unexpected people playing
enthusiastically with these jewels as if they were bright new toys. On every
hand we hear glib talk of trances, visions, healings and divine guidance. We
hear of intimate relationships with the ‘Masters’, of mystic experiences upon
the ‘Path’. We are given full details of ‘Initiations’, reincarnations, and
Magic Black and White! Hundreds of societies and cults with scores of
‘Teachers’ have sprung up everywhere like a mushroom growth – and of
course they mostly claim to be the especial instrument of the ‘Great White
Lodge’.
Now, it may be that many of these people are childish, and that some of the
remain materialistic, and jealous, and even profiteer with their spiritual
goods!
Nevertheless, two things stand out.
Firstly, there is a growing widespread demand for enlightenment on these
subjects, and a deepening sense of the existence of such knowledge.
Secondly, everything that is being given out everywhere bears the same
stamp, posits the same laws, and makes fundamentally the same promises, in
spite of superficial and surface differences. It would all appear to come from
one original source, and that source to have been the very ancient teachings
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 100 ---
of the greatest Sages and Mystics of all times, which has existed the world
over in much the same form.
And although people are still perhaps infantile and naïve over the treasures
of knowledge so freshly re-presented to them, yet their interest is intense and
their numbers are growing.
Furthermore, as in all their various forms these teachings yet tally in laying
emphasis on brotherhood, unselfishness, generosity and Peace, they would
seem to form some kind of opposition to the propensities for slaughter,
oppression, greed and selfishness which are causing widespread havoc in
various parts of the world.
True, among these cults are to be found many cranks, hypocrites and other
undesirables; but these people would exist in any case. They may have more
chance of regeneration where they are. It is necessary always to distinguish
between the Teaching and the Teacher; it is possible to learn beautiful truths
from a very unbeautiful character, who in that way may be working off his
'Karmic’ debts.
The great revival of interest in ‘occult’ subjects began towards the close of
last century. It is said that the close of any century ushers in a foretaste of the
knowledge to be assimilated in the next. Certain it is that fifty years ago
(written in 1937) there was an intense pioneering activity in research, both
‘occult’ and ‘scientific’. The Theosophists, Christian Scientists, and
Spiritualists, the Hypnotists, the Mesmerists and Healers resulted from these
activities, to which were drawn many eminent men and women of the time,
who have left behind a wealth of printed records of their studies and testified
experiments. Much of all of these results may be doubted by the sceptics –
but there is no smoke without fire. The impartial enquirer will do well to
observe that in all these diverse activities much the same type of
manifestations, information and mysterious laws appears to have come to
light.
Those who were studying these things from the mental and philosophical
angle were headed by a remarkable woman called H.P. Blavatsky, whose
strange personality seemed rather divorced from her profound and level-
headed writings. She made a deep and exhaustive search into ancient Eastern
mystical records and produced almost an encyclopedia upon the subject in
her Secret Doctrine and other books. The Theosophists, headed by Annie
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 101 ---
Besant, carried on the work. During the same period a very ancient sect
called the Rosicrucians were allowed to begin to give out a little of their
knowledge to the public. Some of this work was accomplished by Rudolph
Steiner and men like Max Heindel. The less intellectually inclined were
provided for by the Spiritualists, Christian Scientists, Mesmer, Dr. Coue,
and others.
Everything was done by fair means, and possibly foul to awaken people to a
sense of the potency of the inner worlds. The seeds thus sown germinated
and persisted. Today there is a big field of these activities, and excites little
comment because it has grown to be a part of the life of the public.
What are the principal elements of the more exalted of these teachings?
We hear first of all of the great Plan for the evolution of humanity, which
develops through Spirit ensouling seven great Races and dwelling on seven
great Continents, of which Lemuria and then Atlantis were the first two. The
earth itself is to have seven successive incarnations before becoming
spiritualized. All this is only a tiny little cog in the wheel of Planetary
Evolution. Planets come into successive births just as does, humanity, both
individually and collectively, and so do Solar Systems!
Presiding over our Solar System in the Hierarchy, and all their staff of
graded helpers, mentioned in the Bible as the Seven Spirits before the
Throne, the Archangels, Angels, Cherubim and Seraphim. Humanity is in
the School of Earth, graduating to be qualified to fill such exalted positions
in the dim future. The first to pass these mystic examinations (called
Initiations) will be ready to replace those of the celestial company who are
promoted to higher positions. Having attained such status They have no
longer any need of earth-lessons, but They sometimes elect to come back to
help humanity and set them an example of the perfect human life, as did
Jesus Christ, the Buddha, and many others in earliest history. In fact, we are
told that the gods themselves instructed humanity at the dawn of history, at
which time humanity was entirely conscious of the inner world and had
gradually to learn to become aware of the crystallizing Physical Plane.
The gods, or those members of the hierarchy who are in charge of the
elements and the different forces of Nature, have always been appreciated
throughout the ages and worshipped in excellent symbolical form by such
people as the Egyptians, the Assyrians and the Chinese. All these faiths in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 102 ---
their original root form acknowledged the One God over all. For instance, if
we study the revival of that pure religion as it was cultivated by King
Akhnaton, we will see that he founded it upon a former faith, existing
thousands of years previous to his time, which worshipped the one God.
We are told that humanity has had to pass through a long dark Age of
Materialism in which to learn to master physical matter by its own means.
This accomplished, it will rise once more from the ‘Maya’ or ‘Illusion’ of
the importance of matter and focus its eyes upon the real inner world of
causes and realities.
Human beings were built originally, we are told, with a special organ with
which to register the finer vibrations of the physical world, the realm of the
ethers.
This organ was known, as we have said, as the ‘Third Eye’. The ‘Third Eye’
is placed between the other two, at the root of the nose, and has its seat near
the Pineal Gland. It is said that the earliest people of all used only that
middle eye, and were known as the Cyclops. We are told that during the
embryonic development of the human species, at first man’s only organ was
one which he used to feel with, and to differentiate between heat and cold. In
time this organ recessed, and the first sense, of touch, spread all over the
nervous system and through the skin. Apparently man’s second organ to
develop was his one ‘Eye’, which he used to see all ‘non-solid’ matter
(which was all that existed at the time). As the earth solidified man
developed his two physical eyes with which to view the solid world, and his
second organ recessed, its etheric sight spreading all over the nervous
system and having its seat in the solar plexus. It is said each of man’s five
senses will eventually spread all over his body in the same way.
The capacity for sight in the ‘lower’ non-solid etheric portion of the physical
plane is therefore one of the most primitive involuntary functions, which
man shares with the animals. It is only when this ability is brought by will-
power and training under the control of man’s higher faculties, and made to
work in conjunction with the centres in his head, that it becomes of real
value. Thus co-ordinated, all three activities are often classed under the
heading of the ‘THIRD EYE’, and for the present it will simplify matters if
we sometimes do this also.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 103 ---
As physical eyesight developed, the etheric eye recessed, but although
dormant at present In most people, it is only awaiting development and
training to be reawakened . this training is a part of deliberate mystical
development, which was well understood and thoroughly provided for in the
ancient temples. No high ruler or Pharoah was eligible without such training.
The fact of his finished apprenticeship was announced by a nob upon the
forehead of his statue, representing the awakened ‘Third Eye’, or by a
serpent’s head rearing from his own show that he had raised the Kundalini
serpent.
The Chinese mandarin wore a peacock’s feather in his head-dress to
represent the same development.
The functioning of the ‘Third Eye’ puts the individual in touch with the
greater part of the physical world, all that part which is invisible to the
physical eyesight. The physical world is divided, as is all else, into seven
interpenetrating planes or strata. These are solid, liquid, gaseous, and four
kinds of ether. The physical eye can register or ‘see’ the vibrations of the
first three. The ‘Third Eye’ can voluntarily register or ‘see’ the vibrations of
the four ethers.
Certain creatures and types of activity (such as human beings and
waterfalls!) have their final outer expression in solid form.
Many other beings and types of activity have their final outer expression in
ether form or ‘etheric matter’ as it is called. For instance, we are told that the
angels have an etheric body as their outer coat instead of a solid physical one
as we have, and that this is because aeons ago, at the time when they went
through the ‘human’ or individualizing stage, the ether was the densest
condition of matter in existence.
When the ‘Third Eye’ is opened the individual begins to see all the manifold
creatures and activities of the ether, and he approaches much nearer to the
causes and realities of life. The mind can have power over everything which
it can visualize. Therefore, while man is thus studying and learning to
comprehend life in the ethers, he is able to develop the power to use and
control some of this life.
He sees, for instance, exactly what his thoughts are and what happens to
them. Once he has thoroughly comprehended the region of thought he uses
and controls his thinking apparatus to much greater purpose.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 104 ---
He also studies the records of the earth’s history which exist in the ethers in
photographic form. He also gains an acquaintance with the plane described
as the Fourth Dimension, the power to penetrate with one’s sight or
consciousness in every direction at once, and backwards and forwards
through time.
Time and Space are physical attributes, but only an infinitesimal fraction of
their limits can be apprehended by the senses while using their fleshly
encasements.
The Yogi or Sage who wishes to know truth at first hand, and to study the
workings of the universe, sets himself earnestly and patiently to reawaken
his ‘Third Eye’ into activity, using time-worn and tested methods. He
proceeds to study the conditions in each of the four ethers. He gradually
accustoms himself to discriminate between and sum up the unaccustomed
intricacies of interpenetrating, mobile and changing activities. The task is
extraordinarily difficult and unimaginable to the ordinary man, but the Sage
has access to instruction and help of which many of our less advanced
mediums and psychics of the West are ignorant.
Truth is the essence of Purity, and therefore, as the Sage knows, can only be
contacted by one of a like vibration.
Therefore the wise one acknowledges the first step to be the attaining of a
condition of Purity - Purity of Motive and Purity of Living – a very little
understood condition!
He next works to bring the brain under the complete subjection of his will
instead of at the mercy of outside influences. By a series of carefully
planned exercises he trains his mental equipment in much the same way as a
dancer trains her muscles. The dancer gains complete control of her body at
the cost of tremendous work and sacrifice. The Sage, for about the same cost
of effort, gains complete control of the mind.
The mind is a very powerful instrument. We cannot say much about it at this
juncture except that it can be compared with material of electrical
consistuency which has, if concentrated to one point, the same burning
quality as fire. If a mind is divided upon several thoughts its burning force is
dispersed in various directions. If concentrated upon one point it becomes as
a burning-glass to the ‘Sun’ of its own Ego.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 105 ---
The effort of the Yogi, or any spiritual aspirant, is directed towards
achieving one-pointedness of the mind. With this sharp instrument he can
then bore through all the shells of illusion to the very truth and essence of all
life. He can then deliberately wield and mould with his mind creative
patterns which will help to shape the future. He is no longer confined to the
haphazard creative efforts of the average man. He can create from the inside
with the invisible sources of things.
With such capacities he can heal, prophesy and teach from the source of
Truth. Such attributes the true Christian also is dedicated to seek, because
they are the ‘gifts of the Holy Ghost’.,
To do these things, however, it is not enough to have opened the ‘Third
Eye’, or the Eye of the Soul. This knowledge of the universe must be linked
with the highest creative force within the body before creative activity can
follow.
The seat of this creative force is in the throat, in the Thyroid gland. When
the magnetism of the soul dominates the body it draws up reserve force from
the base of the spine, where it was used for the animal nature, to the throat,
as we mentioned in the description of the Kundalini serpent. This fire of
creative force can then be used for inspired creative work of various kinds.
But the highest expression of the power of the throat centre lies in the
spoken word. God spoke and created the world. Christ spoke and called to
the dying to arise and walk.
Man is a god in the making, and the goal is waiting before him. When once
he has set his feet firmly upon the path of attainment his earnest aspirations
will burn the dross out of his body and mind. Then by degrees the centres of
force located within his seven major glands will be enabled to function.
These centres, named by the Indians chakras, connect him with the
knowledge of and power consciously to work in the different planes of
matter.
Man’s whole mentality can by this means be re-oriented and changed from a
limited conception of third-dimensional objective life to a broad
understanding concerning the why and the wherefore of the universe and his
own part in the scheme of things. He achieves a telepathic union with the
Mind of the Being whose body is this solar system, sometimes spoken of as
Cosmic Consciousness.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 106 ---
The science of self-development along these lines usually includes special
dieting, fasting, breathing and posture, but the principal aspect of this
training is known as Meditation.
The practice of Meditation is creeping into various of the Western cults and
occult societies, under different guises, and, alas, in some cases, in
incomplete and misconceived forms. However, the germ of the idea has
already taken root in the West, and as everything is speeded up nowadays it
may come to be more quickly understood than we could expect.
The third factor which is necessary for this attainment of man is the heart.
Sequestered in one of the ventricals of the heart is what is called the ‘seed-
atom’ of man’s physical body. It contains a minute image of the man
himself, and his own body is said to be a large replica of it. This seed atom is
the little record, the actual essence of the man’s personality, the link or
channel between him and his soul. It holds the ‘silver chord’ to the heart,
and when it is severed and ‘death’ occurs the seed-atom leaves the body and
is preserved in the subtler realms until the man’s reincarnation, when he is
formed from it again.
We can say, therefore, that the actual man himself, his real personality, his
essence, his memory and all of him that will endure, dwells, in the last
analysis, within the heart. For this reason all that man learns, through
training and combining his physical brain with his higher mind, must be
linked with his heart before it is really his. Christ said ‘As a man thinketh in
his heart so is he’, and ‘Where a man’s heart is there will his treasure be’.
The function, action and quality of the heart is Love. Love in its broadest
sense is the desire for reunion with the divine Spirit of the Creator which
permeates all life. Love is the magnet which holds all life together. Its
attraction is so strong that nothing can resist it.
Through the direct access of the heart to the Divine Spirit of Love or Truth
come those ‘intuitions’ which are always more reliable than the ‘thought-
out’ processes of the brain – everything which you can love you can
understand. Put limitations to Love and you limit life. That is what most of
us do. We confine our love to one or two people and possessions, and close
ourselves to the rest of life.
To reach the divine Truth, therefore, the heart must desire it, the heart must
love it above all else. And then the power of the heart will link the man
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 107 ---
within it to his illumined mind and brain, the active Pineal Gland and
Pituitary Body. The perfect Triangle will have been formed, the Triangle
that has been drawn and symbolized and named in so many tongues.
Then the birth of the God in Man takes place – ‘Unless ye be reborn ….’ We
must quote the Christ in this connection because His great work, we are told,
was to flood the earth permanently with His own great Spirit of Love, to
make it possible for humanity to attain this rebirth of the Soul through the
pure straight channel of the Heart alone. Since His coming it has no longer
been necessary to have strict occult training and deep mental development
before spiritual heights can be achieved. From then onwards the heart has
been able to reach illumination through direct union, through love and
worship, with the great Christ spirit, and through following the standards set
by Its embodiment in the man Jesus.
The sacrifice of the Christ spirit in thus bearing the heavy mantle of earth
vibrations in order to support the faltering heart-beat of humanity has been
greater than we are able to imagine. Humanity would appear to be very slow
in taking advantage of it, and seems hardly able seen to grasp the standards
set for it as yet.
‘Love thy neighbour as thyself’ – so simple and so clear! And quite enough
to change this tortured earth to a lovely place.
‘Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as doves.’ Here again we have the
serpent as the age-old symbol of the Kundalini serpent which rises up the
spine and links together the great Triangle. We can gather that Jesus Christ
taught His disciples the science of Meditation. Often He took them apart into
a high place (or plane). We read that one of them even reached the ‘third
heaven’ and learned there of things which no man is allowed to tell.
The Buddha sat in Meditation for years until he had gained access to the
Universal Knowledge.
Such great spirits have done much of the preliminary work for us and have
shared with us their knowledge, so all we need do is to profit by it.
It is not necessary for all of us to travel the occult path, to study deeply and
to train as mystics. We are all at different stages along the ‘Path’. We must
not over-reach ourselves or we will have to retrace our steps. Many of us, in
fact, may choose, subconsciously, to continue with our most vital inner
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 108 ---
development only during our hours of sleep, and to withold our growing
knowledge, for the time being, from our little waking brain. But it is never
too early for any of us to take the quickest way – to begin to learn to Love,
and to clear out all the accumulated rubbish of false thinking, intolerance
and greed which is robbing us of the Light of Life.
Whether we choose to approach the Truth through the discipline of study,
complex thought and abstruse language, or through the discipline of self-
sacrifice and service, the essence of that which we seek remains the same –
too simple for words or brain, just a letting go of fear and ambition for the
self.
We are trying to overcome habits of thought embedded in our personalities
for centuries. For some of us this may only be possible at our present stage
through the constant drilling of words, words, words! Others may be able to
short-circuit them by a tremendous effort of Love.
But however the goal is approached, and however, it is achieved, let it be
borne in mind that the gate of man's deliverance, his birth as a god in human
form, is heralded by the re-opening of the ‘Third Eye’, after which he will
remain no longer blind to everything in life except the tiny excrescence
which we call the physical World!
14
FIRST STEPS TO MASTERY
The mastery of which we speak is a potent inner quality that may manifest
outwardly in various forms, according to the decision of the Ego or Inner
Man.
We are told that the Ego decides before birth upon the experiences,
hardships and conditions of life by means of which it shall learn its next
lesson, ‘develop its next spiritual muscle’, upon earth.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 109 ---
It then chooses, or is drawn to, a birthdate which will tune it in to such
conditions, and selects parents with whom it had already built up certain
Karma or obligations in former lives.
It is pointless, therefore, for the individual to try to shirk, avoid, or mitigate
the experiences and difficulties of his life thus expressly selected to help
him. To do so would be merely to postpone the issue and lose chances of
development. The issue at hand is to learn a certain spiritual Law, to cure a
certain defect in character, and to develop a certain quality of mastery.
Therefore an intelligent man will strive to discover where he stands and
what is the lesson he is required to learn. If he is then able, by an effort of
will, to anticipate this lesson by deliberately training his heart and mind to
the stage required, he may in this way obviate the necessity for an
unpleasant experience.
Thus may a man learn to master his own stars, by eradicating in his character
those vibrations which attract the analogous disciplinary stellar influences to
him.
The individual may choose thus to hasten his development by speeding up
the improvement in his own character. Or he may take the simpler way of
the heart, the way of Intuition and Love. In this case he will, through
opening his heart in love and faith, establish a direct link with the Great
Plan, the joy of which superconscious Knowledge will uphold him through
all experience. It will illuminate his path through life, investing sorrows and
joys with the radiance of their inner message, so that he would not wish one
particle of his life changed. ‘Stone walls do not a prison make’ – nor do
palaces a paradise!
Illumined poets throughout the ages have expressed these truths. Milton
said, ‘The mind is its own place and in itself can make a hell of heaven or a
heaven of hell.’ We have to learn to taste life to the very dregs while
listening intently for the inner spiritual message which it teaches, and never
losing sight of the inevitable and glorious goal – Godhood.
The first step to mastery is, therefore, to put the mind in order, to train it to
work clearly and dispassionately and to establish a true perspective on life.
We must clear out from our minds quite mercilessly all the accumulated
rubbish, so that we will have a clean free field in which to develop the
marvellous latent powers which are our heritage. We must get rid of all
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 110 ---
‘inhibitions’, all false values, uncertainties, indecisions, fussiness and
restlessness, all those states which eat away the vitality of body and mind.
We have paid much money in the past to doctors and specialists to analyse
our bodies for us. Finding the results not quite satisfactory, we instinctively
turn to the psycho-analysts and psychologists, paying them to analyse that
which we begin to feel is the root of our troubles. All those men do what
they can for us because we have given them cause to believe that we do not
care to hear the truth – namely that we could do much more for ourselves
than they can do.
Worry, rush, noise, anger, fear and envy poison the system just as surely as
if we took arsenic. If we err sufficiently in any of those ways we die;
therefore, if we err in any lesser degree we are still injuring ourselves; even
although death comes more slowly, we shorten our lives.
It is recorded that venom has been found on the tongue of a man in a rage
exactly similar in its constituents to the venom of a snake. The same poison
has been found to be generated in the body of an angry bull. Such venom
would of course emanate in a fine form from the body of a vindictive and
furious person, and act as a subtle poison to all contacting it. The story is
told of the ward of a certain hospital for the wounded during the war in
which an alarming percentage of the patients died. Investigations were
pursued and it was discovered that the matron had been all her life a ‘man-
hater’. After her departure the death rate returned to normal. There is also
recorded an experiment in which the breath of a person who was very much
upset was caught in a test-tube and found to contain enough poison to kill a
small rodent in a few moments.
The effects of people’s emanations upon flowers, animals and children is
often very noticeable.
Love and hate, then, have each their chemical form and action. It is
obviously impossible for doctors or teachers to do us any permanent good
until we learn not to poison ourselves and those around us.
The true spiritual qualities entirely eliminate these poisons.
Absolute faith makes fear and worry an impossibility. Unreserved love
leaves no room for hate, anger, envy or greed. Worship of beauty in abstract
and concrete form strengthens and protects man in all his activities. One who
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 111 ---
is able to live in this way needs no outside help and sheds warmth and
radiance on all around him.
If we wish seriously to set the stage and prepare the way to this attainment
our first step must be gradually to eliminate all unnecessary thoughts, desires
and habits from our lives.
Every day for a few weeks we should examine ourselves thoroughly, writing
down honest replies to the following questions:
What are our ideals? In what do we really believe?
What is our ambition in life – and why?
Are we prepared to face the truth about ourselves and
make a change?
Or are we liable to sit on both sides of the fence?
What are our faults? And what are our talents? What are
we doing about them?
What are the things which affect and worry us? Just how
important are they?
This examination should be persevered with until all the answers are clearly
written down. It will be found that much sound thinking has probably never
been done before. The result will be like a tonic to the brain and a stimulant
to the endeavours. The important thing is to clear out everything from the
mind which we can possibly do without, so as to concentrate all our powers
upon the strictly necessary.
One of the Seven Devils of mankind is Possessiveness.
Possessions rule us while appearing to be our slaves. Our lives are cluttered
up with possessions which we are sure that we need; they take up our time
and money, tie us to places and complicate our lives in a thousand ways. To
be continually looking at quantities of possessions confuses the brain. A
clairvoyant gazes at the crystal merely to prevent her physical eye from
seeing any objects; she knows that to see them detracts from the powers of
the mind.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Yogi discards all possessions, and tries to discover the minimum needs
for physical existence.
Jesus Christ instructed His disciples to go out into the world to teach, taking
only the barest necessities of raiment.
Possessiveness is the root cause of all wars, tyrannies and other obscenities.
It is founded on an entire fallacy. If we endeavour to possess anything we at
once separate that thing and ourselves from the rest of life. We are meant to
possess all things, to share all things, to be a part of all life, to have power
over all things – not over one. If we insist on striking always on one note the
rest of the music is lost to us.
The desire to possess people or one person also defeats its own end, restricts
progress and leads to jealousy – the gate of madness. We should respect the
privacy and originality of every human soul and allow it complete freedom
for development. Otherwise the inner spirit resents the outrage of repression
and love dies.
Possessiveness arises from the innate unconscious knowledge that we are
born to own and to unite with All; we must learn to transmute our petty
physical possessiveness back to its divine origin. By this achievement a
great amount of the unnecessary will be removed from our lives.
The next step is to study our own processes of thought. We will soon
discover that we are usually ‘thinking of a hundred things at once’. It would
be impossible for several shorthand typists to capture all the thoughts which
jostle one another through our brains in the space of a few moments. This
shows that we divide the power of our minds up into about a hundred parts,
giving only a very small portion of it to any one thing. Therefore we do most
things with a tiny percentage of our actual capacity, which usually remains
for ever unknown.
Once having eliminated all unnecessaries from our minds, we can give
undivided attention to anything we do. The completely undivided attention
of the mind is all-powerful, omnipotent, a force that can burn through
everything and bend everything to its command. This is known to occultists,
mystics, and students of these things, who spend the best part of their lives
in practices and studies with this end in view.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 113 ---
In the West such training as Pelmanism coincides in many particulars with
the Eastern traditions and can produce similar excellent results. It can safely
be said that nothing in any sphere of life will be successfully achieved until
the capacity for one-pointed concentration has been developed.
The third step in the preliminary process of self-analysis is to gain a clear
conception of our sense of values and as concise an idea as possible of our
definition of right and wrong, good and evil.
Many of us do not agree with the statements of the Christian Scientists that
there is no such things as evil and that pain does not exist.
We feel pain, and we see evil and ugliness around us. Perhaps it would be
more practical to accept the evidence of our senses and try to discover what
part the dark side of life is meant to play in the scheme of things and how we
can best co-operate.
A little thought will make clear that this world is built up in reality of a
collection of opposites, and that it is only through being able to compare
these opposites that we are able to have any views at all. Light would be
meaningless to us if we did not know darkness; summer would be equally
monotonous if we had no winter; warmth could not be appreciated if we did
not suffer cold; peace and silence exist to us by reason of their contrast with
noise; and goodness itself would be non-comprehensible were we not able to
compare it with evil. Without sin and pain where would we be? ‘Perfect’,
with no possibility of further progress, static!
If we are to evolve to something better on this earth, we must be given some
means by which to do so. How should we be able to grow, to learn, to
conquer, without such aids as sin, sorrow and pain? If the imagination is
sufficiently alive to picture a world devoid of ‘evil’, life would be seen
going round and round in a complete groove, without incident, without
change, getting nowhere!
In the earliest days of the religion from which part of the Christian beliefs
have sprung, Satan was worshipped. He was understood to be the greatest
benefactor of man, placing before him temptations and experience without
which he would remain stagnant and futile.
Without experience man cannot create. At present humanity is said to be
evolving from a state of ineffectual virgin ‘spirit’ into self-conscious
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 114 ---
creative ‘Godhood’, and this is mostly through the help of ‘evil’ or ‘Satan’.
According to this, then, one can no longer call Satan ‘evil’, nor can one think
of evil as evil if it is so beneficial to us.
It is possible, therefore, to say that there is no evil.
What, then, is there? What causes all the trouble?
There is only un-balance. Perfection is true balance of all the parts whether it
be found in a human face, in character, or in the works of Nature. And this is
where man’s free-will comes in. He is able to upset the ideal balance of
things by stressing too much some particular aspect. This upsetting of the
balance at once creates a state of non-perfection or ‘evil’.
Too much stress upon the possessive feelings, for instance, produces the
‘sin’ of jealously.
Too much stress upon the bodily sensations produces a glutton or a libertine.
Too much stress upon mental sensations creates a crank or a fanatic.
Even if a man puts too much stress upon his spiritual side and ignores his
body he may go mad – unbalanced, as it is rightly called.
There are many lesser stages of madness not recognized as such – a snob, a
miser, a murderer, all expressing advanced stages of over-balance or the
putting of too much stress on any one thing.
We all do this inevitably in one way or another, because of our free-will, and
in order to learn the great law of Karma – cause and effect, action and
reaction.
Satan was at one time called the Magistrate of God, the Keeper of Karma
and of Numbers. His work was to stand by and deal out the lawful effects of
unbalance. It can be imagined, therefore, that the glutton might be given a
diseased body, lasting throughout several lives until he learns balance in that
respect. The fanatic or the man who has ill-used, or not used, his brain might
be given imbecility for a life or two, until he learns to understand the
necessity for keeping a balanced brain. The theory seems to be that the soul
of man, in these cases, chafes with impatience within his imbecile or
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 115 ---
diseased body, bewailing the wasted time due to his former foolishness, and
developing good resolutions for the future.
It takes a long time for man to learn this simple law of cause and effect, and
meanwhile he blames his parents, circumstances or Fate for his
shortcomings. When he learns that he himself has been developing these
shortcomings in former lives he can no longer blame his parents. Nor can
they say that they have not deserved such a son, for he is their Karma as
much as they are his!
Finally, we are told, man will master this lesson of balance – or non-evil – in
all parts of his make-up.
He will learn to love deeply, but unselfishly, without stressing the self,
understanding and forgiving all because of his own experience and
realization of the laws of development. He will no longer give all his love to
his own people and nothing to the world. He will realize that all the world is
serving him – with the experience he so deeply needs for his growth. And he
will keep the balance by giving back to the world always, giving of all the
love and understanding he has, without criticizing that ‘evil’  by means of
which others are striving to develop, just as he is. Understanding the law of
rebirth, he will realize that all stages, either of ignorance, sin, unhappiness or
achievement, either have been or will be once his own. He will learn to
balance his emotions with his aspirations, becoming dispassionately
passionate, joyfully serious, calmly intense, unhurriedly quick, and actively
passive.
To attain complete balance in the character self-study is necessary.
‘Man, know Thyself’ was inscribed over the doors of the wonderful ancient
temples of learning as the most important injunction to all aspirants.
‘The man who has mastered himself has mastered the world’, is another
well-worn saying, which gains in significance when we reflect that man is
said to contain within himself a facsimile of and a link with everything in the
universe.
Having thus set the stage mentally and physically for our progress to self-
mastery, we can now outline the preliminary stages of the actual process.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 116 ---
The two most marked points in a person’s life are the beginning and the end
of his day, and it is to these, first of all, that we must give especial attention.
There is a certain exercise which is given throughout the world to all those
who are seeking ‘wisdom and perfection’. It is considered of primary
importance, and like all exercises depends for its effect upon the regularity
of its performance.
It consists of a careful Review of the events and actions of the day before
going to sleep. The mind must travel slowly backwards through all the
incidents, thoughts, motives, acts and words of the day, seeking quite
impartially for traces of unbalance and also for traces of wiser
understanding. Experience gained must be noted, and a frank and cool
summing-up of failure and achievement must be made without either pride
or condemnation.
This exercise, if faithfully and honestly repeated every night, will work
miracles in the character. It performs two services of invaluable importance.
Firstly, it enables us to go through our Purgatory here and now as we go
along, instead of waiting for its advent in accumulated form at some future
date. By this means we can cancel out whatever particular ‘Hell’ we would
have made for ourselves, as well as much earthly Karma. Our conscience,
through being developed just like any muscle, will become so strong that in
the end we will have as much difficulty in going wrong as formerly we had
in trying to keep right. This is a fine way of clearing the decks for action,
casting out much waste thought, remorse, and other exhausting inhibitions.
It will mean, also, that when we pass out of the body in sleep we can travel
straight through to the heart of things, without being held back to the coarser
realms by any tormented ‘earth-bound’ thoughts. Our sleep will therefore be
deeper and more refreshing. We will have a better chance to gain the ‘soul-
wisdom’ and inspiration which true sleep brings. This exercise also helps to
etch experience into the memory, thereby avoiding the need for a
recapitulation of the events, and so saves much time for the developing soul.
The second of these vital exercises must take place at the moment of
awakening. An effort of the will should be made to capture and remember
the ‘dreams’ or experiences of the night before they rapidly fade from the
memory. All that is recollected, however trivial, must be written down. After
some practice valuable ideas, inspirations and even prognostications will
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 117 ---
begin to be remembered. The final result will be an unbroken train of
consciousness during the twenty-four hours, which consciousness man will
learn eventually to carry straight through the veil of death, and back with
him at his next incarnation.
By means of these two simple exercises, the morning and the evening
Review, he whose inspirations are high, sincere and enduring may begin at
once to achieve his Godhood and acquire his first-hand knowledge of the
secrets of the universe.
15
MEDITATION
‘It is in silence that the soul speaks.’
Men have always realized the mystery of silence; they have ever been
haunted by the feeling that silence and stillness are full of potent and vital
Something that is lost during activity and noise. ‘Speech is silver but Silence
is Golden’, said the poet.
As we gain in experience we will be able to observe that one of the
hallmarks of men great in spiritual qualities is that they are calm, still, and
sparing of speech, although extremely vital. If you meet a man or woman of
this type keep near to them. You will learn much from them, even without
words.
The Science of Meditation has been used throughout the ages as the means
by which a man can link his brain, mind and soul together, and connect them
consciously with the Universal Intelligence – or the Mind and Motives of the
Creator of this Solar System.
By means of Meditation man learns to concentrate and project his attention
straight through the physical plane to the Fourth Dimension, then later to
further dimensions. He endeavours to bring that which he learns through into
the physical world, translated into physical language, and interpreted into his
own brain as best he can. In the realms which he may reach, language,
colour and form have quite different expressions to those with which we are
familiar. He is getting to the heart of things, the underlying causes, the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 118 ---
primordial truths which eventually give their faint distorted reflection as
physical colour, sound and form.
He learns much that cannot be expressed in words or even in ‘physical’
thought. His brain must be gradually trained to encompass these unfamiliar
aspects of life. Often this is well-nigh impossible, and, instead, the
knowledge is absorbed and held by his ‘super-conscious’ mind. It feeds
strength and stability into his character without his being conscious of the
process at all. The result of this union with Divine Intelligence is that man
can now work in accordance with the Plan; he is spared the tragedy of
wasting his efforts in the wrong direction. That which he does and the
influence which he spreads will be for the good of humanity – it will be a
definite building up for future progress. The innate knowledge which he has
thus acquired he may express in the creation of music, art, literature, a new
‘religion’, new economic or social developments, or else in an example of
fine personal living.
He no longer needs to have faith in the existence of ultimate and divine
realities. He knows. He has put himself in touch and in tune with them, and
henceforth can bask inwardly in the radiance and joy of his knowledge. He
can mentally look down upon the conflicting processes of the world’s
development, including his own little suffering, much as one would study a
fascinating Chinese puzzle. With one part of him he suffers and experiences,
while at the same time with the other part he enjoys, comments and learns.
To many people the attainment of such a state of knowledge and power has
been all-important. They have given up their lives to it. Such people are the
Yogis, Disciples, Buddhas, and those of their kind in all countries.
There is a fundamental difference between Eastern and Western peoples.
Those of the East draw everything inward to themselves and hold it, and are
comparatively inactive although they learn much – intraverts.
Those of the West are full of action and energy, but give little time to
studying themselves and acquiring deep knowledge before they act –
extraverts.
So in the East we find inspired inaction resulting in stagnation.
And in the West we find uninspired action resulting in chaos.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 119 ---
When universal love, neighbourliness and brotherhood eventually spread
across the world, East and West will learn from each other and pool their
attributes. The result will be Inspired Activity. We have already seen the
earliest beginnings of this amalgamation around us. While Westerners are
busy improving living conditions in the East, oriental teachers of philosophy
and spiritual laws are gaining a considerable hearing in the West.
The ideal towards which we have to work is therefore Meditation followed
by Action.
Let us now consider the actual process of Meditation and its several phases.
Imagine a great orchestra playing a powerful symphony. In the orchestra is
one delicate muted violin, which we cannot hear although it plays all the
time. The louder vibrations swamp its sound. If the louder instruments be
stopped one by one the violin will still not be heard. Finally when they have
all ceased we can suddenly hear it playing faintly. Our ears gradually
accustom themselves to it until it appears to be making a volume of clear
sound.
This is a good simile of the process of meditation. The human being is like
an orchestra of varying vibrations. The louder, coarser vibrations are those
of the atoms of body and brain. The finer are those of the emotions and
thoughts. The muted violin represents the soul’s message trying to filter
through. To hear the soul’s message all the rest of the orchestra must be
silenced.
All the criss-cross currents of bodily sensations, thoughts, memories, hopes,
desires and emotions must be stilled into complete passivity. Then the brain
must be held poised and ready to receive the impress from the mind of that
which the latter has been able to translate of the soul’s message.
The soul is the egos intermediary between the world of spirit and the world
of matter, the storehouse of the results of experience in both realms, flashes
of its knowledge coming to us as ‘Conscience’ or Inspiration. The soul has
been likened to a mirror which can reflect the spirit world into the physical,
but is usually too clouded over with vibratory disturbances to do so.
‘Now we see through a glass darkly but then face to face’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 120 ---
Meditation stills the vibratory disturbances of the personality, and the mirror
clears. The first stage in meditation is therefore complete bodily relaxation.
This cannot be accomplished when the body is in the wrong position. There
are one or two postures which have been proved to be suitable. The spine
must be erect and well balanced, and the ribs must be free for deep
breathing.
The early Egyptians used to sit very upright upon a chair with the eyes
gazing straight ahead, the hands palm downwards upon the knees, the
elbows well tucked in to throw out the chest, the heels together and the toes
apart. They have left many statues represented as meditating in this position.
We are told it is the one best suited to the Westerner also.
The Indians meditate mostly sitting cross-legged upon the ground. Those
who are skilled and expert use the ‘Lotus’ posture, in which the soles of the
feet are turned upwards and the body is locked and balanced in such a
manner that should the devotee pass into a trance he cannot fall over.
The Chines also squat, using various postures of the hands and feet to
achieve different results.
The Westerner who is making a beginning should adopt the Egyptian pose,
and learn completely to relax sitting upright, and balancing the spine, neck
and head so carefully that he ceases to be conscious of them.
He must then commence to breathe deeply, silently, evenly and slowly,
through the nose, and gradually perfect this process until he can perform it
also unconsciously. The slower the breathing the easier the control of the
mind – but only that which can be performed without the slightest effort or
strain is of any use whatever for his purpose.
By means of these two preliminary steps he has begun the process of stilling
the vibrations of first his physical and then his etheric body.
The next and more difficult task is to tackle his emotional and mental
equipment. He must drop all feeling, all stress, strain and longing for
accomplishment, all anxiety or excitement at the prospect in view.
Excitement and emotion are formed of low, heavy and ‘noisy’ vibrations.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 121 ---
There remains now the brain, that bustling little typewriter which ceaselessly
taps out the drifting or hurrying crowds of thought-forms which float
through it upon the ether. The aspirant must patiently, continuously, and
without effort, wipe these thoughts out as with a sponge upon a slate. This
process also must be continued until it can be performed unconsciously, a
difficult feat which may need months or years of practice. When, however,
this has been accomplished the practice of Meditation becomes possible.
In some occult parlance we are told to ‘make the mind a blank’ for
Meditation. These words lead to an entire misconception. If the ear is
listening very intently for a certain sound, oblivious to all other sounds, we
do not think that the hearing is a blank! On the contrary, it is actively at strict
attention. So must the mind be, in Meditation, held at strict attention, ready
to convey to the typewriter brain its interpretation of the impressions filtered
through to it by the fine vibrations of the inner activities – the ‘subtler planes
where knowledge is’.
The best times for Meditation are said to be upon awaking and at about 6
p.m. It should be practised either before or several hours after a meal. The
room should be dim or dark. The eyes should be facing a plain surface with,
if desired, only one symbolical object on which to concentrate, or, if
preferred, the eyes may be closed.
We have now described the condition to which the aspirant must learn to
bring himself if he hopes to practice Meditation with any success.
The science itself is divided into four successive stages: Concentration,
Meditation, Contemplation and Adoration.
Only the first two are possible to any but the adept of full-fledged mystic,
nevertheless we will describe them all.
The process of Concentration has already been partly analysed. It consists in
getting full control over the personality and then, when the aspirant’s whole
make-up is stilled and passive, in concentrating the attention of the brain to
one point, keeping it clear, steady and empty of stray thoughts, waiting to
receive the information which the mind is collecting.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 122 ---
When full Concentration has been established, then Meditation can begin.
Meditation consists in studying with great thoroughness one object, subject,
quality or force in life. As we have before stated the concentrated one-
pointed mind is like a powerful burning-glass or magnet. When tuned in to
the particular vibration of any object or quality it can burn right through to
the truth of it and draw to itself everything connected with or of that same
vibration.
Thus, supposing the aspirant has chosen a violin as the subject of his
meditation. He will first concentrate upon the violin, building up in his mind
as vivid and complete a picture of the instrument as he is able. Then, holding
the picture steadily before his mind’s eye, he will begin to Meditate upon the
instrument, endeavouring to learn everything he possibly can about it. He
traces its history, the wood and other substances from which it was made,
the process of making, the story of its design, its passage through the hands
of dealers. Gradually it will be found that facts and information come to
light of which the aspirant was hitherto unaware. That is the secret of
Meditation – the possibility of actually learning without books, by active
mental contact with the information sought.
The aspirant who wishes to learn of love, unselfishness, or the reality of the
Divine Spirit, can reach this knowledge through meditating positively but
not vaguely upon it.
Meditation can also be used to solve any of life’s problems and difficulties.
Simply state the problem in an absolutely dispassionate and impartial way,
and wait steadily for the ideas relating to it to be drawn to the mind. A fair
solution will almost inevitably arrive. The Oxford Group, now known as
Moral Rearmament, use something of this idea for their ‘Quiet Times’.
Needless to say, a little knowledge is a dangerous thing. It is better
thoroughly to understand what is happening, to avoid the danger of self-
deception creeping in.
Meditation has to do with all the outer aspects and expressions of an object
or quality – all its physical-plane attributes.
The third stage, Contemplation, has to do with the inner meaning, cause and
Law behind any object or quality. In this case the mind ceases its activity
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 123 ---
and allows the subject of Contemplation to speak, to yield up its secret and
reveal the mystery of its truth.
Having fully meditated upon the violin, if the aspirant could pass into the
stage of Contemplation the envisaged instrument would disappear, leaving a
space. Through that space would play the colours and forces of the subtler
planes, those which form the Architype or Celestial pattern from which
violins are made. The aspirant would learn the why and wherefore of a
violin, its part in the evolutionary process and the actual creative quality of
its particular tone. These things would come to him in a form of knowledge
not clothed in words, and he would be at a loss how best to register and
translate it for his physical use.
The fourth and last stage of this science is Adoration, and of this it is even
less easy to speak.
Having learnt both the outer and inner meaning of his subject, the aspirant
has reached to the core of it. He discovers the core of it to be the same as the
core of himself – both spring from and are a part of the Mind of the Divine
Creator. Having pierced through to this glorious and blinding realization, the
aspirant can lose himself for a brief spell in the knowledge of that perfect
Unity of Love. This is his moment of Adoration.
Through the steady practice of Meditation man can cease to be as a puppet
dancing on the end of a string jerked by some unknown hand. He can learn
to climb the string with his mind and will and take control of the hand. He
can become the friend and associate of the Owner of the hand, and finally
gain the freedom of complete identification with Him.
It must always be remembered when trying to describe non-physical states
that physical language contains no suitable words or phrases. The
unaccustomed brain must be presented with a simile only. When, through
study or meditation, the brain has developed and adjusted itself the same
truths can be presented in a more advanced manner which would not have
been understood before. Therefore it is true to say that there is always much
that is superficially incorrect in occult teaching, and in, for instance, such a
book as this, because the neophyte brain must be coaxed along step by step,
the pill of truth coated with the sugar of inaccuracy, until it becomes
palatable in its purest form. However, books or no books, the truth is always
there for those who desire it above all else.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 124 ---
Another type of work for those who wish to push forward is Group
Meditation, or the blending of a small group of people to meditate in
unselfish brotherhood together.
Inasmuch as this calls for the breaking down of many of the barriers that
exist between the nicest of people – barriers of self-consciousness,
intolerance, criticism, and egocentricity – it is obviously a very fine practice.
Christ said, ‘Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them.’ Thus pointing out that unity is strength on spiritual
as well as on physical levels.
It may be inquired whether prayers do not suffice instead of Meditation.
Prayers are the five-finger exercises, the ABC of spiritual growth. As such
they will for ever play their part. But he who is not content to remain
spiritually in the nursery will sooner or later require to put himself more
individually in touch with the realities.
16
HISTORY OF THE WISDOM
Both the Bible and the history book, while being compiled for us, have
passed through intensive censorships, besides suffering at the hands of
unenlightened translators.
The result is that our orthodox education, both in religion and history, is
often very misleading, and keeps us in complete ignorance of large and vital
aspects of humanity’s evolution.
Much of the records of the knowledge to which we would like to have
access has been carefully guarded, secreted and even destroyed during
periods when it was considered more expedient to keep the people in
ignorance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 125 ---
Nevertheless, there is still a wealth of literature all over the world awaiting
the explorer. If he pursues his inquiries with patience and discrimination the
following points will come to light.
The history of this earth is infinitely older than the modern historian admits.
There exist many and various sects, orders, and religious and philosophical
fraternities, who all possess exhaustive records and treatises describing the
evolution of man upon this planet, and of the part that our Solar System
plays in the Cosmic scheme.
If the pure and original root of these different beliefs can be uncovered, it
will be found to be identical in most respects. In each case we will discover
that the One god over all was acknowledged, and that the existence of the
Hierarchy was well understood, and was tabulated and represented under the
names of various gods and goddesses, nature-spirits and demons. The seven
Great Spirits, their colours, attributes and elements, the seven planes and
man’s sevenfold bodies were all carefully studied and analysed. The great
Cosmic Cycles and Periods, as ruled by the Signs of the Zodiac and all the
astrological influences, both psychic and chemical, were subject to intensive
research. The laws of Rebirth and Karma were embodied in all these beliefs.
We find that at the zenith of their civilization the various great ancient
nations had perfected this knowledge and by its means produced immortal
monuments to their science, such as the Great Pyramid. It transpires that
such a golden period in the history of a nation was followed by
crystallization, stagnancy, degeneration and a final breaking up, leaving only
distorted misunderstood relics of the once-great knowledge. We learn that
such great cycles were said to occur regularly under astrological influences
which provide for the continual recommencing of man’s lesson on a higher
turn of the Spiral of Evolution, so that his development becomes ever subtler
and more complete. Before each new surge forward of enlightenment man
must be borne down within the crouching wave and submerged in darkness
and ignorance.
In all these records reference is made to the wonderful Golden Age which
occurred on the continent of Atlantis, which was said to have submerged
during its proceeding period of degeneration. Mankind was said to have
been taught the Ageless Wisdom by the gods themselves upon Atlantis, and
to have carried its remnants with them in all directions as they fled to safer
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 126 ---
land. The story of Noah and the Ark is repeated in many tongues and in not
very varied guise.
The Atlanteans were said to have founded the Egyptian culture and to have
built the Sphinx, and their descendants the Pyramids. It is believed that the
early Egyptian religion thus founded was the father of all the faiths which
spread across Europe and Asia, as far north as the Esquimaux and the
Laplanders, and as far east as China and Japan. In South America also
perhaps the greatest of Atlantean colonizations took place, but at a still
earlier date.
There have been at least 300 books written about Atlantis. The remains of its
root language are said to be found in identical form among the Welsh, Irish,
Basques, Western Spanish, and on the Canary Islands, Azores, Easter Island
and in Mexico; as well as certain practices and beliefs. The Druids of
England were believed to be the descendants of Atlanteans who built
Stonehenge and other little-understood monuments in the British Isles.
We find also that a realization and consciousness of the inner realities was
the prerogative of ancient man all over the world even if he lived as a
barbarian. He did not need to believe in an after-live and a world of spirits.
He knew. He saw ‘ghosts’, and he understood their difference from spirits.
He communed with his dead. He knew of the nature-spirits, who ruled the
elements; he understood their qualities, colours and their prototypes among
the animals; he used animal effigies to represent them.
The Zuni Indians prayed to seven great nature-gods by means of the seven
colours painted on their prayer-sticks.
The Tibetans also pray in accordance with colours, and designed different-
coloured masks embellished with a large third eye for their ‘devil-dances’.
In New Guinea the doctors paint their patients with the colours of the
particular Spirits needed to effect a cure.
The Early Britons painted themselves with the colours needed to stimulate
their prowess.
The colour of the Spirit of Darkness was usually black, of Light, White; of
water and vegetation, green; of air, blue, and of fire, red. There was always
the one Great Spirit over all whose colour was Golden.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 127 ---
In Egypt Horus was white, Osiris black, Shu red, Amen blue, and Num
green.
The Egyptian Wisdom was brought to a high point under Ptah in the Temple
of memphis.
Wise men and students travelled from all over the world to study with the
Egyptian priesthood, whose famous pupils included Moses, Jesus and
Pythagoras, it is said.
The Egyptians named, described, and drew man’s seven bodies, and went
fully into all his activities after death. They understood the etheric, astral,
mental and spiritual planes, also purgatory, paradise and the successive
heavens.
In their renowned collection of pictures and writings called The Book of the
Dead most of their beliefs are set forth. They considered each human being
as living with one goal in view, that of perfecting his character in earthly life
in preparation for his journey through the ‘nether’ world or astral planes, and
his gradual progress through the subtler planes to ‘paradise’ or the heaven-
world, helped by the various workers and representatives of the spiritual
hierarchy.
The greater part of the Egyptian consciousness was concentrated upon the
Path of Attainment and the evolution of mankind. By means of astronomy
and astrology they mapped out a wonderful and stupendous panorama of the
Plan of Evolution and the history of the world.
They originated the belief in the Messiah, whom they called the Ever-
coming One. He was the Egyptian Jesus, called Iusa or Horus, and was
reborn every 2500 years, or every time the earth passed into the next Sign of
the Zodiac. During each of these great two-thousand-year periods He
embodied the quality, lesson and type of the Sign. For instance, under the
Sign Leo, Iusa or Horus was worshipped as a young lion and it is probable
that the Sphinx was raised in his honour. He was born as a Scarabaeus in
Cancer 10-12,000 years ago, in which Sign was also the crib or manger Star,
and that of the Ass. During that period the scarab was worshipped. During
the Sign of Taurus the Bull. He was born and worshipped as the Golden
Calf. During the Jewish Dispensation He was reborn as a lamb in the Sign of
Aries the Ram. And finally in the Christian Era in the Sign of Pisces the Fish
He came as the Jesus Christ of the New Testament. The Sign of Jesus was a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 128 ---
fish, which is still engraved upon the Pope’s seal ring; the Early Christians
were known as the Pisciculi.
The cross was used 7000 years ago in Egypt to represent the power that
upholds the human soul in death. The story of Jesus, of the Annunciation,
the virgin birth, of His baptism, temptation, teaching, miracles, disciples, the
Last Supper and His resurrection had all existed and been elaborated in
Egypt for 10,000 years. (Ancient Egypt the Light of the World by Gerald
Massey) Apparently it was merely adapted by the writers of the New
Testament and modelled on to the life of the new and greatest Messiah, with
certain alterations which clouded some of its deepest meanings.
There is only space to touch on this interesting subject here, which can be
studied at the student’s leisure.
Each of the great ancient religions had its Book of Records and Teachings,
which were for the outer ring of students. This Book was always
supplemented by a Commentary written for the inner circle of the
priesthood, explaining the secret symbolism of the Book and the Mysteries
therein concealed. Sometimes there was a second and third Commentary
giving the deepest inner meanings. These Keys or Commentaries were
carefully guarded and hidden, and in many cases have apparently
disappeared altogether.
The ancient Indian philosophy began with the Veda, including the
Upanishad books and their great Commentaries. The Rig a Yajur Vedas are
some of the earliest records of Aryan thought. They come between the
Egyptian and the Greek civilizations, and are assigned to about 5000 BC.
They worshipped a Heavenly Father (Dyans-Pitar) and spirits controlling the
elements. They had a very deep conception of the One God. The Indian book
of moral code, called the Laws of Manu, taught continence and moderation
and the striving for a spiritual ‘second birth’. All ten of the Indian
philosophies taught Reincarnation.
Shankara, born about AD 788, was the great Indian saint and elucidator of
the Upanishads. He wrote one of the world’s masterpieces, his commentary
on the Brahman Sutras, the Upanishads, and his ‘Song of the Lord’ (the
‘Bhabavad Gita’ )’. He was a great adept in Yoga.
Yoga is not a religion. It is a science, a method of ‘yoking’ up with the
‘Supreme Self’, a practice of extreme discipline for the attainment of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 129 ---
perfection. A Yogin is one who has studied, Yoga, often at the Buddhist
University of Nalanda.
The Buddha was the great Indian mystic, founder of Buddhism. The
Buddhist philosophy is based on the law of Karma. The Brahmins believed
Buddha to be the reincarnation of Vishnu, their ancient Teacher. They
absorbed his teachings, which also took hold in Tibet, China, and in Japan
among the Zen monks.
The Tibetans have also a Book of the Dead containing the ‘Bod’, which is a
guide-book to the dying during the forty-nine days which constitute the
‘Intermediary Stage’ between death and Union with the Divine. Passages
from this book are read to the deceased for forty-nine days after his death,
while he is supposed to be passing through the three lower astral planes and
viewing the panorama of his created thought-forms. He finally realizes
illusion and craves a new rebirth. He is exhorted to believe in the One great
Divinity of whom he is a part.
In Persian a very fine philosophy was cultivated. This was the Sufi with its
book the Avesta. This was built upon a very early worship of the sun-god
Mithra, which at one time held great sway in Europe as well as upon the
teachings of the prophet Zoroaster.
The Rubaiyat of Omar Kayyam is inspired by Sufism. The Sufis find ecstasy
through losing themselves in union with the One Divine Spirit. Some of the
Fakirs and Dervishes are their offshoots, but these are sometimes
degenerated.
The Mohammedans possess a great wealth of philosophy in their book the
Koran, which also teaches an aspiration to unity with the One God.
In China the religion, whether Buddhist or Taoist, is built upon the teachings
of Confucius. Confucius was a very practical teacher and social organizer.
Born in 551 BC, he worked to develop social science and the building up of
individual character, and did much to bind China together. He was almost a
contemporary of Buddha, and was greatly influenced at one time by Lao
Tze. His pupils recorded his teachings in a book called The Digested
Conversations, a large part of which was burnt later during the Ts’in
dynasty, with the usual object of keeping the people in ignorance. Confucius
believed in the one God over all, and in three types of subsidiary spirits. He
called himself the ‘transmitter of the wisdom of the Ancients’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 130 ---
Lao Tze was the Chinese ‘Jesus’. He was born of a virgin mother, conceived
under a falling star. He was a high mystic and left a famous book called Tao
The King, which expounded a moral code for the Way of Attainment. ‘Tao’
means Way and represents the aspiration of the Taoists, Lao Tze believed in
Reincarnation, Karma, and the victory of gentleness.
The Japanese State religion was Shinto. Shinto means the Way of the Spirits.
Some of the Japanese became Buddhists, and nearly all of them became
Confucians as well.
Then there was a very stern type of Buddhism called Zen which gained great
sway in China and was finally transplanted to Japan. The Zen classic is a
poem called ‘The Taming of the Bull’, the bull being of course the animal
nature or materialism. The Zen monks originated ju-jitsu, which has a deep
scientific and mystical origin, and was practised by their famous samurai
warriors.
The Greek philosophies, founded by Pythagoras, Plato and others, upon the
Egyptian teachings accepted rebirth and other of the ancient doctrines.
The Jews have their own great book of ancient records called the Kaballah,
and the inner meanings of these writings were sought and studied by the
famous Alchemists of the Middle Ages.
The Christian Church, as founded in Rome, guarded many priceless
manuscripts. It accepted Reincarnation and Karma, as it said that Christ had
also done. But from the first General Council of Christendom at Nicaea in
AD 325, to the last Council in Constantinople in AD 869, Christian
principles, rules and teachings were subject to many deletions and changes.
The result was to decrease public knowledge for the aggrandizement of the
priesthood. From that time onwards all who possessed or were teaching the
Secret Wisdom were mercilessly persecuted and put to death.
Henceforward the occult sciences were studied in secret. They were guarded
and kept alive by such people as the Freemasons, Rosicrucians, Alchemists,
Troubadours, Knights of the Grail and the Round Table, and the
Avengensies or paper-makers. In Russia there were the Trottes, and in
Britain there had been the Druids. Earlier still, in Mexico, there were the
remnants of the teachings of Quetzalcoatl, and of the ancient Atlantean
settlement at Peru. In Chaldea there were the Magi or Magicians, the famous
astrologers who possessed the Egyptian Wisdom and knew of the time and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 131 ---
place where the new Messiah should be born. And in Palestine itself the
wise ones belonged to the sect called the Essenes, which had existed for
8000 years, and was to have the privilege of training Jesus.
Everywhere in the world the self-same Ancient Wisdom can be traced, until
its widespread stamping out and persecution at the beginning of the Dark
Ages from which we are now emerging.
And everywhere in the world at present are the signs of the re-emergence of
that Wisdom back into the light of day, not as the prerogative and secret of
the priesthood, but as the hard-earned right of the whole of humanity. The
tables have indeed been turned, and now we find much of the Wisdom
outside the churches and temples instead of inside them.
Humanity is taking its salvation into its own hands. That is because we are
now coming into the great Aquarian Age under the Sign of the Zodiac
Aquarius, which will last, as do all the Signs, for about 2000 years. During
this time the ‘Waters of Life will be poured down on all mankind’, and the
astrological influences will bring a golden age to birth. Many believe that the
Ever-Coming One will arrive again in His newest guise, which we may not
yet know; but great will be the fulfilment for those who are ready and
awaiting His Coming.
17
THE PRESENT AWAKENING
Having taken a lightning and very superficial survey of the history of the
Ancient Wisdom, we can now trace the evidences of its resurrection at the
present time.
The first steps were taken towards the end of the nineteenth century.
H.P.Blavatsky contributed greatly by her inspired researches among ancient
documents and the treasures she brought to light and so tirelessly analysed.
She founded the work which has since been carried forward by the
Theosophists and which consists of a modernization of some of the Ancient
Doctrines, together with public instruction in the form of lectures and
libraries. Various other teachers and communities too numerous to mention
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 132 ---
here have come forward all over the world to add their quota to the
widespread interest.
Some of these stress the mystical side, some the occult, and some the
practical. Everywhere there is a banding together of earnest people thrilled
with their particular fraction of the unearthed wisdom, each little group
usually convinced that it possesses the one and only truth and way of
salvation.
For a long time progress has been hampered by the old feeling of separatism
and the intolerance of another’s method of approach to the truth. But even
that handicap is finally beginning to be overcome. The cry for world-wide
unity, peace, brotherhood and the casting down of barriers is increasingly
making itself heard.
The League of Nations points the way, however imperfectly, to the future
welding together of the nations.
Such a movement as the Oxford Group (now Moral Rearmament), appears
to be inspired, in spite of handicaps, to work for the future fusing of all
classes in a common Christian spirit.
Fraternities like the World Fellowship of Faith have fought against almost
insuperable odds of intolerance and stagnation, to draw together the religions
of the world and bring to light their fundamental sameness. Groups have
been formed all over the earth for purposes of spiritual propaganda, united
meditations, and training for the selfless service of healing and harmonizing
by thought and prayer.
The word ‘international’ is now so much in use that it is almost becoming a
household word. Humane societies for the prevention of cruelty of all kinds
are also doing valuable work and gaining increasing support, while
education and health culture are being revolutionized.
Nudist movements, vegetarian and nature-cure practices, biochemistry and
the latest method of psycho-analysis, all point the way tot he future universal
‘Yoga’ of physical attainment which is being ushered in.
The promised individualization of the Aquarian Age is already in evidence.
No newspaper can hope for success unless it provides crossword puzzles or
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 133 ---
competitions, or in other ways allows its readers to contribute each his own
quota of self-expression or effort.
No film star dare run the risk of ignoring the individual outpourings and
demands of his fans.
From the lowest grades of humanity to the highest can be seen signs of
increasing independence, self-consciousness and awareness.
It is true that at the present time the world is racked in parts by wars and
bound down by oppression and dictatorships and that much cruelty and
selfishness is in evidence. But these very activities are a proof of the
restlessness and striving among all ranks, the stirring up of the mud in the
pond before it can be cleaned. It is like the final orgy of a drunkard which
precipitates the violent reaction through which he is able to regenerate.
The urge to combat stagnation and to struggle out of the ruts of convention
and go forward no matter how has been evidenced for some time past in the
adventures into ‘modern’ art, ‘modern’ literature, ‘modern’ music, and even
‘modern’ manners and morals.
All these signs are healthy and promising and only await the leadership of
those who have put themselves in touch with inner realities to bear rich fruit.
One world-wide group of people, the ‘Men and Women of Goodwill’, are
pledged to contribute that leadership in all phases of human living, fired by a
lofty ideal of brotherhood which remains completely non-partisan and all-
embracing. They are introducing an international periodical to foster the
expression and reciprocity of goodwill all over the globe. This will be an
advance on the hundreds and hundreds of periodicals already in circulation
which are each solely concerned with the activities and teachings of their
own little esoteric fraternity.
A deeper understanding of the arts and sciences is being taught by the
schools founded by Rudolph Steiner, whose very name is an inspiration to
students of the occult.
And so the work grows on all sides. There are some, of particular gifts, who
are practising alchemy itself, revising the ancient mystic knowledge and
probably preparing a wonderful step forward for medical science.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 134 ---
Others are working faithfully and steadily to spin a web of constructive
thought across the world by the formation of groups everywhere meeting
regularly in Meditation.
In the Church itself many are beginning to feel the fires of inspiration rising
once more, and their congregations are quick to appreciate it.
Even those courageous ones who seek to expose the ‘shortcomings’ of the
medical profession are met half-way by many of the doctors themselves.
The flame of regeneration and renaissance is burning high already, and
many are the little sparks, fanned by patient souls, ready now to flare into a
rich fulfilment.
We find too that a higher type of teaching is gradually permeating various
centres of investigation both spiritualist and Christian-Scientist, occultist and
psychic, a type of teaching which is insensibly and subtly drawing them all
closer to each other. At the same time the materialistic scientist, chemist and
experimenter is, by virtue of his very persistence, approaching to the self-
same heart of Truth in his own way.
A wonderful era may soon dawn when humanity will figuratively rub its
eyes to find that blinkers and barriers of so many kinds have somehow
melted away and that it has learnt to turn its back upon the illusion of
Division, and seeks only to unite and fuse all people and all activities into
one coherent Whole which ever becomes simpler and more complete.
18
DANGERS IN THE PATH
He who seeks Truth, the Philosopher’s Stone, and is determined to uncover
and master the secrets of the universe for himself, is treading a Path beset
with many pitfalls, dangers and illusions. The weakest points in his
character, the tiniest chinks in his armour will be cunningly assailed.
Honesty is the talisman which will enable him to reach and to recognize
Truth – plain honesty about himself, his purpose, and other people.
Seekers are side-tracked mainly by two things, a love of sensationalism and
laziness, both of which undermine their honesty. It must always be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 135 ---
remembered that sensationalism (or emotional excitement) is to the
mentality what sexual over-indulgence is to the body. Even religious
emotion can be a type of mental sensuality, and therefore unbalancing.
The discovery of Truth is the most wonderful, powerful and helpful work
that any human being can undertake, and the capacity to understand it is the
greatest attribute which the mind can cultivate.
To attain this inestimable reward of wisdom, man must expect and be eager
to go through at least as much discipline, study and restriction as he would
endure while learning the piano or training as a boxer.
He must remember also that in the uncovering of Truth there is never a last
word, nor a completely accurate statement about any particle of it, because
neither the human language nor brain can encompass it. Truth to anyone is
only that much of it which he can as yet understand. At a certain stage even
an untruth may be taught. For instance, primitive nations had to be given a
jealous god of war, until they evolved sufficiently to accept a loving god of
peace.
The mind must be trained, just like a muscle to cope with certain
conceptions, and this very training enlarges and expands the capacity to
understand still more. After a period of such training one can explain to an
intelligent person something which he would have been quite incapable of
visualizing at the beginning of it. It would have been impossible to talk of
wireless, the telephone or gramophone to a man 200 years ago; neither his
brain nor language was equal to it – he was living in the Dark Age. But to
one of the wise priests of Egypt living 10,000 years ago one could have
talked of these inventions and probably obtained a few suggestions! To
understand the fundamental truths of life is to understand all! Those are the
truths which Christ said would ‘make us free’.
The first effort of the seeker, then, must be to avoid laziness and to love
honesty and discipline.
When once we are attuned to this ideal we will be enabled to distinguish a
wise and good person from a charlatan and so avoid an infinite number of
disillusions and dangers. The hallmarks of the wise are easily distinguished.
Wisdom gives humility, peace, poise and strength; its owner ceases to be
afraid, to be rushed, sickly, worried, ambitious, emotional, sentimental or
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 136 ---
changeable. His voice is resonant, neither shrill nor grating, and his presence
is never exhausting.
A truly wise one will be sparing of words, now will he loosly speak of
initiations, Masters, visions, guides, or his own powers. People who talk of
these things are childish – they have not felt the awe and reverence which
first-hand knowledge gives.
A wise one will never ask money for teaching spiritual things; it is against
the Law. He will have reached the stage where money sufficient for his
needs comes without the asking. Nor will he ever try to persuade anyone to
do or to think anything, nor will he attempt to teach unless earnestly asked to
do so;; for he has learnt to have the greatest care for another’s free-will. A
Wise one seldom uses the word ‘I’.
He will never attack anyone, or any cause, yet he is full of strength and
energy. He has learnt to be ‘wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove’. He is
not a crank on any one subject. He has become such a reservoir of love and
of constructive thought that he is a worker of ‘White Magic’, lucky to those
around him and the bringer of ‘miracles’ to pass.
Such a one is he who has for some while faithfully trodden the Path of
Discipleship which leads to Godhood. He passes unnoticed among all those
who are not seeking with the same purity of motive, the same vibration as
his own. He is sometimes very cleverly aped by the charlatan, or he who
tries to serve both God and Mammon, the worker of ‘black magic’, the
bogus ‘Spiritual Teacher’.
This latter is usually very attractive to others. He has a strong personality,
and often arouses extreme love and devotion in the people around him. This
is because such a one has accumulated throughout many lives, because of his
energy, the experience, vitality and power which he can now use for either
good or evil.
A very evil person is potentially a very good one. (It is the stored power
which counts and which gains a hold on people. That is why the enterprising
lost sheep is of more importance than all who stagnate meekly in the fold.)
If a charlatan spiritual teacher were to give himself up finally wholly to good
he would gradually defeat his own personality and lose, one by one, those
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 137 ---
habits and ruts of thought which give him what his friends would call his
‘little ways’, those very human attributes.
A person who poses as a highly evolved being, a teacher of others, and yet
has human habits and frailties, makes a tremendously strong appeal, because
his achievement, apparently, needs little discipline and rigidity. For that
reason his followers are eager to adore his personality, and he allows,
against the Law, such adoration. Thereby he feeds his own vanity and their
attachment to physical form. They are not encouraged to discriminate, but to
believe blindly what he teaches them. And the ‘teacher’, once this blindness
is established, encounters no spur of criticism or judgement to keep him to
the giving of his best. So the little community soon becomes a sham and
intellect retires.
The inevitable result of this situation is that a hypnotic condition arises, due
firstly to the teacher’s desperate desire to keep his followers’ attention fixed
only upon himself, so that they will not discover better things outside and
cease to contribute to his sustenance; and secondly to the wish of his
followers to give themselves up to the lazy, emotional state of adoring a
physical personality, believing in wonders without the use of intelligence,
and flattering themselves with the importance of possessing a ‘great
Teacher’.
This situation can frequently be met with. It is an ambitious imitation of the
real thing, and because of a lack of honesty on all sides, it goes rapidly
downhill. The combindation of personality-worship, sensationalism and
hypnotism soon leads these people into the toils of emotional, sensual and
sexual indulgence of all kinds. Fraudulence, destructiveness, perversion and
intellectual distortion flourish in this soil, and the link with the higher mind
is broken. It was in such foundations that the horrible Black Mass and the
orgies of ‘black magic’ were able to take root.
Black magic is simply the use of the developed mind-power for a wrong
purpose. It exists in ratio to the strength of will and intelligence of the person
using it and the lack of such in the victim or victims.
Any desire for power over others for either good or bad reasons is an act
contrary to the great Law which stipulates complete free-will. The moment
such power is established, we have a state of hypnotism, in slight or intense
form, and therefore a condition of ‘black magic’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 138 ---
Black magic is not a thing of the past; it is a manipulation of natural laws. It
is with us always, existing for instance in such groups round charlatan
teachers as have just been described; existing sometimes side by side, almost
hand in glove, with White Magic.
Rasputin was a typical example of a modern Black Magician, and I can think
of other living examples who could also be listed in this category.
All such groups provide interesting psychological studies. The author
personally knows of several. In one, the ‘teacher’, a woman, claims to be the
reincarnation of one of the Apostles of Christ. This is earnestly believed by a
worthy but hypnotized little troop of women followers, who are blind to the
fact that their ‘spiritual leader’ breaks most of the commandments under
their very eyes. Another group is headed by a man who claims and is eagerly
believed to be the reincarnation of three famous people in one! There are, I
understand, several different ‘reincarnations’ of the famous Rosicrucian
Comte de Saint-German alive at present, each supported by his little group!
In fact, up to date the author has been honoured by the acquaintance of quite
an array of ‘reincarnated saints and historical celebrities’!
There are also, I am told, certain coloured teachers claiming the highest
spiritual status, of whose relations with their white women disciples it would
be better not to inquire, the hypnotized women believing themselves to be
nearly as honoured as the ‘Chosen of the Lord’; sometimes even with an
acquiescing husband in the background.
All these things are going on, comprising an almost inextricable mixture of
‘good and evil’. The wise seeker will learn to understand the necessity for it
all, and wade through in safety, protected by the life-belt of his own pure
motives. He will not turn in dislike or disapproval from those leaders who
savour of charlatanism or incompetence. They each have their audiences,
who are drawn to them because of similar vibrations, and could go, at their
particular stage, nowhere else.
Sometimes good teaching comes from very faulty people. This fact is a
means of stimulating students into recognizing truth for itself, as apart from
a personality. On the other hand a person who is intrinsically good and true
may be unable to utter a word of sense to satisfy a seeker, nor take any
interest in his seeking. The world is full of infinite variety, and all are
seeking and learning in their different ways. It is hard to know who
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 139 ---
fundamentally is the most ‘advanced’. When the aspirant can understand this
and grow to love his neighbours for their struggles and faults, and utterly
abstain from any critical feeling, then ‘will all things be added unto him’.
There will be no barriers to prevent it. Like attracts like, and his own
honesty and charity will inevitably draw to him as to a magnet all that is
good.
By the same token, any weakness which still remains within his character
will attract him to that with which it has affinity. If he has a latent tendency
to accept too much from others, and to lean on them, he will be an easy prey
for a certain type who bind people to them by a great show of generosity. If
he finds himself saying, ‘The one thing I cannot bear is meanness – I do like
a generous character!’ let him reflect that possibly he still has something of
the parasite within him, and is not determined to be self-reliant. Let him
beware lest he is captured by one who has learnt how much it pays to be
generous and how easy it is by that means to get some people completely
under one’s influence.
Sometimes a ‘teacher’ who preaches and practises ‘generosity’ will soon
obtain financial help from those well-meaning seekers who are able to give
it, and will then proceed to gain more adherents by being generous with
other people’s money! This very real abuse is often put into practice, the
final result being that much money which would otherwise be given to the
poor is spent for the pomp and comfort of the ‘teacher’ and his somewhat
nebulous ‘cause’.
A genuine teacher always deserves and usually gains support but his ‘pomp
and circumstance’ is conspicuous by its absence.
The final warning which must be given is about the imagination. By this
word I refer to that power which the mind has to form images of that which
it desires, and which it uses more successfully subconsciously than
deliberately and consciously. There is a tremendous, intricate and forceful
world of subtle life lying just below the threshold of the conscious mind
which can be manipulated to produce varied results.
For instance, we sometimes hear of an earnest emotional female who has
been practising either ‘meditation’ or ‘psychic development’ not wisely but
too well, describing a wonderful vision she has had, perhaps of the ‘Christ
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 140 ---
Himself’. Who possibly spoke words of praise to her. She becomes vastly
important and ecstatic about the vision, and her friends are much impressed.
But what really happened?
To begin with, the lady by affirming such an experience gives away at once
her complete ignorance as to what is possible in such a way. In all
probability that which occurred was simply a case of ‘imagination’, self-
hypnotism into seeing and hearing that for which she longs; or she may
perhaps have picked up the thought-form of someone else’s imagery. In any
case, the one thing certain is that if anyone were sufficiently ‘advanced’ to
obtain a genuine spiritual experience they would be so filled with awe and so
alive to the laws pertaining to such experiences that they would find it quite
impossible to say a word about it. The only sign of it would be a radiance
emanating from them to those who were sufficiently sensitive to feel it. The
great Moses, after having talked with the Lord, was obliged to veil his face
because it shone so much that the people could not bear to look upon it.
Imagination can play us many tricks, but we can test things out pretty safely
in the following way. Any experience we may have which makes us want to
‘tell’about it is not the real thing, but something to which we have laid
ourselves open through an unconscious wish for a thrill or to acquire
importance. Of a real experience we will never wish to speak, because we
will realize intuitively that each soul grows at its own pace, and that our
vision was sacred to us alone. The resulting faith that we enjoy is all we will
impart. Therefore we must never be impressed by any idle and emotional
talk we may hear about these things.
It is important, however, to try to visualize the condition of that invisible
envelope of ‘compressed ether’ (for want of a better description) which
surrounds us and goes by the name of our ‘aura’. This contains a vast
panorama of photographs, ‘astral talkies’ of all our memories both conscious
and forgotten. When we are forced slowly out of our bodies in drowning we
see this aura ourselves, and review a rapid panorama of the events of our
lives, as has often been attested.
Anyone who is genuinely ‘clairvoyant’, such as a crystal-gazer or fortune-
teller, is able to see this aura on approaching us, and can pick out pictures of
past events, as well as those of our subconscious hopes for the future, and
therefore describe intimately our dead relatives or our home life – almost as
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 141 ---
easily as we could describe any film we were watching! There is not
necessarily anything wonderful, new or valuable for us to hear – merely that
which is already there attached to the mind.
Sometimes, however, she may even get a correct picture of some future
event. In this case she is probably reading a thought-picture in our aura
which we brought through subconsciously from something we were allowed
to learn of in a dream. For those who are tempted to explore the phenomena
of clairvoyance it is very necessary to study the human make-up from the
psycho-analytical point of view, otherwise it is easy to be rendered awe-
struck by some occurrence for which there is a scientific explanation.
The world is indeed full of many astonishing conditions and activities. It is
better to have a clear understanding of anything untoward that occurs than to
become paralysed with superstitious emotionalism and be helplessly swayed
by influences which might otherwise be either ignored or put to good
account.
There is no Black Magic, however powerful, no evil force nor astral horror
which can have the slightest effect upon anyone who does not contain a
strain of the same vibration in their own make-up. One who is completely
honest and whole-heartedly trusts in the power of good is an untouchable as
far as evil influences are concerned. ‘According to thy faith be it done unto
thee.’
Therefore when any evil influences or threats of misfortune approach, the
one attacked needs only to cleanse his own heart of fear, doubt or any
ulterior motives, and he is at once protected by his own vibrations. If we
tune our wireless in to Paris we do not get Moscow, and if we tune our
personal wireless in to good fortune all other vibrations will flow through
and onwards without finding any anchorage. It is upon this principle that the
Christian Scientists and many others work. They know that the fear of
anything is a very powerful magnet which draws that thing inevitably to the
fearful one. As Job said, ‘That which I greatly feared has come upon me.’
Fear, laziness and lack of sincerity are therefore the defects which will lead
the seeker on to the ‘left-hand path’ instead of the ‘right-hand path’. The
natural Karma of this is that he will have to do twice the work before he
finally reaches his true goal.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 142 ---
But if a sharp lookout is kept for the various pitfalls and illusions pointed out
in this chapter much waste of time and many painful humiliations may be
avoided.
Remember that it is always possible to go straight to the innermost goal and
ignore the various stratas of comparatively petty psychic and mental
phenomena which lie in between. The really wise have learnt to know. They
want neither proof nor practice, and they enjoy bliss and glory here and now,
in spite of all circumstances and irrespective of either past, present or future.
19
THE SUMMING UP
An effort has been made in this book to take a necessarily summarized
survey of life as it confronts the independent seeker. The existence of a vast
accumulation of so-called knowledge and belief has been pointed out. The
conceptions of the cosmos which have held sway over millions for
thousands of years have been briefly sketched.
There remains one final theory to be expounded – that which is called by
some people ‘Epigenisis’.
The name means ‘an addition to that which was created’, in other words
Evolution or Progress. It concerns itself with the fact that in the continual
reincarnation of all particles and phases of life the memory of experience is
brought back plus the deductions and adaptation gained from that
experience. The evolution of plant, insect, man and planet consists of a
gradual refining, strengthening and perfecting under the ever-changing
influences of still greater developing bodies. Even in the vast cycles of
historical development each recurring sequence of Golden Age, Dark Age
and Age of Energy is reproduced on a higher and more powerful note, and
embraces the tackling of more difficult conditions.
Humanity has just been required to pass through an age of deeper ignorance,
a more profound Blind Spot, than ever before, and has passed through it
creditably. It may therefore look forward to a Golden Age which will bring
deeper fulfilment and wider understanding and power than any preceding.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 143 ---
Epigenisis is the answer to those who say that the world has not progressed,
but only if they are ready energetically to seek this answer for themselves. In
studying the great religions of the world, therefore, Epigenisis must be taken
into account.
Each of the great Teachers of the world, Zoroaster, Krishna, Lao Tze,
Buddha, adapted former teachings to the future needs of developing
humanity, even though humanity lagged far behind in taking advantage of it.
Therefore it is to the last great Teacher, Jesus Christ, that we must look for
the most advanced ideal and the latest message to humanity. We find that
His work was to transfer the possibility of attainment from the few to the
many, to simplify the great Truths for the use of all humanity and to
introduce the ultimate act of attainment, the awakening of the Love principle
in the heart, to mankind. His teaching has been in some ways too simple for
muddled and inhibited generations to grasp, but after 2000 years there are
faint signs that the seed sown is about to burst into life.
Now, leaving the religious aspect completely on one side, let us consider
entirely from the scientific point of view what the great teachings of the
world, headed by Jesus Christ’s, would do for humanity if put into practise.
The medical profession agrees that human beings are prey to the act of auto-
intoxication, that is to say that they flood their own systems with various
poisons bred by various states of the mind and emotions. The most
poisonous of these states are fear, anger, worry, sentimental emotionalism
and envy. The destructive emanations set up by these mental and emotional
states must be clogging the virility and sensitivity of the race like a heavy
pall, and we should not forget to add the emanations from terrified
slaughtered animals to the general agglomeration.
This terrible pall of thought-poison is of course the breeding-place for all
those ‘instincts’ which make war, murder, cruelty, lust and stupidity
possible. It beats with a heavy vibration, to which people are drawn, as a
speck of iron is drawn to a magnet, if they have no stronger vibration of their
own. From a scientific point of view their only protection is to develop
stronger vibrations, which are those of love, hope, belief, charity, idealism
and intellect – in other words, to learn actually to ‘love one’s neighbour as
oneself’ and to ‘have faith even as a grain of mustard-seed’.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 144 ---
The result therefore of everyone obeying these plain injunctions would be to
overpower, melt or short-circuit this heavy pall, this rubbish-heap of bad
thoughts, breeding-spot for the microbes of mental disease.
Universal love, as we have pointed out, produces an understanding of all that
exists in nature.
The result of faith would be a lack of self-poisoning and therefore perfect
health.
The result of idealism and intellectual development would be complete
normality of the reproductive functions, which would produce in its turn
perfect eugenic conditions and a natural birth control. And the highly
increased mental capacity thus evoked would be available for the solving of
those economic and social problems which defeat the people of today.
The practice of meditation, deep breathing and self-analysis can certainly be
the means of pulling people out of the Slough of Despond of accumulated
generations of bad habits. It constitutes a scientific process of short-
circuiting undesirable vibrations.
From the purely scientific point of view therefore the following of the rules
set forth by the great Teachers would speedily produce ideal world
conditions and the hygienic, eugenic superman for which some nations are
already striving, however imperfectly.
From that which is called the ‘spiritual’ point of view, however, the prospect
is infinitely more thrilling, inspiring and illuminating. He who is drawn to
spiritual endeavour, who feels the call and the pull of the inner mysteries,
will embark on a pilgrimage in which there is no turning back. He will go
through the stages of studying the self, developing the self, and then
forgetting the self completely. He will then realize that the ultimate privilege
and joy, as Jesus Christ came to show, is to serve.
His battle-cry will be ‘Service’. At first he will rush around trying to serve,
and getting very much in the way of his own inspiration. Later he will
realize that true service is first of all to ‘Be’. He will understand that if he
has once polarized himself to be a permanent channel or ‘receiving station’
for the Light of Wisdom, and can hold himself in that state of constant and
unchanging radiation, he can become a fixed power-house, a torch in the
realms of the mind. He can link up with others on the higher levels of their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 145 ---
super-conscious, he can speak to them and teach them in that sphere where
are no words, flooding them with illumination, peace and faith from his own
storehouse. They have merely to think of his name and at once feel the
anchorage of his vibrations.
He learns finally how not to make conscious ‘effort’ to help others, how not
to interfere with their lives or their own way of working out their salvation.
He learns not to criticize but to understand, and to be able to interpret them
to themselves if they ask it, so that they can learn the particular lessons and
reason of their difficulties. He learns to speak to each one who comes to him
in his own language and on his own level; he learns to leave in peace those
who do not seek his help, and to be a power of ready quiet strength to those
who do.
Such an aspirant will begin by envisaging the Path before him, the progress
from student to Probationer, from Probationer to Disciple, from Disciple to
Initiate, from Initiate to Master, from master to Lord of a Planet and so on
upwards and onwards illimitably. The dazzling prospect will spur him on
over the difficult drudgery of the early steps.
But when the gate of his heart is finally opened and the mystery of Love
floods his being, then all thoughts of his own progress are obliterated, and he
would gratefully stay behind until the last faulty little pilgrim ;has passed
safely on before him.
He waits and watches and helps, and suddenly he finds that he is one in
activity and in mind with the Creator Himself. These things, however,
cannot be expressed in words, although much glorious poetry and
philosophy have been poured out in the effort.
All through history humanity has been offered the Key of heaven, even as
this little book attempts to offer it.
Men exist as partially dead creatures until they have used this key and
opened their hearts and minds to Reality. Then they are flooded with such
life and brilliance and illumination that they do indeed experience a ‘second
birth’ infinitely greater than the first.
As a final word, then, the value of the information touched upon in this book
is merely that it can provide the reader with a tool for the building of his life.
Like a knife, which can be used either to murder a beautiful life or to carve
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 146 ---
out an everlasting work of art, the value of the tool depends upon the user. It
can quite definitely be used for unimagined achievement if the motive-
power be sincerity and the highest aspiration.
Or it can result in a conceited boast of superior knowledge, the act of the
‘big fish in the little pond’, if the ideals are not sufficiently strong.
Or again it can fall to the ground through lazy inattention.
It is for each individual reader to decide whether he wishes to become a vital
force for good, and to realize that until he is truly living for the world and
not for himself he will never achieve anything of that which is thrilling,
joyful, wonderful and inspiring.
A selfish person is short-circuited; nothing from outside can flow through.
Some people are not selfish, however, but self-centred, which is just as
inhibiting. They are kind, generous and vivacious at times, but their thoughts
revolve round their own kindness and all their little personal affairs
unceasingly, how they feel and felt, what others think of them, what they
know, how they love, what they must do, how they must help. They are
complete prisoners inside their own little personality. It is this ‘I’ ‘I’ attitude
which is so very difficult to get over, and which is such a subtle handicap to
many.
The only importance the personality has is that it is there as a sort of buffer,
to teach one how completely to get the better of it! PERSONALITY
VERSUS INDIVIDUALITY! How can we discriminate between these two?
The difference is much the same as between emotion and love. Individuality,
the real thing, is a calm, steady, deep and lasting force felt within a person –
his essence, that which composes the ego or inner man.
Personality (the word comes from persona, meaning mask) comprises all the
little surface peculiarities, moods and changes, all which has to do with
physical life, disturbing, evanescent and unimportant. In astrology
individuality is that unchanging part of us governed by the sun, while the
moon rules the unstable personality.
In true sacrifice and service we use our individuality and keep our
personality in complete abeyance. That is what is called slaying our lower
man or killing the dragon!
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 147 ---
TRUE LIVING. If we can learn to love, think and serve as above described,
the mind will become so powerful and co-ordinated, that it will unerringly
direct all of our activities.
Our calm enthusiasm will inevitably give us that slow, deep and powerful
breathing which will finally become automatic with us.
But if we start at the wrong end by an intensive training in breathing it may
give us animal health, it may upset our nervous system, it may even put us in
a madhouse, but it certainly will not give us a ready-made loving heart or
wise and potent mind.
By the same token, with a mind and heart awake we will instinctively know
how, when and what to eat. Our calmness will give us that slowness and
sparingness in eating which is the first neglected essential, and our continual
development will go hand in hand with a continual modification and change
in our diet.
But if we begin at the wrong end by becoming diet cranks we may improve
our bodies or we may ruin them – the chances are pretty equal, but we will
no more create a ready-made wisdom and power that way than by breathing.
If our hearts and minds are rightly orientated we will quite naturally be
drawn to those few studies and people with whom we can further our
particular work – our choice will be unerring and inspired.
But if we start at the other end with absorption in theoretical studies,
teachers and cults, and count on such outside help for our progress, and have
not a strictly honest desire for the truth alone, we shall fall into any number
of traps, and meet with danger and disillusionment and misery. The false
always apes the real. It is only true honesty in ourselves which acts as a
tuning-fork to recognize honesty in another.
Many people are drawn to the Great Search through a feeling of loneliness –
that wistful misunderstood loneliness which attacks them in the midst of
friends and festivities, and which is really the longing of the soul for unity in
service with those who know, and for the realization that they are part of a
wonderful whole – that they belong and are essential to a glorious plan.
Loneliness also comes from being self-centred instead of world-centred,
from a craving for a personal love and reward, and thereby the imprisoning
of oneself in a tiny mental compartment.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 148 ---
Service leads finally to working with others, the beginning of the Universal
Brotherhood which some of us cannot yet picture, yet which is inevitably
and actually coming into being before our eyes.
The various banners of the vanguard of this Universal Brotherhood are
already flinging a challenge right across the world. To anyone who wishes to
achieve fulfilment for himself and to help to build the future Golden Age,
the way is now wide open. The beginning has been made, the world is
passing rapidly from Dark Age into Light, and there remain now only the
fetters of man’s own blindness or laziness to hold him back. Let us shake off
these fetters and move forward with those happy ones who are achieving
their birthright – the triumph of Godhood in human form.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Secret Doctrine, by H.P. Blavatsky.
The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception, by Max Heindel.
From Intellect to Intuition, by Alice A. Bailey.
The Zodiac and the Salts of Salvation, by Dr. George W. Carey and Inez E.
Perry.
The Secret Path, by Paul Brunton.
The Story of Oriental Philosophy. By L. Adams Beck.
The Secret of the Golden Flower, by Wilhelm and Jung.
The Detection of Disease, by Oscar Parkes and Eric Perkins.
The Garden of Vision, by L. Adams Beck.
Akhnaton, by Arthur Weigall.
Ancient Egypt the Light of the World, by Gerald Massey.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages


--- PAGE 149 ---
Initiation Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey.
Your Mysterious Glands, by H.H.Rubin, M.D.
Works on Colour, by Dr. Babbitt from his The Principles of Light and
Colour.
Your Days are Numbered, by Florence Campbell.
Light and Colours, by Colville.
Practical Numerology, by C.G. Sander.
The Problem of Atlantis, by Lewis Spence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

