=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Five Pan Afrikanist Scholars Leaders- Freedom Fighters.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 81
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:56:54.495758
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 1 
Five Pan-Afrikanist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scholars 
Leaders 
 
Freedom 
Fighters 
 
Kwame Nkrumah  Frantz Fanon 
Walter Rodney  
Amilcar Cabral 
 
Julius Nyerere


--- PAGE 2 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 2 
Hypertext Table of Contents 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1909-1972) ...................................................................................... 3 
Neo-Colonialism, the Last Stage of imperialism 
CHAPTER 18: The mechanisms of neo-colonialism ..................................................... 11 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 22 
Rodney, Walter (1942-1980) Leading theoretician of Pan-Africanism ......................... 25 
Cabral, Amilcar (1924-1973) ....................................................................................... 28 
The Weapon of Theory 
Julius Kambarage Nyerere (1922 - 1999) ................................................................... 43 
Ujamma, socialism and self reliance ...................................................................... 44 
Liberation struggles ................................................................................................ 45 
Fanon, Franz (1925-1961) ........................................................................................... 46 
The Wretched of the Earth 
Chapter 3 The Pitfalls of National Consciousness ................................................. 47 
Chapter 6. Conclusion ............................................................................................ 78


--- PAGE 3 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 3 
 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1909-1972) 
Kwame Nkrumah became the first prime and later president of 
Ghana. He was born on September 21, 1909, at Nkroful in what 
was then the British -ruled Gold Coast, the son of a goldsmith. 
Trained as a teacher, he went to the United States in 1935 for 
advanced studies and continued his schooling in England, where 
he helped organize the Pan -African Congress in 1945. He 
returned to Ghana in 1947 and became general secretary of the 
newly founded United Gold Coast Convention but split from it in 
1949 to form the Convention People's party (CPP). 
After his 'positive action' campaign created disturbances in 1950, Nkrumah was jailed, 
but when the CPP swept the 1951 elections, he was freed to form a government, and 
he led the colony to independence as Ghana i n 1957. A firm believer in African 
liberation, Nkrumah pursued a radical pan -African policy, playing a key role in the 
formation of the Organization of African Unity in 1963. As head of government, he was 
less successful however, and as time passed he was accused of forming a dictatorship. 
In 1964 he formed a one-party state, with himself as president for life, and was accused 
of actively promoting a cult of his own personality. Overthrown by the military in 1966, 
with the help of western backing, he spent his last years in exile, dying in Bucharest, 
Romania, on April 27, 1972. His legacy and dream of a "United States of African" still 
remains a goal among many. 
Nkrumah was the motivating force behind the movement for independence of Ghana, 
then British West Africa, and its first president when it became independent in 1957. His 
1965 work Neocolonialism, the last stage of imperialism, shares with Che Guevara the 
credit for introducing the concept of “neocolonialism.” 
 
Neo-Colonialism, the Last Stage of imperialism 
Kwame Nkrumah 1965/ CHAPTER EXTRACTS 
Introduction 
THE neo -colonialism of today represents imperialism in its final and perhaps its most 
dangerous stage. In the past it was possible to convert a country upon which a neo -
colonial regime had been imposed — Egypt in the nineteenth century is an example — 
into a colonial territory. Today this process is no longer feasible. Old -fashioned 
colonialism is by no means entirely abolished. It still constitutes an African problem, but 
it is everywhere on the  retreat. Once a territory has become nominally independent it is 
no longer possible, as it was in the last century, to reverse the process. Existing


--- PAGE 4 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 4 
colonies may linger on, but no new colonies will be created. In place of colonialism as 
the main instrument of imperialism we have today neo-colonialism. 
The essence of neo -colonialism is that the State which is subject to it is, in theory, 
independent and has all the outward trappings of international sovereignty. In reality its 
economic system and thus its political policy is directed from outside. 
The methods and form of this direction can take various shapes. For example, in an 
extreme case the troops of the imperial power may garrison the territory of the neo -
colonial State and control the government of it . More often, however, neo -colonialist 
control is exercised through economic or monetary means. The neo -colonial State may 
be obliged to take the manufactured products of the imperialist power to the exclusion of 
competing products from elsewhere. Control over government policy in the neo -colonial 
State may be secured by payments towards the cost of running the State, by the 
provision of civil servants in positions where they can dictate policy, and by monetary 
control over foreign exchange through the impo sition of a banking system controlled by 
the imperial power. 
Where neo -colonialism exists the power exercising control is often the State which 
formerly ruled the territory in question, but this is not necessarily so. For example, in the 
case of South Viet nam the former imperial power was France, but neo -colonial control 
of the State has now gone to the United States. It is possible that neo -colonial control 
may be exercised by a consortium of financial interests which are not specifically 
identifiable with  any particular State. The control of the Congo by great international 
financial concerns is a case in point. 
The result of neo -colonialism is that foreign capital is used for the exploitation rather 
than for the development of the less developed parts of the world. Investment under 
neo-colonialism increases rather than decreases the gap between the rich and the poor 
countries of the world. 
The struggle against neo -colonialism is not aimed at excluding the capital of the 
developed world from operating in le ss developed countries. It is aimed at preventing 
the financial power of the developed countries being used in such a way as to 
impoverish the less developed. 
Non-alignment, as practised by Ghana and many other countries, is based on co -
operation with all States whether they be capitalist, socialist or have a mixed economy. 
Such a policy, therefore, involves foreign investment from capitalist countries, but it 
must be invested in accordance with a national plan drawn up by the government of the 
non-aligned State with its own interests in mind. The issue is not what return the foreign 
investor receives on his investments. He may, in fact, do better for himself if he invests 
in a non-aligned country than if he invests in a neo -colonial one. The question is one  of 
power. A State in the grip of neo -colonialism is not master of its own destiny. It is this 
factor which makes neo-colonialism such a serious threat to world peace. The growth of 
nuclear weapons has made out of date the old-fashioned balance of power which rested


--- PAGE 5 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 5 
upon the ultimate sanction of a major war. Certainty of mutual mass destruction 
effectively prevents either of the great power blocs from threatening the other with the 
possibility of a world-wide war, and military conflict has thus become confi ned to „limited 
wars‟. For these neo-colonialism is the breeding ground. 
 
Such wars can, of course, take place in countries which are not neo -colonialist 
controlled. Indeed their object may be to establish in a small but independent country a 
neo-colonialist regime. The evil of neo -colonialism is that it prevents the formation of 
those large units which would make impossible „limited war‟. To give one example: if 
Africa was united, no major power bloc would attempt to subdue it by limited war 
because from the very nature of limited war, what can be achieved by it is itself limited. 
It is, only where small States exist that it is possible, by landing a few thousand marines 
or by financing a mercenary force, to secure a decisive result. 
The restriction of mili tary action of „limited wars‟ is, however, no guarantee of world 
peace and is likely to be the factor which will ultimately involve the great power blocs in 
a world war, however much both are determined to avoid it. 
Limited war, once embarked upon, achieve s a momentum of its own. Of this, the war in 
South Vietnam is only one example. It escalates despite the desire of the great power 
blocs to keep it limited. While this particular war may be prevented from leading to a 
world conflict, the multiplication of similar limited wars can only have one end -world war 
and the terrible consequences of nuclear conflict. 
Neo-colonialism is also the worst form of imperialism. For those who practise it, it 
means power without responsibility and for those who suffer from it , it means 
exploitation without redress. In the days of old-fashioned colonialism, the imperial power 
had at least to explain and justify at home the actions it was taking abroad. In the colony 
those who served the ruling imperial power could at least look  to its protection against 
any violent move by their opponents. With neo-colonialism neither is the case. 
Above all, neo -colonialism, like colonialism before it, postpones the facing of the social 
issues which will have to be faced by the fully developed s ector of the world before the 
danger of world war can be eliminated or the problem of world poverty resolved. 
Neo-colonialism, like colonialism, is an attempt to export the social conflicts of the 
capitalist countries. The temporary success of this policy can be seen in the ever 
widening gap between the richer and the poorer nations of the world. But the internal 
contradictions and conflicts of neo-colonialism make it certain that it cannot endure as a 
permanent world policy. How it should be brought to an end is a problem that should be 
studied, above all, by the developed nations of the world, because it is they who will feel 
the full impact of the ultimate failure. The longer it continues the more certain it is that its 
inevitable collapse will destroy th e social system of which they have made it a 
foundation.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 6 
The reason for its development in the post -war period can be briefly summarised. The 
problem which faced the wealthy nations of the world at the end of the second world 
war was the impossibility of returning to the pre-war situation in which there was a great 
gulf between the few rich and the many poor. Irrespective of what particular political 
party was in power, the internal pressures in the rich countries of the world were such 
that no post -war ca pitalist country could survive unless it became a „Welfare State‟. 
There might be differences in degree in the extent of the social benefits given to the 
industrial and agricultural workers, but what was everywhere impossible was a return to 
the mass unemployment and to the low level of living of the pre-war years. 
From the end of the nineteenth century onwards, colonies had been regarded as a 
source of wealth which could be used to mitigate the class conflicts in the capitalist 
States and, as will be expla ined later, this policy had some success. But it failed in „its 
ultimate object because the pre -war capitalist States were so organised internally that 
the bulk of the profit made from colonial possessions found its way into the pockets of 
the capitalist c lass and not into those of the workers. Far from achieving the object 
intended, the working -class parties at times tended to identify their interests with those 
of the colonial peoples and the imperialist powers found themselves engaged upon a 
conflict on two fronts, at home with their own workers and abroad against the growing 
forces of colonial liberation. 
The post -war period inaugurated a very different colonial policy. A deliberate attempt 
was made to divert colonial earnings from the wealthy class and use them instead 
generally to finance the „Welfare State‟. As will be seen from the examples given later, 
this was the method consciously adopted even by those working -class leaders who had 
before the war regarded the colonial peoples as their natural alli es against their 
capitalist enemies at home. 
At first it was presumed that this object could be achieved by maintaining the pre -war 
colonial system. Experience soon proved that attempts to do so would be disastrous 
and would only provoke colonial wars, thu s dissipating the anticipated gains from the 
continuance of the colonial regime. Britain, in particular, realised this at an early stage 
and the correctness of the British judgement at the time has subsequently been 
demonstrated by the defeat of French col onialism in the Far East and Algeria and the 
failure of the Dutch to retain any of their former colonial empire. 
The system of neo-colonialism was therefore instituted and in the short run it has served 
the developed powers admirably. It is in the long run  that its consequences are likely to 
be catastrophic for them. 
Neo-colonialism is based upon the principle of breaking up former large united colonial 
territories into a number of small non -viable States which are incapable of independent 
development and m ust rely upon the former imperial power for defence and even 
internal security. Their economic and financial systems are linked, as in colonial days, 
with those of the former colonial ruler.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 7 
At first sight the scheme would appear to have many advantages fo r the developed 
countries of the world. All the profits of neo -colonialism can be secured if, in any given 
area, a reasonable proportion of the States have a neo -colonialist system. It is not 
necessary that they all should have one. Unless small States can combine they must be 
compelled to sell their primary products at prices dictated by the developed nations and 
buy their manufactured goods at the prices fixed by them. So long as neo -colonialism 
can prevent political and economic conditions for optimum de velopment, the developing 
countries, whether they are under neo -colonialist control or not, will be unable to create 
a large enough market to support industrialisation. In the same way they will lack the 
financial strength to force the developed countries to accept their primary products at a 
fair price. 
In the neo -colonialist territories, since the former colonial power has in theory 
relinquished political control, if the social conditions occasioned by neo -colonialism 
cause a revolt the local neo -colonialist government can be sacrificed and another 
equally subservient one substituted in its place. On the other hand, in any continent 
where neo -colonialism exists on a wide scale the same social pressures which can 
produce revolts in neo -colonial territories will also affect those States which have 
refused to accept the system and therefore neo -colonialist nations have a ready -made 
weapon with which they can threaten their opponents if they appear successfully to be 
challenging the system. 
These advantages, which seem at first sight so obvious, are, however, on examination, 
illusory because they fail to take into consideration the facts of the world today. 
The introduction of neo -colonialism increases the rivalry between the great powers 
which was provoked by the old -style colonialism. However little real power the 
government of a neo -colonialist State may possess, it must have, from the very fact of 
its nominal independence, a certain area of manoeuvre. It may not be able to exist 
without a neo-colonialist master but it may still have the ability to change masters. 
The ideal neo -colonialist State would be one which was wholly subservient to neo -
colonialist interests but the existence of the socialist nations makes it impossible to 
enforce the full rigour of the  neo-colonialist system. The existence of an alternative 
system is itself a challenge to the neo -colonialist regime. Warnings about „the dangers 
of Communist subversion are likely to be two -edged since they bring to the notice of 
those living under a neo -colonialist system the possibility of a change of regime. In fact 
neo-colonialism is the victim of its own contradictions. In order to make it attractive to 
those upon whom it is practised it must be shown as capable of raising their living 
standards, but t he economic object of neo -colonialism is to keep those standards 
depressed in the interest of the developed countries. It is only when this contradiction is 
understood that the failure of innumerable „aid‟ programmes, many of them well 
intentioned, can be explained. 
In the first place, the rulers of neo -colonial States derive their authority to govern, not 
from the will of the people, but from the support which they obtain from their neo -


--- PAGE 8 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 8 
colonialist masters. They have therefore little interest in developing  education, 
strengthening the bargaining power of their workers employed by expatriate firms, or 
indeed of taking any step which would challenge the colonial pattern of commerce and 
industry, which it is the object of neo -colonialism to preserve. „Aid‟, th erefore, to a neo -
colonial State is merely a revolving credit, paid by the neo -colonial master, passing 
through the neo -colonial State and returning to the neo -colonial master in the form of 
increased profits. 
Secondly, it is in the field of „aid‟ that the  rivalry of individual developed States first 
manifests itself. So long as neo -colonialism persists so long will spheres of interest 
persist, and this makes multilateral aid — which is in fact the only effective form of aid 
— impossible. 
Once multilateral aid begins the neo-colonialist masters are f aced by the hostility of the 
vested interests in their own country. Their manufacturers naturally object to any 
attempt to raise the price of the raw materials which they obtain from the neo -colonialist 
territory in question, or to the establishment there of manufacturing industries which 
might compete directly or indirectly with their own exports to the territory. Even 
education is suspect as likely to produce a student movement and it is, of course, true 
that in many less developed countries the students have been in the vanguard of the 
fight against neo-colonialism. 
In the end the situation arises that the only type of aid which the neo -colonialist masters 
consider as safe is „military aid‟. 
Once a neo-colonialist territory is brought to such a state of economic chaos and misery 
that revolt actually breaks out then, and only then, is there no limit to the generosity of 
the neo -colonial overlord, provided, of course, that the funds supplied are utilised 
exclusively for military purposes. 
Military aid in fact marks the last stage of neo -colonialism and its effect is self -
destructive. Sooner or later the weapons supplied pass into the hands of the opponents 
of the neo -colonialist regime and the war itself increases the social misery which 
originally provoked it. 
Neo-colonialism is a mill -stone around the necks of the developed countries which 
practise it. Unless they can rid themselves of it, it will drown them. Previously the 
developed powers could escape from the c ontradictions of neo -colonialism by 
substituting for it direct colonialism. Such a solution is no longer possible and the 
reasons for it have been well explained by Mr Owen Lattimore, the United States Far 
Eastern expert and adviser to Chiang Kai -shek in t he immediate post -war period. He 
wrote: 
„Asia, which was so easily and swiftly subjugated by conquerors in the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, displayed an amazing ability stubbornly to resist modern armies 
equipped with aeroplanes, tanks, motor vehicles and mobile artillery.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 9 
„Formerly big territories were conquered in Asia with small forces. Income, first of all 
from plunder, then from direct taxes and lastly from trade, capital investments and long -
term exploitation, covered with incredible speed the  expenditure for military operations. 
This arithmetic represented a great temptation to strong countries. Now they have run 
up against another arithmetic, and it discourages them.‟ 
The same arithmetic is likely to apply throughout the less developed world. 
This book is therefore  an attempt to examine neo -colonialism not only in its African 
context and its relation to African unity, but in world perspective. Neo -colonialism is by 
no means exclusively an African question. Long before it was practised on any l arge 
scale in Africa it was an established system in other parts of the world. Nowhere has it 
proved successful, either in raising living standards or in ultimately benefiting countries 
which have indulged in it. 
Marx predicted that the growing gap between  the wealth of the possessing classes and 
the workers it employs would ultimately produce a conflict fatal to capitalism in each 
individual capitalist State. 
This conflict between the rich and the poor has now been transferred on to the 
international scene , but for proof of what is acknowledged to be happening it is no 
longer necessary to consult the classical Marxist writers. The situation is set out with the 
utmost clarity in the leading organs of capitalist opinion. Take for example the following 
extracts from The Wall Street Journal, the newspaper which perhaps best reflects 
United States capitalist thinking. 
In its issue of 12 May 1965, under the headline of „Poor Nations‟ Plight‟, the paper first 
analyses „which countries are considered industrial and which backward‟. There is, it 
explains, „no rigid method of classification‟. Nevertheless, it points out: 
„A generally used breakdown, however, has recently been maintained by the 
International Monetary Fund because, in the words of an IMF official, “the e conomic 
demarcation in the world is getting increasingly apparent.”‟ The break -down, the official 
says, “is based on simple common sense.”‟ 
In the IMF‟s view, the industrial countries are the United States, the United Kingdom, 
most West European nations, C anada and Japan. A special category called “other 
developed areas” includes such other European lands as Finland, Greece and Ireland, 
plus Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. The IMF‟s “less developed” category 
embraces all of Latin America and nearly  all of the Middle East, non -Communist Asia 
and Africa.‟ 
In other words the „backward‟ countries are those situated in the neo-colonial areas. 
After quoting figures to support its argument, The Wall Street Journal comments on this 
situation:


--- PAGE 10 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 10 
„The industria l nations have added nearly $2 billion to their reserves, which now 
approximate $52 billion. At the same time, the reserves of the less -developed group not 
only have stopped rising, but have declined some $200 million. To analysts such as 
Britain‟s Miss Wa rd, the significance of such statistics is clear: the economic gap is 
rapidly widening “between a white, complacent, highly bourgeois, very wealthy, very 
small North Atlantic elite and everybody else, and this is not a very comfortable heritage 
to leave to one‟s children.” 
“Everybody else” includes approximately two -thirds of the population of the earth, 
spread through about 100 nations.‟ 
This is no new problem. In the opening paragraph of his book, The War on World 
Poverty, written in 1953, the present British Labour leader, Mr Harold Wilson, 
summarised the major problem of the world as he then saw it: 
„For the vast majority of mankind the most urgent problem is not war, or Communism, or 
the cost of living, or taxation. It is hunger. Over 1,500,000,000 p eople, some-thing like 
two-thirds of the world‟s population, are living in conditions of acute hunger, defined in 
terms of identifiable nutritional disease. This hunger is at the same time the effect and 
the cause of the poverty, squalor and misery in which they live.‟ 
Its consequences are likewise understood. The correspondent of The Wall Street 
Journal previously quoted, underlines them: 
„... many diplomats and economists view the implications as overwhelmingly — and 
dangerously — political. Unless the pr esent decline can be reversed, these analysts 
fear, the United States and other wealthy industrial powers of the West face the distinct 
possibility, in the words of British economist Barbara Ward, “of a sort of international 
class war”.‟ 
What is lacking ar e any positive proposals for dealing with the situation. All that The 
Wall Street Journal’s correspondent can do is to point out that the traditional methods 
recommended for curing the evils are only likely to make the situation worse. 
It has been argued that the developed nations should effectively assist the poorer parts 
of the world, and that the whole world should be turned into a Welfare State. However, 
there seems little prospect that anything of this sort could be achieved. The so -called 
„aid‟ progr ammes to help backward economies represent, according to a rough U.N. 
estimate, only one half of one per cent of the total income of industrial countries. But 
when it comes to the prospect of increasing such aid the mood is one of pessimism: 
„A large school of thought holds that expanded share -the-wealth schemes are idealistic 
and impractical. This school contends climate, undeveloped human skills, lack of natural 
resources and other factors — not just lack of money — retard economic progress in 
many of these lands, and that the countries lack personnel with the training or will to use 
vastly expanded aid effectively. Share -the-wealth schemes, according to this view,


--- PAGE 11 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 11 
would be like pouring money down a bottomless well, weakening the donor nations 
without effectively curing the ills of the recipients.‟ 
The absurdity of this argument is demonstrated by the fact that every one of the 
reasons quoted to prove why the less developed parts of the world cannot be developed 
applied equally strongly to the present devel oped countries in the period prior to their 
development. The argument is only true in this sense. The less developed world will not 
become developed through the goodwill or generosity of the developed powers. It can 
only become developed through a struggle  against the external forces which have a 
vested interest in keeping it undeveloped. 
Of these forces, neo-colonialism is, at this stage of history, the principal. 
I propose to analyse neo -colonialism, first, by  examining the state of the African 
continent and showing how neo -colonialism at the moment keeps it artificially poor. 
Next, I propose to show how in practice African Unity, which in itself can only be 
established by the defeat of neo -colonialism, could i mmensely raise African living 
standards. From this beginning, I propose to examine neo -colonialism generally, first 
historically and then by a consideration of the great international monopolies whose 
continued stranglehold on the neo-colonial sectors of the world ensures the continuation 
of the system. 
Neo-Colonialism, the Last Stage of imperialismKwame Nkrumah 1965 
CHAPTER 18: The mechanisms of neo-colonialism 
IN order to halt foreign interference in the affairs of developing countries it is necessary 
to study, understand, expose and actively combat neo -colonialism in whatever guise it 
may appear. For the methods of neo -colonialists are subtle and varied. They operate 
not only in the economic field, but also in the political, religious, ideological and cul tural 
spheres. 
Faced with the militant peoples of the ex -colonial territories in Asia, Africa, the 
Caribbean and Latin America, imperialism simply switches tactics. Without a qualm it 
dispenses with its flags, and even with certain of its more hated expatr iate officials. This 
means, so it claims, that it is „giving‟ independence to its former subjects, to be followed 
by „aid‟ for their development. Under cover of such phrases, however, it devises 
innumerable ways to accomplish objectives formerly achieved b y naked colonialism. It 
is this sum total of these modern attempts to perpetuate colonialism while at the same 
time talking about „freedom‟, which has come to be known as neo-colonialism. 
Foremost among the neo -colonialists is the United States, which has long exercised its 
power in Latin America. Fumblingly at first she turned towards Europe, and then with 
more certainty after world war two when most countries of that continent were indebted 
to her. Since then, with methodical thoroughness and touching att ention to detail, the 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 12 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 12 
Pentagon set about consolidating its ascendancy, evidence of which can be seen all 
around the world. 
Who really rules in such places as Great Britain, West Germany, Japan, Spain, Portugal 
or Italy? If General de Gaulle is „defecting‟ from U.S. monopoly control, what 
interpretation can be placed on his „experiments‟ in the Sahara desert, his paratroopers 
in Gabon, or his trips to Cambodia and Latin America? 
Lurking behind such questions are the extended tentacles of the Wall Street octo pus. 
And its suction cups and muscular strength are provided by a phenomenon dubbed 
„The Invisible Government‟, arising from Wall Street‟s connection with the Pentagon and 
various intelligence services. I quote: 
„The Invisible Government ... is a loose amorphous grouping of individuals and agencies 
drawn from many parts of the visible government. It is not limited to the Central 
Intelligence Agency, although the CIA is at its heart. Nor is it confined to the nine other 
agencies which comprise what is known as the intelligence community: the National 
Security Council, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, Army 
Intelligence, Navy Intelligence and Research, the Atomic Energy Commission and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
„The Invis ible Government includes also many other units and agencies, as well as 
individuals, that appear outwardly to be a normal part of the conventional government. It 
even encompasses business firms and institutions that are seemingly private. 
„To an extent that is only beginning to be perceived, this shadow government is shaping 
the lives of 190,000,000 Americans. An informed citizen might come to suspect that the 
foreign policy of the United States often works publicly in one direction and secretly 
through the Invisible Government in just the opposite direction. 
„This Invisible Government is a relatively new institution. It came into being as a result of 
two related factors: the rise of the United States after World War II to a position of pre -
eminent world power, and the challenge to that power by Soviet Communism... 
„By 1964 the intelligence network had grown into a massive hidden apparatus, secretly 
employing about 200,000 persons and spending billions of dollars a year. [ The Invisible 
Government, David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, Random House, New York, 1964.] 
Here, from the very citadel of neo -colonialism, is a description of the apparatus which 
now directs all other Western intelligence set -ups either by persuasion or by force. 
Results were achieved in Algeria  during the April 1961 plot of anti -de Gaulle generals; 
as also in Guatemala, Iraq, Iran, Suez and the famous U -2 spy intrusion of Soviet air 
space which wrecked the approaching Summit, then in West Germany and again in 
East Germany in the riots of 1953, i n Hungary‟s abortive crisis of 1959, Poland‟s of 
September 1956, and in Korea, Burma, Formosa, Laos, Cambodia and South Vietnam; 
they are evident in the trouble in Congo (Leopoldville) which began with Lumumba‟s


--- PAGE 13 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 13 
murder, and continues till now; in events in  Cuba, Turkey, Cyprus, Greece, and in other 
places too numerous to catalogue completely. 
And with what aim have these innumerable incidents occurred? The general objective 
has been mentioned: to achieve colonialism in fact while preaching independence. 
On the economic front, a strong factor favouring Western monopolies and acting against 
the developing world is inter -national capital‟s control of the world market, as well as of 
the prices of commodities bought and sold there. From 1951 to 1961, without taki ng oil 
into consideration, the general level of prices for primary products fell by 33.l per cent, 
while prices of manufactured goods rose 3.5 per cent (within which, machinery and 
equipment prices rose 31.3 per cent). In that same decade this caused a los s to the 
Asian, African and Latin American countries, using 1951 prices as a basis, of some 
$41,400 million. In the same period, while the volume of exports from these countries 
rose, their earnings in foreign exchange from such exports decreased. 
Another technique of neo -colonialism is the use of high rates of interest. Figures from 
the World Bank for 1962 showed that seventy -one Asian, African and Latin American 
countries owed foreign debts of some $27,000 million, on which they paid in interest 
and servi ce charges some $5,000 million. Since then, such foreign debts have been 
estimated as more than £30,000 million in these areas. In 1961, the interest rates on 
almost three-quarters of the loans offered by the major imperialist powers amounted to 
more than five per cent, in some cases up to seven or eight per cent, while the call -in 
periods of such loans have been burdensomely short. 
While capital worth $30,000 million was exported to some fifty -six developing countries 
between 1956 and 1962, „it is estimate d that interest and profit alone extracted on this 
sum from the debtor countries amounted to more than £15,000 million. This method of 
penetration by economic aid recently soared into prominence when a number of 
countries began rejecting it. Ceylon, Indone sia and Cambodia are among those who 
turned it down. Such „aid‟ is estimated on the annual average to have amounted to 
$2,600 million between 1951 and 1955; $4,007 million between 1956 and 1959, and 
$6,000 million between 1960 and 1962. But the average sum s taken out of the aided 
countries by such donors in a sample year, 1961, are estimated to amount to $5,000 
million in profits, $1,000 million in interest, and $5,800 million from non -equivalent 
exchange, or a total of $11,800 million extracted against $6, 000 million put in. Thus, 
„aid‟ turns out to be another means of exploitation, a modern method of capital export 
under a more cosmetic name. 
Still another neo -colonialist trap on the economic front has come to be known as 
„multilateral aid‟ through interna tional organisations: the International Monetary Fund, 
the Inter -national Bank for Reconstruction and Development (known as the World 
Bank), the International Finance Corporation and the International Development 
Association are examples, all, significantl y, having U.S. capital as their major backing. 
These agencies have the habit of forcing would -be borrowers to submit to various 
offensive conditions, such as supplying information about their economies, submitting


--- PAGE 14 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 14 
their policy and plans to review by the Wo rld Bank and accepting agency supervision of 
their use of loans. As for the alleged development, between 1960 and mid -1963 the 
International Development Association promised a total of $500 million to applicants, 
out of which only $70 million were actually received. 
In more recent years, as pointed out by Monitor in The Times, 1 July 1965, there has 
been a substantial increase in communist technical and economic aid activities in 
developing countries. During 1964 the total amount of assistance offered was 
approximately £600 million. This was almost a third of the total communist aid given 
during the previous decade. The Middle East received about 40 per cent of the total, 
Asia 36 per cent, Africa 22 per cent and Latin America the rest. 
Increased Chinese activity was responsible to some extent for the larger amount of aid 
offered in 1964, though China contributed only a quarter of the total aid committed; the 
Soviet Union provided a half, and the East European countries a quarter. 
Although aid from socialist countries still falls far short of that offered from the west, it is 
often more impressive, since it is swift and flexible, and interest rates on communist 
loans are only about two per cent compared with five to six per cent charged on loans 
from western countries. 
Nor is the whole story of „aid‟ contained in figures, for there are conditions which hedge 
it around: the conclusion of commerce and navigation treaties; agreements for 
economic co-operation; the right to meddle in internal finances, including cur rency and 
foreign exchange, to lower trade barriers in favour of the donor country‟s goods and 
capital; to protect the interests of private investments; determination of how the funds 
are to be used; forcing the recipient to set up counterpart funds; to su pply raw materials 
to the donor; and use of such funds a majority of it, in fact to buy goods from the donor 
nation. These conditions apply to industry, commerce, agriculture, shipping and 
insurance, apart from others which are political and military. 
So-called „invisible trade‟ furnishes the Western monopolies with yet another means of 
economic penetration. Over 90 per cent of world ocean shipping is controlled by me 
imperialist countries. They control shipping rates and, between 1951 and 1961, they 
increased them some five times in a total rise of about 60 per cent, the upward trend 
continuing. Thus, net annual freight expenses incurred by Asia, Africa and Latin 
America amount to no less than an estimated $1,600 million. This is over and above all 
other pr ofits and interest payments. As for insurance payments, in 1961 alone these 
amounted to an unfavourable balance in Asia, Africa and Latin America of some 
additional $370 million. 
Having waded through all this, however, we have begun to understand only the basic 
methods of neo-colonialism. The full extent of its inventiveness is far from exhausted. 
In the labour field, for example, imperialism operates through labour arms like the Social 
Democratic parties of Europe led by the British Labour Party, and throu gh such


--- PAGE 15 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 15 
instruments as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), now 
apparently being superseded by the New York Africa -American Labour Centre (AALC) 
under AFL -CIO chief George Meany and the well -known CIA man in labour‟s top 
echelons, Irving Brown. 
In 1945, out of the euphoria of anti-fascist victory, the World Federation of Trade Unions 
(WFTU) had been formed, including all world labour except the U.S. American 
Federation of Labor (AFL). By 1949, however, led by the British Trade Union  Congress 
(TUC), a number of pro -imperialist labour bodies in the West broke away from the 
WFTU over the issue of anti-colonialist liberation, and set up the ICFTU. 
For ten years it continued under British TUC leadership. Its record in Africa, Asia and 
Latin America could gratify only the big international monopolies which were extracting 
super-profits from those areas. 
In 1959, at Brussels, the United States AFL-CIO union centre fought for and won control 
of the ICFTU Executive Board. From then on a flood of typewriters, mimeograph 
machines, cars, supplies, buildings, salaries and, so it is still averred, outright bribes for 
labour leaders in various parts of the developing world rapidly linked ICFTU in the minds 
of the rank and file with the CIA. To such a n extent did its prestige suffer under these 
American bosses that, in 1964, the AFL -CIO brains felt it necessary to establish a fresh 
outfit. They set up the AALC in New York right across the river from the United Nations. 
„As a steadfast champion of natio nal independence, democracy and social justice‟, 
unblushingly stated the April 1965 Bulletin put out by this Centre, „the AFL -CIO will 
strengthen its efforts to assist the advancement of the economic conditions of the 
African peoples. Toward this end, step s have been taken to expand assistance to the 
African free trade unions by organising the African -American Labour Centre. Such 
assistance will help African labour play a vital role in the economic and democratic 
upbuilding of their countries.' 
The March is sue of this Bulletin, however, gave the game away: „In mobilising capital 
resources for investment in Workers Education, Vocational Training, Co -operatives, 
Health Clinics and Housing, the Centre will work with both private and public institutions. 
It will  also encourage labour -management co -operation to expand American capital 
investment in the African nations.‟ The italics are mine. Could anything be plainer? 
Following a pattern previously set by the ICFTU, it has already started classes: one for 
drivers and mechanics in Nigeria, one in tailoring in Kenya. Labour scholarships are 
being offered to Africans who want to study trade unionism in of all places -Austria, 
ostensibly by the Austrian unions. Elsewhere, labour, organised into political parties of 
which the British Labour Party is a leading and typical example, has shown a similar 
aptitude for encouraging „Labour -management co -operation to expand . . . capital 
investment in African nations.'


--- PAGE 16 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 16 
But as the struggle sharpens, even these measures of neo-colonialism are proving too 
mild. So Africa, Asia and Latin America have begun to experience a round of coups 
d'etat or would -be coups, together with a series of political assassinations which have 
destroyed in their political primes some of the newly emerging nations best leaders. To 
ensure success in these endeavours, the imperialists have made widespread and wily 
use of ideological and cultural weapons in the form of intrigues, manoeuvres and 
slander campaigns. 
Some of these methods used by neo -colonialists to slip past our guard must now be 
examined. The first is retention by the departing colonialists of various kinds of 
privileges which infringe on our sovereignty: that of setting up military bases or 
stationing troops in former colonies and the su pplying of „advisers‟ of one sort or 
another. Sometimes a number of „rights‟ are demanded: land concessions, prospecting 
rights for minerals and/or oil; the „right‟ to collect customs, to carry out administration, to 
issue paper money; to be exempt from cu stoms duties and/or taxes for expatriate 
enterprises; and, above all, the „right‟ to provide „aid‟. Also demanded and granted are 
privileges in the cultural field; that Western information services be exclusive; and that 
those from socialist countries be excluded. 
Even the cinema stories of fabulous Hollywood are loaded. One has only to listen to the 
cheers of an African audience as Hollywood‟s heroes slaughter red Indians or Asiatics 
to understand the effectiveness of this weapon. For, in the developing continents, where 
the colonialist heritage has left a vast majority still illiterate, even the smallest child gets 
the message contained in the blood and thunder stories emanating from California. And 
along with murder and the Wild West goes an incessant bar rage of anti -socialist 
propaganda, in which the trade union man, the revolutionary, or the man of dark skin is 
generally cast as the villain, while the policeman, the gum -shoe, the Federal agent — in 
a word, the CIA — type spy is ever the hero. Here, truly, is the ideological under-belly of 
those political murders which so often use local people as their instruments. 
While Hollywood takes care of fiction, the enormous monopoly press, together with the 
outflow of slick, clever, expensive magazines, attends t o what it chooses to call „news. 
Within separate countries, one or two news agencies control the news handouts, so that 
a deadly uniformity is achieved, regardless of the number of separate newspapers or 
magazines; while internationally, the financial prep onderance of the United States is felt 
more and more through its foreign correspondents and offices abroad, as well as 
through its influence over inter-national capitalist journalism. Under this guise, a flood of 
anti-liberation propaganda emanates from the capital cities of the West, directed against 
China, Vietnam, Indonesia, Algeria, Ghana and all countries which hack out their own 
independent path to freedom. Prejudice is rife. For example, wherever there is armed 
struggle against the forces of reaction , the nationalists are referred to as rebels, 
terrorists, or frequently „communist terrorists'! 
Perhaps one of the most insidious methods of the neo -colonialists is evangelism. 
Following the liberation movement there has been a veritable riptide of religio us sects, 
the overwhelming majority of them American. Typical of these are Jehovah‟s Witnesses


--- PAGE 17 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 17 
who recently created trouble in certain developing countries by busily teaching their 
citizens not to salute the new national flags. „Religion‟ was too thin to smother the outcry 
that arose against this activity, and a temporary lull followed. But the number of 
evangelists continues to grow. 
Yet even evangelism and the cinema are only two twigs on a much bigger tree. Dating 
from the end of 1961, the U.S. has activ ely developed a huge ideological plan for 
invading the so -called Third World, utilising all its facilities from press and radio to 
Peace Corps. 
During 1962 and 1963 a number of international conferences to this end were held in 
several places, such as Nico sia in Cyprus, San Jose in Costa Rica, and Lagos in 
Nigeria. Participants included the CIA, the U.S. Information Agency (USIA), the 
Pentagon, the International Development Agency, the Peace Corps and others. 
Programmes were drawn up which included the syst ematic use of U.S. citizens abroad 
in virtual intelligence activities and propaganda work. Methods of recruiting political 
agents and of forcing „alliances‟ with the U.S.A. were worked out. At the centre of its 
programmes lay the demand for an absolute U.S . monopoly in the field of propaganda, 
as well as for counteracting any independent efforts by developing states in the realm of 
information. 
The United States sought, and still seeks, with considerable success, to co -ordinate on 
the basis of its own strat egy the propaganda activities of all Western countries. In 
October 1961, a conference of NATO countries was held in Rome to discuss problems 
of psychological warfare. It appealed for the organisation of combined ideological 
operations in Afro-Asian countries by all participants. 
In May and June 1962 a seminar was convened by the U.S. in Vienna on ideological 
warfare. It adopted a secret decision to engage in a propaganda offensive against the 
developing countries along lines laid down by the U.S.A. It was a greed that NATO 
propaganda agencies would, in practice if not in the public eye, keep in close contact 
with U.S. Embassies in their respective countries. 
Among instruments of such Western psychological warfare are numbered the 
intelligence agencies of Western countries headed by those of the United States 
„Invisible Government‟. But most significant among them all are Moral Re -Armament 
QARA), the Peace Corps and the United States Information Agency (USIA). 
Moral Re -Armament is an organisation founded in  1938 by the American, Frank 
Buchman. In the last days before the second world war, it advocated the appeasement 
of Hitler, often extolling Himmler, the Gestapo chief. In Africa, MRA incursions began at 
the end of World War II. Against the big anti -colonial upsurge that followed victory in 
1945, MRA spent millions advocating collaboration between the forces oppressing the 
African peoples and those same peoples. It is not without significance that Moise 
Tshombe and Joseph Kasavubu of Congo (Leopoldville) are  both MRA supporters. 
George Seldes, in his book One Thousand Americans, characterised MRA as a fascist


--- PAGE 18 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 18 
organisation „subsidised by . . . Fascists, and with a long record of collaboration with 
Fascists the world over. . . .‟ This description is supported b y the active participation in 
MRA of people like General Carpentier, former commander of NATO land forces, and 
General Ho Ying -chin, one of Chiang Kai -shek‟s top generals. To cap this, several 
newspapers, some of them in the Western ;vorld, have claimed th at MRA is actually 
subsidised by the CIA. 
When MRA‟s influence began to fail, some new instrument to cover the ideological 
arena was desired. It came in the establishment of the American Peace Corps in 1961 
by President John Kennedy, with Sargent Shriver, Jr., his brother -in-law, in charge. 
Shriver, a millionaire who made his pile in land speculation in Chicago, was also known 
as the friend, confidant and co -worker of the former head of the Central Intelligence 
Agency, Allen Dulles. These two had worked tog ether in both the Office of Strategic 
Services, U.S. war-time intelligence agency, and in the CIA. 
Shriver‟s record makes a mockery of President Kennedy‟s alleged instruction to Shriver 
to „keep the CIA out of the Peace Corps‟. So does the fact that, altho ugh the Peace 
Corps is advertised as a voluntary organisation, all its members are carefully screened 
by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
Since its creation in 1961, members of the Peace Corps have been exposed and 
expelled from many African , Middle Eastern and Asian countries for acts of subversion 
or prejudice. Indonesia, Tanzania, the Philippines, and even pro -West countries like 
Turkey and Iran, have complained of its activities. 
However, perhaps the chief executor of U.S. psychological w arfare is the United States 
Information Agency (USIA). Even for the wealthiest nation on earth, the U.S. lavishes an 
unusual amount of men, materials and money on this vehicle for its neo-colonial aims. 
The USIA is staffed by some 12,000 persons to the tun e of more than $130 million a 
year. It has more than seventy editorial staffs working on publications abroad. Of its 
network comprising 110 radio stations, 60 are outside the U.S. Programmes are 
broadcast for Africa by American stations in Morocco, Eritrea , Liberia, Crete, and 
Barcelona, Spain, as well as from off -shore stations on American ships. In Africa alone, 
the USIA transmits about thirty territorial and national radio programmes whose content 
glorifies the U.S. while attempting to discredit countrie s with an independent foreign 
policy. 
The USIA boasts more than 120 branches in about 100 countries, 50 of which are in 
Africa alone. It has 250 centres in foreign countries, each of which is usually associated 
with a library. It employs about 200 cinemas and 8,000 projectors which draw upon its 
nearly 300 film libraries. 
This agency is directed by a central body which operates in the name of the U.S. 
President, planning and coordinating its activities in close touch with the Pentagon, CIA 
and other Cold War agencies, including even armed forces intelligence centres.


--- PAGE 19 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 19 
In developing countries, the USIA actively tries to prevent expansion of national media 
of information so as itself to capture the market -place of ideas. It spends huge sums for 
publication and distribution of about sixty newspapers and magazines in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America. 
The American government backs the USIA through direct pressures on developing 
nations. To ensure its agency a complete monopoly in propaganda, for instance, many 
agreements for economic co -operation offered by the U.S. include a demand that 
Americans be granted preferential rights to disseminate information. At the same time, 
in trying to close the new nations to other sources of information, it employs other 
pressures. For instance, after agreeing to set up USIA information centres in their 
countries, both Togo and Congo (Leopoldville) originally hoped to follow a non -aligned 
path and permit Russian information centres as a balance. But Washington threatened 
to stop all aid, thereby forcing these two countries to renounce their plan. 
Unbiased studies of the USIA by such authorities as Dr R. Holt of Princeton University, 
Retired Colonel R. Van de Velde, former intelligence agents Murril Dayer, Wilson Dizard 
and others, hav e all called attention to the close ties between this agency and U.S. 
Intelligence. For example, Deputy Director Donald M. Wilson was a political intelligence 
agent in the U.S. Army. Assistant Director for Europe, Joseph Philips, was a successful 
espionage agent in several Eastern European countries. 
Some USIA duties further expose its nature as a top intelligence arm of the U.S. 
imperialists. In the first place, it is expected to analyse the situation in each country, 
making recommendations to its Embassy,  thereby to its Government, about changes 
that can tip the local balance in U.S. favour. Secondly, it organises networks of monitors 
for radio broadcasts and telephone conversations, while recruiting informers from 
government offices. It also hires people to distribute U.S. propaganda. Thirdly, it collects 
secret information with special reference to defence and economy, as a means of 
eliminating its international military and economic competitors. Fourthly, it buys its way 
into local publications to influe nce their policies, of which Latin America furnishes 
numerous examples. It has been active in bribing public figures, for example in Kenya 
and Tunisia. Finally, it finances, directs and often supplies with arms all anti -neutralist 
forces in the developing countries, witness Tshombe in Congo (Leopoldville) and Pak 
Hung Ji in South Korea. In a word, with virtually unlimited finances, there seems no 
bounds to its inventiveness in subversion. 
One of the most recent developments in neo -colonialist strategy is th e suggested 
establishment of a Businessmen Corps which will, like the Peace Corps, act in 
developing countries. In an article on „U.S. Intelligence and the Monopolies‟ in 
International Affairs (Moscow, January 1965), V. Chernyavsky writes: „There can hardl y 
be any doubt that this Corps is a new U.S. intelligence organisation created on the 
initiative of the American monopolies to use Big Business for espionage. It is by no 
means unusual for U.S. Intelligence to set up its own business firms which are merely  
thinly disguised espionage centres. For example, according to Chernyavsky, the C.I.A. 
has set up a firm in Taiwan known as Western Enterprises Inc. Under this cover it sends


--- PAGE 20 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 20 
spies and saboteurs to South China. The New Asia Trading Company, a CIA firm in 
India, has also helped to camouflage U.S. intelligence agents operating in South -east 
Asia. 
Such is the catalogue of neo -colonialism‟s activities and methods in our time. Upon 
reading it, the faint -hearted might come to feel that they must give up in despai r before 
such an array of apparent power and seemingly inexhaustible resources. 
Fortunately, however, history furnishes innumerable proofs of one of its own major laws; 
that the budding future is always stronger than the withering past. This has been amply  
demonstrated during every major revolution throughout history. 
The American Revolution of 1776 struggled through to victory over a tangle of 
inefficiency, mismanagement, corruption, outright subversion and counter -revolution the 
like of which has been repeated to some degree in every subsequent revolution to date. 
The Russian Revolution during the period of Intervention, 1917 to 1922, appeared to be 
dying on its feet. The Chinese Revolution at one time was forced to pull out of its 
existing bases, lock sto ck and barrel, and make the unprecedented Long March; yet it 
triumphed. Imperialist white mercenaries who dropped so confidently out of the skies on 
Stanleyville after a plane trip from Ascension Island thought that their job would be „duck 
soup‟. Yet, til l now, the nationalist forces of Congo (Leopoldville) continue to fight their 
way forward. They do not talk of if they will win, but only of when. 
Asia provides a further example of the strength of a people‟s will to determine their own 
future. In South Vi etnam „special warfare‟ is being fought to hold back the tide of 
revolutionary change. „Special warfare‟ is a concept of General Maxwell Taylor and a 
military extension of the creed of John Foster Dulles: let Asians fight Asians. Briefly, the 
technique is for the foreign power to supply the money, aircraft, military equipment of all 
kinds, and the strategic and tactical command from a General Staff down to officer 
„advisers‟, while the troops of the puppet government bear the brunt of the fighting. Yet 
in spite of bombing raids and the immense build -up of foreign strength in the area, the 
people of both North and South Vietnam are proving to be unconquerable. 
In other parts of Asia, in Cambodia, Laos, Indonesia, and now the Philippines, Thailand 
and Burma, the peoples of ex-colonial countries have stood firm and are winning battles 
against the allegedly superior imperialist enemy. In Latin America, despite „final‟ punitive 
expeditions, the growing armed insurrections in Colombia, Venezuala and other 
countries continue to consolidate gains. 
In Africa, we in Ghana have withstood all efforts by imperialism and its agents; Tanzania 
has nipped subversive plots in the bud, as have Brazzaville, Uganda and Kenya. The 
struggle rages back and forth. The surging popular forces may still be hampered by 
colonialist legacies, but nonetheless they advance inexorably.


--- PAGE 21 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 21 
All these examples prove beyond doubt that neo -colonialism is not a sign of 
imperialism‟s strength but rather of its last hideous gasp. It testifies to its inabi lity to rule 
any longer by old methods. Independence is a luxury it can no longer afford to permit its 
subject peoples, so that even what it claims to have „given‟ it now seeks to take away. 
This means that neo-colonialism can and will be defeated. How can this be done? 
Thus far, all the methods of neo -colonialists have pointed in one direction, the ancient, 
accepted one of all minority ruling classes throughout history — divide and rule. 
Quite obviously, therefore, unity is the first requisite for destroying neo -colonialism. 
Primary and basic is the need for an all -union government on the much divided 
continent of Africa. Along with that, a strengthening of the Afro -Asian Solidarity 
Organisation and the spirit of Bandung is already under way. To it,  we must seek the 
adherence on an increasingly formal basis of our Latin American brothers. 
Furthermore, all these liberatory forces have, on all major issues and at every possible 
instance, the support of the growing socialist sector of the world. 
Finally, we must encourage and utilise to the full those still all too few yet growing 
instances of support for liberation and anti-colonialism inside the imperialist world itself. 
To carry out such a political programme, we must all back it with national plans 
designed to strengthen ourselves as independent nations. An external condition for 
such independent development is neutrality or political non -alignment. This has been 
expressed in two conferences of Non -Aligned Nations during the recent past, the last of 
which, in Cairo in 1964, clearly and inevitably showed itself at one with the rising 
forcesof liberation and human dignity. 
And the preconditions for all this, to which lip se rvice is often paid but activity seldom 
directed, is to develop ideological clarity among the anti -imperialist, anti-colonialist, pro-
liberation masses of our continents. They, and they alone, make, maintain or break 
revolutions. 
With the utmost speed, neo -colonialism must be analysed in clear and simple terms for 
the full mass understanding by the surging organisations of the African peoples. The All-
African Trade Union Federation (AATUF) has already made a start in this direction, 
while the Pan-African Youth Movement, the women, journalists, farmers and others are 
not far behind. Bolstered with ideological clarity, these organisations, closely linked with 
the ruling parties where liberatory forces are in power, will prove that neo -colonialism is 
the symptom of imperialism‟s weakness and that it is defeatable. For, when all is said 
and done, it is the so -called little man, the bent-backed, exploited, malnourished, blood-
covered fighter for independence who decides. And he invariably decides for freedom.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 22 
Neo-Colonialism, the Last Stage of imperialism 
Kwame Nkrumah 1965 
Conclusion 
IN the Introduction I attempted to set out the dilemma now facing the world. The conflict 
between rich and poor in the second half of the nineteenth century and the first half of 
the twentieth, which was fought out between the rich and the poor in the developed 
nations of the world ended in a compromise. Capitalism as a system disappeared from 
large areas of the world, but where socialis m was established it was in its less 
developed rather than its more developed parts and, in fact, the revolt against 
capitalism had its greatest successes in those areas where early neo -colonialism had 
been most actively practised. In the industrially more  developed countries, capitalism, 
far from disappearing, became infinitely stronger. This strength was only achieved by 
the sacrifice of two principles which had inspired early capitalism, namely the 
subjugation of the working classes within each individua l country and the exclusion of 
the State from any say in the control of capitalist enterprise. 
By abandoning these two principles and substituting for them „welfare states‟ based on 
high working -class living standards and on a State -regulated capitalism at  home, the 
developed countries succeeded in exporting their internal problem and transferring the 
conflict between rich and poor from the national to the international stage. 
Marx had argued that the development of capitalism would produce a crisis within each 
individual capitalist State because within each State the gap between the „haves‟ and 
the „have nots‟ would widen to a point where a conflict was inevitable and that it would 
be the capitalists who would be defeated. The basis of his argument is not i nvalidated 
by the fact that the conflict, which he had predicted as a national one, did not 
everywhere take place on a national scale but has been transferred instead to the world 
stage. World capitalism has postponed its crisis but only at the cost of tra nsforming it 
into an international crisis. The danger is now not civil war within individual States 
provoked by intolerable conditions within those States, but international war provoked 
ultimately by the misery of the majority of mankind who daily grow poorer and poorer. 
When Africa becomes economically free and politically united, the monopolists will 
come face to face with their own working class in their own countries, and a new 
struggle will arise within which the liquidation and collapse of imperialis m will be 
complete. 
As this book has attempted to show, in the same way as the internal crisis of capitalism 
within the developed world arose through the uncontrolled action of national capital, so 
a greater crisis is being provoked today by similar uncont rolled action of international 
capitalism in the developing parts of the world. Before the problem can be solved it must 
at least be understood. It cannot be resolved merely by pretending that neo -colonialism 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 23 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 23 
does not exist. It must be realised that the me thods at present employed to solve the 
problem of world poverty are not likely to yield any result other than to extend the crisis. 
Speaking in 1951, the then President of the United States, Mr Truman, said, „The only 
kind of war we seek is the good old fi ght against man‟s ancient enemies. . . poverty, 
disease, hunger and illiteracy.‟ Sentiments of a similar nature have been re -echoed by 
all political leaders in the developed world but the stark fact remains: whatever wars 
may have been won since 1951, none  of them is the war against poverty, disease, 
hunger and illiteracy. However little other types of war have been deliberately sought, 
they are the only ones which have been waged. Nothing is gained by assuming that 
those who express such views are insincer e. The position of the leaders of the 
developed capitalist countries of the world are, in relation to the great neo -colonialist 
international combines, very similar to that which Lord Macaulay described as existing 
between the directors of the East India C ompany and their agent, Warren Hastings, 
who, in the eighteenth century, engaged in the wholesale plunder of India. Macaulay 
wrote: 
„The Directors, it is true, never enjoined or applauded any crime. Far from it. Whoever 
examines their letters written at th e time will find there are many just and humane 
sentiments, many excellent precepts, in short, an admirable code of political ethics. But 
each exultation is modified or nullified by a demand for money. . . . We by no means 
accuse or suspect those who frame d these dispatches of hypocrisy. It is probable that, 
written 15,000 miles from the place where their orders were to be carried into effect, 
they never perceived the gross inconsistency of which they were guilty. But the 
inconsistency was at once manifest to their lieutenant in Calcutta. 
„... Hastings saw that it was absolutely necessary for him to disregard either the moral 
discourses or the pecuniary requisitions of his employers. Being forced to disobey them 
in something, he had to consider what kind of disobedience they would most readily 
pardon; and he correctly judged that the safest course would be to neglect the sermons 
and to find the rupees.' 
Today the need both to maintain a welfare state, i.e. a parasite State at home, and to 
support a huge and e ver-growing burden of armament costs makes it absolutely 
essential for developed capitalist countries to secure the maximum return in profit from 
such parts of the international financial complex as they control. However much private 
capitalism is exhorted to bring about rapid development and a rising standard of living in 
the less developed areas of the world, those who manipulate the system realise the 
inconsistency between doing this and producing at the same time the funds necessary 
to maintain the sinews of war and the welfare state at home. They know when it comes 
to the issue they will be excused if they fail to provide for a world -wide rise in the 
standard of living. They know they will never be forgiven it they betray the system and 
produce a crisis  at home which either destroys the affluent State or interferes with its 
military preparedness.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 24 
Appeals to capitalism to work out a cure for the division of the world into rich and poor 
are likely to have no better result than the appeals of the Directors of the East India 
Company to Warren Hastings to ensure social justice in India. Faced with a choice, 
capitalism, like Hastings, will come down on the side of exploitation. 
Is there then no method of avoiding the inevitable world conflict occasioned by an 
international class war? To accept that world conflict is inevitable is to reject any belief 
in co-existence or in the policy of non -alignment as practised at present by many of the 
countries attempting to escape from neo-colonialism. A way out is possible. 
To start with, for the first time in human history the potential material resources of the 
world are so great that there is no need for there to be rich and poor. It is only the 
organisation to deploy these potential resources that is lacking. Effective world pressure 
can force such a redeployment, but world pressure is not exercised by appeals, 
however eloquent, or by arguments, however convincing. It is only achieved by deeds. It 
is necessary to secure a world realignment so that those who are at the mo ment the 
helpless victims of a system will be able in the future to exert a counter pressure. Such 
counter pressures do not lead to war. On the contrary, it is often their absence which 
constitutes the threat to peace. 
A parallel can be drawn with the meth ods by which direct colonialism was ended. No 
imperial power has ever granted independence to a colony unless the forces were such 
that no other course was possible, and there are many instances where independence 
was only achieved by a war of liberation, but there are many other instances when no 
such war occurred. The very organisation of the forces of independence within the 
colony was sufficient to convince the imperial power that resistance to independence 
would be impossible or that the political and economic consequences of a colonial war 
outweighed any advantage to be gained by retaining the colony. 
In the earlier chapters of this book I have set out the argument for African unity and 
have explained how this unity would destroy neo-colonialism in Africa. In later chapters I 
have explained how strong is the world position of those who profit from neo -
colonialism. Nevertheless, African unity is something which is within the grasp of the 
African people. The foreign firms who exploit our resources long ago saw the strength to 
be gained from acting on a Pan -African scale. By means of interlocking directorships, 
cross-shareholdings and other devices, groups of apparently different companies have 
formed, in fact, one enormous capitalist monopoly. The only eff ective way to challenge 
this economic empire and to recover possession of our heritage, is for us also to act on 
a Pan-African basis, through a Union Government. 
No one would suggest that if all the peoples of Africa combined to establish their unity 
their decision could be revoked by the forces of neo -colonialism. On the contrary, faced 
with a new situation, those who practise neo-colonialism would adjust themselves to this 
new balance of world forces in exactly the same way as the capitalist world has in the 
past adjusted itself to any other change in the balance of power.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 25 
The danger to world peace springs not from the action of those who seek to end neo -
colonialism but from the inaction of those who allow it to continue. To argue that a third 
world war is not inevitable is one thing, to suppose that it can be avoided by shutting our 
eyes to the development of a situation likely to produce it is quite another matter. 
If world war is not to occur it must be prevented by positive action. This positive action is 
within the power of the peoples of those areas of the world which now suffer under 
neocolonialism but it is only within their power if they act at once, with resolution and in 
unity. 
 
 
  
Rodney, Walter (1942-1980)  
Leading theoretician of Pan-Africanism 
Walter Rodney was born in Georgetown, Guyana on March 23, 1942. His 
was a working class family -his father was a tailor and his mother a 
seamstress. After attending primary school, he won an open exhibitio n 
scholarship to attend Queens College as one of the early working -class beneficiaries of 
concessions made in the filed of education by the ruling class in Guyana to the new 
nationalism that gripped the country in the early 1950s.  
While at Queens College young Rodney excelled academically, as well as in the fields 
of athletics and debating. In 1960, he won an open scholarship to further his studies at 
the University of the West Indies in Jamaica. He graduated with a first -class honors 
degree in history in 1963 and. he won an open scholarship to the School of Oriental and 
African Studies in London. In 1966, at the age of 24 he was awarded a Ph.D. with 
honors in African History.  
His doctoral research on slavery on the Upper Guinea Coast was the result of lon g 
meticulous work on the records of Portuguese merchants both in England and in 
Portugal. In the process he learned Portuguese and Spanish which along with the 
French he had learned at Queens College made him somewhat of a linguist.  
In 1970, his Ph.D diss ertation was published by Oxford University Press under the title, 
A History of the Upper Guinea Coast, 1545 -1800. This work was to set a trend for 
Rodney in both challenging the assumptions of western historians about African history 
and setting new standards for looking at the history of oppressed peoples. According to 
Horace Campbell: 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 26 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 26 
“This work was path -breaking in the way in which it analyzed the impact of slavery on 
the communities and the interrelationship between societies of the region and on the 
ecology of the region.”  
Walter took up his first teaching appointment in Tanzania before returning to his alma 
mater, the University of the West Indies, in 1968. This was a period of great political 
activity in the Caribbean as the countries begun their po st colonial journey. But it was 
the Black Power Movement that caught Walter‟s imagination.  
Some new voices had begun to question the direction of the post -independence 
governments, in particular their attitude to the plight of the down -trodden. The issue of 
empowerment for the black and brown poor of the region was being debated among the 
progressive intellectuals. Rodney, who from very early on had rejected the authoritarian 
role of the middle class political elite in the Caribbean, was central to this de bate. He, 
however, did not confine his activities to the university campus. He took his message of 
Black Liberation to the gullies of Jamaica. In particular he shared his knowledge of 
African history with one of the most rejected section of the Jamaican so ciety-the 
Rastafarians.  
Walter had shown an interest in political activism ever since he was a student in 
Jamaica and England. Horace Campbell reports that while at UWI Walter “was active in 
student politics and campaigned extensively in 1961 in the Jamai ca Referendum on the 
West Indian Federation.” While studying in London, Walter participated in discussion 
circles, spoke at the famous Hyde Park and, participated in a symposium on Guyana in 
1965. It was during this period that Walter came into contact wit h the legendary CLR 
James and was one of his most devoted students.  
By the summer of 1968 Rodney‟s “groundings with the working poor of Jamaica had 
begun to attract the attention of the government. So, when he attended a Black Writers‟ 
Conference in Montreal, Canada, in October 1968, the Hugh Shearer -led Jamaican 
Labor Party Government banned him from re -entering the country. This action sparked 
widespread riots and revolts in Kingston in which several people were killed and injured 
by the police and security forces, and millions of dollars worth of property destroyed.. 
Rodney‟s encounters with the Rastafarians were published in a pamphlet entitled 
“Grounding with My Brothers,” that became a bible for the Caribbean Black Power 
Movement.  
Having been expelled from Jamaica, Walter returned to Tanzania after a short stay in 
Cuba.. There he lectured from 1968 to 1974 and continued his groundings in Tanzania 
and other parts of Africa. This was the period of the African liberation struggles and 
Walter, who fervently believed that the intellectual should make his or her skills 
available for the struggles and emancipation of the people, became deeply involved.. It 
was from partly from these activities that his second major work, and his best known — 
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa  — emerged. It was published by Bogle -
L‟Ouverture, in London, in conjunction with Tanzanian Publishing House in 1972.


--- PAGE 27 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 27 
This Tanzanian period was perhaps the most important in the formation of Rodney‟s 
ideas. According to Horace Campbell: 
“Here he was at the forefront of establishing an intellectual tradition which still today 
makes Dar es Salaam one of the centers of discussion of African politics and history. 
Out of he dialogue, discussions and study groups he deepened the Marxist tradition 
with respect to African politics, class struggle, the race question, African history and the 
role of the exploited in social change. It was within the context of these discussions that 
the book, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa was written.”  
 
Campbell also reports that 
“In he same period, he wrote the critical articles on Tanzanian Ujamaa, imperialism, on 
underdevelopment, and the problems of state and class formation in Africa. Many of his 
articles which were written in Tanzania appeared in Maji Maji, the discussion journal of 
the TANU Youth League at the University. He wo rked in the Tanzanian archives on the 
question of forced labor, the policing of the countryside and the colonial economy. This 
work — World War II and the Tanzanian Economy  — was later published as a 
monograph by Cornell University in 1976.”  
Rodney also developed a reputation as a Pan-Africanist theoretician and spokesperson. 
Campbell says that “In Tanzania he developed close political relationships with those 
who were struggling to change the external control of Africa He was very close to some 
of the lea ders of liberation movements in Africa and also to political leaders of popular 
organizations of independent territories. Together with other Pan -Africanists he 
participated in discussion leading up to the Sixth Pan -African Congress, held in 
Tanzania, 1974. Before the Congress he wrote a piece: “Towards the Sixth Pan -African 
Congress: Aspects of the International Class Struggle in Africa, the Caribbean and 
America.”  
In 1974, Walter returned to Guyana to take up an appointment as Professor of History 
at the  University of Guyana, but the government rescinded the appointment. But 
Rodney remained in Guyana, joined the newly formed political group, the Working 
People‟s Alliance. Between 1974 and his assassination in 1980, he emerged as the 
leading figure in the resistance movement against the increasingly authoritarian PNC 
government. He give public and private talks all over the country that served to 
engender a new political consciousness in the country. During this period he developed 
his ideas on the self ema ncipation of the working people, People‟s Power, and multi -
racial democracy.  
On July 11, 1979, Walter, together with seven others, was arrested following the 
burning down of two government offices. He, along with Drs Rupert Roopnarine and 
Omawale, was later charged with arson. From that period up to the time of his murder, 
he was constantly persecuted and harassed and at least on one occasion, an attempt


--- PAGE 28 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 28 
was made to kill him. Finally, on the evening of June 13, 1980, he was assassinated by 
a bomb in the middle of Georgetown..  
Walter was married to Dr Patricia Rodney and the union bore three children - Shaka, 
Kanini and Asha.  
From http://www.guyanacaribbeanpolitics.com/ 
 
 
Cabral, Amilcar (1924-1973)  
Architect and undisputed leader of the PAIGC & the national 
liberation movement in Guinea-Bissau  
In the early 1950s, Cabral was employed as an Agronomist. Using this 
position, he went to every village in the entire country and from this 
direct observation, he came up with an analysis and strategy for the national liberation 
movement.  
With others, he founded the PAIGC in 1956, and in 1963 their full -blown military 
campaign to overthrown Portuguese colonialism began.  
Within two years they had extensive liberated zones where effectively they were in 
power.  
In 1971 Cabral argued for the creation of the National People‟s Assembly, which was 
created in 1972 and based on popular vote in the liberated territories.  
On 20 January 1973, just months before the victory of the national liberation struggle, 
Cabral was assassinated with the help of Portuguese agents operating within the 
PAIGC. 
Amilcar Cabral 1966 
 
 
 
 
 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 29 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 29 
 
The Weapon of Theory 
 
Address delivered to the first Tricontinental Conference of the Peoples of Asia, 
Africa and Latin America held in Havana in January, 1966.  
 
If any of us came to Cuba with doubts in our mind about the solidity, strength, maturity 
and vitality of the Cuban Revolution, these doubts have been removed by what we have 
been able to see. Our hearts are now warmed by an unshakeable certainty which give s 
us courage in the difficult but glorious struggle against the common enemy: no power in 
the world will be able to destroy this Cuban Revolution, which is creating in the 
countryside and in the towns not only a new life but also — and even more important — 
a New Man, fully conscious of his national, continental and international rights and 
duties. In every field of activity the Cuban people have made major progress during the 
last seven years, particularly in 1965, Year of Agriculture.  
We believe that thi s constitutes a particular lesson for the national liberation 
movements, especially for those who want their national revolution to be a true 
revolution. Some people have not failed to note that a certain number of Cubans, albeit 
an insignificant minority, have not shared the joys and hopes of the celebrations for the 
seventh anniversary because they are against the Revolution. It is possible that others 
will not be present at the celebrations of the eighth anniversary, but we would like to 
state that we co nsider the „open door‟ policy for enemies of the Revolution to be a 
lesson in courage, determination, humanity and confidence in the people, another 
political and moral victory over the enemy; and to those who are worried, in a spirit of 
friendship, about the dangers which many be involved in this exodus, we guarantee that 
we, the peoples of the countries of Africa, still completely dominated by Portuguese 
colonialism, are prepared to send to Cuba as many men and women as may be needed 
to compensate for the departure of those who for reasons of class or of inability to adapt 
have interests or attitudes which are incompatible with the interests of the Cuban 
people. Taking once again the formerly hard and tragic path of our ancestors (mainly 
from Guinea and An gola) who were taken to Cuba as slaves, we would come now as 
free men, as willing workers and Cuban patriots, to fulfill a productive function in this 
new, just and multi-racial society, and to help and defend with our own lives the victories 
of the Cuban people. Thus we would strengthen both all the bonds of history, blood and 
culture which unite our peoples with the Cuban people, and the spontaneous giving of 
oneself, the deep joy and infectious rhythm which make the construction of socialism in 
Cuba a new phenomenon for the world, a unique and, for many, unaccustomed event.  
We are not going to use this platform to rail against imperialism. An African saying very 
common in our country says: “When your house is burning, it‟s no use beating the tom -


--- PAGE 30 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 30 
toms.” O n a Tricontinental level, this means that we are not going to eliminate 
imperialism by shouting insults against it. For us, the best or worst shout against 
imperialism, whatever its form, is to take up arms and fight. This is what we are doing, 
and this is what we will go on doing until all foreign domination of our African homelands 
has been totally eliminated.  
Our agenda includes subjects whose meaning and importance are beyond question and 
which show a fundamental preoccupation with struggle. We note, h owever, that one 
form of struggle which we consider to be fundamental has not been explicitly mentioned 
in this programme, although we are certain that it was present in the minds of those who 
drew up the programme. We refer here to the struggle against ou r own weaknesses.  
Obviously, other cases differ from that of Guinea; but our experience has shown us that 
in the general framework of daily struggle this battle against ourselves — no matter 
what difficulties the enemy may create — is the most difficult of  all, whether for the 
present or the future of our peoples. This battle is the expression of the internal 
contradictions in the economic, social, cultural (and therefore historical) reality of each 
of our countries. We are convinced that any national or so cial revolution which is not 
based on knowledge of this fundamental reality runs grave risk of being condemned to 
failure.  
When the African peoples say in their simple language that “no matter how hot the 
water from your well, it will not cook your rice,”  they express with singular simplicity a 
fundamental principle, not only of physics, but also of political science. We know that 
the development of a phenomenon in movement, whatever its external appearance, 
depends mainly on its internal characteristics. We also know that on the political level 
our own reality — however fine and attractive the reality of others may be — can only 
be transformed by detailed knowledge of it, by our own efforts, by our own sacrifices. It 
is useful to recall in this Tricontinen tal gathering, so rich in experience and example, 
that however great the similarity between our various cases and however identical our 
enemies, national liberation and social revolution are not exportable commodities; they 
are, and increasingly so every d ay, the outcome of local and national elaboration, more 
or less influenced by external factors (be they favorable or unfavorable) but essentially 
determined and formed by the historical reality of each people, and carried to success 
by the overcoming or co rrect solution of the internal contradictions between the various 
categories characterising this reality. The success of the Cuban revolution, taking place 
only 90 miles from the greatest imperialist and anti -socialist power of all time, seems to 
us, in its content and its way of evolution, to be a practical and conclusive illustration of 
the validity of this principle.  
However we must recognize that we ourselves and the other liberation movements in 
general (referring here above all to the African experie nce) have not managed to pay 
sufficient attention to this important problem of our common struggle.  
The ideological deficiency, not to say the total lack of ideology, within the national 
liberation movements — which is basically due to ignorance of the hi storical reality 
which these movements claim to transform — constitutes one of the greatest


--- PAGE 31 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 31 
weaknesses of our struggle against imperialism, if not the greatest weakness of all. We 
believe, however, that a sufficient number of different experiences has alre ady been 
accumulated to enable us to define a general line of thought and action with the aim of 
eliminating this deficiency. A full discussion of this subject could be useful, and would 
enable this conference to make a valuable contribution towards streng thening the 
present and future actions of the national liberation movements. This would be a 
concrete way of helping these movements, and in our opinion no less important than 
political support or financial assistance for arms and suchlike.  
It is with the  intention of making a contribution, however modest, to this debate that we 
present here our opinion of the foundations and objectives of national liberation in 
relation to the social structure.  This opinion is the result of our own experiences of the 
struggle and of a critical appreciation of the experiences of others. To those who see in 
it a theoretical character, we would recall that every practice produces a theory, and that 
if it is true that a revolution can fail even though it be based on perfectly conceived 
theories, nobody has yet made a successful revolution without a revolutionary theory.  
Those who affirm — in our case correctly — that the motive force of history is the class 
struggle would certainly agree to a revision of this affirmation to ma ke it more precise 
and give it an even wider field of application if they had a better knowledge of the 
essential characteristics of certain colonized peoples, that is to say peoples dominated 
by imperialism. In fact in the general evolution of humanity and of each of the peoples of 
which it is composed, classes appear neither as a generalized and simultaneous 
phenomenon throughout the totality of these groups, nor as a finished, perfect, uniform 
and spontaneous whole. The definition of classes within one or several human groups is 
a fundamental consequence of the progressive development of the productive forces 
and of the characteristics of the distribution of the wealth produced by the group or 
usurped from others. That is to say that the socio -economic ph enomenon „class‟ is 
created and develops as a function of at least two essential and interdependent 
variables — the level of productive forces and the pattern of ownership of the means of 
production. This development takes place slowly, gradually and uneve nly, by 
quantitative and generally imperceptible variations in the fundamental components; 
once a certain degree of accumulation is reached, this process then leads to a 
qualitative jump , characterized by the appearance of classes and of conflict between 
them.  
Factors external to the socio -economic whole can influence, more or less significantly, 
the process of development of classes, accelerating it, slowing it down and even 
causing regressions. When, for whatever reason, the influence of these factors ce ases, 
the process reassumes its independence and its rhythm is then determined not only be 
the specific internal characteristics of the whole, but also by the resultant of the effect 
produced in it by the temporary action of the external factors. On a stri ctly internal level 
the rhythm of the process may vary, but it remains continuous and progressive. Sudden 
progress is only possible as a function of violent alterations — mutations — in the level 
of productive forces or in the pattern of ownership. These violent transformations carried 
out within the process of development of classes, as a result of mutations in the level of


--- PAGE 32 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 32 
productive forces or in the pattern of ownership, are generally called, in economic and 
political language, revolutions.  
Clearly, however, the possibilities of this process are noticeably influenced by external 
factors, and particularly by the interaction of human groups. This interaction is 
considerably increased by the development of means of transport and communication 
which as creat ed the modern world, eliminating the isolation of human groups within 
one area, of areas within one continent, and between continents. This development, 
characteristic of a long historical period which began with the invention of the first 
means of transpo rt, was already more evident at the time of the Punic voyages and in 
the Greek colonization, and was accentuated by maritime discoveries, the invention of 
the steam engine and the discovery of electricity. And in our own times, with the 
progressive domesticization of atomic energy it is possible to promise, if not to take men 
to the stars, at least to humanize the universe.  
This leads us to pose the following question: does history begin only with the 
development of the phenomenon of „class‟, and consequen tly of class struggle? To 
reply in the affirmative would be to place outside history the whole period of life of 
human groups from the discovery of hunting, and later of nomadic and sedentary 
agriculture, to the organization of herds and the private approp riation of land. It would 
also be to consider — and this we refuse to accept — that various human groups in 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America were living without history, or outside history, at the time 
when they were subjected to the yoke of imperialism. It  would be to consider that the 
peoples of our countries, such as the Balantes of Guinea, the Coaniamas of Angola and 
the Macondes of Mozambique, are still living today — if we abstract the slight influence 
of colonialism to which they have been subjected — outside history, or that they have 
no history.  
Our refusal, based as it is on concrete knowledge of the socio -economic reality of our 
countries and on the analysis of the process of development of the phenomenon „class‟, 
as we have seen earlier, leads us to conclude that if class struggle is the motive force of 
history, it is so only in a specific historical period. This means that before the class 
struggle — and necessarily after it, since in this world there is no before without an after 
— one or several factors was and will be the motive force of history. It is not difficult to 
see that this factor in the history of each human group is the mode of production — the 
level of productive forces and the pattern of ownership — characteristic of that group. 
Furthermore, as we have seen, classes themselves, class struggle and their 
subsequent definition, are the result of the development of the productive forces in 
conjunction with the pattern of ownership of the means of production. It therefore seems 
correct to conclude that the level of productive forces, the essential determining element 
in the content and form of class struggle, is the true and permanent motive force of 
history.  
If we accept this conclusion, then the doubts in our minds are cleared away. Be cause if 
on the one hand we can see that the existence of history before the class struggle is 
guaranteed, and thus avoid for some human groups in our countries — and perhaps in


--- PAGE 33 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 33 
our continent — the sad position of being peoples without any history, then on  the other 
hand we can see that history has continuity, even after the disappearance of class 
struggle or of classes themselves. And as it was not we who postulated — on a 
scientific basis — the fact of the disappearance of classes as a historical inevitab ility, 
we can feel satisfied at having reached this conclusion which, to a certain extent, re -
establishes coherence and at the same time gives to those peoples who, like the people 
of Cuba, are building socialism, the agreeable certainty that they will not  cease to have 
a history when they complete the process of elimination of the phenomenon of „class‟ 
and class struggle within their socio -economic whole. Eternity is not of this world, but 
man will outlive classes and will continue to produce and make hist ory, since he can 
never free himself from the burden of his needs, both of mind and of body, which are 
the basis of the development of the forces of production.  
The foregoing, and the reality of our times, allow us to state that the history of one 
human g roup or of humanity goes through at least three stages. The first is 
characterized by a low level of productive forces — of man‟s domination over nature; 
the mode of production is of a rudimentary character, private appropriation of the means 
of production does not yet exist, there are no classes, nor, consequently, is there any 
class struggle. In the second stage, the increased level of productive forces leads to 
private appropriation of the means of production, progressively complicates the mode of 
production, provokes conflicts of interests within the socio -economic whole in 
movement, and makes possible the appearance of the phenomena „class‟ and hence of 
class struggle, the social expression of the contradiction in the economic field between 
the mode of production and private appropriation of the means of production. In the third 
stage, once a certain level of productive forces is reached, the elimination of private 
appropriation of the means of production is made possible, and is carried out, together 
with the elimination of the phenomenon „class‟ and hence of class struggle; new and 
hitherto unknown forces in the historical process of the socio -economic whole are then 
unleashed.  
In politico -economic language, the first stage would correspond to the comm unal 
agricultural and cattle-raising society, in which the social structure is horizontal, without 
any state; the second to feudal or assimilated agricultural or agro -industrial bourgeois 
societies, with a vertical social structure and a state; the third t o socialist or communist 
societies, in which the economy is mainly, if not exclusively, industrial (since agriculture 
itself becomes a form of industry) and in which the state tends to progressively 
disappear, or actually disappears, and where the social structure returns to horizontality, 
at a higher level of productive forces, social relations and appreciation of human values.  
At the level of humanity or of part of humanity (human groups within one area, of one or 
several continents) these three stages ( or two of them) can be simultaneous, as is 
shown as much by the present as by the past. This is a result of the uneven 
development of human societies, whether caused by internal reasons or by one or more 
external factors exerting an accelerating or slowing -down influence on their evolution. 
On the other hand, in the historical process of a given socio -economic whole each of


--- PAGE 34 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 34 
the above-mentioned stages contains, once a certain level of transformation is reached, 
the seeds of the following stage.  
We should also note that in the present phase of the life of humanity, and for a given 
socio-economic whole, the time sequence of the three characteristic stages is not 
indispensable. Whatever its level of productive forces and present social structure, a 
society can pass rapidly through the defined stages appropriate to the concrete local 
realities (both historical and human) and reach a higher stage of existence. This 
progress depends on the concrete possibilities of development of the society‟s 
productive forces and is governed mainly by the nature of the political power ruling the 
society, that is to say, by the type of state or, if one likes, by the character of the 
dominant class or classes within the society.  
A more detailed analysis would show that the possibility of such a jump in the historical 
process arises mainly, in the economic field, from the power of the means available to 
man at the time for dominating nature, and, in the political field, from the new event 
which has radically clanged the f ace of the world and the development of history, the 
creation of socialist states.  
Thus we see that our peoples have their own history regardless of the stage of their 
economic development. When they were subjected to imperialist domination, the 
historical process of each of our peoples (or of the human groups of which they are 
composed) was subjected to the violent action of an exterior factor. This action — the 
impact of imperialism on our societies — could not fail to influence the process of 
development of the productive forces in our countries and the social structures of our 
countries, as well as the content and form of our national liberation struggles.  
But we also see that in the historical context of the development of these struggles, our 
peoples have the concrete possibility of going from their present situation of exploitation 
and underdevelopment to a new stage of their historical process which can lead them to 
a higher form of economic, social and cultural existence.  
The political statement d rawn up by the international preparatory committee of this 
conference, for which we reaffirm our complete support, placed imperialism, by clear 
and succinct analysis, in its economic context and historical co -ordinates. We will not 
repeat here what has alr eady been said in the assembly. We will simply state that 
imperialism can be defined as a worldwide expression of the search for profits and the 
ever-increasing accumulation of surplus value by monopoly financial capital, centered in 
two parts of the world; first in Europe, and then in North America. And if we wish to 
place the fact of imperialism within the general trajectory of the evolution of the 
transcendental factor which has changed th e face of the world, namely capital and the 
process of its accumulation, we can say that imperialism is piracy transplanted from the 
seas to dry land piracy reorganized, consolidated and adapted to the aim of exploiting 
the natural and human resources of o ur peoples. But if we can calmly analyze the 
imperialist phenomenon, we will not shock anybody by admitting that imperialism — and 
everything goes to prove that it is in fact the last phase in the evolution of capitalism —


--- PAGE 35 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 35 
has been a historical necessity, a consequence of the impetus given by the productive 
forces and of the transformations of the means of production in the general context of 
humanity, considered as one movement, that is to say a necessity like those today of 
the national liberation of peoples, the destruction of capital and the advent of socialism.  
The important thing for our peoples is to know whether imperialism, in its role as capital 
in action, has fulfilled in our countries its historical mission: the acceleration of the 
process of development of the productive forces and their transformation in the sense of 
increasing complexity in the means of production; increasing the differentiation between 
the classes with the development of the bourgeoisie, and intensifying the class struggle; 
and appreciably increasing the level of economic, social and cultural life of the peoples. 
It is also worth examining the influences and effects of imperialist action on the social 
structures and historical processes of our peoples.  
We will not condemn nor  justify imperialism here; we will simply state that as much on 
the economic level as on the social and cultural level, imperialist capital has not 
remotely fulfilled the historical mission carried out by capital in the countries of 
accumulation. This mean s that if, on the one had, imperialist capital has had, in the 
great majority of the dominated countries, the simple function of multiplying surplus 
value, it can be seen on the other hand that the historical capacity of capital (as 
indestructible accelerator of the process of development of productive forces) depends 
strictly on its freedom, that is to say on the degree of independence with which it is 
utilized. We must however recognize that in certain cases imperialist capital or 
moribund capitalism has had sufficient self -interest, strength and time to increase the 
level of productive forces (as well as building towns) and to allow a minority of the local 
population to attain a higher and even privileged standard of living, thus contributing to a 
process which some would call dialectical, by widening the contradictions within the 
societies in question. In other, even rarer cases, there has existed the possibility of 
accumulation of capital, creating the conditions for the development of a local 
bourgeoisie.  
On the question of the effects of imperialist domination on the social structure and 
historical process of our peoples, we should first of all examine the general forms of 
imperialist domination. There are at least two forms: the first is direct domina tion, by 
means of a power made up of people foreign to the dominated people (armed forces 
police, administrative agents and settlers); this is generally called classical colonialism 
or colonialism is indirect domination, by a political power made up mainly  or completely 
of native agents; this is called neocolonialism.  
In the first case, the social structure of the dominated people, whatever its stage of 
development, can suffer the following consequences: (a) total destruction, generally 
accompanied by imme diate or gradual elimination of the native population and, 
consequently, by the substitution of a population from outside; (b) partial destruction, 
generally accompanied by a greater or lesser influx of population from outside; (c) 
apparent conservation, conditioned by confining the native society to zones or reserves


--- PAGE 36 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 36 
generally offering no possibilities of living, accompanied by massive implantation of 
population from outside.  
The two latter cases are those which we must consider in the framework of the 
problematic national liberation, and they are extensively present in Africa. One can say 
that in either case the influence of imperialism on the historical process of the 
dominated people produces paralysis, stagnation and even in some cases regression in 
this process. However this paralysis is not complete. In one sector or another of the 
socio-economic whole in question, noticeable transformations can be expected, caused 
by the permanent action of some internal (local) factors or by the action of new factor s 
introduced by the colonial domination, such as the introduction of money and the 
development of urban centers. Among these transformations we should anticipate a 
progressive loss of prestige of the ruling native classes or sectors, the forced or 
voluntary exodus of part of the peasant population to the urban centers, with the 
consequent development of new social strata; salaried workers, clerks, employees in 
commerce and the liberal professions, and an instable stratum of unemployed. In the 
countryside th ere develops, with very varied intensity and always linked to the urban 
milieu, a stratum made up of small landowners. In the case of neo -colonialism, whether 
the majority of the colonized population is of native or foreign origin, the imperialist 
action takes the form of creating a local bourgeoisie or pseudo -bourgeoisie, controlled 
by the ruling class of the dominating country.  
The transformations in the social structure are not so marked in the lower strata, above 
all in the countryside, which retains t he characteristics of the colonial phase; but the 
creation of a native pseudo -bourgeoisie which generally develops out of a petty 
bourgeoisie of bureaucrats and accentuates the differentiation between the social strata 
and intermediaries in the commercial system (compradores), by strengthening the 
economic activity of local elements, opens up new perspectives in the social dynamic, 
mainly by the development of an urban working class, the introduction of private 
agricultural property and the progressive appe arance of an agricultural proletariat. 
These more or less noticeable transformations of the social structure, produced by a 
significant increase in the level of productive forces, have a direct influence on the 
historical process of the socio -economic whol e in question. While in classical 
colonialism this process is paralyzed, neo -colonialist domination, by allowing the social 
dynamic to awaken (conflicts of interests between native social strata or class 
struggles), creates the illusion that the historical  process is returning to its normal 
evolution. This illusion will be reinforced by the existence of a political power (national 
state) composed of native elements. In reality it is scarcely even an illusion, since the 
submission of the local „ruling‟ class  to the ruling class of the dominating country limits 
or prevents the development of the national productive forces.  
But in the concrete conditions of the present -day world economy this dependence is 
fatal and thus the local pseudo -bourgeoisie, however na tionalist it may be, cannot 
effectively fulfill its historical function; it cannot freely direct the development of the 
productive forces; in brief it cannot be a national bourgeoisie. For as we have seen, the


--- PAGE 37 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 37 
productive forces are the motive force of hist ory, and total freedom of the process of 
their development is an indispensable condition for their proper functioning.  
We therefore see that both in colonialism and in neo -colonialism the essential 
characteristic of imperialist domination remains the same : the negation of the historical 
process of the dominated people by means of violent usurpation of the freedom of 
development of the national productive forces. This observation, which identifies the 
essence of the two apparent forms of imperialist dominat ion, seems to us to be of major 
importance for the thought and action of liberation movements, both in the course of 
struggle and after the winning of independence.  
On the basis of this, we can state that national liberation is the phenomenon in which a 
given socio -economic whole rejects the negation of its historical process. In other 
words, the national liberation of a people is the regaining of the historical personality of 
that people, its return to history through the destruction of the imperialist do mination to 
which it was subjected.  
We have seen that violent usurpation of the freedom of the process of development of 
the productive forces of the dominated socio -economic whole constitutes the principal 
and permanent characteristic of imperialist domination, whatever its form. We have also 
seen that this freedom alone can guarantee the normal development of the historical 
process of a people. We can therefore conclude that national liberation exists only when 
the national productive forces have been co mpletely freed from every kind of foreign 
domination.  
It is often said that national liberation is based on the right of every people to freely 
control its own destiny and that the objective of this liberation is national independence. 
Although we do not disagree with this vague and subjective way of expressing a 
complex reality, we prefer to be objective, since for us the basis of national liberation, 
whatever the formulas adopted on the level of international law, is the inalienable right 
of every people  to have its own history, and the objective of national liberation is to 
regain this right usurped by imperialism, that is to say, to free the process of 
development of the national productive forces.  
For this reason, in our opinion, any national liberati on movement which does not take 
into consideration this basis and this objective may certainly struggle against 
imperialism, but will surely not be struggling for national liberation.  
This means that, bearing in mind the essential characteristics of the p resent world 
economy, as well as experiences already gained in the field of anti -imperialist struggle, 
the principal aspect of national liberation struggle is the struggle against neo -
colonialism. Furthermore, if we accept that national liberation demands a profound 
mutation in the process of development of the productive forces, we see that this 
phenomenon of national liberation necessarily corresponds to a revolution. The 
important thing is to be conscious of the objective and subjective conditions in whi ch


--- PAGE 38 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 38 
this revolution can be made and to know the type or types of struggle most appropriate 
for its realization.  
We are not going to repeat here that these conditions are favorable in the present 
phase of the history of humanity; it is sufficient to recall that unfavorable conditions also 
exist, just as much on the international level as on the internal level of each nation 
struggling for liberation.  
On the international level, it seems to us that the following factors, at least, are 
unfavorable to national  liberation movements: the neo -colonial situation of a great 
number of states which, having won political independence, are now tending to join up 
with others already in that situation; the progress made by neo -capitalism, particularly in 
Europe, where imp erialism is adopting preferential investments, encouraging the 
development of a privileged proletariat and thus lowering the revolutionary level of the 
working classes; the open or concealed neo -colonial position of some European states 
which, like Portuga l, still have colonies; the so -called policy of „aid for undeveloped 
countries‟ adopted by imperialism with the aim of creating or reinforcing native pseudo -
bourgeoisies which are necessarily dependent on the international bourgeoisie, and 
thus obstructing  the path of revolution; the claustrophobia and revolutionary timidity 
which have led some recently independent states whose internal economic and political 
conditions are favorable to revolution to accept compromises with the enemy or its 
agents; the grow ing contradictions between anti -imperialist states; and, finally, the 
threat to world peace posed by the prospect of atomic war on the part of imperialism. All 
these factors reinforce the action of imperialism against the national liberation 
movements.  
If the repeated interventions and growing aggressiveness of imperialism against the 
peoples can be interpreted as a sign of desperation faced with the size of the national 
liberation movements, they can also be explained to a certain extent by the weaknesses 
produced by these unfavorable factors within the general front of the anti -imperialist 
struggle.  
On the internal level, we believe that the most important weaknesses or unfavorable 
factors are inherent in the socio -economic structure and in the tendencie s of its 
evolution under imperialist pressure, or to be more precise in the little or no attention 
paid to the characteristics of this structure and these tendencies by the national 
liberation movements in deciding on the strategy of their struggles.  
By saying this we do not wish to diminish the importance of other internal factors which 
are unfavorable to national liberation, such as economic under -development, the 
consequent social and cultural backwardness of the popular masses, tribalism and 
other cont radictions of lesser importance. It should however be pointed out that the 
existence of tribes only manifests itself as an important contradiction as a function of 
opportunistic attitudes, generally on the part of detribalised individuals or groups, within  
the national liberation movements. Contradictions between classes, even when only 
embryonic, are of far greater importance than contradictions between tribes.


--- PAGE 39 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 39 
Although the colonial and neo -colonial situations are identical in essence, and the main 
aspect of the struggle against imperialism is neo -colonialist, we feel it is vital to 
distinguish in practice these two situations. In fact the horizontal structure, however it 
may differ from the native society, and the absence of a political power composed of 
national elements in the colonial situation make possible the creation of a wide front of 
unity and struggle, which is vital to the success of the national liberation movement. But 
this possibility does not remove the need for a rigorous analysis of the na tive social 
structure, of the tendencies of its evolution, and for the adoption in practice of 
appropriate measures for ensuring true national liberation. While recognizing that each 
movement knows best what to do in its own case, one of these measures see ms to us 
indispensable, namely, the creation of a firmly united vanguard, conscious of the true 
meaning and objective of the national liberation struggle which it must lead. This 
necessity is all the more urgent since we know that with rare exceptions the colonial 
situation neither permits nor needs the existence of significant vanguard classes 
(working class conscious of its existence and rural proletariat) which could ensure the 
vigilance of the popular masses over the evolution of the liberation movement . On the 
contrary, the generally embryonic character of the working classes and the economic, 
social and cultural situation of the physical force of most importance in the national 
liberation struggle-the peasantry-do not allow these two main forces to dis tinguish true 
national independence from fictitious political independence. Only a revolutionary 
vanguard, generally an active minority, can be aware of this distinction from the start 
and make it known, through the struggle, to the popular masses. This ex plains the 
fundamentally political nature of the national liberation struggle and to a certain extent 
makes the form of struggle important in the final result of the phenomenon of national 
liberation.  
In the neo-colonial situation the more or less vertica l structure of the native society and 
the existence of a political power composed of native elements -national state -already 
worsen the contradictions within that society and make difficult if not impossible the 
creation of as wide a front as in the colonia l situation. On the one hand the material 
effects (mainly the nationalization of cadres and the increased economic initiative of the 
native elements, particularly in the commercial field) and the psychological effects (pride 
in the belief of being ruled by  one‟s own compatriots, exploitation of religious or tribal 
solidarity between some leaders and a fraction of the masses) together demobilize a 
considerable part of the nationalist forces. But on the other hand the necessarily 
repressive nature of the neo -colonial state against the national liberation forces, the 
sharpening of contradictions between classes, the objective permanence of signs and 
agents of foreign domination (settlers who retain their privileges, armed forces, racial 
discrimination), the gro wing poverty of the peasantry and the more or less notorious 
influence of external factors all contribute towards keeping the flame of nationalism 
alive, towards progressively raising the consciousness of wide popular sectors and 
towards reuniting the majority of the population, on the very basis of awareness of neo -
colonialist frustration, around the ideal of national liberation. In addition, while the native 
ruling class becomes progressively more bourgeois, the development of a working class 
composed of urban workers and agricultural proletarians, all exploited by the indirect 
domination of imperialism, opens up new perspectives for the evolution of national


--- PAGE 40 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 40 
liberation. This working class, whatever the level of its political consciousness (given a 
certain minimum, namely the awareness of its own needs), seems to constitute the true 
popular vanguard of the national liberation struggle in the neo -colonial case. However it 
will not be able to completely fulfill its mission in this struggle (which does not end  with 
the gaining of independence) unless it firmly unites with the other exploited strata, the 
peasants in general (hired men, sharecroppers, tenants and small farmers) and the 
nationalist petty bourgeoisie. The creation of this alliance demands the mobil ization and 
organization of the nationalist forces within the framework (or by the action) of a strong 
and well-structured political organization.  
Another important distinction between the colonial and neo -colonial situations is in the 
prospects for the s truggle. The colonial situation (in which the nation class fights the 
repressive forces of the bourgeoisie of the colonizing country) can lead, apparently at 
least, to a nationalist solution (national revolution); the nation gains its independence 
and theo retically adopts the economic structure which best suits it. The neo -colonial 
situation (in which the working classes and their allies struggle simultaneously against 
the imperialist bourgeoisie and the native ruling class) is not resolved by a nationalist  
solution; it demands the destruction of the capitalist structure implanted in the national 
territory by imperialism, and correctly postulates a socialist solution.  
This distinction arises mainly from the different levels of the productive forces in the t wo 
cases and the consequent sharpening of the class struggle.  
It would not be difficult to show that in time the distinction becomes scarcely apparent. It 
is sufficient to recall that in our present historical situation — elimination of imperialism 
which uses every means to perpetuate its domination over our peoples,  and 
consolidation of socialism throughout a large part of the world — there are only two 
possible paths for an independent nation: to return to imperialist domination (neo -
colonialism, capitalism, state capitalism), or to take the way of socialism. This o peration, 
on which depends the compensation for the efforts and sacrifices of the popular masses 
during the struggle, is considerably influenced by the form of struggle and the degree of 
revolutionary consciousness of those who lead it. The facts make it u nnecessary for us 
to prove that the essential instrument of imperialist domination is violence. If we accept 
the principle that the liberation struggle is a revolution and that it does not finish at the 
moment when the national flag is raised and the natio nal anthem played, we will see 
that there is not, and cannot be national liberation without the use of liberating violence 
by the nationalist forces, to answer the criminal violence of the agents of imperialism. 
Nobody can doubt that, whatever its local ch aracteristics, imperialist domination implies 
a state of permanent violence against the nationalist forces. There is no people on earth 
which, having been subjected to the imperialist yoke (colonialist or neo -colonialist), has 
managed to gain its independe nce (nominal or effective) without victims. The important 
thing is to determine which forms of violence have to be used by the national liberation 
forces in order not only to answer the violence of imperialism, but also to ensure 
through the struggle the f inal victory of their cause, true national independence. The 
past and present experiences of various peoples, the present situation of national 
liberation struggles in the world (especially in Vietnam, the Congo and Zimbabwe) as


--- PAGE 41 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 41 
well as the situation of pe rmanent violence, or at least of contradictions and upheavals, 
in certain countries which have gained their independence by the so -called peaceful 
way, show us not only that compromises with imperialism do not work, but also that the 
normal way of national  liberation, imposed on peoples by imperialist repression, is 
armed struggle.  
We do not think we will shock this assembly by stating that the only effective way of 
definitively fulfilling the aspirations of the peoples, that is to say of attaining nationa l 
liberation, is by armed struggle. This is the great lesson which the contemporary history 
of liberation struggle teaches all those who are truly committed to the effort of liberating 
their peoples.  
It is obvious that both the effectiveness of this way a nd the stability of the situation to 
which it leads after liberation depend not only on the characteristics of the organization 
of the struggle but also on the political and moral awareness of those who, for historical 
reasons, are capable of being the imm ediate heirs of the colonial or neo -colonial state. 
For events have shown that the only social sector capable of being aware of the reality 
of imperialist domination and of directing the state apparatus inherited from this 
domination is the native petty bo urgeoisie. If we bear in mind the aleatory 
characteristics and the complexity of the tendencies naturally inherent in the economic 
situation of this social stratum or class, we will see that this specific inevitability in our 
situation constitutes one of the weaknesses of the national liberation movement.  
The colonial situation, which does not permit the development of a native pseudo -
bourgeoisie and in which the popular masses do not generally reach the necessary 
level of political consciousness before th e advent of the phenomenon of national 
liberation, offers the petty bourgeoisie the historical opportunity of leading the struggle 
against foreign domination, since by nature of its objective and subjective position 
(higher standard of living than that of the masses, more frequent contact with the agents 
of colonialism, and hence more chances of being humiliated, higher level of education 
and political awareness, etc.) it is the stratum which most rapidly becomes aware of the 
need to free itself from foreig n domination. This historical responsibility is assumed by 
the sector of the petty bourgeoisie which, in the colonial context, can be called 
revolutionary, while other sectors retain the doubts characteristic of these classes or ally 
themselves to colonialism so as to defend, albeit illusorily, their social situation.  
The neo -colonial situation, which demands the elimination of the native pseudo -
bourgeoisie so that national liberation can be attained, also offers the petty bourgeoisie 
the chance of playing  a role of major and even decisive importance in the struggle for 
the elimination of foreign domination. But in this case, by virtue of the progress made in 
the social structure, the function of leading the struggle is shared (to a greater or lesser 
extent) with the more educated sectors of the working classes and even with some 
elements of the national pseudo -bourgeoisie who are inspired by patriotic sentiments. 
The role of the sector of the petty bourgeoisie which participates in leading the struggle 
is all the more important since it is a fact that in the neo -colonial situation it is the most 
suitable sector to assume these functions, both because of the economic and cultural


--- PAGE 42 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 42 
limitations of the working masses, and because of the complexes and limitations of an 
ideological nature which characterize the sector of the national pseudo -bourgeoisie 
which supports the struggle. In this case it is important to note that the role with which it 
is entrusted demands from this sector of the petty bourgeoisie a greater  revolutionary 
consciousness, and the capacity for faithfully interpreting the aspirations of the masses 
in each phase of the struggle and for identifying themselves more and more with the 
masses.  
But however high the degree of revolutionary consciousness  of the sector of the petty 
bourgeoisie called on to fulfill this historical function, it cannot free itself from one 
objective of reality: the petty bourgeoisie, as a service class (that is to say that a class 
not directly involved in the process of produ ction) does not possess the economic base 
to guarantee the taking over of power. In fact history has shown that whatever the role 
— sometimes important — played by individuals coming from the petty bourgeoisie in 
the process of a revolution, this class has never possessed political control. And it never 
could possess it, since political control (the state) is based on the economic capacity of 
the ruling class, and in the conditions of colonial and neo-colonial society this capacity is 
retained by two entities: imperialist capital and the native working classes.  
To retain the power which national liberation puts in its hands, the petty bourgeoisie has 
only one path: to give free rein to its natural tendencies to become more bourgeois, to 
permit the developme nt of a bureaucratic and intermediary bourgeoisie in the 
commercial cycle, in order to transform itself into a national pseudo -bourgeoisie, that is 
to say in order to negate the revolution and necessarily ally. In order not to betray these 
objectives the p etty bourgeoisie has only one choice: to strengthen its revolutionary 
consciousness, to reject the temptations of becoming more bourgeois and the natural 
concerns of its class mentality, to identify itself with the working classes and not to 
oppose the nor mal development of the process of revolution. This means that in order 
to truly fulfill the role in the national liberation struggle, the revolutionary petty 
bourgeoisie must be capable of committing suicide as a class in order to be reborn as 
revolutionary workers, completely identified with the deepest aspirations of the people to 
which they belong.  
This alternative — to betray the revolution or to commit suicide as a class — constitutes 
the dilemma of the petty bourgeoisie in the general framework of th e national liberation 
struggle. The positive solution in favor of the revolution depends on what Fidel Castro 
recently correctly called the development of revolutionary consciousness.  This 
dependence necessarily calls our attention to the capacity of the l eader of the national 
liberation struggle to remain faithful to the principles and to the fundamental cause of 
this struggle. This shows us, to a certain extent, that if national liberation is essentially a 
political problem, the conditions for its develop ment give it certain characteristics which 
belong to the sphere of morals.  
We will not shout hurrahs or proclaim here our solidarity with this or that people in 
struggle. Our presence is in itself a cry of condemnation of imperialism and a proof of 
solidarity with all peoples who want to banish from their country the imperialist yoke,


--- PAGE 43 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 43 
and in particular with the heroic people of Vietnam. But we firmly believe that the best 
proof we can give of our anti -imperialist position and of our active solidarity with our 
comrades in this common struggle is to return to our countries, to further develop this 
struggle and to remain faithful to the principles and objectives of national liberation.  
Our wish is that every national liberation movement represented here may b e able to 
repeat in its own country, arms in hand, in unison with its people, the already legendary 
cry of Cuba:  
Patria O Muerte, Venceremos!  
Death to the Forces of Imperialism!  
Free, Prosperous and Happy Country for Each of our Peoples!  
Venceremos! 
  
Julius Kambarage Nyerere (1922 - 1999) 
 
Transcribed by: Ayanda Madyibi. 
 
One of Africa’s most respected figures, Julius Nyerere (1922 — 
1999) was a politician  of principle and intelligence. Known as 
Mwalimu or teacher he had a vision of education that was rich with 
possibility 
Julius Kambarage Nyerere was born on April 13, 1922 in Butiama, 
on the eastern shore of lake Victoria in north west Tanganyika. His fath er was the chief 
of the small Zanaki tribe. He was 12 before he started school (he had to walk 26 miles 
to Musoma to do so). Later, he transferred for his secondary education to the Tabora 
Government Secondary School. His intelligence was quickly recognize d by the Roman 
Catholic fathers who taught him. He went on, with their help, to train as a teacher at 
Makerere University in Kampala (Uganda). On gaining his Certificate, he taught for 
three years and then went on a government scholarship to study history and political 
economy for his Master of Arts at the University of Edinburgh (he was the first 
Tanzanian to study at a British university and only the second to gain a university 
degree outside Africa. In Edinburgh, partly through his encounter with Fabian thinking, 
Nyerere began to develop his particular vision of connecting socialism with African 
communal living.  
Back toTop


--- PAGE 44 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 44 
On his return to Tanganyika, Nyerere was forced by the colonial authorities to make a 
choice between his political activities and his teaching. He was reported as saying that 
he was a schoolmaster by choice and a politician by accident. Working to bring a 
number of different nationalist factions into one grouping he achieved this in 1954 with 
the formation of TANU (the Tanganyika African National Union). He became President 
of the Union (a post he held until 1977), entered the Legislative Council in 1958 and 
became chief minister in 1960. A year later Tanganyika was granted internal self -
government and Nyerere became premier. Full independence came  in December 1961 
and he was elected President in 1962.  
Nyerere‟s integrity, ability as a political orator and organizer, and readiness to work with 
different groupings was a significant factor in independence being achieved without 
bloodshed. In this he was helped by the co-operative attitude of the last British governor 
— Sir Richard Turnbull. In 1964, following a coup in Zanzibar (and an attempted coup in 
Tanganyika itself) Nyerere negotiated with the new leaders in Zanzibar and agreed to 
absorb them in to the union government. The result was the creation of the Republic of 
Tanzania. 
Ujamma, socialism and self reliance  
As President, Nyerere had to steer a difficult course. By the late 1960s Tanzania was 
one of the world‟s poorest countries. Like many others it was suffering from a severe 
foreign debt burden, a decrease in foreign aid, and a fall in the price of commodities. His 
solution, the collectivization of agriculture, villigization (see Ujamma below) and large -
scale nationalization was a unique blend of socialism and communal life. The vision was 
set out in the Arusha Declaration of 1967 (reprinted in Nyerere 1968):  
"The objective of socialism in the United Republic of Tanzania is to build a society in 
which all members have equal rights and equal opportunities; in which all can live in 
peace with their neighbours without suffering or imposing injustice, being explo ited, or 
exploiting; and in which all have a gradually increasing basic level of material welfare 
before any individual lives in luxury." (Nyerere 1968: 340)  
The focus, given the nature of Tanzanian society, was on rural development. People 
were encourage d (sometimes forced) to live and work on a co -operative basis in 
organized villages or ujamaa (meaning „familyhood‟ in Kishwahili). The idea was to 
extend traditional values and responsibilities around kinship to Tanzania as a whole.  
Within the Declaration there was a commitment to raising basic living standards (and an 
opposition to conspicuous consumption and large private wealth). The socialism he 
believed in was „people -centred‟. Humanness in its fullest sense rather than wealth 
creation must come firs t. Societies become better places through the development of 
people rather than the gearing up of production. This was a matter that Nyerere took to 
be important both in political and private terms. Unlike many other politicians, he did not 
amass a large fortune through exploiting his position.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 45 
The policy met with significant political resistance (especially when people were forced 
into rural communes) and little economic success. Nearly 10 million peasants were 
moved and many were effectively forced to giv e up their land. The idea of collective 
farming was less than attractive to many peasants. A large number found themselves 
worse off. Productivity went down. However, the focus on human development and self -
reliance did bring some success in other areas no tably in health, education and in 
political identity. 
Liberation struggles  
A committed pan-Africanist, Nyerere provided a home for a number of African liberation 
movements including the African National Congress (ANC) and the Pan African 
Congress (PAC) of South Africa, Frelimo when seeking to overthrow Portuguese rule in 
Mozambique, Zanla (and Robert Mugabe) in their struggle to unseat the white regime in 
Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). He also opposed the brutal regime of Idi Amin in 
Uganda. Following a border invasion by Amin in 1978, a 20,000 -strong Tanzanian army 
along with rebel groups, invaded Uganda. It took the capital, Kampala, in 1979, 
restoring Uganda‟s first President, Milton Obote, to power. The battle against Amin was 
expensive and placed a strain on government finances. There was considerable 
criticism within Tanzania that he had both overlooked domestic issues and had not paid 
proper attention to internal human rights abuses. Tanzania was a one party state — and 
while there was a strong dem ocratic element in organization and a concern for 
consensus, this did not stop Nyerere using the Preventive Detention Act to imprison 
opponents. In part this may have been justified by the need to contain divisiveness, but 
there does appear to have been a disjuncture between his commitment to human rights 
on the world stage, and his actions at home.  
Retirement 
In 1985 Nyerere gave up the Presidency but remained as chair of the Party - Chama 
Cha Mapinduzi (CCM). He gradually withdrew from active politics, r etiring to his farm in 
Butiama. In 1990 he relinquished his chairmanship of CCM but remained active on the 
world stage as Chair of the Intergovernmental South Centre. One of his last high profile 
actions was as the chief mediator in the Burundi conflict (i n 1996). He died in a London 
hospital of leukaemia on October 14, 1999.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 46 
 
 
 
Fanon, Franz (1925-1961) 
West Indian psychoanalyst and social philosopher, 
known for his theory that some neuroses are socially 
generated and for his writings on behalf of the national 
liberation of colonial peoples  
After attending schools in Martinique and France, Fanon served in the French army 
during World War II and afterward completed his studies in medicine and psychiatry at 
the University of Lyon. In 1953-56 he served as head of the psychiatry department of 
Blida-Joinville Hospital in Algeria, which was then part of France. He joined the Algerian 
liberation movement in 1954 and in 1956 became an editor of its newspaper, El 
Moudjahid, published in Tunis. In 1960 he was appointed ambassador to Ghana by the 
rebel Provisional Government.  
Fanon's Black Skin, White Masks (1952) reflected his personal frustrations with racism. 
The publication shortly before his death of his book The Wretched of the Earth (1961) 
established Fanon as a prophetic figure, the author of a social gospel that urged 
colonised peoples to purge themselves of their degradation in a "collective catharsis" to 
be achieved by violence against their European oppressors. This book traced the 
stages of development of culture and social development as a new nation emerges from 
the domination of colonialism and he warned of the dangers of a nation achieving 
national liberation before achieving maturity in the development of its own culture, 
pointing to the United States as an example. 
The national liberation struggle which Fanon spoke for and Fanon's writings themselves 
served as a source of intellectual inspiration for the US Black Civil Rights movement 
and subsequently the women's liberation movement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 47 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 47 
 
 
 
Frantz Fanon, 1961 
The Wretched of the Earth 
Chapter 3 
The Pitfalls of National Consciousness 
 
Source: Les damnés de la terre by François Maspéro éditeur in 1961; 
First published: in Great Britain by Macgibbon and Kee in 1965; 
Transcribed: by Dominic Tweedie. 
 
HISTORY teaches us clearly that the battle against colonialism does not run straight 
away along the lines of nationalism. For a very long time the native devotes his energies 
to ending certain definite abuses: forced labour, corporal punishment, inequality of 
salaries, limitation of political rights, etc. This fight for democracy against the oppression 
of mankind will slowly leave the confusion of neo -liberal universalism to emerge, 
sometimes laboriously, as a claim to nationhood. It so happens that the unpreparedness 
of the educated classes, the lack of practical links between them and the mass of the 
people, their laziness, and, let it be said, their c owardice at the decisive moment of the 
struggle will give rise to tragic mishaps. 
National consciousness, instead of being the all -embracing crystallization of the 
innermost hopes of the whole people, instead of being the immediate and most obvious 
result of the mobilization of the people, will be in any case only an empty shell, a crude 
and fragile travesty of what it might have been. The faults that we find in it are quite 
sufficient explanation of the facility with which, when dealing with young and 
independent nations, the nation is passed over for the race, and the tribe is preferred to 
the state. These are the cracks in the edifice which show the process of retrogression 
that is so harmful and prejudicial to national effort and national unity. We shall  see that 
such retrograde steps with all the weaknesses and serious dangers that they entail are 
the historical result of the incapacity of the national middle class to rationalize popular 
action, that is to say their incapacity to see into the reasons for that action. 
This traditional weakness, which is almost congenital to the national consciousness of 
under-developed countries, is not solely the result of the mutilation of the colonized


--- PAGE 48 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 48 
people by the colonial regime. It is also the result of the intellec tual laziness of the 
national middle class, of its spiritual penury, and of the profoundly cosmopolitan mould 
that its mind is set in. 
The national middle class which takes over power at the end of the colonial regime is an 
under-developed middle class. It  has practically no economic power, and in any case it 
is in no way commensurate with the bourgeoisie of the mother country which it hopes to 
replace. In its wilful narcissism, the national middle class is easily convinced that it can 
advantageously replac e the middle class of the mother country. But that same 
independence which literally drives it into a comer will give rise within its ranks to 
catastrophic reactions, and will oblige it to send out frenzied appeals for help to the 
former mother country. Th e university and merchant classes which make up the most 
enlightened section of the new state are in fact characterized by the smallness of their 
number and their being concentrated in the capital, and the type of activities in which 
they are engaged: busi ness, agriculture and the liberal professions. Neither financiers 
nor industrial magnates are to be found within this national middle class. The national 
bourgeoisie of under-developed countries is not engaged in production, nor in invention, 
nor building, nor labour; it is completely canalized into activities of the intermediary type. 
Its innermost vocation seems to be to keep in the running and to be part of the racket. 
The psychology of the national bourgeoisie is that of the businessman, not that of a 
captain of industry; and it is only too true that the greed of the settlers and the system of 
embargoes set up by colonialism has hardly left them any other choice. 
Under the colonial system, a middle class which accumulates capital is an impossible 
phenomenon. Now, precisely, it would seem that the historical vocation of an authentic 
national middle class in an under -developed country is to repudiate its own nature in so 
far as it is bourgeois, that is to say in so far as it is the tool of capitalism, and t o make 
itself the willing slave of that revolutionary capital which is the people. 
In an under -developed country an authentic national middle class ought to consider as 
its bounden duty to betray the calling fate has marked out for it, and to put itself to  
school with the people: in other words to put at the people‟s disposal the intellectual and 
technical capital that it has snatched when going through the colonial universities. But 
unhappily we shall see that very often the national middle class does not follow this 
heroic, positive, fruitful and just path; rather, it disappears with its soul set at peace into 
the shocking ways — shocking because anti-national — of a traditional bourgeoisie, of a 
bourgeoisie which is stupidly, contemptibly, cynically bourgeois. 
The objective of nationalist parties as from a certain given period is, we have seen, 
strictly national. They mobilize the people with slogans of independence, and for the 
rest leave it to future events. When such parties are questioned on the econom ic 
programme of the state that they are clamouring for, or on the nature of the regime 
which they propose to install, they are incapable of replying, because, precisely, they 
are completely ignorant of the economy of their own country.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 49 
This economy has alw ays developed outside the limits of their knowledge. They have 
nothing more than an approximate, bookish acquaintance with the actual and potential 
resources of their country‟s soil and mineral deposits; and therefore they can only speak 
of these resources  on a general and abstract plane. After independence this under -
developed middle class, reduced in numbers and without capital, which refuses to follow 
the path of revolution, will fall into deplorable stagnation. It is unable to give free rein to 
its genius, which formerly it was wont to lament, though rather too glibly, was held in 
check by colonial domination. The precariousness of its resources and the paucity of its 
managerial class forces it back for years into an artisan economy. From its point of 
view, which is inevitably a very limited one, a national economy is an economy based 
on what may be called local products. Long speeches will be made about the artisan 
class. Since the middle classes find it impossible to set up factories that would be more 
profit-earning both for themselves and for the country as a whole, they will surround the 
artisan class with a chauvinistic tenderness in keeping with the new awareness of 
national dignity, and which moreover will bring them in quite a lot of money. This c ult of 
local products and this incapability to seek out new systems of management will be 
equally manifested by the bogging down of the national middle class in the methods of 
agricultural production which were characteristic of the colonial period. 
The national economy of the period of independence is not set on a new footing. It is 
still concerned with the ground -nut harvest, with the cocoa crop and the olive yield. In 
the same way there is no change in the marketing of basic products, and not a single 
industry is set up in the country. We go on sending out raw materials; we go on being 
Europe‟s small farmers who specialize in unfinished products. 
Yet the national middle class constantly demands the nationalization of the economy 
and of the trading sectors. This is because, from their point of view, nationalization does 
not mean placing the whole economy at the service of the nation and deciding to satisfy 
the needs of the nation. For them, nationalization does not mean governing the state 
with regard to the new social relations whose growth it has been decided to encourage. 
To them, nationalization quite simply means the transfer into native hands of those 
unfair advantages which are a legacy of the colonial period. 
Since the middle class has neither suffic ient material nor intellectual resources (by 
intellectual resources we mean engineers and technicians) it limits its claims to the 
taking over of business offices and commercial houses formerly occupied by the 
settlers. The national bourgeoisie steps into the shoes of the former European 
settlement: doctors, barristers, traders, commercial travellers, general agents and 
transport agents. It considers that the dignity of the country and its own welfare require 
that it should occupy all these posts. From now on it will insist that all the big foreign 
companies should pass through its hands, whether these companies wish to keep on 
their connexions with the country, or to open it up. The national middle class discovers 
its historic mission: that of intermediary. 
Seen through its eyes, its mission has nothing to do with transforming the nation; it 
consists, prosaically, of being the transmission line between the nation and a capitalism,


--- PAGE 50 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 50 
rampant though camouflaged, which today puts on the masque of neocolonialism. The 
national bourgeoisie will be quite content with the role of the Western bourgeoisie‟s 
business agent, and it will play its part without any complexes in a most dignified 
manner. But this same lucrative role, this cheap -jack‟s function, this meanness of  
outlook and this absence of all ambition symbolize the incapability of the national middle 
class to fulfil its historic role of bourgeoisie. Here, the dynamic, pioneer aspect, the 
characteristics of the inventor and of the discoverer of new worlds which a re found in all 
national bourgeoisies are lamentably absent. In the colonial countries, the spirit of 
indulgence is dominant at the core of the bourgeoisie; and this is because the national 
bourgeoisie identifies itself with the Western bourgeoisie, from w hom it has learnt its 
lessons. It follows the West -em bourgeoisie along its path of negation and decadence 
without ever having emulated it in its first stages of exploration and invention, stages 
which are an acquisition of that Western bourgeoisie whateve r the circumstances. In its 
beginnings, the national bourgeoisie of the colonial countries identifies itself with the 
decadence of the bourgeoisie of the West. We need not think that it is jumping ahead; it 
is in fact beginning at the end. It is already se nile before it has come to know the 
petulance, the fearlessness or the will to succeed of youth. 
The national bourgeoisie will be greatly helped on its way towards decadence by the 
Western bourgeoisies, who come to it as tourists avid for the exotic, for b ig-game 
hunting and for casinos. The national bourgeoisie organizes centres of rest and 
relaxation and pleasure resorts to meet the wishes of the Western bourgeoisie. Such 
activity is given the name of tourism, and for the occasion will be built up as a na tional 
industry. If proof is needed of the eventual transformation of certain elements of the ex -
native bourgeoisie into the organizers of parties for their Western opposite numbers, it is 
worth while having a look at what has happened in Latin America. Th e casinos of 
Havana and of Mexico, the beaches of Rio, the little Brazilian and Mexican girls, the 
half-breed thirteen -year-olds, the ports of Acapulco and Copacabana — all these are 
the stigma of this depravation of the national middle class. Because it i s bereft of ideas, 
because it lives to itself and cuts itself off from the people, undermined by its hereditary 
incapacity to think in terms of all the problems of the nation as seen from the point of 
view of the whole of that nation, the national middle c lass will have nothing better to do 
than to take on the role of manager for Western enterprise, and it will in practice set up 
its country as the brothel of Europe. 
Once again we must keep before us the unfortunate example of certain Latin American 
republics. The banking magnates, the technocrats and the big businessmen of the 
United States have only to step on to a plane and they are wafted into sub -tropical 
climes, there for a space of a week or ten days to luxuriate in the delicious depravities 
which their „reserves‟ hold for them. 
The behaviour of the national landed proprietors is practically identical with that of the 
middle classes of the towns. The big farmers have, as soon as independence was 
proclaimed, demanded the nationalization of agricultural production. Through manifold 
scheming practices they manage to make a clean sweep of the farms formerly owned 
by settlers, thus rein -forcing their hold on the district. But they do not try to introduce


--- PAGE 51 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 51 
new agricultural methods, nor to farm more intensively , nor to integrate their farming 
systems into a genuinely national economy. 
In fact, the landed proprietors will insist that the state should give them a hundred times 
more facilities and privileges than were enjoyed by the foreign settlers in former times . 
The exploitation of agricultural workers will be intensified and made legitimate. Using 
two or three slogans, these new colonists will demand an enormous amount of work 
from the agricultural labourers, in the name of the national effort of course. There will be 
no modernization of agriculture, no planning for development, and no initiative; for 
initiative throws these people into a panic since it implies a minimum of risk, and 
completely upsets the hesitant, prudent, landed bourgeoisie, which gradually sl ips more 
and more into the lines laid down by colonialism. In. the districts where this is the case, 
the only efforts made to better things are due to the government; it orders them, 
encourages them and finances them. The landed bourgeoisie refuses to take  the 
slightest risk, and remains opposed to any venture and to any hazard. It has no 
intention of building upon sand; it demands solid investments and quick returns. The 
enormous profits which it pockets, enormous if we take into account the national 
revenue, are never reinvested. The money -in-the-stocking mentality is dominant in the 
psychology of these landed proprietors. Sometimes, especially in the years immediately 
following independence, the bourgeoisie does not hesitate to invest in foreign banks the  
profits that it makes out of its native soil. 
On the other hand large sums are spent on display: on cars, country houses, and on all 
those things which have been justly described by economists as characterizing an 
under-developed bourgeoisie. 
We have said  that the native bourgeoisie which comes to power uses its class 
aggressiveness to corner the positions formerly kept for foreigners. On the morrow of 
independence, in fact, it violently attacks colonial personalities: barristers, traders, 
landed proprietors, doctors and higher civil servants. It will fight to the bitter end against 
these people „who insult our dignity as a nation‟. It waves aloft the notion of the 
nationalization and Aricanization of the ruling classes. The fact is that such action will 
become more and more tinged by racism, until the bourgeoisie bluntly puts the problem 
to the government by saying „We must have these posts‟. They will not stop their 
snarling until they have taken over every one. 
The working class of the towns, the masses o f unemployed, the small artisans and 
craftsmen for their part line up behind this nationalist attitude; but in all justice let it be 
said, they only follow in the steps of their bourgeoisie. If the national bourgeoisie goes 
into competition with the Europe ans, the artisans and craftsmen start a fight against 
non-national Africans. In the Ivory Coast, the anti -Dahoman and anti -Voltaic troubles 
are in fact racial riots. The Dahoman and Voltaic peoples, who control the greater part 
of the petty trade, are, onc e independence is declared, the object of hostile 
manifestations on the part of the people of the Ivory Coast. From nationalism we have 
passed to ultra -nationalism, to chauvinism, and finally to racism. These foreigners are 
called on to leave; their shops are burned, their street stalls are wrecked, and in fact the


--- PAGE 52 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 52 
government of the Ivory Coast commands them to go, thus giving their nationals 
satisfaction. In Senegal it is the anti -Sudanese demonstrations which called forth these 
words from Mr Mamadou Dia: 
“The truth is that the Senegalese people have only adopted the Mali mystique through 
attachment to its leaders. Their adhesion to the Mali has no other significance than that 
of a fresh act of faith in the political policy of the latter. The Senegalese ter ritory was no 
less real, in fact it was all the more so in that the presence of the Sudanese in Dakar too 
obviously manifested for it to be forgotten. It is this fact which explains that, far from 
being regretted, the break-up of the Federation has been greeted with relief by the mass 
of the people and nowhere was a hand raised to maintain it.” (Mamadou Dia: Nations 
africaines et sohdarite mondial, Presses Universitaires de France, p. 140.) 
While certain sections of the Senegalese people jump at the chance which is afforded 
them by their own leaders to get rid of the Sudanese, who hamper them in commercial 
matters or in administrative posts, the Congolese, who stood by hardly daring to believe 
in the mass exodus of the Belgians, decide to bring pressure to b ear on the Senegalese 
who have settled in Leopoldville and Elizabethville and to get them to leave. 
As we see it, the mechanism is identical in the two sets of circumstances. If the 
Europeans get in the way of the intellectuals and business bourgeoisie of the young 
nation, for the mass of the people in the towns competition is represented principally by 
Africans of another nation. On the Ivory Coast these competitors are the Dahomans; in 
Ghana they are the Nigerians; in Senegal, they are the Sudanese. 
When the bourgeoisie‟s demands for a ruling class made up exclusively of Negroes or 
Arabs do not spring from an authentic movement of nationalization but merely 
correspond to an anxiety to place in the bourgeoisie‟s hands the power held hitherto by 
the foreigner, the masses on their level present the same demands, confining, however, 
the notion of Negro or Arab within certain territorial limits. Between resounding 
assertions of the unity of the continent and this behaviour of the masses which has its 
inspiration in their leaders, many different attitudes may be traced. We observe a 
permanent see -saw between African unity, which fades quicker and quicker into the 
mists of oblivion, and a heart -breaking return to chauvinism in its most bitter and 
detestable form. 
“On the Senegalese side, the leaders who have been the main theoreticians of African 
unity, and who several times over have sacrificed their local political organizations and 
their personal positions to this idea, are, though in all good faith, undeniably 
responsible. Their mistake — our mistake — has been, under pretext of fighting 
„Balkanization‟, not to have taken into consideration the pre-colonial fact of territorialism. 
Our mistake has been not to have paid enough attention in our analyses to this 
phenomenon, which is the fruit of colonialism if you like, but also a sociological fact 
which no theory of unity, be it ever so laudable or attractive, can abolish. We have 
allowed ourselves to be seduced by a mirage; that of the structure which is the most 
pleasing to our minds; and, mistaking our ideal for reality, we have believed it enough to


--- PAGE 53 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 53 
condemn territorialism, and its natural sequel, micro -nationalism, for us to get the better 
of them, and to assure the success of our chimerical undertaking”. (Mamadou  Dia, op. 
cit.) 
From the chauvinism of the Senegalese to the tribalism of the Yolofs is not a big step. 
For, in fact, everywhere that the national bourgeoisie has failed to break through to the 
people as a whole, to enlighten them, and to consider all prob lems in the first place with 
regard to them — a failure due to the bourgeoisie‟s attitude of mistrust and to the 
haziness of its political tenets — everywhere where that national bourgeoisie has shown 
itself incapable of extending its vision of the world s ufficiently, we observe a falling back 
towards old tribal attitudes, and, furious and sick at heart, we perceive that race feeling 
in its most exacerbated form is triumphing. Since the sole motto of the bourgeoisie is 
„Replace the foreigner‟, and because i t hastens in every walk of life to secure justice for 
itself and to take over the posts that the foreigner has vacated, the „small people‟ of the 
nation — taxi-drivers, cake-sellers and shoeblacks — will be equally quick to insist that 
the Dahomans go home  to their own country, or will even go further and demand that 
the Foulbis and the Peuhls return to their jungle or their mountains. 
It is from this view -point that we must interpret the fact that in young, independent 
countries, here and there federalism triumphs. We know that colonial domination has 
marked certain regions out for privilege. The colony‟s economy is not integrated into 
that of the nation as a whole. It is still organized in order to complete the economy of the 
different mother countries. Co lonialism hardly ever exploits the whole of a country. It 
contents itself with bringing to light the natural resources, which it extracts, and exports 
to meet the needs of the mother country‟s industries, thereby allowing certain sectors of 
the colony to become relatively rich. But the rest of the colony follows its path of under -
development and poverty, or at all events sinks into it more deeply. 
Immediately after independence, the nationals who live in the more prosperous regions 
realize their good luck, and show a primary and profound reaction in refusing to feed the 
other nationals. The districts which are rich in „ground -nuts, in cocoa and in diamonds 
come to the forefront, and dominate the empty panorama which the rest of the nation 
presents. The nationals of these rich regions look upon the others with hatred, and find 
in them envy and covetousness, and homicidal impulses. Old rivalries which were there 
before colonialism, old inter -racial hatred come to the surface. The Balubas refuse to 
feed the Lulu as; Katanga forms itself into a state, and Albert Kalondji gets himself 
crowned king of South Kasai. 
African unity, that vague formula, yet one to which the men and women of Africa were 
passionately attached, and whose operative value served to bring immen se pressure to 
bear on colonialism, African unity takes off the mask, and crumbles into regionalism 
inside the hollow shell of nationality itself. The national bourgeoisie, since it is strung up 
to defend its immediate interests, and sees no farther than t he end of its nose, reveals 
itself incapable of simply bringing national unity into being, or of building up the nation 
on a stable and productive basis. The national front which has forced colonialism to 
withdraw cracks up, and wastes the victory it has gained.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 54 
This merciless fight engaged upon by races and tribes, and this aggressive anxiety to 
occupy the posts left vacant by the departure of the foreigner, will equally give rise to 
religious rivalries. In the country districts and the bush, minor con -fraternities, local 
religions and maraboutic cults will show a new vitality and will once more take up their 
round of excommunications. In the big towns, on the level of the administrative classes, 
we will observe the coming to grips of the two great revealed  religions, Islam and 
Catholicism. 
Colonialism, which had been shaken to its very foundations by the birth of African unity, 
recovers its balance and tries now to break that will to unity by using all the movement‟s 
weaknesses. Colonialism will set the Afr ican peoples moving by revealing to them the 
existence of „spiritual‟ rivalries. In Senegal, it is the newspaper New Africa which week 
by week distils hatred of Islam and of the Arabs. The Lebanese, in whose hands is the 
greater part of the small trading e nterprises on the western seaboard, are marked out 
for national obloquy. The missionaries find it opportune to remind the masses that long 
before the advent of European colonialism the great African empires were disrupted by 
the Arab invasion. There is no hesitation in saying that it was the Arab occupation which 
paved the way for European colonialism; Arab imperialism is commonly spoken of, and 
the cultural. imperialism of Islam is condemned. Moslems are usually kept out of the 
more important posts. In oth er regions the reverse is the case, and it is the native 
Christians who are considered as conscious, objective enemies of national 
independence. 
 
Colonialism pulls every string shamelessly, and is only too content to set at loggerheads 
those Africans who only yesterday were leagued against the settlers. The idea of a 
Saint Bartholomew takes shape in certain minds, and the advocates of colonialism 
laugh to themselves derisively when they hear magnificent declarations about African 
unity. Inside a single nat ion, religion splits up the people into different spiritual 
communities, all of them kept up and stiffened by colonialism and its instruments. 
Totally unexpected events break out here and there. In regions where Catholicism or 
Protestantism predominates, w e see the Moslem minorities flinging themselves with 
unaccustomed ardour into their devotions. The Islamic feast days are revived, and the 
Moslem religion defends itself inch by inch against the violent absolutism of the Catholic 
faith. Ministers of state are heard to say for the benefit of certain individuals that if they 
are not content they have only to go to Cairo. Sometimes American Protestantism 
transplants its anti -Catholic prejudices into African soil, and keeps up tribal rivalries 
through religion. 
Taking the continent as a whole, this religious tension may be responsible for the revival 
of the commonest racial feeling. Africa is divided into Black and White, and the names 
that are substituted — Africa south of the Sahara, Africa north of the Sahara  — do not 
manage to hide this latent racism. Here, it is affirmed that White Africa has a thousand -
year-old tradition of culture; that she is Mediterranean, that she is a Continuation of 
Europe and that she shares in Graeco -Latin civilization. Black Africa  is looked on as a


--- PAGE 55 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 55 
region that is inert, brutal, uncivilized — in a word, savage. There, all day long you may 
hear unpleasant remarks about veiled women, polygamy and the supposed disdain the 
Arabs have for the feminine sex. All such remarks are reminiscen t in their 
aggressiveness of those that are so often heard coming from the settler‟s lips. The 
national bourgeoisie of each of these two great religions, which has totally assimilated 
colonialist thought in its most corrupt form, takes over from the Europe ans and 
establishes in the continent a racial philosophy which is extremely harmful for the future 
of Africa. By its laziness and will to imitation, it promotes the ingrafting and stiffening of 
racism which was characteristic of the colonial era. Thus it i s by no means astonishing 
to hear in a country that calls itself African remarks which are neither more nor less than 
racist, and to observe the existence of paternalist behaviour which gives you the bitter 
impression that you are in Paris, Brussels or London. 
In certain regions of Africa, drivelling paternalism with regard to the blacks and the 
loathsome idea derived from Western culture that the black man is impervious to logic 
and the sciences reign in all their nakedness. Sometimes it may be ascertained  that the 
black minorities are hemmed in by a kind of semi -slavery which renders legitimate that 
species of wariness, or in other words mistrust, which the countries of Black Africa feel 
with regard to the countries of White Africa. It is all too common th at a citizen of Black 
Africa hears himself called a „Negro‟ by the children when walking in the streets of a big 
town in White Africa, or finds that civil servants address him in pidgin English. 
Yes, unfortunately it is not unknown that students from Black  Africa who attend 
secondary schools north of the Sahara hear their schoolfellows asking if in their country 
there are houses, if they know what electricity is, or if they practise cannibalism in their 
families. Yes, unfortunately it is not unknown that in  certain regions north of the Sahara 
Africans coming from countries south of the Sahara meet nationals who implore them to 
take them „anywhere at all on condition we meet Negroes‟. In parallel fashion, in certain 
young states of Black Africa members of parliament, or even ministers, maintain without 
a trace of humour that the danger is not at all of a reoccupation of their country by 
colonialism but of an eventual invasion by „those vandals of Arabs coming from the 
North‟. 
As we see it, the bankruptcy of th e bourgeoisie is not apparent in the economic field 
only. They have come to power in the name of a narrow nationalism and representing a 
race; they will prove themselves incapable of triumphantly putting into practice a 
programme with even a minimum humani st content, in spite of fine -sounding 
declarations which are devoid of meaning since the speakers bandy about in 
irresponsible fashion phrases that come straight out of European treatises on morals 
and political philosophy. When the bourgeoisie is strong, when it can arrange everything 
and everybody to serve its power, it does not hesitate to affirm positively certain 
democratic ideas which claim to be universally applicable. There must be very 
exceptional circumstances if such a bourgeoisie, solidly based economically, is forced 
into denying its own humanist ideology. The Western bourgeoisie, though fundamentally 
racist, most often manages to mask this racism by a multiplicity of nuances which allow 
it to preserve intact its proclamation of mankind‟s outstanding dignity.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 56 
The Western bourgeoisie has prepared enough fences and railings to have no real fear 
of the competition of those whom it exploits and holds in contempt. Western bourgeois 
racial prejudice as regards the nigger and the Arab is a racism of con tempt; it is a 
racism which minimizes what it hates. Bourgeois ideology, however, which is the 
proclamation of an essential equality between men, manages to appear logical in its 
own eyes by inviting the sub -men to become human, and to take as their protot ype 
Western humanity as incarnated in the Western bourgeoisie. 
The racial prejudice of the young national bourgeoisie is a racism of defence, based on 
fear. Essentially it is no different from vulgar tribalism, or the rivalries between septs or 
confraternities. We may understand why keen -wined international observers have 
hardly taken seriously the great flights of oratory about African unity, for it is true that 
there are so many cracks in that unity visible to the naked eye that it is only reasonable 
to insist that all these contradictions ought to be resolved before the day of unity can 
come. 
The people of Africa have only recently come to know themselves. They have decided, 
in the name of the whole continent, to weigh in strongly against the colonial reg ime. 
Now the nationalist bourgeoisies, who in region after region hasten to make their own 
fortunes and to set up a national system of exploitation, do their utmost to put obstacles 
in the path of this „Utopia‟. The national bourgeoisies, who are quite cle ar as to what 
their objectives are, have decided to bar the way to that unity, to that coordinated effort 
on the part of two hundred and fifty million men to triumph over stupidity, hunger and 
inhumanity at one and the same time. This is why we must understand that African unity 
can only be achieved through the upward thrust of the people, and under the leadership 
of the people, that is to say, in defiance of the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
As regards internal affairs and in the sphere of institutions, th e national bourgeoisie will 
give equal proof of its incapacity. In a certain number of under -developed countries the 
parliamentary game is faked from the beginning. Powerless economically, unable to 
bring about the existence of coherent social relations, a nd standing on the principle of 
its domination as a class, the bourgeoisie chooses the solution that seems to it the 
easiest, that of the single party. It does not yet have the quiet conscience and the cairn 
that economic power and the control of the state  machine alone can give. It does not 
create a state that reassures the ordinary citizen, but rather one that rouses his anxiety 
The state, which by its strength and discretion ought to inspire confidence and disarm 
and lull everybody to sleep, on the contr ary seeks to impose itself in spectacular 
fashion. It makes a display, it jostles people and bullies them, thus intimating to the 
citizen that he is in continual danger. The single party is the modem form of the 
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, unmasked, unpainted, unscrupulous and cynical. 
It is true that such a dictatorship does not go very far. It cannot halt the processes of its 
own contradictions. Since the bourgeoisie has not the economic means to ensure its 
domination and to throw a few crumbs to the  rest of the country; since, moreover, it is 
preoccupied with filling its pockets as rapidly as possible but also as prosaically as


--- PAGE 57 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 57 
possible, the country sinks all the more deeply into stagnation. And in order to hide this 
stagnation and to mask this regre ssion, to reassure itself and to give itself something to 
boast about, the bourgeoisie can find nothing better to do than to erect grandiose 
buildings in the capital and to lay out money on what are called prestige expenses. 
The national bourgeoisie turns its back more and more on the interior and on the real 
facts of its undeveloped country, and tends to look towards the former mother country 
and the foreign capitalists who count on its obliging compliance. As it does not share its 
profits with the people and in no way allows them to enjoy any of the dues that are paid 
to it by the big foreign companies, it will discover the need for a popular leader to whom 
will fall the dual role of stabilizing the regime and of perpetuating the domination of the 
bourgeoisie. The bourgeois dictatorship of under-developed countries draws its strength 
from the existence of a leader. We know that in the well -developed countries the 
bourgeois dictatorship is the result of the economic power of the bourgeoisie. In the 
under-developed countries on the contrary the leader stands for moral power, in whose 
shelter the thin and poverty-stricken bourgeoisie of the young nation decides to get rich. 
The people who for years on end have seen this leader and heard him speak, who from 
a distance in a kind of dream have followed his contests with the colonial power, 
spontaneously put their trust in this patriot. Before independence, the leader generally 
embodies the aspirations of the people for independence, political liberty and national  
dignity. But as soon as independence is declared, far from embodying in concrete form 
the needs of the people in what touches bread, land and the restoration of the country 
to the sacred hands of the people, the leader will reveal his inner purpose: to be come 
the general president of that company of profiteers impatient for their returns which 
constitutes the national bourgeoisie. 
In spite of his frequently honest conduct and his sincere declarations, the leader as 
seen objectively is the fierce defender o f these interests, today combined, of the 
national bourgeoisie and the ex -colonial companies. His honesty, which is his soul‟s 
true bent, crumbles away little by little. His contact with the masses is so unreal that he 
comes to believe that his authority i s hated and that the services that he has rendered 
his country are being called in question. The leader judges the ingratitude of the masses 
harshly, and every day that passes ranges himself a little more resolutely on the side of 
the exploiters. He theref ore knowingly becomes the aider and abettor of the young 
bourgeoisie which is plunging into the mire of corruption and pleasure. 
The economic channels of the young state sink back inevitably into neo -colonialist lines. 
The national economy, formerly protec ted, is today literally controlled. The budget is 
balanced through loans and gifts, while every three or four months the chief ministers 
themselves or else their governmental delegations come to the erstwhile mother 
countries or elsewhere, fishing for capital. 
The former colonial power increases its demands, accumulates concessions and 
guarantees and takes fewer and fewer pains to mask the hold it has over the national 
government. The people stagnate deplorably in unbearable poverty; slowly they awaken


--- PAGE 58 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 58 
to the unutterable treason of their leaders. This awakening is all the more acute in that 
the bourgeoisie is incapable of learning its lesson. The distribution of wealth that it 
effects is not spread out between a great many sectors; it is not ranged among dif ferent 
levels, nor does it set up a hierarchy of half -tones. The new caste is an affront all the 
more disgusting in that the immense majority, nine -tenths of the population, continue to 
die of starvation. The scandalous enrichment, speedy and pitiless, of this caste is 
accompanied by a decisive awakening on the part of the people, and a growing 
awareness that promises stormy days to come. The bourgeois caste, that section of the 
nation which annexes for its own profit all the wealth of the country, by a kin d of 
unexpected logic will pass disparaging judgements upon the other Negroes and the 
other Arabs that more often than not are reminiscent of the racist doctrines of the former 
representatives of the colonial power. At one and the same time the poverty of the 
people, the immoderate money -making of the bourgeois caste, and its widespread 
scorn for the rest of the nation will harden thought and action. 
But such threats will lead to the re -affirmation of authority and the appearance of 
dictatorship. The leader , who has behind him a lifetime of political action and devoted 
patriotism, constitutes a screen between the people and the rapacious bourgeoisie 
since he stands surety for the ventures of that caste and closes his eyes to their 
insolence, their mediocrity  and their fundamental immorality. He acts as a braking -
power on the awakening consciousness of the people. He comes to the aid of the 
bourgeois caste and hides his manoeuvres from the people, thus becoming the most 
eager worker in the task of mystifing and bewildering the masses. Every time he speaks 
to the people he calls to mind his often heroic life, the struggles he has led in the name 
of the people and the victories in their name he has achieved, thereby intimating clearly 
to the masses that they ough t to go on putting their confidence in him. There are plenty 
of examples of African patriots who have introduced into the cautious political advance 
of their elders a decisive style characterized by its nationalist outlook. These men came 
from the backwoods, and they proclaimed, to the scandal of the dominating power and 
the shame of the nationals of the capital, that they came from the backwoods and that 
they spoke in the name of the Negroes. These men, who have sung the praises of their 
race, who have tak en upon themselves the whole burden of the past, complete with 
cannibalism and degeneracy, find themselves today, alas, at the head of a team of 
administrators who turn their back on the jungle and who proclaim that the vocation of 
their people is to obey, to go on obeying and to be obedient till the end of time. 
The leader pacifies the people. For years on end after independence has been won, we 
see him, incapable of urging on the people to a concrete task, unable really to open the 
future to them or of fl inging them into the path of national reconstruction, that is to say, 
of their own reconstruction; we see him reassessing the history of independence and 
recalling the sacred unity of the struggle for liberation. The leader, because he refuses 
to break up the national bourgeoisie, asks the people to fall back into the past and to 
become drunk on the remembrance of the epoch which led up to independence. The 
leader, seen objectively, brings the people to a halt and persists in either expelling them 
from history or preventing them from taking root in it. During the struggle for liberation 
the leader awakened the people and promised them a forward march, heroic and


--- PAGE 59 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 59 
unmitigated. Today, he uses every means to put them to sleep, and three or four times 
a year asks them to remember the colonial period and to look back on the long way they 
have come since then. 
Now it must be said that the masses show themselves totally incapable of appreciating 
the long way they have come. The peasant who goes on scratching out a li ving from the 
soil, and the unemployed man who never finds employment do not manage, in spite of 
public holidays and flags, new and brightly -coloured though they may be, to convince 
themselves that anything has really changed in their lives. The bourgeoisi e who are in 
power vainly increase the number of processions; the masses have no illusions. They 
are hungry; and the police officers, though now they are Africans, do not serve to 
reassure them particularly. The masses begin to sulk; they turn away from th is nation in 
which they have been given no place and begin to lose interest in it. 
From time to time, however, the leader makes an effort; he speaks on the radio or 
makes a tour of the country to pacify the people, to calm them and bemuse them. The 
leader is all the more necessary in that there is no party. During the period of the 
struggle for independence there was one right enough, a party led by the present 
leader. But since then this patty has sadly disintegrated; nothing is left but the shell of a 
party, the name, the emblem and the motto. The living party, which ought to make 
possible the free exchange of ideas which have been elaborated according to the real 
needs of the mass of the people, has been transformed into a trade union of individual 
interests. Since the proclamation of independence the party no longer helps the people 
to set out its demands, to become more aware of its needs and better able to establish 
its power. Today, the party‟s mission is to deliver to the people the instructions which  
issue from the summit. There no longer exists the fruitful give -and-take from the bottom 
to the top and from the top to the bottom which creates and guarantees democracy in a 
party. Quite on the contrary, the party has made itself into a screen between th e 
masses and the leaders. There is no longer any party life, for the branches which were 
set up during the colonial period are today completely demobilized. 
The militant champs on his bit. Now it is that the attitude taken up by certain militants 
during the struggle for liberation is seen to be justified, for the fact is that in the thick of 
the fight more than a few militants asked the leaders to formulate a dogma, to set out 
their objectives and to draw up a programme. But under the pretext of safeguardin g 
national unity, the leaders categorically refused to attempt such a task. The only 
worthwhile dogma, it was repeatedly stated, is the union of the nation against 
colonialism. And on they went, armed with an impetuous slogan which stood for 
principles, while their only ideological activity took the form of a series of variants on the 
theme of the right of peoples to self -determination, borne on the wind of history which 
would inevitably sweep away colonialism. When the militants asked whether the wind of 
history couldn‟t be a little more clearly analysed, the leaders gave them instead hope 
and trust, the necessity of decolonialization and its inevitability, and more to that effect. 
After independence, the party sinks into an extraordinary lethargy. The militants are only 
called upon when so -called popular manifestations are afoot, or international


--- PAGE 60 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 60 
conferences, or independence celebrations. The local party leaders are given 
administrative posts, the party becomes an administration, and the militants disappear  
into the crowd and take the empty title of citizen. Now that they have fulfilled their 
historical mission of leading the bourgeoisie to power, they are firmly invited to retire so 
that the bourgeoisie may carry out its mission in peace and quiet. But we have seen that 
the national bourgeoisie of under -developed countries is incapable of carrying out any 
mission whatever. After a few years, the break -up of the party becomes obvious, and 
any observer, even the most superficial, can notice that the party, tod ay the skeleton of 
its former self, only serves to immobilize the people. The party, which during the battle 
had drawn to itself the whole nation, is falling to pieces. The intellectuals who on the eve 
of independence rallied to the party, now make it dear  by their attitude that they gave 
their support with no other end in view than to secure their slices of the cake of 
independence. The party is becoming a means of private advancement. 
There exists inside the new regime, however, an inequality in the acqui sition of wealth 
and in monopolization. Some have a double source of income and demonstrate that 
they are specialized in opportunism. Privileges multiply and corruption triumphs, while 
morality declines. Today the vultures are too numerous and too voraciou s in proportion 
to the lean spoils of the national wealth. The party, a true instrument of power in the 
hands of the bourgeoisie, reinforces the machine, and ensures that the people are 
hemmed in and immobilized. The party helps the government to hold the people down. 
It becomes more and more clearly anti-democratic, an implement of coercion. The party 
is objectively, sometimes subjectively, the accomplice of the merchant bourgeoisie. In 
the same way that the national bourgeoisie conjures away its phase of construction in 
order to throw itself into the enjoyment of its wealth, in parallel fashion in the institutional 
sphere it jumps the parliamentary phase and chooses a dictatorship of the national -
socialist type. We know today that this fascism at high inte rest which has triumphed for 
half a century in Latin America is the dialectic result of states which were semi -colonial 
during the period of independence. 
In these poor, under -developed countries, where the rule is that the greatest wealth is 
surrounded by the greatest poverty, the army and the police constitute the pillars of the 
regime; an army and a police force (another rule which must not be forgotten) which are 
advised by foreign experts. The strength of the police force and the power of the army 
are proportionate to the stagnation in which the rest of the nation is sunk. By dint of 
yearly loans, concessions are snatched up by foreigners; scandals are numerous, 
ministers grow rich, their wives doll themselves up, the members of parliament feather 
their nests and there is not a soul down to the simple policeman or the customs officer 
who does not join in the great procession of corruption. 
The opposition becomes more aggressive and the people at once catch on to its 
propaganda. From now on their hostilit y to the bourgeoisie is plainly visible. This young 
bourgeoisie which appears to be afflicted with precocious senility takes no heed of the 
advice showered upon it, and reveals itself incapable of understanding that it would be 
in its interest to draw a ve il, even if only the flimsiest kind, over its exploitation. It is the


--- PAGE 61 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 61 
most Christian newspaper The African Weekly, published in Brazzaville, which 
addresses the princes of the regime thus: 
“You who are in good positions, you and your wives, today you enjoy  many comforts; 
perhaps a good education, a fine house, good contacts and many missions on which 
you are delegated which open new horizons to you. But all your wealth forms a hard 
shell which prevents your seeing the poverty that surrounds you. Take care.” 
This warning coming from The African Weekly and, addressed to the henchmen of 
Monsieur Youlou has, we may imagine, nothing revolutionary about it. What The African 
Weekly wants to point out to the starvers of the Congolese people is that God will 
punish t heir conduct. It continues: „If there is no room in your heart for consideration 
towards those who are beneath you, there will be no room for you in God‟s house.' 
It is clear that the national bourgeoisie hardly worries at all about such an indictment. 
With its wave-lengths tuned in to Europe, it continues firmly and resolutely to make the 
most of the situation. The enormous profits which it derives from the exploitation of the 
people are exported to foreign countries. The young national bourgeoisie is ofte n more 
suspicious of the regime that it has set up than are the foreign companies. The national 
bourgeoisie refuses to invest in its own country and behaves towards the state that 
protects and nurtures it with, it must be remarked, astonishing ingratitude.  It acquires 
foreign securities in the European markets, and goes off to spend the week -end in Paris 
or Hamburg. The behaviour of the national bourgeoisie of certain under -developed 
countries is reminiscent of the members of a gang, who after every hold -up hide their 
share in the swag from the other members who are their accomplices and prudently 
start thinking about their retirement. Such behaviour shows that more or less 
consciously the national bourgeoisie is playing to lose if the game goes on too long. 
They guess that the present situation will not last indefinitely but they intend to make the 
most of it. Such exploitation and such contempt for the state, however, inevitably gives 
rise to discontent among the mass of the people. It is in these conditions that the regime 
becomes harsher. In the absence of a parliament it is the army that becomes the 
arbiter: but sooner or later it will realize its power and will hold over the government‟s 
head the threat of a manifesto. 
As we see it, the national bourgeoi sie of certain under-developed countries has learned 
nothing from books. If they had looked closer at the Latin American countries they 
doubtless would have recognized the dangers which threaten them. We may thus 
conclude that this bourgeoisie in miniature  that thrusts itself into the forefront is 
condemned to mark time, accomplishing nothing. In under -developed countries the 
bourgeois phase is impossibly arid. Certainly, there is a police dictatorship and a 
profiteering caste, but the construction of an el aborate bourgeois society seems to be 
condemned to failure. The ranks of decked -out profiteers whose grasping hands scrape 
up the bank-notes from a poverty-stricken country will sooner or later be men of straw in 
the hands of the army, cleverly handled by foreign experts. In this way the former 
mother country practises indirect government, both by the bourgeoisie that it upholds


--- PAGE 62 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 62 
and also by the national army led by its experts, an army that pins the people down, 
immobilizing and terrorizing them. 
The observations that we have been able to make about the national bourgeoisie bring 
us to a conclusion which should cause no surprise. In under -developed countries, the 
bourgeoisie should not be allowed to find the conditions necessary for its existence and 
its gro wth. In other words, the combined effort of the masses led by a party and of 
intellectuals who are highly conscious and armed with revolutionary principles ought to 
bar the way to this useless and harmful middle class. 
The theoretical question that for the  last fifty years has been raised whenever the 
history of under -developed countries is under discussion — whether or not the 
bourgeois phase can be skipped — ought to be answered in the field of revolutionary 
action, and not by logic. The bourgeois phase i n under -developed countries can only 
justify itself in so far as the national bourgeoisie has sufficient economic and technical 
strength to build up a bourgeois society, to create the conditions necessary for the 
development of a large -scale proletariat, t o mechanize agriculture and finally to make 
possible the existence of an authentic national culture. 
A bourgeoisie similar to that which developed in Europe is able to elaborate an ideology 
and at the same time strengthen its own power. Such a bourgeoisie,  dynamic, educated 
and secular, has fully succeeded in its undertaking of the accumulation of capital and 
has given to the nation a minimum of prosperity. In under -developed countries, we have 
seen that no true bourgeoisie exists; there is only a sort of l ittle greedy caste, avid and 
voracious, with the mind of a huckster, only too glad to accept the dividends that the 
former colonial power hands out to it. This get -rich-quick middle class shows itself 
incapable of great ideas or of inventiveness. It rememb ers what it has read in European 
textbooks and imperceptibly it becomes not even the replica of Europe, but its 
caricature. 
The struggle against the bourgeoisie of under -developed countries is far from being a 
theoretical one. It is not concerned with maki ng out its condemnation as laid down by 
the judgement of history. The national bourgeoisie of under -developed countries must 
not be opposed because it threatens to slow down the total, harmonious development of 
the nation. It must simply be stoutly opposed  because, literally, it is good for nothing. 
This bourgeoisie, expressing its mediocrity in its profits, its achievements and in its 
thought, tries to hide this mediocrity by buildings which have prestige value at the 
individual level, by chromium plating on big American cars, by holidays on the Riviera 
and week-ends in neon-lit night-clubs. 
This bourgeoisie which turns its back more and more on the people as a whole does not 
even succeed in extracting spectacular concessions from the West, such as 
investments which would be of value for the country‟s economy or the setting up of 
certain industries. On the contrary, assembly plants spring up and consecrate the type 
of neo -colonialist industrialization in which the country‟s economy flounders. Thus it 
must no t be said that the national bourgeoisie retards the country‟s evolution, that it


--- PAGE 63 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 63 
makes it lose time or that it threatens to lead the nation up blind alleys. In fact, the 
bourgeois phase in the history of under -developed countries is a completely useless 
phase. When this caste has vanished, devoured by its own contradictions, it will be 
seen that nothing new has happened since independence was proclaimed, and that 
everything must be started again from scratch. The change -over will not take place at 
the level of the structures set up by the bourgeoisie during its reign, since that caste has 
done nothing more than take over unchanged the legacy of the economy, the thought 
and the institutions left by the colonialists. 
It is all the easier to neutralize this bou rgeois class in that, as we have seen, it is 
numerically, intellectually and economic -ally weak. In the colonized territories, the 
bourgeois caste draws its strength after independence chiefly from agreements reached 
with the former colonial power. The nat ional bourgeoisie has all the more opportunity to 
take over from the oppressor since it has been given time for a leisurely tête-á-tête with 
the ex -colonial power. But deep -rooted contradictions undermine the ranks of that 
bourgeoisie; it is this that gives the observer an impression of instability. There is not as 
yet a homogeneity of caste. Many intellectuals, for example, condemn this regime 
based on the domination of the few. In under -developed countries, there are certain 
members of the elite, intellectuals and civil servants, who are sincere, who feel the 
necessity for a planned economy, the outlawing of profiteers and the strict prohibition of 
attempts at mystification. In addition, such men fight in a certain measure for the mass 
participation of the people in the ordering of public affairs. 
In those under -developed countries which accede to independence, there almost 
always exists a small number of honest intellectuals, who have no very precise ideas 
about politics, but who instinctively distrust the  race for positions and pensions which is 
symptomatic of the early days of independence in colonized countries. The personal 
situation of these men (bread -winners of large families) or their background (hard 
struggles and a strictly moral upbringing) expla in their manifest contempt for profiteers 
and schemers. We must know how to use these men in the decisive battle that we 
mean to engage upon which will lead to a healthier outlook for the nation. Closing the 
road to the national bourgeoisie is, certainly, the means whereby the vicissitudes of 
new-found independence may be avoided, and with them the decline of morals, the 
installing of corruption within the country, economic regression, and the immediate 
disaster of an anti-democratic regime depending on for ce and intimidation. But it is also 
the only means towards progress. 
What holds up the taking of a decision by the profoundly democratic elements of the 
young nation and adds to their timidity is the apparent strength of the bourgeoisie. In 
newly independent under-developed countries, the whole of the ruling class swarms into 
the towns built by colonialism. The absence of any analysis of the total population 
induces onlookers to think that there exists a powerful and perfectly organized 
bourgeoisie. In fact, we know today that the bourgeoisie in under-developed countries is 
non-existent. What creates a bourgeoisie is not the bourgeois spirit, nor its taste or 
manners, nor even its aspirations. The bourgeoisie is above all the direct product of 
precise economic conditions.


--- PAGE 64 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 64 
Now, in the colonies, the economic conditions are conditions of a foreign bourgeoisie. 
Through its agents, it is the bourgeoisie of the mother country that we find present in the 
colonial towns. The bourgeoisie in the colonies is, before ind ependence, a Western 
bourgeoisie, a true branch of the bourgeoisie of the mother country, that derives its 
legitimacy, its force and its stability from the bourgeoisie of the homeland. During the 
period of unrest that precedes independence, certain native elements, intellectuals and 
traders, who live in the midst of that imported bourgeoisie, try to identify themselves with 
it. A permanent wish for identification with the bourgeois representatives of the mother 
country is to be found among the native intellectuals and merchants. 
This native bourgeoisie, which has adopted unreservedly and with enthusiasm the ways 
of thinking characteristic of the mother country, which has become wonderfully 
detached from its own thought and has based its consciousness upon foundations 
which are typically foreign, will realize, with its mouth watering, that it lacks something 
essential to a bourgeoisie: money. The bourgeoisie of an under -developed country is a 
bourgeoisie in spirit only. It is not its economic strength, nor the dynamism of its leaders, 
nor the breadth of its ideas that ensures its peculiar quality of bourgeoisie. 
Consequently it remains at the beginning and for a long time afterwards a bourgeoisie 
of the civil service. It is the positions that it holds in the new national administration 
which will give it strength and serenity. If the government gives it enough time and 
opportunity, this bourgeoisie will manage to put away enough money to stiffen its 
domination. But it will always reveal itself as incapable of giving birth to an authentic 
bourgeois society with all the economic and industrial consequences which this entails. 
From the beginning the national bourgeoisie directs its efforts towards activities of the 
intermediary type. The basis of its strength is f ound in its aptitude for trade and small 
business enterprises, and in securing commissions. It is not its money that works, but its 
business acumen. It does not go m for investments and it cannot achieve that 
accumulation of capital necessary to the birth and blossoming of an authentic 
bourgeoisie. At that rate it would take centuries to set on foot an embryonic industrial 
revolution, and in any case it would find the way barred by the relentless opposition of 
the former mother country, which will have take n all precautions when setting up neo -
colonialist trade conventions. 
If the government wants to bring the country out of its stagnation and set it well on the 
road towards development and progress, it must first and foremost nationalize the 
middle-man‟s trading sector. The bourgeoisie, who wish to see both the triumph of the 
spirit of money-making and the enjoyment of consumer goods, and at the same time the 
triumph of their contemptuous attitude towards the mass of the people and the 
scandalous aspect of p rofit-making (should we not rather call it robbery?), in fact invest 
largely in this sector. The intermediary market which formerly was dominated by the 
settlers will be invaded by the young national bourgeoisie. In a colonial economy the 
intermediary sect or is by far the most important. If you want to progress, you must 
decide in the first few hours to nationalize this sector. But it is clear that such a 
nationalization ought not to take on a rigidly state -controlled aspect. It is not a question 
of placing at the head of these services citizens who have had no political education.


--- PAGE 65 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 65 
Every time such a procedure has been adopted it has been seen that the government 
has in fact contributed to the triumph of a dictatorship of civil servants who had been set 
in th e mould of the former mother country, and who quickly showed themselves 
incapable of thinking in terms of the nation as a whole. These civil servants very soon 
began to sabotage the national economy and to throw its structure out of joint; under 
them, corruption, prevarication, the diversion of stocks and the black market came to 
stay. Nationalizing the intermediary sector means organizing wholesale and retail 
cooperatives on a democratic basis; it also means decentralizing these cooperatives by 
getting the mass of the people interested in the ordering of public affairs. You will not be 
able to do all this unless you give the people some political education. Previously, it was 
realized that this key problem should be clarified once and for all. Today, it is true that 
the principle of the political education of the masses is generally subscribed to in under -
developed countries. But it does not seem that this primordial task is really taken to 
heart. When people stress the need to educate the people politically , they decide to 
point out at the same time that they want to be supported by the people in the action 
that they are taking. A government which declares that it wishes to educate the people 
politically thus expresses its desire to govern with the people an d for the people. It 
ought not to speak a language destined to camouflage a bourgeois administration. In 
the capitalist countries, the bourgeois governments have long since left this infantile 
stage of authority behind. To put it bluntly, they govern with the help of their laws, their 
economic strength and their police. Now that their power is firmly established they no 
longer need to lose time in striking demagogic attitudes. They govern in their own 
interests, and they have the courage of their own streng th. They have created 
legitimacy, and they are strong in their own right. 
The bourgeois caste in newly independent countries have not yet the cynicism nor the 
unruffled calm which are founded on the strength of long -established bourgeoisies. 
From this springs the fact that they show a certain anxiety to hide their real convictions, 
to side-track, and in short to set themselves up as a popular force. But the inclusion of 
the masses in politics does not consist in mobilizing three or four times a year ten 
thousand or a hundred thousand men and women. These mass meetings and 
spectacular gatherings are akin to the old tactics that date from before independence, 
whereby you exhibited your forces in order to prove to yourself and to others that you 
had the people behind you. The political education of the masses proposes not to treat 
the masses as children but to make adults of them. 
This brings us to consider the role of the political party in an under -developed country. 
We have seen in the preceding pages that ve ry often simple souls, who moreover 
belong to the newly born bourgeoisie, never stop repeating that in an under -developed 
country the direction of affairs by a strong authority, in other words a dictatorship, is a 
necessity. With this in view the party is given the task of supervising the masses. The 
party plays understudy to the administration and the police, and controls the masses, 
not in order to make sure that they really participate in the business of governing the 
nation, but in order to remind them constantly that the government expects from them 
obedience and discipline. That famous dictatorship, whose supporters believe that it is 
called for by the historical process and consider it an indispensable prelude to the dawn


--- PAGE 66 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 66 
of independence, in fact symb olizes the decision of the bourgeois caste to govern the 
under-developed country first with the help of the people, but soon against them. The 
progressive transformation of the party into an information service is the indication that 
the government holds i tself more and more on the defensive. The incoherent mass of 
the people is seen as a blind force that must be continually held in check either by 
mystification or by the fear inspired by the police force. The party acts as a barometer 
and as an information  service. The militant is turned into an informer. He is entrusted 
with punitive expeditions against the villages. The embryo opposition parties are 
liquidated by beatings and stonings. The opposition candidates see their houses set on 
fire. The police inc rease their provocations. In these conditions, you may be sure, the 
party is unchallenged and 99.99 per cent of the votes are cast for the governmental 
candidate. We should add that in Africa a certain number of governments actually 
behave in this way. All  the opposition parties, which moreover are usually progressive 
and would therefore tend to work for the greater influence of the masses in the conduct 
of public matters, and who desire that the proud, money -making bourgeoisie should be 
brought to heel, ha ve been by dint of baton charges and prisons condemned first to 
silence and then to a clandestine existence. 
The political party in many parts of Africa which are today independent is puffed up in a 
most dangerous way. In the presence of a member of the pa rty, the people are silent, 
behave like a flock of sheep and publish panegyrics in praise of the government of the 
leader. But in the street when evening comes, away from the village, in, the cafes or by 
the river, the bitter disappointment of the people, their despair but also their unceasing 
anger makes itself heard. The party, instead of welcoming the expression of popular 
discontentment, instead of taking for its fundamental purpose the free flow of ideas from 
the people up to the government, forms a sc reen, and forbids such ideas. The party 
leaders behave like common sergeant -majors, frequently reminding the people of the 
need for „silence in the ranks‟. This party which used to call itself the servant of the 
people, which used to claim that it worked f or the fail expression of the people‟s will, as 
soon as the colonial power puts the country into its control hastens to send the people 
back to their caves. As far as national unity is concerned the party will also make many 
mistakes, as for example when t he so-called national party behaves as a party based 
on ethnical differences. It becomes, in fact, the tribe which makes itself into a party. This 
party which of its own will proclaims that it is a national party, and which claims to speak 
in the name of t he totality of the people, secretly, sometimes even openly organizes an 
authentic ethnical dictatorship. We no longer see the rise of a bourgeois dictatorship, 
but a tribal dictatorship. The ministers, the members of the cabinet, the ambassadors 
and local commissioners are chosen from the same ethnological group as the leader, 
sometimes directly from his own family. Such regimes of the family sort seem to go 
back to the old laws of inbreeding, and not anger but shame is felt when we are faced 
with such stup idity, such an imposture, such intellectual and spiritual poverty. These 
heads of the government are the true traitors in Africa, for they sell their country to the 
most terrifying of all its enemies: stupidity. This tribalizing of the central authority, i t is 
certain, encourages regionalist ideas and separatism. All the decentralizing tendencies 
spring up again and triumph, and the nation falls to pieces, broken in bits. The leader, 
who once used to call for „African unity‟ and who thought of his own littl e family wakes


--- PAGE 67 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 67 
up one day to find himself saddled with five tribes, who also want to have their own 
ambassadors and ministers; and irresponsible as ever, still unaware and still 
despicable, he denounces their „treason‟. 
We have more than once drawn attenti on to the baleful influence frequently wielded by 
the leader. This is due to the fact that the party in certain districts is organized like a 
gang, with the toughest person in it as its head. The ascendancy of such a leader and 
his power over others is often mentioned, and people have no hesitation in declaring, in 
a tone of slightly admiring complicity that he strikes terror into his nearest collaborators. 
In order to avoid these many pitfalls an unceasing battle must be waged, a battle to 
prevent the part y ever be -coming a willing tool in the hands of a leader. „Leader': the 
word comes from the English verb „to lead‟, but a frequent French translation is „to 
drive‟. The driver, the shepherd of the people no longer exists today. The people are no 
longer a h erd; they do not need to be driven. If the leader drives me on, I want him to 
realize that at the same time I show him the way; the nation ought not to be something 
bossed by a Grand Panjandrum. We may understand the panic caused in governmental 
circles each time one of these leaders falls ill; they are obsessed by the question of who 
is to succeed him. What will happen to the country if the leader disappears? The ruling 
classes who have abdicated in favour of the leader, irresponsible, oblivious of 
everything and essentially preoccupied with the pleasures of their everyday life, their 
cocktail parties, their journeys paid for by government money, the profits they can make 
out of various schemes — from time to time these people discover the spiritual waste 
land at the heart of the nation. 
A country that really wishes to answer the questions that history puts to it, that wants to 
develop not only its towns but also the brains of its inhabitants, such a country must 
possess a trustworthy political patty. The pa rty is not a tool in the hands of the 
government. Quite on the contrary, the party is a tool in the hands of the people; it is 
they who decide on the policy that the government carries out. The party is not, and 
ought never to be, the only political bureau  where all the members of the government 
and the chief dignitaries of the regime may meet freely together. Only too frequently the 
political bureau, unfortunately, consists of all the party and its members who reside 
permanently in the capital. In an under developed country, the leading members of the 
party ought to avoid the capital as if it had the plague. They ought, with some few 
exceptions, to live in the country districts. The centralization of all activity in the city 
ought to be avoided. No excuse of  administrative discipline should be taken as 
legitimizing that excrescence of a capital which is already over -populated and over -
developed with regard to nine -tenths of the country. The party should be decentralized 
in the extreme. It is the only way to b ring life to regions which are dead, those regions 
which are not yet awakened to life. 
In practice, there will be at least one member of the political bureau in each area and he 
will deliberately not be appointed as head of that area. He will have no admin istrative 
powers. The regional member of the political bureau is not expected to hold the highest 
rank in the regional administrative organization. He ought not automatically to belong to 
the regional administrative body. For the people, the party is not a n authority, but an


--- PAGE 68 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 68 
organism through which they as the people exercise their authority and express their 
will. The less there is of confusion and duality of powers, the more the party will play its 
part of guide and the more surely it will constitute for t he people a decisive guarantee. If 
the party is mingled with the government, the fact of being a party militant means that 
you take the short cut to gain private ends, to hold a post in the government, step up the 
ladder, get promotion and make a career for yourself. 
In an under -developed country, the setting up of dynamic district officials stops the 
progress whereby the towns become top -heavy, and the incoherent rush towards the 
cities of the mass of country people. The setting up early in the days of independence of 
regional organizations and officials who have full authority to do everything in their 
power to awaken such a region, to bring life to it and to hasten the growth of 
consciousness in it is a necessity from which there is no escape for a countr y that 
wishes to progress. Otherwise, the government big -wigs and the party officials group 
themselves around the leader. The government services swell to huge proportions, not 
because they are developing and specializing, but because new -found cousins and  
fresh militants are looking for jobs and hope to edge themselves into the government 
machine. And the dream of every citizen is to get up to the capital, and to have his 
share of the cake. The local districts are deserted; the mass of the country people w ith 
no one to lead them, uneducated and unsupported, turn their backs on their poorly -
laboured fields and flock towards the outer ring of suburbs, thus swelling out of all 
proportion the ranks of the lumpen-proletariat. 
The moment for a fresh national cris is is not far off. To avoid it, we think that a quite 
different policy should be followed: that the interior, the back -country ought to be the 
most privileged part of the country. Moreover, in the last resort, there is nothing 
inconvenient in the governmen t choosing its seat elsewhere than in the capital. The 
capital must be deconsecrated; the outcast masses must be shown that we have 
decided to work for them. It is with this idea in mind „that the government of Brazil tried 
to found Brazilia. The dead city  of Rio de Janeiro was an insult to the Brazilian people. 
But, unfortunately, Brazilia is just another new capital, as monstrous as the first. The 
only advantage of this achievement is that, today, there exists a road through the bush 
to it. 
No, there is no serious reason which can be opposed to the choice of another capital, or 
to the moving of the government as a whole towards one of the most under -populated 
regions. The capital of under -developed countries is a commercial notion inherited from 
the colonial period. But we who are citizens of the under -developed countries, we ought 
to seek every occasion for contacts with the rural masses. We must create a national 
policy, in other words a policy for the masses. We ought never to lose contact with the 
people which has battled for its independence and for the concrete betterment of its 
existence. 
The native civil servants and technicians ought not to bury themselves in diagrams and 
statistics, but rather in the heart of the people”. They ought not to bristle up every time 
there is question of a move to be made to the „interior‟. We should no longer see the


--- PAGE 69 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 69 
young women of the country threaten their husbands with divorce if they do not manage 
to avoid being appointed to a rural post. For these reasons, the polit ical bureau of the 
party ought to treat these forgotten districts in a very privileged manner; and the life of 
the capital, an altogether artificial life which is stuck on to the real, national life like a 
foreign body ought to take up the least space poss ible in the life of the nation, which is 
sacred and fundamental. 
In an under-developed country the party ought to be organized in such fashion that it is 
not simply content with having contacts with the masses. The party should be the direct 
expression of the masses. The party is not an administration responsible for transmitting 
government orders; it is the energetic spokesman and the incorruptible defender of the 
masses. In order to arrive at this conception of the party, we must above all rid 
ourselves of the very Western, very bourgeois and therefore contemptuous attitude that 
the masses are incapable of governing themselves. In fact, experience proves that the 
masses understand perfectly the most complicated problems. One of the greatest 
services that the Algerian revolution will have rendered to the intellectuals of Algeria will 
be to have placed them in contact with the people, to have allowed them to see the 
extreme, ineffable poverty of the people, at the same time allowing them to watch the 
awakening of the people‟s intelligence and the onward progress of their consciousness. 
The Algerian people, that mass of starving illiterates, those men and women plunged for 
centuries in the most appalling obscurity have held out against tanks and aeroplanes, 
against napalm and „psychological services‟, but above all against corruption and brain -
washing, against traitors and against the „national‟ armies of General Bellounis. This 
people has held out in spite of hesitant or feeble individuals, and in spite of woul d-be 
dictators. This people has held out because for seven years its struggle has opened up 
for it vistas that it never dreamed existed. Today, arms factories are working in the midst 
of the mountains several yards underground; today, the people‟s tribunal s are 
functioning at every level, and local planning commissions are organizing the division of 
large-scale holdings, and working out the Algeria of tomorrow. An isolated individual 
may obstinately refuse to understand a problem, but the group or the villa ge 
understands with disconcerting rapidity. It is true that if care is taken to use only a 
language that is understood by graduates in law and economics, you can easily prove 
that the masses have to be managed from above. But if you speak the language of 
every day; if you are not obsessed by the perverse desire to spread confusion and to rid 
yourself of the people, then you will realize that the masses are quick to seize every 
shade of meaning and to learn all the tricks of the trade. If recourse is had to technical 
language, this signifies that it has been decided to consider the masses as uninitiated. 
Such a language is hard put to it to hide the lecturers‟ wish to cheat the people and to 
leave them out of things. The business of obscuring language is a ma sk behind which 
stands out the much greater business of plunder. The people‟s property and the 
people‟s sovereignty are to be stripped from them at one and the same time. Everything 
can be explained to the people, on the single condition that you really wa nt them to 
understand. And if you think that you don‟t need them, and that on the contrary they 
may hinder the smooth running of the many limited liability companies whose aim it is to 
make the people even poorer, then the problem is quite clear.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 70 
For if you think that you can manage a country without letting the people interfere, if you 
think that the people upset the game by their mere presence, whether they slow it down 
or whether by their natural ignorance they sabotage it, then you must have no 
hesitation: you must keep the people out. Now, it so happens that when the people are 
invited to partake in the management of the country, they do not slow the movement 
down but on the contrary they speed it up. We Algerians have had occasion and the 
good fortune during the course of this war to handle a fair number of questions. In 
certain country districts, the politico -military leaders of the revolution found themselves 
in fact confronted with situations which called for radical solutions. We shall look at 
some of these situations. 
During the years 1956-7, French colonialism had marked off certain zones as forbidden, 
and within these zones people‟s movements were strictly controlled. Thus the peasants 
could no longer go freely to the towns and buy provisions. Dur ing this period, the 
grocers made huge profits. The prices of tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco and salt soared. 
The black market flourished blatantly. The peasants who could not pay in money 
mortgaged their crops, in other words their land, or else lopped off f ield after field of 
their fathers‟ farms and during the second phase worked them for the grocer. As soon 
as the political commissioners realized the danger of the situation they reacted 
immediately. Thus a rational system of provisioning was instituted: th e grocer who went 
to the town was obliged to buy from nationalist wholesalers who handed him an invoice 
which clearly showed the prices of the goods. When the retailer got back to the village, 
before doing anything else he had to go to the political commis sioner who checked the 
invoice, decided on the margin of profit and fixed the price at which the various goods 
should be sold. However, the retailer soon discovered a new trick, and after three or 
four days declared that his stocks had run out. In fact, he  went on with his business of 
selling on the black market on the sly. The reaction of the politico -military authorities 
was thorough-going. Heavy penalizations were decided on, and the fines collected were 
put into the village funds and used for social pur poses or to pay for public works in the 
general interest. Sometimes it was decided to shut down the shop for a while. Then if 
there was a repetition of black marketeering, the business was at once confiscated and 
a managing committee elected to carry it on , which paid a monthly allowance to the 
former owner. 
Taking these experiences as a starting -point, the functioning of the main laws of 
economics were explained to the people, with concrete examples. The accumulation of 
capital ceased to be a theory and be came a very real and immediate mode of 
behaviour. The people understood how that once a man was in trade, he could become 
rich and increase his turnover. Then and then only did the peasants tell the tale of how 
the grocer gave them loans at exorbitant inte rest, and others recalled how he evicted 
them from their land and how from owners they became labourers. The more the people 
understand, the more watchful they become, and the more they come to realize that 
finally everything depends on them and their salv ation lies in their own cohesion, in the 
true understanding of their interests and in knowing who are their enemies. The people 
come to understand that wealth is not the fruit of labour but the result of organized, 
protected robbery. Rich people are no longer respectable people; they are nothing more


--- PAGE 71 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 71 
than flesh-eating animals, jackals and vultures which wallow in the people‟s blood. With 
another end in view the political commissioners have had to decide that nobody will 
work for anyone else any longer. The land belongs to those that till it. This is a principle 
which has through explanation become a fundamental law of the Algerian revolution. 
The peasants who used to employ agricultural labourers have been obliged to give a 
share of the land to their former employees. 
So it may be seen that production per acre trebled, in spite of the many raids by the 
French, in spite of bombardments from the air, and the difficulty of getting manures. The 
fellahs who at harvest -time were able to judge and weigh the crops th us obtained 
wanted to know whence came such a phenomenon; and they were quick to understand 
that the idea of work is not as simple as all that, that slavery is opposed to work, and 
that work presupposes liberty, responsibility and consciousness. 
In those d istricts where we have been able to carry out successfully these interesting 
experiments, where we have watched man being created by revolutionary beginnings, 
the peasants have very clearly caught hold of the idea that the more intelligence you 
bring to yo ur work, the more pleasure you will have in it. We have been able to make 
the masses understand that work is not simply the output of energy, nor the functioning 
of certain muscles, but that people work more by using their brains and their hearts than 
with only their muscles and their sweat. In the same way in these liberated districts 
which are at the same time excluded from the old trade routes we have had to modify 
production, which formerly looked only towards the towns and towards export. We have 
organized production to meet consumers‟ needs for the people and for the units of the 
national army of liberation. We have quadrupled the production of lentils and organized 
the manufacture of charcoal. Green vegetables and charcoal have been sent through 
the mountains from the north to the south, whereas the southern districts send meat to 
the north. This coordination was decided upon by the F.L.N. and they it was who set up 
the system of communications. We did not have any technicians or planners coming 
from big Western universities; but in these liberated regions the daily ration went up to 
the hitherto unheard -of figure of 3,200 calories. The people were not content with 
coming triumphant out of this test. They started asking themselves theoretical 
questions: for example, why did certain districts never see an orange before the war of 
liberation, while thousands of tons are exported every year abroad? Why were grapes 
unknown to a great many Algerians whereas the European peoples enjoyed them by 
the million? To day, the people have a very clear notion of what belongs to them. The 
Algerian people today know that they are the sole owners of the soil and mineral wealth 
of their country. And if some individuals do not under -stand the unrelenting refusal of 
the F.L.N. to tolerate any encroachment on this right of ownership, and its fierce refusal 
to allow any compromise on principles, they must one and all remember that the 
Algerian people is today an adult people, responsible and fully conscious of its 
responsibilities. In short, the Algerians are men of property. 
If we have taken the example of Algeria to illustrate our subject, it is not at all with the 
intention of glorifying our own people, but simply to show the important part played by 
the war in leading them tow ards consciousness of themselves. It is clear that other


--- PAGE 72 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 72 
peoples have come to the same conclusion in different ways. We know for sure today 
that in Algeria the test of force was inevitable; but other countries through political action 
and through the work of clarification undertaken by a party have led their people to the 
same results. In Algeria, we have realized that the masses are equal to the problems 
which confront them. In an under -developed country, experience proves that the 
important thing is not that three hundred people form a plan and decide upon carrying it 
out, but that the whole people plan and decide even if it takes them twice or three times 
as long. The fact is that the time taken up by explaining, the time „lost‟ in treating the 
worker as a human being, will be caught up in the execution of the plan. People must 
know where they are going, and why. The politician should not ignore the fact that the 
future remains a closed book so long as the consciousness of the people remains 
imperfect, elementary and cloudy. We African politicians must have very clear ideas on 
the situation of our people. But this clarity of ideas must be profoundly dialectical. The 
awakening of the whole people will not come about at once; the people‟s work in the 
building of the nation will not immediately take on its full dimensions: first because the 
means of communication and transmission are only beginning to be developed; 
secondly because the yardstick of time must no longer be that of the moment or up till 
the next harvest, but must become that of the rest of the world, and lastly because the 
spirit of discouragement which has been deeply rooted in people‟s minds by colonial 
domination is still very near the surface. But we must not overlook the fact that victory 
over those weaknesses which are the heritage of the material and spiritual domination 
of the country by another is a necessity from which no government will be able to 
escape. Let us take the example of work under the colonial regime. The settler never 
stopped complaining that the native is slow. Today, in certain countries which have 
become independent, we hear the ruling classes taking up the same cry. The fact is that 
the settler wanted the native to be enthusiastic. By a sort of process of mystification 
which constitutes the most sublime type of separation from reality, he wanted to 
persuade the slave that the land that he worked belonged to him, that the mines where 
he lost his health were owned by him. The settler was singularly forgetful of the fact that 
he was growing rich through the death -throes of the slave. In fact what the settler was 
saying to the native was „Kill yourself that I may become rich‟. Today, we must behave 
in a different fashion. We ought not to say to the people: „Kill yourselves that the country 
may become rich.‟ If we want to increase the national revenue, and decrease the 
importing of certain products which are useless, or even harmful, if we want to increase 
agricultural production and overcome illiteracy, we must explain what we ar e about. The 
people must understand what is at stake. Public business ought to be the business of 
the public. So the necessity of creating a large number of well -informed nuclei at the 
bottom crops up again. Too often, in fact, we are content to establish national 
organizations at the top and always in the capital: the Women‟s Union, the Young 
People‟s Federation, Trade Unions, etc. But if one takes the trouble to investigate what 
is behind the office in the capital, if you go into the inner room where the reports ought 
to be, you will be shocked by the emptiness, the blank spaces, and the bluff. There 
must be a basis; there must be cells that supply content and life. The masses should be 
able to meet together, discuss, propose and receive directions. The ci tizens should be 
able to speak, to express themselves and to put forward new ideas. The branch 
meeting and the committee meeting are liturgical acts. They are privileged occasions


--- PAGE 73 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 73 
given to a human being to listen and to speak. At each meeting, the brain in -creases its 
means of participation and the eye discovers a landscape more and more in keeping 
with human dignity. 
The large proportion of young people in the under -developed countries raises specific 
problems for the government, which must be tackled with  lucidity. The young people of 
the towns, idle and often illiterate, are a prey to all sorts of disintegrating influences. It is 
to the youth of an under -developed country that the industrialized countries most often 
offer their pastimes.  
Normally, there is a certain homogeneity between the mental and material level of the 
members of any given society and the pleasures which that society creates for itself. 
But in under -developed countries, young people have at their disposal leisure 
occupations designed for the youth of capitalist countries: detective novels, penny-in-the 
slot machines, sexy photographs, pornographic literature, films banned to those under 
sixteen, and above all alcohol. In the West, the family circle, the effects of education 
and the rela tively high standard of living of the working classes provide a more or less 
efficient protection against the harmful action of these pastimes. But in an African 
country, where mental development is uneven, where the violent collision of two worlds 
has considerably shaken old traditions and thrown the universe of the perceptions out of 
focus, the impressionability and sensibility of the young African are at the mercy of the 
various assaults made upon them by the very nature of Western culture. His family ve ry 
often proves itself incapable of showing stability and homogeneity when faced with such 
attacks. 
In this domain, the government‟s duty is to act as a filter and a stabilizer. But the Youth 
Commissioners in under-developed countries often make the mistak e of imagining their 
role to be that of Youth Commissioners in frilly developed countries. They speak of 
strengthening the soul, of developing the body, and of facilitating the growth of 
sportsmanlike qualities. It is our opinion that they should beware of  these conceptions. 
The young people of an under -developed country are above all idle: occupations must 
be found for them. For this reason the Youth Commissioners ought for practical 
purposes to be attached to the Ministry for Labour. The Ministry for Labo ur, which is a 
prime necessity in an under -developed country, functions in collaboration with the 
Ministry for Planning, which is another necessary institution in under -developed 
countries. The youth of Africa ought not to be sent to sports stadiums but in to the fields 
and into the schools. The stadium ought not to be a show place erected in the towns, 
but a bit of open ground in the midst of the fields that the young people must reclaim, 
cultivate and give to the nation. The capitalist conception of sport is fundamentally 
different from that which should exist in an under -developed country. The African 
politician should not be preoccupied with turning out sportsmen, but with turning out fully 
conscious men, who play games as well. If games are not integrate d into the national 
life, that is to say in the building of the nation, and if you turn out national sportsmen and 
not fully conscious men, you will very quickly see sport rotted by professionalism and 
commercialism. Sport should not be a pastime or a dist raction for the bourgeoisie of the 
towns. The greatest task before us is to understand at each moment what is happening


--- PAGE 74 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 74 
m our country. We ought not to cultivate the exceptional or to seek for a hero, who is 
another form of leaden. We ought to uplift the pe ople; we must develop their brains, fill 
them with ideas, change them and make them into human beings. 
We once more come up against that obsession of ours — which we would like to see 
shared by all African politicians — about the need for effort to be well-informed, for work 
which is enlightened and free from its historic intellectual darkness. To hold a 
responsible position in an under-developed country is to know that in the end everything 
depends on the education of the masses, on the raising of the leve l of thought, and on 
what we are too quick to call „political teaching‟. 
In fact, we often believe with criminal superficiality that to educate the masses politically 
is to deliver a long political harangue from time to time. We think that it is enough tha t 
the leader or one of his lieutenants should speak in a pompous tone about the principle 
events of the day for them to have fulfilled this bounden duty to educate the masses 
politically. Now, political education means opening their minds, awakening them, and 
allowing the birth of their intelligence; as Cesaire said, it is „to invent souls‟. To educate 
the masses politically does not mean, cannot mean making a political speech. What it 
means is to try, relentlessly and passionately, to teach the masses that  everything 
depends on them; that if we stagnate it is their responsibility, and that if we go forward it 
is due to them too, that there is no such thing as a demiurge, that there is no famous 
man who will take the responsibility for everything, but that t he demiurge is the people 
themselves and the magic hands are finally only the hands of the people. In order to put 
all this into practice, in order really to incarnate the people, we repeat that there must be 
decentralization in the extreme. The movement f rom the top to the bottom and from the 
bottom to the top should be a fixed principle, not through concern for formalism but 
because simply to respect this principle is the guarantee of salvation. It is from the base 
that forces mount up which supply the su mmit with its dynamic, and make it possible 
dialectically for it to leap ahead. Once again we Algerians have been quick to 
understand these facts, for no member of the government at the head of any recognized 
state has had the chance of availing himself of  such a mission of salvation. For it is the 
rank-and-file who are fighting in Algeria, and the rank -and-file know well that without 
their daily struggle, hard and heroic as it is, the summit would collapse; and in the same 
way those at the bottom know that  without a head and without leadership the base 
would split apart in incoherence and anarchy. The summit only draws its worth and its 
strength from the existence of the people at war. Literally, it is the people who freely 
create a summit for themselves, and not the summit that tolerates the people. 
The masses should know that the government and the party are at their service. A 
deserving people, in other words a people conscious of its dignity, is a people that never 
forgets these facts. During the colonia l occupation the people were told that they must 
give their lives so that dignity might triumph. But the African peoples quickly came to 
understand that it was not only the occupying power that threatened their dignity. The 
African peoples were quick to re alize that dignity and sovereignty were exact 
equivalents, and, in fact, a free people living in dignity is a sovereign people. It is no use 
demonstrating that the African peoples are childish or weak. A government or a party


--- PAGE 75 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 75 
gets the people it deserves an d sooner or later a people gets the government it 
deserves. 
Practical experience in certain regions confirms this point of view. It sometimes happens 
at meetings that militants use sweeping, dogmatic formulae. The preference for this 
shortcut, in which spontaneity and over -simple sinking of differences dangerously 
combine to defeat intellectual elaboration, frequently triumphs. When we meet this 
shirking of responsibility in a militant it is not enough to tell him he is wrong. We must 
make him ready for responsibility, encourage him to follow up his chain of reasoning 
and make him realize the true nature, often shocking, inhuman and in the long run 
sterile, of such over-simplification. 
Nobody, neither leader nor rank-and-file, can hold back the truth. The  search for truth in 
local attitudes is a collective affair. Some are richer in experience, and elaborate their 
thought more rapidly, and in the past have been able to establish a greater number of 
mental links. But they ought to avoid riding rough shod ov er the people, for the success 
of the decision which is adopted depends upon the coordinated, conscious effort of the 
whole of the people. No one can get out of the situation scot free. Everyone will be 
butchered or tortured; and in the framework of the in dependent nation everyone will go 
hungry and everyone will suffer in the slump. The collective struggle presupposes 
collective responsibility at the base and collegiate responsibility at the top. Yes; 
everybody will have to be compromised in the fight for the common good. No one has 
clean hands; there are no innocents and no onlookers. We all have dirty hands; we are 
all soiling them in the swamps of our country and in the terrifying emptiness of our 
brains. Every onlooker is either a coward or a traitor. 
The duty of those at the head of the movement is to have the masses behind them. 
Allegiance presupposes awareness and understanding of the mission which has to be 
fulfilled; in short, an intellectual position, however embryonic. We must not voodoo the 
people, nor dissolve them in emotion and confusion. Only those under -developed 
countries led by revolutionary elites who have come up from the people can today allow 
the entry of the masses upon the scene of history. But, we must repeat, it is absolutely 
necessary to oppose vigorously and definitively the birth of a national bourgeoisie and a 
privileged caste. To educate the masses politically is to make the totality of the nation a 
reality to each citizen. It is to make the history of the nation part of the per sonal 
experience of each of its citizens. As President Sekou Toure aptly remarked in his 
message to the second congress of African writers: 
“In the realm of thought, man may claim to be the brain of the world; but in real life 
where every action affects spiritual and physical existence, the world is always the brain 
of mankind; for it is at this level that you will find the sum total of the powers and units of 
thought, and the dynamic forces of development and improvement; and it is there that 
energies are merged and the sum of man‟s intellectual values is finally added together.” 
Individual experience, because it is national and because it is a link in the chain of 
national existence, ceases to be individual, limited and shrunken and is enabled to open


--- PAGE 76 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 76 
out into the truth of the nation and of the world. In the same way that during the period 
of armed struggle each fighter held the fortune of the nation in his hand, so during the 
period of national construction each citizen ought to continue in his real, every day 
activity to associate himself with the whole of the nation, to incarnate the continuous 
dialectical truth of the nation and to will the triumph of man in his completeness here 
and now. If the building of a bridge does not enrich the awareness of those who work on 
it, then that bridge ought not to be built and the citizens can go on swimming across the 
river or going by boat. The bridge should not be „parachuted down‟ from above; it should 
not be imposed by a deus ex machina upon the social scene; on the  contrary it should 
come from the muscles and the brains of the citizens. Certainly, there may well be need 
of engineers and architects, sometimes completely foreign engineers and architects; but 
the local party leaders should be always present, so that th e new techniques can make 
their way into the cerebral desert of the citizen, so that the bridge in whole and in part 
can be taken up and conceived, and the responsibility for it assumed by the citizen. In 
this way, and in this way only, everything is possible. 
A government which calls itself a national government ought to take responsibility for 
the totality of the nation; and in an under-developed country the young people represent 
one of the most important sectors. The level of consciousness of young peop le must be 
raised; they need enlightenment. If the work of explanation had been carried on among 
the youth of the nation, and if the Young People‟s National Union had carried out its 
task of integrating them into the nation, those mistakes would have been avoided which 
have threatened or already undermined the future of the Latin American Republics. The 
army is not always a school of war; more often, it is a school of civic and political 
education. The soldier of an adult nation is not a simple mercenary bu t a citizen who by 
means of arms defends the nation. That is why it is of fundamental importance that the 
soldier should know that he is in the service of his country and not in the service of his 
commanding officer, however great that officer‟s prestige m ay be. We must take 
advantage of the national military and civil service in order to raise the level of the 
national consciousness, and to detribalize and unite the nation. In an under -developed 
country every effort is made to mobilize men and women as qui ckly as possible; it must 
guard against the danger of perpetuating the feudal tradition which holds sacred the 
superiority of the masculine element over the feminine. Women will have exactly the 
same place as men, not in the clauses of the constitution but  in the life of every day: in 
the factory, at school and in the parliament. If in the Western countries men are shut up 
in barracks, that is not to say that this is always the best procedure. Recruits need not 
necessarily be militarized. The national servi ce may be civil or military, and in any case 
it is advisable that every able -bodied citizen can at any moment take his place in a 
fighting unit for the defence of national and social liberties. 
It should be possible to carry out large -scale undertakings in the public interest by using 
recruited labour. This is a marvellous way of stirring up inert districts and of making 
known to a greater number of citizens the needs of their country. Care must be taken to 
avoid turning the army into an autonomous body whi ch sooner or later, finding itself idle 
and without any definite mission, will „go into politics‟ and threaten the government. 
Drawing-room generals, by dint of haunting the corridors of government departments,


--- PAGE 77 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 77 
come to dream of manifestoes. The only way to  avoid this menace is to educate the 
army politically, in other words to nationalize it. In the same way another urgent task is 
to increase the militia. In case of war, it is the whole nation which fights and works. It 
should not include any professional s oldiers, and the number of permanent officers 
should be reduced to a minimum. This is in the first place because officers are very 
often chosen from the university class, who could be much more useful elsewhere; an 
engineer is a thousand times more indispe nsable to his country than an officer; and 
secondly, because the crystallization of the caste spirit must be avoided. We have seen 
in the preceding pages that nationalism, that magnificent song that made the people 
rise against their oppressors, stops shor t, falters and dies away on the day that 
independence is proclaimed. Nationalism is not a political doctrine, nor a programme. If 
you really wish your country to avoid regression, or at best halts and uncertainties, a 
rapid step must be taken from national  consciousness to political and social 
consciousness. The nation does not exist except in a programme which has been 
worked out by revolutionary leaders and taken up with fall understanding and 
enthusiasm by the masses. The nation‟s effort must constantly be adjusted into the 
general background of underdeveloped countries. The battle -line against hunger, 
against ignorance, against poverty and against unawareness ought to be ever present 
in the muscles and the intelligences of men and women. The work of the masses and 
their will to overcome the evils which have for centuries excluded them from the mental 
achievements of the past ought to be grafted on to the work and will of all under -
developed peoples. On the level of underdeveloped humanity there is a kind of 
collective effort, a sort of common destiny. The news which interests the Third World 
does not deal with King Baudouin‟s marriage nor the scandals of the Italian ruling class. 
What we want to hear about are the experiments carried out by the Argentinian s or the 
Burmese in their efforts to overcome illiteracy or the dictatorial tendencies of their 
leaders. It is these things which strengthen us, teach us and increase our efficiency ten 
times over. As we see it, a programme is necessary for a government wh ich really 
wants to free the people politically and socially. There must be an economic 
programme; there must also be a doctrine concerning the division of wealth and social 
relations. In fact, there must be an idea of man and of the future of humanity; th at is to 
say that no demagogic formula and no collusion with the former occupying power can 
take the place of a programme. The new peoples, unawakened at first but soon 
becoming more and more clear -minded, will make strong demands for this programme. 
The African people and indeed all under-developed peoples, contrary to common belief, 
very quickly build up a social and political consciousness. What can be dangerous is 
when they reach the stage of social consciousness before the stage of nationalism. If 
this happens, we find in under -developed countries fierce demands for social justice 
which paradoxically are allied with often primitive tribalism. The under -developed 
peoples behave like starving creatures; this means that the end is very near for those 
who are having a good time in Africa. Their government will not be able to prolong its 
own existence indefinitely. A bourgeoisie that provides nationalism alone as food for the 
masses fails in its mission and gets caught up in a whole series of mishaps. But if 
nationalism is not made explicit, if it is not enriched and deepened by a very rapid 
transformation into a consciousness of social and political needs, in other words into 
humanism, it leads up a blind alley. The bourgeois leaders of under -developed


--- PAGE 78 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 78 
countries imprison national consciousness in sterile formalism. It is only when men and 
women are included on a vast scale in enlightened and fruitful work that form and body 
are given to that consciousness. Then the flag and the palace where sits the 
government cease to be the symbols of the nation. The nation deserts these brightly lit, 
empty shells and takes shelter in the country, where it is given life and dynamic power. 
The living expression of the nation is the moving consciousness of the whole of the 
people; it is the coherent, enlightened action of men and women. The collective building 
up of a destiny is the assumption of responsibility on the historical scale. Otherwise 
there is anarchy, repression and the resurgence of tribal parties and federalism. Th e 
national government, if it wants to be national, ought to govern by the people and for the 
people, for the outcasts and by the outcasts. No leader, however valuable he may be, 
can substitute himself for the popular will; and the national government, befo re 
concerning itself about international prestige, ought first to give back their dignity to all 
citizens, fill their minds and feast their eyes with human things, and create a prospect 
that is human because conscious and sovereign men dwell therein. 
  
 
Frantz Fanon, 1961 
The Wretched of the Earth 
Chapter 6. Conclusion 
 
Source: Les damnés de la terre by François Maspéro éditeur in 1961; 
First published: in Great Britain by Macgibbon and Kee in 1965; 
Transcribed: by Dominic Tweedie. 
 
Come, then, comrades; it would be as well to decide at once to change our ways. We 
must shake off the heavy darkness in which we were plunged, and leave it behind. The 
new day which is already at hand must find us firm, prudent and resolute. 
We must leave our dreams and abandon our old beliefs and friendships of the time 
before life began. Let us waste no time in sterile litanies and nauseating mimicry. Leave 
this Europe where they are never done talking of Man, yet murder men everywhere they 
find them, at the corner of every one of their own streets, in all the corners of the globe. 
For centuries they have stifled almost the whole of humanity in the name of a so -called 
spiritual experience. Look at them today swaying between atomic and spiritual 
disintegration. 
Back toTop


--- PAGE 79 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 79 
And yet it may be said that Europe has been successful in as much as everything that 
she has attempted has succeeded. 
Europe undertook the leadership of the world with ardour, cynicism and violence. Look 
at how the shadow of her palaces stretches out ever farther! Every one of her 
movements has burst the bounds of space and thought. Europe has declined all 
humility and all modesty; but she has also set her face against a ll solicitude and all 
tenderness. 
She has only shown herself parsimonious and niggardly where men are concerned; it is 
only men that she has killed and devoured. 
So, my brothers, how is it that we do not understand that we have better things to do 
than to follow that same Europe? 
That same Europe where they were never done talking of Man, and where they never 
stopped proclaiming that they were only anxious for the welfare of Man: today we know 
with what sufferings humanity has paid for every one of their triumphs of the mind. 
Come, then, comrades, the European game has finally ended; we must find something 
different. We today can do everything, so long as we do not imitate Europe, so long as 
we are not obsessed by the desire to catch up with Europe. 
Europe now lives at such a mad, reckless pace that she has shaken off all guidance 
and all reason, and she is running headlong into the abyss; we would do well to avoid it 
with all possible speed. 
Yet it is very true that we need a model, and that we want bluepri nts and examples. For 
many among us the European model is the most inspiring. We have therefore seen in 
the preceding pages to what mortifying set -backs such an imitation has led us. 
European achievements, European techniques and the European style ought n o longer 
to tempt us and to throw us off our balance. 
When I search for Man in the technique and the style of Europe, I see only a succession 
of negations of man, and an avalanche of murders. 
The human condition, plans for mankind and collaboration between  men in those tasks 
which increase the sum total of humanity are new problems, which demand true 
inventions. 
Let us decide not to imitate Europe; let us combine our muscles and our brains in a new 
direction. Let us try to create the whole man, whom Europe has been incapable of 
bringing to triumphant birth.


--- PAGE 80 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 80 
Two centuries ago, a former European colony decided to catch up with Europe. It 
succeeded so well that the United States of America became a monster, in which the 
taints, the sickness and the inhumanity of Europe have grown to appalling dimensions. 
Comrades, have we not other work to do than to create a third Europe? The West saw 
itself as a spiritual adventure. It is in the name of the spirit, in the name of the spirit of 
Europe, that Europe has made her encroachments, that she has justified her crimes 
and legitimized the slavery in which she holds four-fifths of humanity. 
Yes, the European spirit has strange roots. All European thought has unfolded in places 
which were increasingly more deserted and more encircled by precipices; and thus it 
was that the custom grew up in those places of very seldom meeting man. 
A permanent dialogue with oneself and an increasingly obscene narcissism never 
ceased to prepare the way for a half delirious state, where intellec tual work became 
suffering and the reality was not at all that of a living man, working and creating himself, 
but rather words, different combinations of words, and the tensions springing from the 
meanings contained in words. Yet some Europeans were found to urge the European 
workers to shatter this narcissism and to break with this un-reality. 
But in general the workers of Europe have not replied to these calls; for the workers 
believe, too, that they are part of the prodigious adventure of the European spirit. 
All the elements of a solution to the great problems of humanity have, at different times, 
existed in European thought. But Europeans have not carried out in practice the mission 
which fell to them, which consisted of bringing their whole weight to b ear violently upon 
these elements, of modifying their arrangement and their nature, of changing them and, 
finally, of bringing the problem of mankind to an infinitely higher plane. 
Today, we are present at the stasis of Europe. Comrades, let us flee from t his 
motionless movement where gradually dialectic is changing into the logic of equilibrium. 
Let us reconsider the question of mankind. Let us reconsider the question of cerebral 
reality and of the cerebral mass of all humanity, whose connexions must be in creased, 
whose channels must be diversified and whose messages must be re-humanized. 
Come, brothers, we have far too much work to do for us to play the game of rear -guard. 
Europe has done what she set out to do and on the whole she has done it well; let us  
stop blaming her, but let us say to her firmly that she should not make such a song and 
dance about it. We have no more to fear; so let us stop envying her. 
The Third World today faces Europe like a colossal mass whose aim should be to try to 
resolve the problems to which Europe has not been able to find the answers. 
But let us be clear: what matters is to stop talking about output, and intensification, and 
the rhythm of work.


--- PAGE 81 ---
Five Pan-Afrikanist Scholars-Leaders-Freedom Fighters                                                                                 Page 81 
No, there is no question of a return to Nature. It is simply a very concrete question of not 
dragging men towards mutilation, of not imposing upon the brain rhythms which very 
quickly obliterate it and wreck it. The pretext of catching up must not be used to push 
man around, to tear him away from himself or from his privacy, to break and kill him. 
No, we do not want to catch up with anyone. What we want to do is to go forward all the 
time, night and day, in the company of Man, in the company of all men. The caravan 
should not be stretched out, for in that case each line will hardly see  those who precede 
it; and men who no longer recognize each other meet less and less together, and talk to 
each other less and less. 
It is a question of the Third World starting a new history of Man, a history which will 
have regard to the sometimes prodig ious theses which Europe has put forward, but 
which will also not forget Europe‟s crimes, of which the most horrible was committed in 
the heart of man, and consisted of the pathological tearing apart of his functions and the 
crumbling away of his unity. An d in the framework of the collectivity there were the 
differentiations, the stratification and the bloodthirsty tensions fed by classes; and 
finally, on the immense scale of humanity, there were racial hatreds, slavery, 
exploitation and above all the bloodless genocide which consisted in the setting aside of 
fifteen thousand millions of men. 
So, comrades, let us not pay tribute to Europe by creating states, institutions and 
societies which draw their inspiration from her. 
Humanity is waiting for something o ther from us than such an imitation, which would be 
almost an obscene caricature. 
If we want to turn Africa into a new Europe, and America into a new Europe, then let us 
leave the destiny of our countries to Europeans. They will know how to do it better th an 
the most gifted among us. 
But if we want humanity to advance a step farther, if we want to bring it up to a different 
level than that which Europe has shown it, then we must invent and we must make 
discoveries. 
If we wish to live up to our peoples‟ expectations, we must seek the response elsewhere 
than in Europe. 
Moreover, if we wish to reply to the expectations of the people of Europe, it is no good sending 
them back a reflection, even an ideal reflection, of their society and their thought with whi ch 
from time to time they feel immeasurably sickened. 
For Europe, for ourselves and for humanity, comrades, we must turn over a new leaf, we must 
work out new concepts, and try to set afoot a new man. 
 
 
Back toTop

