=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Frolinan-Scholar.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 45
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:53:25.102318
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
FROLINAN’S NATIONAL STRATEGY 
FROLINAN: Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan* Nation 
RBG Communiversity  National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
By Marc Imhotep Cray, M.D. 
Dr. Cray is Physician, Web 2.0 & E-Learning Educator, Africana Studies Bibliophile and  
New Afrikan Thinker and Organizer  
Abstract: In this paper my thesis is a prescriptive one. It is a 
"Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National 
Oppression" that represents an application of Dr. Amos 
Wilson’s Afrikan Liberation psychology teachings and his 
“Blueprint for Black Power” reclama tion of Black self -
determination paradigm. I argue that because the masses of 
New Afrikan* people live under “de facto colonization and 
third world nation status”, with strategic implementation of 
a New Afrikan revolutionary theoretical framework and 
program of decolonization, based on a nation -within-a-
nation consciousness, commitment and conduct, the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement can be pushed forward 
towards  our ultimate objective of national independence. 
Within the context of the aforementioned no tions i.e., 
colonization and nation -within-a-nation, a “National 
Program of Decolonization” can be implemented and 
propagated throughout New Afrikan (Black) communities 
across the United States that will positively reflect and impact the cultural, politica l, 
socioeconomic and moral needs of the masses of New Afrikan people and thus, serve as a 
Keywords and phrases: 
 
 Theory and Practice 
  Break the Chains  
 De facto colonization 
 National oppression 
 Colonial domination 
 Neo-colony 
 Dialectical materialism 
 Historical materialism 
 Program of Decolonization 
 Third world nation status 
 Nation-within-a-Nation 
 Consciousness 
 Liberation Education 
 Political Economic Development 
 New Afrikan  
 New Afrikan Independence 
Movement  
 New Afrikan Education  
 Nation-building paradigms and 
praxis


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
template for present and future New Afrikan  Education and Nation -building paradigms and 
praxis into the 21st century. 
*We of the New Afrikan Independence Movement sp ell "Afrikan" with a "k" because Afrikan linguists 
originally used "k" to indicate the "c" sound in the English language. We use the term "New Afrikan," 
instead of Black, to define ourselves as an Afrikan people who have been forcibly transplanted to a new  
land and formed into a "new Afrikan nation" in North America. That withstanding, in this paper  New 
Afrikan, Black, African American and Afrikans in America are used interchangeably in accordance with 
citations used. 
CONTENTS: 
Preface 
"Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National 
Oppression" 
    Introductory Note  
   HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW  
   A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE: 
      In Refutation of Black Capitalism  
  THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE  
        First Phase - CLASS STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL UNITY  
        Second-Phase - NATIONAL UNITY FOR SELF GOVERNMENT  
        Third Phase - SELF-GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE  
  NATIONAL STRATEGY- BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION  
 
 
 
Companion Power Point to this 
paper: 
 
From RBG Communiversity to 
Frolinan Means Paradigm to Praxis


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Preface 
 
New Blueprint for Black Power Preface (August 24, 2011): 
“The actual empowerment of Black people under the banner of Black 
nationalism cannot occur as long as the two main ingredients necessary 
for power-definition and organization -are missing or underdeveloped”  
... Even if Black Nationalist motives and purpose were perfectly defined 
and matched, Blac k Power would still prove elusive without 
organizational appropriateness and a sufficiency of human and 
material resources”. [Emphasis mines] 
Dr. Amos Wilson, Blueprint for Black Power 1998, pg. 856-57 
 
In this paper my thesis is a prescriptive one. It is a "Theory and 
Practice to Break the Chains of National Oppression" that 
represents an application of Dr. Amos Wilson’s Afrikan 
Liberation psychology teachings and his “Blueprint for Black 
Power” reclamation of Black self-determination paradigm. I argue 
that because the masses of New Afrikan* people live under “de 
facto colonization and third world nation status”, with strategic 
implementation of a New Afrikan revolutionary theoretical 
framework and program of decolonization, based on a nation -
within-a-nation consciousness, commitment and conduct, the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement can be pushed forward towards  
our ultimate objective of national independence. Within the 
context of the aforementioned notions i.e., colonization and 
nation-within-a-nation, a  “National Program of Decolonization” 
can be implemented and propagated throughout New Afrikan (Black) communities across the 
United States that will positively reflect and impact the cultural, political, socioeconomic and 
Companion Studies Collections 
to this paper: 
 
RBG New Afrikan (Afrikans in 
America) Liberation Programs 
 
RBG Political Economy and 
Nationhood Studies Collection 
 
RBG FROLINAN STUDIES 
COLLECTION


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
moral needs of the masses of New Afrikan people and thus, serve as a template for present and 
future New Afrikan  Education and Nation-building paradigms and praxis into the 21st century. 
The Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation (Frolinan)  is a “from the garss -roots up 
[New Afrikan Peoples]  self-determination and Nation -building program”. A revolutionary 
nationalist theory and plan for Afrikan American community political economic control towards 
the ultimate goal of national independence. The initial objective is to evolve a united strategy and 
direction amongst the many New Afrikan nationalist formations / organizations / movements of 
local, regional and national significance. Once this has been achieved, the second objective will 
be to implement a transitional program for New Afrikan liberation (ISR, 1969), whereby we will 
strategically demand and tactically se cure control of the socioeconomic and political institutions 
of the urban and rural areas where New Afrikan people comprise the majority by pointing our 
economic decisions as a Nation -within-a-Nation. The demand for New Afrikan control of the 
Black community has a number of att ributes which give it a potent potential for mobilizing the 
masses in a revolutionary direction. Firstly, it speaks directly to the most pressing problems of 
our people such as housing, education, employment, and poverty that are cause by racist U.S. 
national oppression, colonial domination and economic exploitation. Secondly, New Afrikan  
control of the Black community is a democratic demand. It is based on something which the U.S. 
colonial government says it believes in, i.e., the right of people to have democratic c ontrol over 
their own lives and communities. Thus, the resistance the U.S. colonial power structure will 
invariably wage against this struggle for community control will help to expose the hypocrisy of 
the capitalist -imperialist colonial government on one of the central issues which it uses to 
psychologically incarcerate  and enslave the Black masses, namely, its proclaimed adherence to 
democracy. (ThisNation.com's online textbook , 2011)  Thirdly, the struggle for New Afrikan 
community control is profoundly revolutionary  because it poses the question of who will have 
decision-making power over New Afrikan people: themselves or racist capitalist exploiters. 
Thus, realization of the aim of political economic control of the Black community will serve as a 
New Afrikan fortress  and center  of Black  (New Afrikan)  counter-power to racist national 
oppression and colonial subjugation. As economic develop ment within the Black community 
grows resultant to our economic pointing initi atives and struggles targeted to win control over 
specific institutions and agencies  surmount, these victories and accomplishments will serve  to


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
inculcate a national spirit among the people , and thus pave the way to prepare increasing 
numbers of the masses to join the all-inclusive goal of national independence.  
 
As we struggle against continued U.S. colonization  (Allen, 1990) , New Afrikans must have a 
determined sense of history in regard to the New Afrikan Nation’s relationship to the world. 
Without this common national consciousn ess and perception of our existence, based on history, 
our practice will continue to be confused and chaotic, without the historical continuity which 
serves to give practical guidance to our struggle and movement on the road to independence.  
Thus, the pivotal supposition the problem statement portion of Frolinan relies upon as its point of 
departure is the “academic theory of internal colonialism” and the notion of neo -colonialism 
(Allen, 1990; Pinderhughes, 2010; Bohmer, 1998) . We stand firmly on the basi c propositions 
brought forward in these ideas as they apply to the present day living conditions of the masses of 
Afrikans in America. The intellectual origin of this theory are rooted in the written and spoken 
condemnation of historical European coloniali sm in Africa, and the putting forward of an anti -
colonial national liberation strategy by Afrikan leaders and revolutionaries such as Kwame 
Nkrumah and Frantz Fanon during the 1950’s. (Nimako, 2010; Fanon, 1965) 
 In the United States, during the 1960’s, pe rsons such as Malcolm X and Kwame Ture (formerly 
Stokely Carmichael)  were inspired by anti -colonial and anti-imperialist movements in the Third 
World, and their victories in places such as Ghana, Cuba and Algeria. They found the critique of 
colonialism and neo-colonialism to be a most suitable one for understanding the oppression of 
Blacks people in the United States. In his 1964 speech entitled “The Black Revolution”; 
Malcolm X argued that "America is a colonial power. She has colonized 22 million Afro -
Americans by depriving us of first -class citizenship, by depriving us of civil rights, actually by 
depriving us of human rights" (Malcolm X, 1963) 
Malcolm X and others found relevant the analysis of the domination of oppressed people based 
on the violence of the colonizer, the exploitation of their land, labor and natural resources, and 
the systematic attempt to destroy their culture in the search fo r profits. (Bohmer, 1998) . 
Regarding the evolution of the internal colonialism theory, Peter Bohmer states  “In the late 
1960’s and 1970’s, anti -racist analysis and activism increasingly worked from within a


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
developing internal colonial framework. This framework converged with the long tradition of 
Black Nationalism, the movement for Black Power, and the growing radicalization of many 
activists. This led to a theory and practice that identified black people within the United States as 
part of the Third World, requiring political and economic independence -a national liberation 
struggle-to ends their oppression.”  (Bohmer, 1998)  
Frolinan’s political economic self -determination aspirations are  set in a solid historical 
foundation. As far back as during the chattel slavery era free Black communities established a 
variety of independent community developments. (Curry, 1981). There were numerous self -help 
community development initiatives following the Civil War, such as the efforts to build all Black 
towns in Illinois, Kansas and Oklahoma (Cha-Jua, 2000; Hamilton, 1991),  and efforts to build 
strong urban economic networks in cities like Durham, North Carolina during the 1900 (Du Bois, 
1912). During the 19th century Martin R. Delaney, a Harvard trained physician, was the first to 
enunciate the idea that Black people in their separate existence in America did, in fact, constitute 
a "Nation within a Nation."(Delany,1852 ). In Delany’s book, The Condition, Elevation, 
Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored People of the United States, Politically Considered, 
published in 1852, one sentence in the appendix that is most quoted in this regard reads as 
follows: "We are a nation within a nation, as the Poles in Russia, the Hungarians in Austria, the 
Welsh, Irish and Scotch in the British dominions." (Delany, 1852) In his essay “How Black 
Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory” 
Pinderhughes indicates the following;  
“There is a 180-year-old tradition of black activists viewing African America as a "nation with a 
nation." The slogan is notable in the national black convention movement's first call to unite in 
1830, as it responded to the program against the blacks of Cincinnati in 1830. Martin Delany 
utilized it in his colonization appeals. In 1853, Frederick Douglass embraced the formulation in 
his call to black national consciousness. Cyril Briggs employed it in his Amsterdam News 
assessment of the contradiction between the African American condition and President Wilson's 
World War I peace proposals. And it was the title of W.E.B. Du Bois's call in 1935 to sidestep 
Jim Crow segregation during the Great Depress ion with a cooperative economic program.”  
(Pinderhughes, 2010)


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
In Blueprint for Black Power, Dr. Amos Wilson has emphasized with time both Afrikan 
Americans “de facto third world status” and our “nation-within-a-nation” character as both 
central to our problems and solution, respectively. In a subsection of his Nation -within-a-Nation 
chapter entitled “The Afrikan American Community as a de facto Third World Nation”. Dr. 
Wilson maintains that “The failure of the Afrikan American community along with its cadr e of 
activists, leadership establishment and intelligentsia to recognize the community as constituting 
a nation -within-a-nation, and to operate as such, is the primary, overarching reason for the 
relative powerlessness of Afrikans in America and Afrikans i n the world.”  (Wilson, 1998, pg. 
504). Consequently, Frolinan’s “Program of Decolonization” is predicated on the Nation -within-
a-Nation ideal. 
In his “Nationhood” discussions in Blueprint for Black Power, Dr. Amos Wilson seem t o be 
saying that the Afrikan American community is a politically disenfranchised, economically 
exploited and alien culture dominated nation -within-a-nation (de facto third world nation), 
without national consciousness nor commitment to itself as a Nation. At one juncture he makes 
this point by stating the following “except for its mainly second-tier alien employment status, its 
cultural entertainment contributions to the American market economy, its role as a mass 
consumer market for White American manufact ured products and services, its full -spectrum 
participation in and integration into American society is negligible.” (Wilson, 1998, pg. 504) 
With the above background in mind I assert that the pathogenesis of the present day ill-condition 
of the masses of New Afrikan people and communities inside the U.S. is the combination of our 
own disunity, dependency, fear, ahistorification, lack of vision, politico -economic 
disorganization, and most importantly the "underdeveloped" of ou r state of mind as a collective 
Afrikan people, thus we offer Frolinan - “A Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National 
Oppression”.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
"Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National Oppression" 
Introductory Note 
In the last several years from many corners of the New Afrikan Independence Movement, there 
has been a clarion call for the building of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
(New Afrikan Liberation Front Statement , 2000) . A revolutionary nationalist front to establish a 
movement for national independence, to free the “national territory of Kush” from the colonial 
(U.S.) government. This call has mostly come from New Afrikan Political Prisoners and 
Prisoners of War and their supporters (Acoli, 1995)  who recognize the need to resurrect a 
militant resistance to continued national oppression, identifying the basis of our peoples' colonial 
subjugation as part of the anti -imperialist struggle being waged by Third World peoples in many 
parts of the world. Of course, this means we have to once again develop a militant political 
organization that will challenge U.S. colonialism and organize New Afrikans to offensively 
pursue the ultimate objective of national independence. This task has to be greater than a survival 
program pending revolution: as all survival programs are in essence defensive in posture, based 
on the ideal to survive is to defend against attacks, but survival programs do not forge a 
movement, only sustain an existence. 
I have taken the initiative to write this proposal and treaties for our numbers and revolutionary 
nationalist to build upon, for us to unite our forces under a single program and national strategy. 
Since the destruction of the Black Panther Party, our movement has fallen in the hands of passive 
resisters, losing its vitality, momentum, and revolutionary fervor. It is now necessary to rekindle 
the spirit of militant resistance and rebuild our revolutionary movement. Build F rolinan, our 
revolutionary nationalist front, comprising the needed national organizations and programs that 
will assure not only our survival, but also, our inevitable victory in establishing the Republic of 
New Afrika in the western hemisphere. 
Frolinan National Strategy is based on the Three Phase Theory for National Independence. 
Frolinan's National Strategy is exemplified in our Ten Point Platform and Theory and


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Organizational Program for Decolonization. Our strategy and practice will serve to manifest  in 
reality the Ten Point Platform, a program accepted in principle by all members of Frolinan. 
We anticipate and work toward Frolinan to develop into a mass based revolutionary nationalist 
front, comprising national organizations and groups, to organize a nd mobilize our oppressed 
New Afrikan people for our inevitable independence. 
HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW 
We accept all aspects of our history from the beginning of civilization on the Afrikan continent, 
to the present stages of technological develo pment of Afrikan nation -states, and the continued 
struggle of Afrikan people throughout the world against tyranny and capitalist imperialist 
oppression. 
With this conception of history, we view the material basis in which history evolved to its 
present and ongoing developing modes of history as Afrikan people relate and interrelate with 
one another, other people of color in the Third World, and the European races. This 
understanding and materialist outlook of history, notes that dialectically, our present c ondition 
and struggle is based on our past experiences in a continuing development of an Afrikan history. 
The New Afrikan experience in America is not separate from the Afrikan experience on the 
continent, rather, they are linked in a chain of events which imposes socioeconomic, political and 
historical realities encompassing the criteria by which New Afrikan struggle for independence 
must be developed. 
We call ourselves New Afrikan because of the degree of force breeding and miscegenation we as 
a people ha ve suffered, as well the cultural imperialism and the psychological plunder and rape 
of our affinity to Afrika, stripping away our Afrikan language, art and world outlook. And 
national oppression, which in our efforts to combat, has created a national heri tage rich in 
resistance based on the two ideals of integration and separation. These experiences which have 
left us stripped of our Afrikanist perspective, and despite miscegenation and cultural 
imperialism, culminated into an Afrikan national heritage in the Diaspora, creating the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
This conception of history from a dialectical materialist perspective provides the means to 
formulate a program and strategy to conquer racist oppression and national subjugation, utilizing, 
the truth of our entire history as a guide to enlighten our practice.  
. As an oppressed nation, we have a rich history of resistance to bondage ranging from revolts on 
slave ships during the middle passage, revolts and rebellions for hundreds of years on sla ve 
plantations, fighting for freedom in the War of Independence, War of 1812, and Civil War; and 
even fighting in the U.S. Army in the name of U.S. democracy can also be considered part of our 
national determination to be free. 
We preserve four epochs in o ur history as indicative of our struggle to be free of U.S. national 
subjugation and colonial domination. After the signing of the Emancipation Proclamation in 
1863 and the 13th Amendment in 1865, and the Civil War having ended barbaric chattel slavery; 
the 14th Amendment stripped Afrikans in America of their land (“Forty Acres and a Mule”) 
provided by Field Order No. 115 (Sherman, 1865) and imposed American citizenship on these 
Afrikan nationals. This country then entered a period  defined as reconstruction and the industrial 
revolution. This was a period when the slavocracy gave birth to mercantile capitalism (Yeshitela, 
1983); the gross surplus of such commodities as cotton, tobacco, sugar, etc., produced from slave 
labor in the South, provided economic -textile-industrial growth and development in Northern 
States. Reconstruction found millions of New Afrikans either re -enslaved by the vestiges of 
chattel times, the Black Code -Law to sharecropping, unemp loyment, and landlessness or 
migrating North in search of educational and employment opportunities. The Hayes -Tilden 
Compromise of 1877 restored racist national oppression and colonial domination and prevailed 
with resultant terrorist KuKluxKlan raids, rac e riots (white against Blacks), mob violence and 
lynching of New Afrikans in the North and South. (Avakian, 2000) 
In 1905, the Niagara Movement was consummated. We recognized the Niagara Movement as 
the first significant epoch  in our continued struggle for independence. The Niagara Movement 
was not the first time New Afrikans organized themselves, as there had been many abolitionist 
groups comprising "freedman" of Afrikan descent. But the Niagara Movement marks a stage in 
which, under the leadership of W.E.B. DuBois, they developed a concept and an organization 
which prevails today. The concept of integration was comprehensively evolved during the


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Niagara Movement by DuBois, and is adamantly held today by the NAACP, which came i nto 
existence out of the Niagara Movement in 1910, with DuBois as a founding member and 
incorporator. It was DuBois who forged the conceptual appeal of Pan -Afrikanism during this 
time; while the NAACP up until 1940 had campaigned for anti -lynch legislation, and from 1950 
to present campaigned for desegregation, integration and civil rights. 
The second epoch  of historical importance was the 1920 Marcus Garvey "Back to Afrika" 
Movement. This movement which has yet to be surpassed appealed to and organized mil lions of 
New Afrikans, and established national pride and dignity directly associated to the Afrikan 
continent. Although the Back to Afrika movement only lasted until 1925, when viewed in 
juxtaposition in historical continuity to the Niagara Movement and P an Afrikanist ideas 
developing at the time, the thread of struggle and our peoples' conscious determination to be free 
of colonial domination becomes very significant. 
The third epoch is divided into two distinct and interdependent parts as they actualized  the first 
and second epochs in character and content. The Elijah Muhammad Nation of Islam movement 
which came into existence in the 1940, but had not come into national prominence until the 
1960, developed many of the separatist ideals held by the Marcus Garvey  UNIA -ACL 
movement; it generally appealed to those who had been adherents of the separatist movement of 
Marcus Garvey. In the 1960s, Malcolm X (El Hajj Malik Shabazz) brought the Nation of Islam 
separatist movement into national attention, recruitme nt reported to be approximately 1 million 
"Black Muslims" by some estimates. Elijah Muhammad called for the separation of Blacks (New 
Afrikans) into a government of their own in the South Black Belt, basing his program on 
mystified interpretation of Islam and Black "self-help" economics (the principle now adopted as 
Black capitalism) (Berg, 2009). During this same epoch, in 1955, the civil rights movement was 
launched, with Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. as its primary lea der and spokesperson. Given 
the political character and objective of Martin L. King, Jr.'s movement, it ushered the line and 
principle of struggle first established in the Niagara Movement. The principle organizations of 
this course of struggle were SCLC, NAACP, Urban League, CORE and SNCC, all working in a 
united front strategy for desegregation, integration and civil rights. Politically, this movement 
could actually be defined as a negro-bourgeoisie democratic revolution . It attacked and did


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
battle with t he essential foundation and cornerstone of colonial domination of New Afrikans in 
America, racism and national oppression. The civil rights movement sought the fruition of 
democratic civil -rights guaranteed to white people to be equally administrated to B lack people. 
It was a nationally organized movement, which put in motion masses of people in freedom -rides, 
sit-ins and marches, which precipitated the eventful call for "Black Power" and nationalist 
political consciousness. Martin L. King, Jr.'s assassina tion brought things to a violent climax, 
resulting in Black riots and rebellions across the country. 
The dialectical (unity and struggle of opposites) relationship  between the Elijah Muhammad 
separatist and Martin L. King, Jr. integrationist movement, pres erved in historical continuity the 
ideals of both the Marcus Garvey separatist and W.E.B. DuBois integrationist movements, 
forging the course of struggle towards a synthesis of ideals first espoused with the cry and birth 
pains of "Black Power". 
The fourth epoch, an outgrowth of the proceeding era adopted the synthetic conception of Black 
Power, uniting the symbolic determination of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and 
Malcolm X Black Nationalist ideas in the Black Panther Party. The Black Panther P arty for Self-
Defense was established in 1966 and in 1967 Black Panthers captured national attention by 
entering the California State Capital hearing-on gun control, carrying rifles and shotguns, calling 
for community control of police, self -defense, and B lack political power. Even through, during 
this period, there had been other Black nationalist groups and formations (i.e., RNA, JOMO, 
Deacons for Defense and Justice, RAM, etc.) that evolved out of the negro -bourgeois-
democratic revolution , none made such  an indelible historic impression on the developing 
struggle like the Black Panther Party. From its inception, the BPP had considered the necessity 
for armed struggle to wrestle Black power from the U.S.' white power structure. The BPP 
developed the Black underground which evolved into the Black Liberation Army - a clandestine 
network of armed urban guerrillas. It had been the BPP that first raised the concept of class 
struggle, introducing and infusing the ideology of Marxist - Leninist-Mao Tse Tung thought with 
the Black Nationalist ideas of Malcolm X in accordance to the concrete realities of the struggle 
taking shape in Black (New Afrikan) ghettos/communities across the country.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
With its Ten Point Platform and Program the BPP attempted to manifest Black political power 
on the basis of community control as a tactical objective toward the strategic goal of total 
independence. 
By 1967 the colonial government (U.S.A.) had directed its full attention and counter -intelligence 
program (COINTELPRO *) on the BPP/BLA and other nationalist formations such as the RNA 
and RAM. This counter revolutionary action by the government was implemented with the intent 
to discredit, disrupt and destroy the BPP, with murderous raids, infiltration and provocation. In a 
four year battle with the police, by 1971, the BPP had been significantly subverted on a national 
level, whereupon, by 1973, the BPP was in all actuality defunct. This inevitably led to the defeat 
and decimation of the BLA as a fighting clandestine urban guerrilla network. 
*COINTELPRO (an acronym for Counter Intelligence Program) was a series of covert, and 
often illegal, projects conducted by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
aimed at investigating and disrupting dissident political organization s within the United States. 
The FBI used covert operations from its inception; however formal COINTELPRO operations 
took place between 1956 and 1971. The FBI's stated motivation at the time was "protecting 
national security, preventing violence, and maintaining the existing social and political order."  
The directives governing COINTELPRO were issued by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who 
ordered FBI agents to "expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" the activities 
of these movements and their leaders. 
It is these four epochs in the continuing struggle for political power and independence that are of 
great significance. They had the greatest influence and impact on New Afrikans nationally in 
juxtaposition to our relationship to the ene my colonial (U.S.A.) government. We accept these 
four epochs as the foundation in which current and future development in the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement will be objectively molded, shaped and forged to victory. 
Consequently, history discloses that t here are two basic and distinct lines and influences in the 
New Afrikan peoples struggle for political power and self -determination. Our oppressed people 
have fought for integration and civil rights, and we've fought for separation and human rights. It 
is these two directions that characterize any real differences in our peoples' aspiration to be free


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
of racist colonial domination. Furthermore, it will be integration verses separation that will be a 
determinative aspect for the building of national unity am ongst New Afrikans to engage the 
colonial (U.S.A.) government for political power and self -determination in the future. This 
understanding of history and the ideological political forces that have shaped our struggle 
provides conscious and deliberate activ ity to combat national oppression and colonialism, with 
the continuity of preserving history and the mode of struggle toward separation. We of Frolinan 
must take a stand on the side of separation, and in so doing, give recognition to those forces that 
are currently making history in building the independence movement.  
 
A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE: In Refutation of Black Capitalism  
Since the 1965 advent of the federal government sponsored Economic Opportunity Commission, 
and the various poverty progr ams instituted as a result of the Black insurrections during the 
1960s, the quest for Black capitalism as an integral part of the freedom struggle surged as the 
political, socioeconomic alternative to white capitalism and exploitation . This development  has 
established a unique obstacle before the New Afrikan revolution. By 1970, the U.S. government 
managed to consolidate a national bourgeoisie neo-colonial class comprising Black businessmen, 
civil rights leaders and elected officials. In the process of this  development, evolved a Black 
middle class whose political alliance remained with the oppressed Black masses, and recognized 
a political responsibility that in essence contradicts the economic realities of Black capitalism, 
they now find themselves at lost to the real ideals, program, and objectives of the Black struggle. 
While the national bourgeoisie aspires integration and assimilation into the mainstream 'of 
monopoly-capitalism, the Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie are split in their sociopolitical 
aspirations. Economically the Black middle class can't afford to negate their tie to the system of 
national oppression without forfeiting material advantage and livelihood. But as the crisis of 
monopoly-capitalism worsens (inflation/recession), the existen ce of the Black middle class is 
threatened, as the national bourgeoisie intensifies their integrationist program on the deaf ear of 
the U.S. conservatism.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
From a New Afrikan revolutionary nationalist analysis of the developing struggle, dialectical 
historical materialism must be the basis in which such an analysis serves to manifest an ideology, 
theory and political program that will strengthen the socioeconomic and political determination 
of the New Afrikan community and overall Independence Movement. In this way, the New 
Afrikan revolution will not become short -sighted and bend to reformist  and gradualism  
concessions of the national bourgeoisie neo -colonialist, who in behalf of their class interest and 
the interest of colonialism may be  thrown in the path  of the revolution via the Black middle 
class-petty bourgeoisie and unconscious working class. Hence, this New Afrikan revolutionary 
nationalist analysis must be a class analysis of national significance. It then becomes first to 
identify the classes of neo-colonial oppression.  
The national Black bourgeoisie, neo -colonialists are identified as those business people/ 
corporations such as whose economic policy in class collaboration and collusion with monopoly-
capitalism serves as financiers to political ent ities/ individuals who espouse the neo -colonialist 
dictates of integration and assimilation . These individuals and organizations maintain direct ties 
to the colonial (U.S.A.) government in their relationship to the oppressed neo -colony, and 
espouse the soc iopolitical illusion of integration -assimilation and non-violent struggle for Black 
survival in racist-imperialist America. They are the bulwark of neo -colonialist leaders who serve 
the colonial government by institutionalizing the concept of gradualism, r eformism, and Black 
capitalism as the socioeconomic policy for political struggle by the oppressed New Afrikan 
masses. Their entire program is based on acculturation, assimilation, and integration on a 
monopoly capitalist platform. Such a program has influenced the established Black middle class-
petty bourgeoisie skilled laborers in their efforts to gain material wealth and status in the colonial 
system of oppression. In many cases, the petty bourgeoisie comes face to face with racist 
institutions and stand ards (i.e., housing, employment, promotions, etc.) that cause them to 
reconsider socio -politically the aspects in which acculturation, integration and assimilation are 
realistic. But because of their socioeconomic ties to the system of oppression, they are n't totally 
able or willing to sever their relationship and join the oppressed New Afrikan masses in the 
national independence movement. Hence, the Black (upper) middle class attempts to employ a 
cultural identity to the development of Black capitalism, wh ich is progressive in form and 
reactionary in content. This bourgeois cultural nationalism has evoked socioeconomically an


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
exploitative relationship to the oppressed neo -colony by developing Black business, 
employment, etc., in the Black community but taki ng the profit out of the community -- while 
politically they espouse Black community self -control in which Black capitalists and politicians 
will overwhelmingly benefit.  
The Black middle class petty bourgeoisie cultural nationalist, economic and political  aspiration 
as currently forged is progressive in form by collecting and consolidating our talented, educated 
and skilled Black people in a national formation to supposedly represent the interests of the 
oppressed New Afrikan masses; and reactionary in con tent by developing Black capitalism 
intricately tied to U.S. monopoly-capitalism. It is illusionary, as it would not evolve independent 
of U.S. monopoly-capitalism, since Black capitalism would rely on capitalist imperialism for its 
own growth and developm ent, strengthening a neo -colonial relationship to the oppressed New 
Afrikan masses of whom are a colonized nation. Hence, Black capitalism perpetuates class 
exploitation of New Afrikans, and neo-colonial subjugation to U.S. imperialism. 
It can thereby be determined, the Black middle class petty bourgeoisie cultural nationalist can be 
allied to the New Afrikan working class upon realizing Black capitalism is a tool of the colonial 
ruling class oppressors, utilized by their neo -colonialist agents - the national Black bourgeoisie. 
Furthermore, where Black capitalism is tied to monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, its 
existence and development is based on the existence and development of imperialism and 
imperialism is based on colonial domination of oppressed pe ople-nations. Thus, socioeconomic 
and politically Black capitalism is a neo -colonialist institution demanding continued Black 
exploitation and colonial oppression domestically and U.S. imperialist expansion in the Third 
World. This present reality alongsid e t he overall roll -back of affirmative action and economic 
programs that served the needs of the Black masses during the late 60s and throughout the 70s, 
provides the basis in which the current New Afrikan (Black) revolution is mounted; the 
socioeconomic c ontradiction between the owners of the means of production (ruling class 
capitalist-imperialist) and the laborers (managers and manual labor) is becoming more  
antagonistic - the principle ideal of Black capitalism in juxtaposition in racist capitalist-
imperialism is refuted.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE: 
With a full understanding of our history in relationship to the colonial (U.S.A.) government and 
its economic system of monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, we are then able to develop a 
practical theory to formulate a decisive working strategy by which to educate, organize and 
mobilize our oppressed New Afrikan Nation for complete sovereignty and independence. It is 
important that recognition is given to our task for a social, political, economic and cultural 
perspective.  
Our Three Phase Theory for National Independence is based on the historical manifestation of 
our national oppression in racist capitalist America. This theory negates nothing from our history 
although it establishes its pragmatic foundation on prevailing conditions, and moves from these 
conditions, building conceptual understanding of how our practice must conform to given 
realities if we are to be free. The Three Phase Theory for National Independence is based on the 
principles of dialectical materialism, determining the need of both class and national struggle. 
First Phase - Class Struggle for National Unity 
It is first important to identify the various classes in which national unity is to be brought. We 
recognize the fact that the New Afrikan people are a colonized nation in the United States. We 
also recognize that New Afrikans' colonization is one of the race and class oppression. The 
division of oppression between Euro Americans and New Afrikans is buffeted by a sys tem of 
neo colonization established and maintained by members of the New Afrikan Nation who are in 
essence neo-colonialist agents of the oppressor nation government. 
These neo-colonialists are the National Bourgeoisie of the oppressed New Afrikan Nation. T he 
national bourgeoisie are Black politicians and business people (capitalist) who are integrationist 
and assimilationist, they aspire (by policy making in organizations) to have the oppressed New 
Afrikan people to integrate and assimilate into the government of oppression. This ideal, as it has 
been historically manifested, is in essence an illusion in which it is the national bourgeoisie who 
benefits, with token concessions from the colonial government, rewarded for their efforts to


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
maintain order and con trol of the New Afrikan people. The national bourgeoisie are identified 
historically as leaders of the NAACP, PUSH, National Urban League, Congressional Black 
Caucus, etc. All of them work in the interests of the colonial government and in their own 
interests, aspiring integration and assimilation into this system of capitalist imperialism; and by 
seeking to stifle the militant struggle of the oppressed New Afrikan people for independence. 
The political wing of the national bourgeoisie is financed by Black capitalist and liberal white 
institutions (i.e., foundations) and corporate groups. Essentially they epitomize by the structure 
of the colonial government to represent the interests of New Afrikan people. They attempt to 
persuade New Afrikans as to what is  in their interest to struggle for or against in relation to the 
policies of the colonial government. Their policy and interests are that of neo -colonial capitalist 
and integrationist in relation to the oppressed New Afrikan Nation. 
Under the national bour geoisie are the petty bourgeoisie  (cultural nationalist) middle class. 
These are the skilled Black professionals and marginal/small business people which can be 
divided into two segments in a socio -psychological conception, but are equally Black capitalist . 
On the one hand there are the assimilationist and integrationist who are in every way like the 
national bourgeoisie, and on the other hand are the cultural nationalist. The middle class cultural 
nationalist attempts to maintain a Black social consciousne ss in terms of identifying with the 
New Afrikan oppressed masses, but because they are in essence capitalist, their aspirations as 
pseudo-nationalist are forsaken. They are economically and materially tied to the system of 
oppression and these ties are man ifested politically as they tend to support and enhance the 
prospects of neo -colonialism, ensuring Blacks are the representatives of Blacks, who are the 
representatives of the colonial (U.S.A.) government.  
The majority of New Afrikans are of the lower cla ss - workers and laborers - the 
proletariat class. They are the semi-skilled and manual laborers, the office and factory workers, 
etc., whose standard of living is just above or at poverty level, many of whom subsist on a 
combination of work, welfare (medi cal aid, social security or veterans benefits, etc.) and 
hustling. The Black proletariats suffer the brunt of the socioeconomic oppression of capitalist 
exploitation and are most politically disenfranchised by the system of colonial domination. In 
juxtaposition to neocolonial class divisions within the New Afrikan Nation, the capitalist system


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
employs racist national oppression as the primary mechanism to keep the aspirations of the Black 
proletariat in check. This racist national oppression is found in eve ry vestige of the Black 
proletariat existence, in housing, employment, health, and social institutions.  
Beneath the Black working class are the subculture  referred to as the , lumpen-proletariat, 
the unskilled and menial laborers whose primary means of sub sistence is based on hustling 
(selling drugs, thievery, prostitution, etc.), marginal employment and welfare. For the most part, 
the socioeconomic provisions within this subculture are maintained by the "illegitimate 
capitalist" activity of the lumpen-proletariat. In accordance to their aspirations to fulfill the social 
values of the bourgeoisie, they employ business acumen in criminal activity for subsistence and 
profit. As they seek material wealth and social status of the bourgeoisie within the confines of 
the subculture, they are in many cases politically reactionary, concerned with nothing other than 
personal survival and individual gain. It is only when the lumpen -proletariat are educated and 
become politically aware of their socioeconomic condition, d oes the possibility exist for them to 
become staunch supporters of the revolution, recognizing their dire standard of living is based 
wholly on the system of oppression they are desperately trying to emulate. 
This brief description of the class break -down of the oppressed New Afrikan Nation provides 
some indication as to why it is so difficult for the oppressed Black masses to challenge the 
government of oppression in unity and struggle. This also determines why the first phase of 
Frolinan’s theoretical position is one in which struggle must commence within the class divisions 
of the neo-colony, before New Afrikans can adequately challenge the colonial government with a 
degree of strength and fortitude, and cause the government to bend to the will of the New  
Afrikan Nation for complete independence and sovereignty. 
Thus, class struggle for national unity must begin by understanding the aspects of the particular 
contradiction existing between two contending forces within the neo -colony, and how these 
forces in  unity and struggle - dialectically - attract and repel one another politically, and 
determine the basis of this relationship with the oppressed New Afrikan people in building and 
sustaining their aspiration to fight for independence. 
.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Second-Phase – National Unity for Self Government 
Within the development of the first phase, lies the seed of the second phase, the phase whereby 
national unity has been attained for the ideals of the independence movement. It then becomes 
possible to challenge the colonial government with a single national program to concretize our 
immediate demands as expressed during the first phase in terms of civil and human rights. The 
concrete social and political struggle of New Afrikan peoples' fight for self -determination is 
characterized in economic and political terms of self-government. 
Hence, it can be established that the first phase is one in which the revolutionary nationalist 
forces fight to win the oppressed New Afrikan masses to support Black community control in the 
independence movement. The programs and struggle for civil and human rights are tactical 
initiatives to build and sustain the movement on the socioeconomic level, while ideologically and 
politically the class struggle evolves political class consciousness on a national level to the ideals 
political and economic community control, ultimately towards of separation and self -
government. 
Thereby, the New Afrikan Nation has become educated and organized into a national liberation 
front, a united front in national  unity, and in the second phase, they are mobilized for self -
determination and self -government. Our national unity is decisive, it is our strength and 
foundation for the future, and our fight for self -government is prerequisite to total and complete 
independence. Encompassing this theory for emancipation is the objective and concrete realities 
of the fight for civil and human rights as expressed in the first phase. It is manifested, the 
fertilization of the seed for independence as planted in the first phas e - class struggle for national 
unity - is then cultivated in the second phase - national unity for self -government - and will be 
harvested in the last phase. 
The political programs of Frolinan in national unity for self-government are to concretize the 
struggle for independence. To strengthen and intensify the political struggle between the 
nationally oppressed and the national oppressor; and socioeconomically consolidate the 
prospects for national independence, is the basic condition by which the movement  will evolve


--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
qualitatively in both the national and international political arena. This leads to the principle 
contradiction of two antagonistic contending political forces and national wills. Whereby the 
demand and struggle for complete control of institu tions, resources and the wealth of the 
oppressed nation will be the character of the second phase. It then becomes essential at this phase 
to call for the assistance of Frolinan international supporters, to support and assist in the 
socioeconomic and political objectives in building New Afrikan communities independent of the 
colonial government. But at the same time, it will be incumbent of the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government to preserve a practical relationship with the New Afrikan Nation, a relationship of 
economic and political co -existence and interdependence. Hence, the dialectics of unity and 
struggle of opposites is the principle contradiction between two contending forces and nationals. 
Thus, this second phase as a prerequisite to national independence is one in which the New 
Afrikan Nation begins to formulate the means and method of self -government in the 
geographical areas where New Afrikans constitute the majority; to control and direct the 
resources, labor, institutions and wealth which determines th e extent of their livelihood. The 
demands of civil and human rights as applicable to these social, political, and economic 
conditions, will serve to preserve the growth and development of the liberation movement, as 
New Afrikans become self-determinative in manifesting their future on all fronts.  
Third Phase – Self Government for National Independence 
Where the first two phases were for building the movement and consolidating it - where New 
Afrikan people comprise the majority geographically - establishing a national political 
consciousness, socioeconomic and cultural development for national independence. The third 
phase, golf-Government for National independence, is to fight for the national territory of Kush, 
to win the war and free the land. 
It can be e asily determined based on this proposition; the third phase depends much on the 
success of the first two phases. Once Frolinan has established a revolutionary nationalist social 
consciousness amongst the oppressed masses to want and fight for control of th e Black 
community, and further consolidate this social and political consciousness toward self -
government; the prospects of substantiating the ultimate goal of national independence becomes


--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
more realistic and plausible in the overall scheme of this underta king. Each step is a tactical 
initiative within a national strategy, each tactical initiative being strategically developed to 
formulate the necessary socioeconomic, political and cultural ingredients into a national program 
in which the various segments of the independence movement can fulfill. 
The third phase is the final stage - to mobilize the entire nation to free the land - employing all 
the resources available to the movement in challenging the colonial government for complete 
independence. To recover the territory the oppressed nation once occupied and controlled by its 
labor and ownership of land, granted by the government when it first freed New Afrikans from 
chattel slavery in 1863. This is the phase in which the national aspirations of New Afrika ns, as 
determined through the course of the struggle, will be called to task to wrestle the national 
territory from the colonial government. The mobilization of New Afrikans will be in national 
demonstrations, and strangling the economic development of the  colonial government, as well as 
intensifying the guerrilla war in both urban and rural areas, gaining international support on the 
specific objectives of national independence. 
This is a time when the call will be made for mass migration to [Kush] and whe re economic, 
social, political development will concentrate in the national territory. The transferring of 
economic, political resources and finances from out of the autonomous regions to the national 
territory will create a social, economic and political upheaval for the colonial government, 
greater than the struggles created in the first two phases. It will cause a major shift in the 
relationship of the autonomous regions with the colonial government in each area, diffusing and 
disrupting what may have be en tentatively secured economic and political areas of co -existence 
between the colonial government and New Afrikan communities (or Provisional Government of 
the Republic of New Afrika and Frolinan). 
Of course, this fight cannot be fully developed until th e course of the struggle 'for self -
government has evolved the mechanisms and institutions for governmental organization of 
national magnitude with international recognition: providing the essential tasks of a government 
in all socioeconomic and political f ronts, such as in agriculture, industries (for food and 
employment), for national security, etc. It cannot be expected of New Afrikans to sacrifice 
beyond the exercise and expectations of a government to provide stable livelihood for its


--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 23 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
nationals. Hence, the reasons for the first two phases, in which’ New Afrikans will be organized 
in national unity and self -government, utilizing the skills and resources within the oppressed 
nation, establishing a national social consciousness and political determination f or the inevitable 
fight to free the land.  
Thus, self-government for national independence, the third phase of this theory -strategically - is 
the phase in which all others work to accomplish. The point in the national liberation struggle 
where New Afrikans are in a position of strength beyond the capacity of the colonial government 
to destroy the independence movement. The seed of independence planted in the first phase and 
cultivated in the second phase, will have blossomed in the third phase, the phase i n which 
national independence will become an accomplished reality. 
In conclusion, this theoretical proposition determines the need of the national liberation struggle, 
by first recognizing and organizing the New Afrikan Nation on the ideal of national 
independence, by having our talented, skilled and educated return to the Black communities; for 
them to live, work and build the political and social movement in the Black community under the 
guiding principles of class struggle for national unity; and further  develop a political and 
socioeconomic foundation toward self -sufficiency and self -reliance amongst New Afrikan 
people on the principle of national unity for self-government.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Page 24 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
NATIONAL STRATEGY:  BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION 
The national strategy basic aim and objectives are to establish a Program for Decolonization that 
encompasses the strategic and tactical goals of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. It is 
within the development of a Program for Decolonization that nati onal liberation will be 
accomplished. The Program for Decolonization must afford a tactical initiative attacking the 
social, political, economic and cultural manifestation of disenfranchisement New Afrikans 
suffers as a neo -colony; and seek the means to ri d New Afrikans of this condition of oppression 
strategically leading to national independence. 
 
The Program of Decolonization is a program for 
national liberation and a strategy in the 
independence movement to be fulfilled tactically 
by the various members of Frolinan, and New 
Afrikan revolutionary nationalists across the 
country. 
We therefore call for the establishment of several 
national organizations to be constructed under 
the auspices of Frolinan:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION 
1. National Union of New Afrikan 
Workers  
2. National Alliance of New Afrikan 
Students  
3. New Afrikan Independence Academy  
4. Panther Youth Corps 
5. New Afrikan Children Center  
6. New Afrikan Community Health Clinic:  
7. New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program  
8. The New Afrikan Community Alert 
Patrol  
9. New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance 
Program  
10. National Organization of New Afrikan 
Women


--- PAGE 25 ---
Page 25 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
National Union of New Afrikan Workers:   
The National Union of New Afrikan Workers (NUNAW) is a national network of New Afrikan 
political activists in urban and rural areas, w ho function on the organizing principle of Frolinan 
in the work place (industries, companies, manufacturers, office workers, etc.). Their primary goal 
and objective is to raise the political consciousness of New Afrikan Workers of the 
socioeconomic condition inherent in the system of monopoly-capitalism. In so doing, to organize 
New Afrikan workers into labor federations who will call for the implementation of Frolinan's 
Program for Decolonization at the work place. 
It will be the responsibility of NUNAW to address the problems of affirmative action in the work 
place, to call for owners of the means of production to relinquish profits for the development of 
New Afrikan communities, and have them not engage -in economic ventures in South Afrika and 
other reactionary Afrikan countries. To further establish a national body of workers in a union 
formation to fortify the political thrust of the independence movement in the economic sphere. 
On the rural front, NUNAW will be responsible to organize agrarian collecti ves, co-ops, and the 
establishment of rural industries. 
Eventually, it will be the responsibility of NUNAW to develop a national economic system as a 
foundation for the liberated national territory of Kush and the establishment of the New Afrikan 
Nation. H ence, NUNAW is the backbone of the independence movement in building and 
strengthening the class struggle for national unity, by organizing the Black proletariat under the 
auspices of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. 
Furthermore, because of the role NUNAW will play in support of New Afrikan workers, it has 
the potential to become the most powerful sector within the New Afrikan communities across the 
country. As New Afrikans are victims of inequality in the economic system of monopoly - 
capitalism, they have often organized separately on the job to advance their interests and protect 
their rights. New Afrikan workers in general, and those who are employed by multi -national 
corporations in particular, should be organized around demands that more jobs be made available 
to our People by cutting back in the use of cheap labor abroad. New Afrikan workers should be


--- PAGE 26 ---
Page 26 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
organized against state and federal government sanctions allowing multi -national corporations to 
hire foreign workers aboard at less than the national minimum wage required by state and federal 
law in the U.S.  
These aims can be furthered through the following demands: 
1. Call for rank and file democratic control of the unions currently in existence and for the 
elimination of all racial practices in t he labor movement. Equal rights for all New Afrikan 
workers. 
2. Call for preferential hiring and advancement of New Afrikan workers and free access to 
apprentice training programs, the skilled trades and higher paying supervisory posts. 
3. Call for an escalator clause in all union contracts to assure automatic wage adjustment to keep 
up with the rising cost of living. 
4. Call for a shorter work week at standard living wages allowing the means for unemployed to 
gain employment preserving the need of productivity. 
5. Call for speedier grievance procedures and safety inspection with no restrictions on the right to 
strike. 
6. Call for the complete independence of unions from government interference. Repeal of all 
anti-labor laws. End prisoner’s slavery and uphold their right to unionize. 
7. Call for the establishment of a national import quota on products made by foreign corporations 
outside the U.S. territory, a balance in import/export trade. 
8. Call for workers control of industry through factory committe es elected by the workers on the 
job. 
9. Call for big business taxes subsidize New Afrikan community projects, i.e., health clinic, child 
day care centers, drug rehabilitation programs, prisoners’ parole training programs, senior citizen 
care programs, etc.


--- PAGE 27 ---
Page 27 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
10. Call for multi -national corporations in conjunction with the U.S. government to give 
reparations to the New Afrikan Nation by subsidizing industrial construction and agricultural 
development in the New Afrikan Nation. 
These democratic demands within the Program for Decolonization builds the foundation in 
which Frolinan political activists can organize New Afrikan workers in NUNAW, and have 
NUNAW become a motivating factor in building the class struggle for national unity in the 
independence movement. 
National Alliance of New Afrikan Students:  
The National Alliance of New Afrikan Students (NANAS) is a national network of New Afrikan 
student groups and activists functioning under the auspices of Frolinan's Program for 
Decolonization. It will be the resp onsibility of NANAS to formulate a national direction on 
school campuses across the country, to support the development of the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement. To have New Afrikan history programs established, taught and 
maintained by professionals who a re in support of the independence movement. To also have 
New Afrikan students to become more aware of their responsibility in the independence 
movement, by organizing tutoring courses in high school and building liberation schools in the 
ghetto/barrio. It is important that New Afrikan students know they are the future of the 
independence movement and essentially are the principle leaders of the movement. With this 
understanding, they will be able to apply themselves in education and in other extracurricular  
activity to the well -being of the movement and the security of the Nation. Students must 
recognize that their education is not solely for individual gain and pleasure, but rather, for the 
building of minds to serve the movement and the Nation. They must b ecome politically aware of 
their relationship to the Nation, and it is the responsibility of NANAS to assure New Afrikan 
students are organized in support of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. This program 
dealing in the area of education will allow NA NAS to become the motivating factor in assuring 
its development and success.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Page 28 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The following are NANAS program: 
 1. Election of community control boards to supervise schools in the New Afrikan community. 
2. Establish an educational system and curriculum whi ch meets the needs of New Afrikan 
children, prepares them for the future in economic and technical skills, and technical security of 
the New Afrikan Nation. And gives them knowledge of themselves and an understanding of the 
true history and culture of Afrikan people. 
3. To involve parents in every phase of school life as part of the development of community 
involvement in the political life of the independence movement. 
4. Under the direction of Frolinan to support a program to train Black academicians, his torians, 
and administrators in the principle and policy of class and national liberation struggle, and the 
objective of community control of the education system. 
5. To support Frolinan's position that community groups should be entitled to use school 
facilities to promote activities for the benefit of the community and the independence movement.  
6. In support of Frolinan's direction, to call for the dismissal of all school officials who victimize 
or insult students on racial grounds, or are found to be di rectly in cahoots with the colonial 
government efforts to suppress Frolinan's education Program for Decolonization. 
7. Support the establishment of community liberation schools to introduce special tutoring 
programs for all students who have fallen behind in their studies; to offer a full program of adult 
education; and teach the political motives and direction of the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement, the prospect of a national social democratic society.


--- PAGE 29 ---
Page 29 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
For High School Students: 
1. Establishing student p olicy-making boards to run student activities in the high schools handle 
disciplinary problems and participate in the general supervision of the schools. 
2. To hold regular school assemblies to discuss school -problems and ascertain the will of the 
student body in conjunction with the independence movement. 
3. Maintain the rights of all students and teachers. These include the freedom of expression, 
freedom to organize, to pass out literature, freedom from censorship of school newspaper, 
freedom of assembly and the right to invite outside speakers regardless of their political views. 
4. End disciplinary expulsions and suspensions, if there is a problem with a particular student, it 
must be brought to the policy making board, for them to deal with the problem - without having 
the student lose in education. 
5. Special tutoring for all students who fall behind in their studies, and for the development of a 
study program teaching New Afrikan history and the real nature of monopoly -capitalism, 
colonialism and imperialism. To further upgrade job training programs and adequate preparation 
for all students to attend college. 
In this aspect of the Program for Decolonization, NANAS will be able to organize students on 
both the high school and college levels, working in c onjunction with one another in support of 
Frolinan's political and economic program. In this way, the political and economic development 
of the independence movement becomes a total part of the education process of students, each 
working for the benefit of  the other for as long as New Afrikan students must attend schools 
controlled by the colonial government. The primary objective is to control the schools in the 
ghetto/barrios and within the development of the class struggle for national unity, to have New  
Afrikan educators become responsible to the needs and development of the independence 
movement. It is in the process of freeing our minds of cultural imperialism that our oppressed 
nation will be able to free ourselves from national oppression and colonial domination.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Page 30 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The building of NANAS will be the forging of a youth movement on school campuses under the 
auspices of Frolinan. This youth movement will have a practical program to develop directly in 
relation to education and the political development of F rolinan. Hence, NANAS is the spirit of 
the independence movement, New Afrikan youth organized in a national network of groups and 
activists to establish Frolinan's Program for Decolonization in the heart of the New Afrikan 
community, strengthening the foundation of the New Afrikan Nation. 
New Afrikan Independence Academy:  
The building of New Afrikan Independence Academy (NAIA) is the essential tool in which 
Frolinan broadens its organizing ability in the New Afrikan community. The New Afrikan 
Independence Academy is the needed liberation schools established for the purpose of teaching 
and training New Afrikan youth, adults and members of Frolinan in the political direction of the 
independence movement! These liberation schools will be organized in a nationa l network by 
New Afrikan members of NANAS, NUNAW, political educators and activist in support of the 
independence movement. It is Frolinan's position that the New Afrikan community should have 
universities which are in support of New Afrikan independence s truggle and against national 
oppression, cultural imperialism and colonialism; where such universities do not exist, the New 
Afrikan Independence Academy will serve this purpose. 
These academies will be education centers, established in urban and rural communities to forge 
education in Afrikan history, political and social science, economics, business and organization 
administration, and technical training conducive to the preservation of the independence 
movement. The curriculum of the academy will be d ivided to serve youth and adult education, 
especially developed to evolve leadership quality amongst New Afrikans and fulfill the needs of 
the national program and strategy of Frolinan. The New Afrikan Independence Academy will be 
established by a national education board consisting of academicians, historians, intellectuals.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Page 31 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
Panther Youth Corps: 
The Panther Youth Corps (PYC) is Frolinan's pre -teen youth organization whose primary 
activity in to learn the foundation in which the independence movement is be ing organized. The 
PYC will serve to develop the young minds of our oppressed nation of the ideals, principles, 
concepts and fortitude of nationhood. 
In the course of the liberation movement, the most courageous brother and sisters that have yet to 
organize the New Afrikan community had been those of the Black Panther Party. This history 
must not be forgotten, but rather maintained in a principled and dialectical fashion that will 
preserve that spirit of resistance in the liberation movement. Thusly, Frolin an will use the name 
Panther as the foundation in which the spirit of resistance will be taught to your young. They will 
become young Panthers progressively forging this determination of our history of struggle 
towards the finer and better modes of struggl e embodied in the socioeconomic and political 
program of Frolinan. 
The PYC will also serve the aspirations of the elementary grade school children in conjunction 
with NANAS in establishing a national curriculum conducive to their education and 
development. An essential part of their activity will be field trips to sites of noted interest to New 
Afrikans, community recreation activity, history classes and other programs to strengthen their 
impressionable young minds in disciplined understanding of their resp onsibility and place in the 
oppressed New Afrikan Nation. 
New Afrikan Children Center:  
The New Afrikan Children Center (NACC) is child day care centers established by Frolinan and 
operated by members of the New Afrikan community and Frolinan organizers. These day care 
centers will operate to serve the needs of working parents and political activist who need 
someone to look after their children, while they are out securing a livelihood and/or fulfilling the 
political objectives of the independence movement.


--- PAGE 32 ---
Page 32 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
These centers depending on location, will also serve free breakfast for school children in the 
neighborhood, and generally be supportive of the development of the community in respects to 
the growth of children in conjunction with the PYC and other stude nt related programs. 
Although the New Afrikan Children Center will be mostly responsible for children from the age 
of one to five years of age, these children will be taught basic skills and practices that will 
enhance their intelligence aptitude and understanding of the world around them. 
It is in the development of the New Afrikan Children Center's that will further the building of 
Frolinan and forge its program in the heart of the New Afrikan community, fulfilling a need and 
concern that affects most families. Whereby, having the community support the centers would be 
to have New Afrikan families support the political motivation by which Frolinan seeks to build 
the independence movement.  
New Afrikan Community Health Clinic:  
The New Afrikan Community Hea lth Clinic (NACHC) is institutions established in the New 
Afrikan community for which preventive medicine will be the primary method of operation. 
These clinics will serve the New Afrikan community in regards to dentistry, abortion, drug 
rehabilitation, ra pe crisis, acupuncture, hypertension, stress and other forms of physical and 
mental complications New Afrikans suffers and find common in their communities. It will also 
be the responsibility of the health clinics to formulate Sickle Cell Anemia research a nd HIV -
AIDS prevention programs as a central health awareness campaign in the New Afrikan 
community, in conjunction with the overall political program of Frolinan. 
These New Afrikan Community Health Clinics are essential tools by which Frolinan serves a 
particular interest in the community, and as part of the campaign to combat genocides in health 
care New Afrikans suffers across the country. It is Frolinan0s position, we as a nation, have 
responsible trained professional doctors and medics to fill the vari ous positions that these clinics 
will serve. Upon the development of the class struggle for national unity, these medical 
professionals will be organized to serve the needs of New Afrikan people and the independence 
movement. Thus, the establishment of NAC HC is a necessary part of Frolinan's organizing


--- PAGE 33 ---
Page 33 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
platform, building its program for the survival and inevitable liberation of the New Afrikan 
Nation. 
 
New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program:  
The New Afrikan Food Co-op Program (NAFCOP) is a Frolinan project to orga nize members of 
the New Afrikan community to unite in cooperative economic planning in securing wholesale 
produce and food stuff. With the development of food co -ops and the socioeconomic interaction 
of members of the community, the community will formulat e working relationships for the 
improvement of the entire group. This also is the basic means in which Frolinan educate New 
Afrikans of the ideals of community responsibility, development and survival during the course 
of the independence movement. Efforts  will be made to develop farming cooperatives, whereby, 
agriculture will be used in the supplying of food co -ops in urban areas. The establishment of 
food co-op networks across the country for the distribution of foods will ensure the growth and 
development of Frolinan's national program and strategy. 
These food co -ops will strengthen the political determination of the need to free the land as an 
essential and recognize objective, as New Afrikans will understand the need for us to feed 
ourselves. The food c o-ops will become a practical organizing tool both politically and 
organizationally, a central foundation to serve other aspects of Frolinan's national strategy, such 
as the free breakfast program for school children. It is when New Afrikan Food Co -op Markets 
are established, comprising hundreds of community co -op groups throughout the New Afrikans 
community, will Frolinan be able to gauge the strength of its political determination in 
organizing New Afrikans under the auspices of its national program towar ds self -government 
and independence.


--- PAGE 34 ---
Page 34 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol:  
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol (NACAP) will become a network of New Afrikan 
men and woman organized for the defense of the New Afrikan community. It will establish 
security patrols against vigilantes, killer cops, racists, and black on black crime. These Now 
Afrikans will be trained in police tactics and codes to protect the New Afrikan community in 
patrols as security guards. They will compile information and intelligence  of high crime areas 
that are frequented by outsiders; they will be responsible for the protection of our senior citizens 
and youth, a well as, various political programs, demonstrations, etc. Members of NACAP will 
be trained in martial arts, weapons, dril ling, police science, crowd control and military science 
encompassing guerrilla warfare. 
One of the primary objectives of Frolinan's political program is to have the colonial government 
occupation army (police) withdraw from the New Afrikan community. But in order to gain the 
support of New Afrikans in this endeavor, it is essential that community residences feel safe and 
confident. The folks in the community must believe their lives will not be in any greater danger 
once the occupying army in forced to wit hdraw from the community. It is important that the 
community understand the police, occupies our territory primarily to protect the property of the 
capitalists, who for the most part do not live in our communities. Frolinan's call for community 
control and  self-government will become a motivating factor by which the establishment of 
NACAP is an essential part. 
It must also be put forth, that drugs and black on black crime is a problem that causes the 
occupying (police) army to be called and stay in and arou nd the New Afrikan community. It is 
with the liquidation of the distribution, selling and consumption of drugs and black on black 
crime; and when New Afrikans becomes responsible to each other in respects to the 
independence movement, the community will be  organized in its highest operative development. 
Eventually, NACAP will be organized into a peoples' militia to serve the development of the 
armed struggle for national liberation. These community alert patrols will be the means in which 
members of the New  Afrikan community will gain experience in working in a disciplined


--- PAGE 35 ---
Page 35 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
security conscious apparatus. They will gain with the high ideals and responsibility of protecting 
the New Afrikan community. 
New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance Program:  
The New Afrikan P.O.W.  Assistance Program (NAPOWAP) will be developed to assure that 
New Afrikan captives are assisted in their efforts to be released from prison. Such assistance will 
be formulated in legal support in defense of our captured; pre-release programs for those about to 
be release on parole or discharged; political assistance in building programs and campaigns of 
national impact concerning the prison movement; and when possible, financial aid for the family 
of captives. In the past, the Prison movement has lead sign ificant political support to the general 
independence movement. Many of those captured had been principle leaders in the movement on 
the streets. Where they might be able to continue to give leadership and enhance the 
development of the independence moveme nt, it will be the responsibility of NAPOWAP to 
ensure they are provided the essential assistance in mutual regards to the independence 
movement, and Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. Emphasis will be given to the 
development of national campaigns for  amnesty and/or exchange of political prisoners of war; 
the ending of prison slavery and repeal of the 13th Amendment of the U.S. constitution as it 
upholds prison slavery; call for the unionization of prisoners labor and minimum wage 
remuneration for thei r labor; call for the release of New Afrikans prisoners nationally, for them 
to return to the national territory of Kush and support the agricultural development of the New 
Afrikan Nation; for the immediate end of the death penalty; and release of New Afri kans in 
military prisons. All of which is part of the Program for Decolonization and Ten Point Program. 
 
National Organization of New Afrikan Women:  
The National Organization of New Afrikan Women (NONAW) will become a national network 
of New Afrikan women  organized under the auspices of Frolinan's political direction. The 
express purpose of NONAW will be to fulfill the Program for Decolonization, and the problems 
effecting New Afrikan women in general. We do not separate the problems effecting New 
Afrikan Women from the major problem confronting the oppressed nation. We must differentiate


--- PAGE 36 ---
Page 36 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
the problem besetting New Afrikan women from those expressed by women of the oppressor 
nation and their movement. It is important that New Afrikan women recognize that the ir 
responsibility in the New Afrikan Independence Movement is wholly encompassing their 
liberation from sex discrimination, which is an essential aspect of colonial oppression. Once this 
understand is re -enforced in the political matrix of the independence  movement, New Afrikan 
women will take leadership roles and responsibility in the independence movement. 
Furthermore, Frolinan hold dearly to the ideal that our women are the backbone of the New 
Afrikan Nation. They nurture our young providing them with wi sdom of life, and further secure 
a household and family, the very fabric of the nation. It is the women of the New Afrikan Nation, 
and their staunch support and participation in the various Programs for Decolonization that will 
ensure the independence move ment is victorious. In their support of the Programs for 
Decolonization, they will become liberated by working for the liberation of the nation. They will 
establish the basis for unity and equality among gender roles while working in their 
responsibility towards the oppressed nation. 
We hold that our women can become fighters for independence at whatever level of the struggle 
they wish to attend or are needed. We also maintain that the establishment of secure family 
households is the foundation in which women are most needed. We hold to this position, because 
over the years and due to slavery and vestiges of colonialism, the New Afrikan household has 
become disunited and fractionalized. Historically, it has been the women who have held what 
family structure we now have together. It is most necessary that this development does not erode, 
but rather become stable and grow stronger, as families become a part of the independence 
movement. 
In this regards, particular ideological and social questions need to be address by our women, 
such as the ideal of polygamy, monogamy, and the effects of homosexuality; how to combat 
prostitution; the building of viable education institutions and develop positive images for our 
children in our communities; the establishment of  health and day care centers, rape crisis and 
sterilization/abortion centers, etc. These are issues of social and political significance that has 
particular effects on women, and affects our oppressed nation. We therefore call upon our 
women to lead the fight against these social and political problems, that has disastrous effects on


--- PAGE 37 ---
Page 37 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
our family structures in particular, and the social morass of the New Afrikan nation in general. 
These and other areas of concern embodied in the Program for Decolonization wom en will take 
leadership responsibility, encompassing the struggle in the home, in the community,, at the work 
place and within the political development of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. 
These ten organizational programs are the essential determina tions by which Frolinan will build 
its Program for Decolonization, establishing a national strategy within the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement. The emphasis is placed on organizing New Afrikans, and in doing so, 
educating them on the ideals of independen ce, how to build towards national liberation by 
employing the Three Phase Theory for National Independence, and the manifestation of the 
Program for Decolonization. It is with the fulfillment of the Three Phase Theory, in conjunction 
with the Program for D ecolonization, that Frolinan will build the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement. Each organizational program compliments the other, broadening the prospects for 
unified and even development across the country. 
drimhotep (bka RBG Street Scholar) 
Works Cited 
ThisNation.com's online textbook . ( 2011, August 23). Retrieved from ThisNation.com: 
http://www.thisnation.com/textbook/ 
Acoli, S. (1995, November 30). A Brief History of the New Afrikan Prison Struggle. Retrieved 10 08, 2010, 
from Hartford Web Publishing World History Archives: http://www.hartford-
hwp.com/archives/45a/513.html 
Allen, R. L. (1990). Black Awakening in Capitalist America: An Analytic History. Africa World Press . 
Avakian, B. ( 2000, November 27). Slavery, Capitalism andthe History of the Electoral College. Retrieved 
July 16, 2011, from Revolution: http://revcom.us/a/v22/1080-89/1080/elecol.htm 
Berg, H. (2009). Elijah Muhammad and Islam. New York: New York University Press. 
Bohmer, P. (1998, December 20). African-Americans as an Internal Colony:The Theory of Internal 
Colonialism. Retrieved June 24, 2011, from Academic Program Pages at Evergreen: 
http://academic.evergreen.edu/b/bohmerp/internalcolony.htm 
Curry, L. P. (1981). The Free Black in Urban America, 1800-1850: The Shadow of the Dream. Chicago: 
Univ of Chicago Press.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Page 38 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Du Bois, W. E.-1. ( 1912, July 28). The Upbuilding of Black Durham From World's Work, vol. 23. Retrieved 
August 3, 2011, from Documenting the American South: The North Carolina Experience: 
http://docsouth.unc.edu/nc/texts.html 
ISR. (1969, From International Socialist Review, Vol.30 No.6, November-December 1969, pp.50-60.). A 
Transitional Program for Black Liberation. International Socialist Review, Vol.30 No.6, pp.50-60. 
Malcolm X, e. b. (1963, June). Malcolm-X.org. Retrieved August 23, 2011, from The Black Revolution 
Malcolm X: http://www.malcolm-x.org/speeches/spc_06__63.htm 
New Afrikan Liberation Front Statement . (2000, April 11). NEW AFRIKAN LIBERATION FRONT 
STATEMENT TO THE NEW AFRIKAN NATION. Retrieved January 10, 2010, from NY Transfer News 
Collective, A Service of Blythe Systems: http://www.blythe.org/nytransfer-
subs/2000rad/New_Afrikan_Liberation_Front_Statement_ 
Pinderhughes, C. (2010, June 22). How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a 
New Internal Colonialism Theory. Retrieved August 23, 2011, from The Free Library: 
http://www.thefreelibrary.com/How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation 
for a...-a0233963295 
Sherman, M.-G. W. (1865, January 16). Forty Acres and a Mule: Special Field Order No. 15. Retrieved July 
27, 2011, from TeachingAmericanHistory.Org: 
http://teachingamericanhistory.org/library/index.asp?document=545 
Wilson, A. (1998, pg. 504). Nation-Within-A-Nation. In A. N. Wilson, Blueprint for Black Power: A 
Moral,Political and Economic Imperative for the Twenty-First Century (p. 504). Brooklyn: Afrikan 
World InfoSystems. 
Yeshitela, O. (1983). STOLEN BLACK LABOR: The Political Economy of Domestic Colonialism . Okland: 
Burning Spear Publications.


--- PAGE 39 ---
Page 39 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
APPENDIX I: 
FROLINAN’s Ten Point Platform:  
WHAT WE WANT 
Frolinan’s National Strategy is based on a Three Phase Theory for National Independence. 
Frolinan's National Strategy is exemplified in our Ten Point Platform and Theory and 
Organizational Program for Decolonization. Our strategy and practice will serve to manifest 
in reality the Ten Point Platform, a program accepted in principle by all members of Frolinan. 
Over the past six years the advent of open access internet and the accompanying dissemination 
New Afrikan consciousness raising information has resulted in rapidly growing revolutionary 
sentiments among many Afrikans in America. Consequentl y, an increasing numbers of Afrikans 
in America, especially among our youth and young adults, are ready, willing and able to devote 
their lives to the building of a revolutionary nationalist movement to win political economic 
power for the masses of our people; with the ultimate goal of national independence. We are now 
forced to grapple with the extremely complex problem of how this can be done. Without a 
properly historically contextualized and realistic perspective for carrying on the struggle for self -
determination based on a clear overstanding of the present objective conditions in the United 
States, thousands of potentially excellent revolutionary prospects run the risk of disorientation or 
wasting time and energy while trying to achieve the goal of self-determination. 
In the wake of our heighten consciousness we clearly see the necessity of breaking away, once 
and for all, from both the Democratic and Republican parties and the necessity of forming a 
“Black Nationalist Political Party” which will not o nly enter candidates in local, state and 
national election campaigns, but also mobilize New Afrikan communities across the United 
States in actions to attain demands of community control as articulated in our ten point platform.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Page 40 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
However, we must see clearl y how to link struggles for the pressing immediate needs of the 
masses of our people with the revolutionary goal of national independence. We must work as a 
collective (Nation -within-a-Nation) to alleviate and solve the most pressing problems of our 
people such as housing, education, employment, and poverty that are cause  by racist U.S. 
national oppression, economic exploitation and terroristic colonial domination.  We realize that a 
fundamental transformation (destruction) of the whole “U.S. capitalist -imperialist multi-national 
corporation, international bankster controlled” economic, social and political system is required 
for this. What we now know beyond any shadow of a doubt is that these ruthless parasites have 
no intention of removing the causes of discrimination, poverty and misery among the masses as 
these plagues are the driving force of their capitalist-imperialist system.   
Historically, in our search for an answer to this difficult problem we have swung from one 
extreme to the other without fin ding a logical and practical connection between the two ends. 
Thus, in the past we talked about armed struggle by small, highly disciplined, and trained groups 
of militants as the only really revolutionary method of action. When we run up against the 
unrealism of guerrilla -type actions in the United States, where the scale of revolutionary 
struggles demands huge and much more complex commitments of forces, we roll back to 
spasmodic and uncoordinated activities such as the largely spontaneous uprisings and r ebellions 
that flare up in our various communities over issues that often do not serve to be far -reaching or 
sustaining. 
It is true of course, as the current U.S. anti -Afrikan political and economic climate indicates that 
the New Afrikan conscious communit y is more ready to fight for their freedom from national 
oppression and colonial domination than any other sector of society. But it requires the active 
backing and participation of the majority of our population along with our activist, intelligentsia 
and leadership to achieve lasting political and economic power. This level of organization 
certainly has not yet been reached. Moreover, the political understanding of our numbers is far 
less advanced than their combative frame of mind. Thus, the Front for th e Liberation of the New 
Afrikan Nation (Frolinan) is a “from the garss -roots up New Afrikan Peoples self -determination 
and Nation -building program” that proposes a two prong approach.  Presently, our primary 
objective is to evolve a united strategy and dir ection amongst the many New Afrikan nationalist


--- PAGE 41 ---
Page 41 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
formations / organizations / movements of local, regional and national significance. Once this 
has been achieved the second objective will be to implement a transitional liberation program 
that will strategic ally demand and tactically secure control of the socioeconomic and political 
institutions of the urban and rural areas where New Afrikan people comprise the majority, 
independent of  colonial and alien control. Once these transition activities are underway  we will 
have established a solid foundation to completely break the chains of national oppression and 
colonial domination. Our strategy and practice will serve to manifest in reality the Ten Point 
Platform. 
 
WHAT WE WANT 
1. We want National Independence and the power to determine the destiny of the New Afrikan 
Nation. We believe that New Afrikans will not be free or able to determine their own destiny 
until they have end neo -colonial and capitalist -imperialist domination. It hereby becomes 
essential that our struggle commences with the fight for Black community control, a fight that 
will be the first step towards self-government, which is prerequisite to national independence. 
 
2. We want full employment of our people. We believe that the federal governmen t and this 
system of monopoly -capitalism are responsible for the abject poverty and the basis for 
unemployment existing in the New Afrikan community. This provides the basis for 
underdevelopment in the New Afrikan community, giving rise to socioeconomic an d political 
disenfranchisement of New Afrikans. Thereby, the fight for Black community control 
encompasses a fight for community development in which the federal government and multi -
national corporation provide economic incentive to produce jobs in the New Afrikan community. 
This is the major formulation revolutionary nationalist are to establish a relations with the 
colonial (U.S.A.) government, to assure federal funds are allocated to the New Afrikan 
community for constructive development and jobs.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Page 42 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
3. We want the end of capitalist exploitation of the New Afrikan community, national liberation 
of the national territory of Kush, and reparations for over four hundred years of national 
oppression. We demand all tax money expropriation from New Afrikan peopl e be appropriated 
for the development in national territory of Kush. 
 
4. We want decent housing and control of the land in which New Afrikans reside. In the past the 
landlord who owned the property of N ew Afrikan residences, usually live outside the 
community, and did not care for the land and housing dwelling. Based upon that experience and 
the struggle for Black community control and self -government, we demand ownership of the 
property in which we reside, to- be developed in cooperatives and communal central. 
 
5. We want education for our people that not exposes the true nature of monopoly-capitalism and 
imperialism, but also provides the historical foundation in which our cultural development is 
based in this country, in relation to other people of color throughout the world; such an education 
that provides our youth with the essential skills and incentive to become a part of the 
independence movement. As we demand control of the community in which we reside, the 
development of academic institutions becom es a fundamental part of the security of the 
independence movement, to build leaders for the future, in preserving the prospects for self -
determination. Hence, education is to evolve understanding of the development of the struggle 
for self -determination, but also the historical and practical academic foundation in which the 
New Afrikan Nation is to preserve its destiny. 
 
6. We want all New Afrikans to be exempt of military service in the colonial (U.S.A.) 
government as it is our position that all wars by t he colonial government are wars of aggression 
for the colonial domination and imperialist exploitation of lesser developed nations/countries; 
and other people of color victimized by the same forces of racism and capitalist exploitation New


--- PAGE 43 ---
Page 43 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Afrikans are cur rently under subjugation. -we demand exemption from military service in the 
colonial government and call for the building of a New Afrikan Peoples Liberation Army to fight 
for and establish the security and well-being of New Afrikans. 
 
7. We want an immediate end to police brutality and murder of New Afrikan people. We believe 
that the police of the colonial (U.S.A.) government acts as an occupation force to maintain 
control and order for the benefit of the colonial government. That the police motives are n ot in 
the basic interest of New Afrikans and their community, but rather, for the interest of the 
capitalist class who have businesses and own property in the New Afrikan community. In the 
course of establishing Black community control, we call for the imm ediate withdrawal of the 
occupation police army from our communities, and for New Afrikans to establish their own 
security system. We also maintain the right of self -defense against racist police repression and 
brutality, the right to bear arms, and the ri ght to organize self -defense groups to preserve the 
security of the New Afrikan community. 
 
8. We want the immediate release of all New Afrikan people held in federal, state, county and 
city prisons and jails. We believe that the system of national oppress ion has not provided New 
Afrikans with fair and impartial trials or hearings, in which the bias and prejudice inherent in the 
system served to assure their imprisonment Furthermore, the judicial system is one of the major 
tools by which the system of oppre ssion uses to stifle the fruition of the national liberation 
struggle and every aspects in which New Afrikans fight for civil and human rights. It is therefore 
held that the police, courts and prisons are all a part of the system of oppression and are unable to 
dispense justice and impartiality towards New Afrikans who might come before them for a trial 
or hearing. We call for all New Afrikans when brought to trial to be tried by a jury of their peers 
or people from their New Afrikan community, and if found  guilty of a charge for them to be 
sentence to areas of confinement in or near the New Afrikan community. We maintain the 
colonial (U.S.A.) government has no right to try any New Afrikan for as long as a state of war 
exist between two nations and colonial domination persists; and that all captive members of


--- PAGE 44 ---
Page 44 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
NAPLA or the Black underground be recognized as political prisoners of war and afforded 
Geneva Accord status. 
 
9. We want the right to be free of colonial domination, capitalist exploitation and national  
oppression. We demand full control of the New Afrikan community where we are a majority, for 
the express purpose of self -government towards nation independence. We call on the United 
Nations and the Organization of Afrikan Unity to recognize the existence  of a nationally 
oppressed New Afrikan people and nation in the United States and for them to conduct a national 
plebiscite for the purpose of a vote of independence, giving recognition to the New Afrikan 
nation in the western hemisphere. 
 
10. We want the right to migrate to the national territory of Kush and establish an independent 
nation separate from the colonial (U.S.A.) government of the United States of America. We 
believe New Afrikans have had enough of over four hundred years of national oppression  and 
are willing to establish their own nation employing the resources and labor inherent in the New 
Afrikan nation. We claim the five (5) states of the black belt as our national homeland in this 
country having named the national territory Kush and are bo und to liberate this territory in a 
national liberation struggle; to eventually migrate to the national territory and establish the 
government of the Republic of New Afrika.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Page 45 of 45 
  
 
FROLINAN’s National Strategy                                        Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
APPENDIX II: 
The prerequisite for becoming a member of Frolinan are as follows: 
1. Recognition of the existence of the New Afrikan Nation as an oppressed nation within the 
colonial government of the United States of America in the Western Hemisphere; 
2. That the Republic of New Afrika is the name and government of the New Afr ikan Nation, a 
government in exile, struggling for the liberation of the “National Territory of Kush”; 
3. Acceptance of the New Afrikan Declaration of Independence, Creed, Code of Umoja and 
RBG Code of Conduct; 
4. Recognize and support the New Afrikan People Liberation Army (NAPLA) as the armed front 
of the New Afrikan Nation;  
5. Support and work to manifest the National Strategy of Frolinan as the legitimate 
representative of New Afrikan Independence Movement, and work to support all groups in 
alliance to Frolinan; 
6. Must be anti -imperialist, anti-capitalist, antiracist/fascist, pro -national independence, willing 
to participate in the class and national liberation struggle for land (Kush) and social-democracy; 
7. Believe and have faith in the creative ing enuity, spiritual quality, and humanity of our New 
Afrikan people, and the historical, cultural, socioeconomic, and political productivity of our 
struggle for national independence.

