=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Frolinan-Suitable-for-Print-Distribution-Version.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 36
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:50.400202
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
By RBG Street Scholar 
SUITABLE FOR PRINT & DISTRIBUTION VERSION 
http://www.scribd.com/collections/3102046/RBG-FROLINAN-STUDIES-COLLECTION 
Hypertext Contents: 
Author's Preface.................................................................................................................... 1 
Introductory Note ................................................................................................................. 4 
HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW ......................................................... 5 
A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE In Refutation of Black Capitalism . 10 
THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE ............................... 13 
FIRST PHASE - Class Struggle for National Unity ........................................................ 14 
Second-Phase - NATIONAL UNITY FOR SELF GOVERNMENT ............................. 18 
Third Phase - SELF-GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE: ........... 20 
NATIONAL-STRATEGY BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES PROGRAM FOR 
DECOLONIZATION ......................................................................................................... 22 
 
Online: 
Access the Full FROLINAN Studies Collection (All Free PDF Downloads) 
Access FROLINAN Video Education Grid


--- PAGE 2 ---
2 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  2 
 
 
Author's Preface 
 
In the last several years from many corners of the New Afrikan Independence Movement , 
there has been a clarion call for the building of the Front for the Liberation of the New 
Afrikan Nation . A revolutionary nationalist front to establish a movement for national 
independence, to free the national territory of Kush from the colonial (U.S.A.) government. This 
call has mostly come from BLA---POWs and their supporters who recognize the need to 
resurrect a militant resistance to continued national oppression, identifying the basis of our 
peoples' colonial subjugation as part of the anti-imperialist struggle being waged by Third World 
peoples in many  parts of the world. Of course, this means we have to once again develop a 
militant political organization that will challenge U.S. colonialism and organize New Afrikans to 
offensively pursue the ultimate objective of national independence. This task has t o be greater 
than a survival program pending revolution: as all survival programs are in essence defensive in 
posture, based on the ideal to survive is to defend against attacks, but survival programs do not 
forge a movement, only sustain an existence. 
 
Therefore, to build Frolinan is to push forward the quest of national emancipation, as Frolinan's 
national strategy is not based simply on survival pending revolution, but rather, building the 
revolution to survive. This position on survival is not relegated  to a defensive posture, but 
develops an offensive Program for Decolonization, establishing a revolutionary theory and 
program to militantly fight for national independence. 
I have taken the initiative to write this proposal and treaty for our numbers and revolutionary 
nationalist to build upon, for us to unite our forces under a single progr am and national strategy. 
Since the destruction of the Black Panther Part y, our movement has fallen in the hands of 
passive resisters, losing its vitality, momentum, and revolutionary fervor. It is now necessary to 
rekindle the spirit of militant resistance and rebuild our revolutionary movement. Build Frolinan, 
our revolutionary nationalist front, comprising the needed national organizations and programs 
that will assure not only our survival, but also, our inevitable victory in establishing the 
Republic of New Afrika in the western hemisphere. 
 
This document is presented for revolutionary nationalist to discuss and seek the means and 
methods to create conditions to manifest the National Strategy of Frolinan. Of course, this is my 
conception of what needs to be done based on varied discussions amongst Comrades, and basic 
analysis of the general situati on of opportunism, liberalism, and sectarianism effecting our 
overall struggle. Therefore, this document is not all conclusive or inclusive of our needs in 
struggle; rather, it seeks to forge the basis to establish a durable foundation by which we may 
unite our talents and resources to build Frolinan. Hence, this document is offered as a pivot to 
create the needed center of gravity from which we can rally our forces, and move forward in 
unity and struggle.


--- PAGE 3 ---
3 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  3 
 
Based on the foregoing, I'm requesting of those receiving this document and who are able, to 
make copies and redistribute to those you believe might be interested in building Frolinan. 
Furthermore, I'm requesting all authentic revolutionary nationalist to do the following upon 
review of this document: 
1. Submit proposals to strengthen the basis to build Frolinan, i.e., organizational structure, 
ideological format, political programs, etc.;  
 
2. Establish a Frolinan organizing-cadre to build one of the Programs of Decolonization in your 
area, adopting Frolinan's National Strategy;  
 
3. Discuss this document with others, and contribute financially, materially and personally to the 
National Strategy of Frolinan. 
In the near future, an effort will be made to organize a national congress/conference of 
revolutionary nationalists who have expressed an interest and commitment to build Frolinan and 
support a particular aspect of the Program for Decolonization, to come together, and develop this 
revolutionary nationalist front.  
 
To contribute to this cause and become a front member of Frolinan, write to: 
FROLINAN 
Front for the Liberation of the 
New Afrikan Nation 
rbgstreetscholar@gmail.com


--- PAGE 4 ---
4 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  4 
 
"Theory and Practice to Break the Chains of National Oppression" 
 
Introductory Note 
  
Frolinan is initially a cadre -organization of New Afrikan revolutionary nationalist, whose 
primary objective is to evolve a united strategy and direction amongst the many New Afrikan 
nationalist formations. This objective is to further enjoin New Afrikan revolutionary nationalist 
to accept a position within the front, to develop greater principled unity of action in  the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement (NAIM ), in accordance with the National Strategy of 
Frolinan. 
 
There are many progressive and revolutionary organizations/parties/fronts in the NAIM of local, 
regional and national significance. Frolinan r ecognizes each organization/  party/ front has a 
specific and general role in the NAIM, but it is our faith, this role must be formulated in unity 
and struggle amongst our oppressed N ew Afrikan masses under the guidance of a single 
national strategy and pro gram. We believe that with the tactical implementation of a national 
strategy, which embraces the specific and general cause of NAIM in theory and practice, the 
various organization/parties/fronts will greatly enhance the overall development of the N ew 
Afrikan Independence Movement. 
 
Frolinan is characterized as a revolutionary nationalist front, recognizing the human and 
inalienable rights of New Afrikans to be free from racist colonialism, genocide, and imperialist 
national oppression/ exploitation. That New Afrikan "human rights', encompass the right to be 
self-governed and independent of the U.S. colonial government, thus, national rights in 
accordance to international law and politics. 
 
The prerequisite for becoming a member of Frolinan are as follows: 
1. Recognition of the existence of the New Afrikan Nation as an oppressed nation within the 
colonial government of the United States of America in the Western Hemisphere; 
 
2. That the Republic of New Afrika is the name and government of the New Afrikan Nation, a 
government in exile, struggling for the liberation of the National Territory of Kush; 
 
3. Acceptance of the New Afrikan Declaration of Independence, Creed and Code of Umoja and 
RBG Code 
 
4. Recognize and support the New Afrikan People Liberation Army (NAPLA) as the armed 
front of the New Afrikan Nation;  
 
5. Support and work to manifest the National Strategy of Frolinan as the legitimate 
representative of New Afrikan Independence Movement, and work to support all groups in


--- PAGE 5 ---
5 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  5 
 
alliance to Frolinan; 
 
6. Must be anti-imperialist, anti-capitalist, antiracist/fascist, pro-national independence, willing 
to participate in the class and national liberation struggle for land (Kush) and social-democracy; 
 
7. Believe and have faith in the creative ingenuity, spiritual quality, and humanity of our New 
Afrikan people, and the historical, cultural, socioeconomic, and political productivity of our 
struggle for national independence. 
 
Frolinan National Strategy is based on the Three Phase Theory for National Independence , it 
is our faith, this revolutionary theory is the criteria which our revolutionary movement is to be 
organized. Frolinan's National Strategy is exemplified in our Ten point Platform, Theory, and 
Organizational Program for Decolonization ; Strategy and Practice will serve to manifest in 
reality the Ten Point Platform, a program accepted in principle by all members of Frolinan. 
 
 
We anticipate and work toward Frolinan to develop into a mass based revolutionary nationalist 
front, comprising national organizations and groups, to organize and mobilize our oppressed 
New Afrikan people for our inevitable independence. 
 
HISTORICAL CONCEPTION AND OVERVIEW 
 
We accept all aspects of our history from the beginning of civilization on the Afrikan continent, 
to the present stages of technological development of Afrikan nation-states, and the continued 
struggle of Afrikan people throughout the world against tyranny and imperialist oppression. 
 
With this conception of history, we view the material basis in which history evolved to its 
present and ongoing developing modes of history; as Afrikan people relate and interrelate with 
one another, other people of color is t he Third World, and the European races. This 
understanding and materialist outlook of history, notes that dialectically, our present condition 
and struggle is based on our past experiences in a continuing development of an Afrikan history. 
The New Afrikan experience in America is not separate from the Afrikan experience on the 
continent, rather, they are linked in a chain of events which imposes socioeconomic, political and 
historical realities encompassing the criteria by which New Afrikan struggle for ind ependence 
must be developed.


--- PAGE 6 ---
6 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  6 
 
We call ourselves New Afrikan because  of the degree of force breeding and miscegenation we 
as a people have suffered, as well the cultural imperialism and the psychological plunder and 
rape of our affinity to Afrika - stripping away our Afrikan language, art and world, outlook, and 
national o ppression, which in our efforts to combat have created a national heritage rich in 
resistance based on two ideals of integration and/or separation. These experiences which left us 
stripped of our Afrikanist perspective despite miscegenation and cultural im perialism, 
encompassing those experiences into an Afrikan national heritage in Diaspora, creating the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement. 
 
 
This conception of history in a dialectical materialist per spective provides the means to 
formulate a program and strategy to conquer racist oppression and national subjugation, utilizing, 
the truth of our entire history as a guide to enlighten our practice. For instance, in terms of a 
(foreign) policy of Afrikan intercommunalism with our people on the Afrikan continent, it is 
essential to know what our relationship had been in history -providing a substantial foundation to 
develop principled relations today... For New Afrikans, it is important to know that slavery  did 
not begin as an American phenomenon, but rather, American chattel slavery of Afrikans is a 
direct outgrowth of Afrikans enslaving Afrikans on the Afrikan continent. Many of our ancestors 
had been enslaved by Afrikans due to internecine struggles, border wars of territorial imperative- 
amongst tribes and wars of aggression between Afrikan nation -states. The prisoner of wars, 
and/or because of denture, were placed in bondage, and often sold or traded.  
When the Europeans (Portuguese, Dutch, Spanish, Brit ish, etc.) made contact with Northern and 
Western coastal areas of Afrika, they not only raided villages and kidnapped Afrikans, but more 
often and productively (numerically) brought already enslaved Afrikans from Afrikan chieftains 
and traders. Hence, for  the most part, our existence in the Western hemisphere is as much a 
consequence of Afrikan history as it is of European history. 
 
 
Thus, as we conceive ourselves in history, we must place responsibility of our condition in 
context to the actual historical  development leading to our present situation. In this regards, we 
don't expect assistance from our Afrikan brothers nations simply because we are of one people -- 
only separated by distance -- but because history demand recompense for a people (New 
Afrikans) whose existence and suffering is based on our unfortunate relation in the history of 
slavery mutual to us all, and the commonality of our fight against mutual enemy -- imperialism. 
This same conception and relation to history is binding on any relationship established with other 
past enslaver, such as the Dutch, Portuguese, British, Spanish, etc. 
 
 
As we struggle against continued U.S. colonization, New Afrikans must have a determined sense 
of history in regard to the New Afrikan Nation relationship to the world. Without this common 
national consciousness and perception of our existence, based on history, our practice will 
continue to be confused and chaotic, without historical continuity which serves to give practical 
guidance on the road to independenc e. As an oppressed nation, we have a rich history of 
resistance to bondage; revolts on slave ships during the middle passage; revolts and rebellions for 
hundreds of years on slave plantations; fighting for freedom in the War of Independence, War of


--- PAGE 7 ---
7 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  7 
 
1812, and Civil War; and fighting in the U.S. Army in the name of U.S. democracy (hypocrisy) 
can also be considered part of the national determination to be free. 
 
 
We preserve four epochs in our history as indicative of our struggle to be free of U.S. national 
subjugation and colonial domination. After the signing of the Emancipation Proclamation in 
1863 and the 13th Amendment in 1865, and the Civil War having ended barbaric chattel slaver y; 
the 14th Amendment stripped Afrikans in America of their land (provided by Field Order No. 
115) imposed American citizenship on these Afrikan nationals, this country entered a period 
defined as reconstruction and the industrial revolution.  This was a pe riod when the slavocracy 
gave birth to mercantile capitalism; the gross surplus of such commodities as cotton, tobacco, 
sugar, etc., produced from slave labor in the South, provided economic -textile-industrial growth 
and development in Northern States. Rec onstruction found millions of New Afrikans either re -
enslaved by the vestiges of the Black Code -Law to sharecropping, unemployment, and landless, 
or migrating North in search of educational and employment opportunities. But the Hayes Tilden 
agreement resto red racist national oppression and colonial domination prevailed with terrorist 
KuKluxKlan raids, race riots (white against Blacks), mob violence, lynching of New Afrikans in 
the North and South. 
 
 
In 1905, the Niagara Movement was consummated, we recognized the Niagara Movement as a 
significant epoch in our continued struggle for independence. The Niagara Movement was not 
the first time New Afrikans organized themselves, as there had been many a bolitionist groups 
comprising "freedman" of Afrikan descent. But the Niagara Movement marks a stage in which, 
under the leadership of W.E.B. DuBois, they developed a concept and an organization which 
prevails today. The concept of integration was comprehen sively evolved during the Niagara 
Movement by DuBois, and is adamantly held today by the NAACP, which came into existence 
out of the Niagara Movement in 1910, with DuBois as a founding member and incorporator. It 
was DuBois who forged the conceptual appeal  of Pan -Afrikanism during this time; while the 
NAACP up until 1940 had campaigned for anti -lynch legislation, and from 1950 to present 
campaigned for desegregation, integration and civil rights. 
 
 
The second epoch  of historical importance was the 1920  Marcus Garvey "Back to Afrika" 
Movement. This movement which has yet to be surpassed appealed to and organized millions of 
New Afrikans, and established national pride and dignity directly associated to the Afrikan 
continent. Although the Back to Afrika movement only lasted until 1925, when viewed in 
juxtaposition in historical continuity  to the Niagara Movement and Pan Afrikanist ideas 
developing at the time, the thread of struggle and our peoples' conscious determination to be free 
of colonial domination becomes very significant. 
 
The third epoch is divided into two distinct and interdep endent parts as they actualized the first 
and second epochs in character and content. The Elijah Muhammad Nation of Islam movement 
which came -into existence in the 1940, but had not come into national prominence until the 
1960, developed many of the separa tist ideals held by Marcus Garvey movement; it generally 
appealed to those who had been adherents of the separatist movement of Marcus Garvey. In the


--- PAGE 8 ---
8 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  8 
 
1960s, Malcolm X (El Hajj Malik Shabazz) brought the Nation of Islam separatist movement 
into national att ention, recruitment reported to be approximately 1 million "Black Muslims" by 
some estimates. Elijah Muhammad called for the separation of Blacks (Ne w Afrikans) into a 
government of their own in the South Black Belt, basing his program on mystified interpretation 
of Islam and Black "self-help" economics (the principle now adopted as Black capitalism)  
 
... During this same epoch, in 1955, the so -called civil rights movement was launched, with  
Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr . as its primary leader and spokesperson. Given the political 
character and objective of  Martin L. King, Jr.'s movement, it ushered the line and principle of 
struggle first established in the Niagara Movement. The principle organizations of this course of 
struggle were SCLC, NAACP, Urban League, CORE and SNCC  all working in an united front 
strategy for desegregation, integration and civil rights. Politically, this movement could actually 
be defined as a negro-bourgeoisie democratic revolution . It attacked and did battle with the 
essential foundation and corner stone of colonial domination of New Afrikans in America - 
racism and national oppression. The civil rights movement sought the fruition of democratic civil 
-rights guaranteed to white to be equally administrated to Black people It was a nationally 
organized movement, which put in motion masses of people in freedom -rides, sit -ins and 
marches, which precipitated the eventful call for " Black Power"; nationalist political 
consciousness, resulting in riots and rebellions across the country. 
 
 
The dialectical (unity and struggle of opposites) relationship between the Elijah Muhammad 
separatist and Martin L. King, Jr. integrationist movement, pre served in historical continuity the 
ideals of both the Marcus Garvey separatist and W.E.B. DuBois integrationist movements, 
forging the course of struggle towards a synthesis of ideals first espoused with the cry and birth 
pains of "Black Power". 
 
 
The fou rth epoch , an outgrowth of the proceeding era adopted the synthetic conception of 
Black Power, uniting the symbolic determination of th e Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party 
and Malcolm X Black Nationalist ideas in the Black Panther Party. The Black Panther Party for 
Self-Defense was established in 1966 and in 1967 Black Panthers captured national attention by 
entering the California State Capital hearing-on gun control, carrying rifles and shotguns, calling 
for community control of police, self-defense, and Black political power. Even through, during 
this period, there had been other Black nationalist groups and formations ( i.e., RNA, JOM O, 
Deacons for Defense and Justice, RAM, APP, etc.) that evolved out of the negro -bourgeois-
democratic revolution, none made such an indelible historic impression on the developing 
struggle like the Black Panther Party. From its inception, the BPP had cons idered the necessity 
for armed struggle to wrestle Black power from the U.S.' white power structure. The BPP 
developed the Black underground which evolved into the Black Liberation Army - a clandestine 
network of armed urban guerrillas. It had been the BPP  that first raised the concept of class 
struggle, introducing and infusing the ideology of Marxist - Leninist-Mao Tse Tung thought with 
the Black Nationalist ideas of Malcolm X in accordance to the concrete realities of the struggle 
taking shape in Black (New Afrikan) ghettos/communities across the country.


--- PAGE 9 ---
9 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  9 
 
With its Ten Point Platform and Program the BPP  attempted to manifest Black political 
power on the basis of community control as a tactical objective toward the strategic goal of total 
independence. 
 
 
By 1976, the colonial government (U.S.A.) had directed its attention and counter -intelligence 
program (COINTELPRO *) on the BPP/BLA and other nationalist formations as the RNA. This 
counter revolutionary action by the government was implemented with  the intent to discredit, 
disrupt and destroy the BPP, with murderous raids, infiltration and provocation. In a four year 
battle with the police, by 1971, the BPP had been significantly subverted on a national level, 
whereupon, by 1973, the BPP was in all actuality defunct. This inevitably led to the defeat and 
decimation of the BLA as a fighting clandestine urban guerrilla network. 
 
*COINTELPRO  (an acronym for Counter Intelligence Program) was a series of covert, and often illegal, projects 
conducted by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) aimed at investigating and disrupting dissident 
political organizations within the Unite d States. The FBI used covert operations from its inception, however formal 
COINTELPRO  operations took place between 1956 and 1971. The FBI's stat ed motivation at the time was 
"protecting national security, preventing violence, and maintaining the existing social and political order."  
 
According to FBI records, 85% of COINTELPRO resources were expended on infiltrating, disrupting, 
marginalizing, and/or subverting groups suspected of being subversive, such as commun ist and socialist 
organizations; the women's rights movement; militant black nationalist groups, and the non -violent civil rights 
movement, including individuals such as Martin Luther King, Jr. and others associated with the Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the Congress of Racial 
Equality, the American Indian Movement, and other civil rights groups; a broad range of organizations labeled 
"New Left", including Students for a Democratic Society, the National Lawyers Guild, the Weathermen, almost all 
groups protesting the Vietnam War, and even individual student demonstrators with no group affiliation; and 
nationalist groups such as those "seeking independence for Puerto Rico." The other 1 5% of COINTELPRO 
resources were expended to marginalize and subvert "white hate groups," including the Ku Klux Klan and National 
States' Rights Party. 
 
The directives governing COINTELPRO were issued by FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who ordered FBI agents to 
"expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" the activities of these movements and their leaders. 
 
 
 
It is these four epochs in the continuing struggle of New for political power and independence 
that are of great significance. They had the greatest influence and impact on New Afrikans 
nationally in juxtaposition to our relationship to the enemy colonial (U.S.A.) governme nt. We 
accept these four epochs as the foundation in which current and future development in the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement will be objectively molded, shaped and forged to victory. 
 
 
History shows us that there are two basic and distinct lines and influences in the New Afrikan 
peoples I struggle f or political power and self -determination. Our oppressed people have fought 
for integration and civil rights, and we've fought for separation and human rights. It is these two 
directions that characterize any real differences in our peoples' aspiration to be free of racist 
colonial domination. Furthermore, it will be integration verses separation that will be a 
determinative aspect for the building of national unity amongst New Afrikans to engage the


--- PAGE 10 ---
10 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  10 
 
colonial (U.S.A.) government for political power and self -determination in the future. This 
understanding of history and the ideological political  forces that have shaped our struggle 
provides conscious and deliberate activity to combat national oppression and c olonialism, with 
the continuity of preserving history and the mode of struggle toward separation. We of Frolinan 
must take a stand on the side of separation, and in so doing, give recognition to those forces that 
are currently making history in building th e independence movement. We recognize the 
organization of the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika for its contribution, 
but not necessarily to subordinate ourselves to its current strategy and program in the movement. 
We therefore reserve the right to formulate a revolutionary theory, strategy, and program to 
educate, organize and mobilize New Afrikans toward national emancipation, and unite our 
strategy and program of action with other New Afrikan revolutionary forces that are also fighting 
for separation and independence, not excluding the present Republic of New Afrika - Provisional 
Government. 
 
 
Frolinan recognizes and understands the history of resistance our oppressed nation has fought in 
both the integrationist and separatist movement s. But because we believe in our inalienable 
human rights, as a nation of people, to be self -governed; and because we are anti -capitalist-
imperialist, we find no practical basis - in accordance to our history - to integrate in this colonial 
(U.S.A.) govern ment. Therefore, we will concentrate our energies in preserving our nation 
peoples' history to separate, to establish an independent self -governed socioeconomic, political 
and cultural-sovereign nation in the Western Hemisphere. 
 
A REVOLUTIONARY CLASS PERSPECTIVE 
In Refutation of Black Capitalism:  
 
Since the advent of the government sponsored Economic opportunity Commission, and the 
various poverty programs instituted as a result of the Black insurrections during the 1960s, the 
quest for Black capitalism as an integral part of the freedom struggle su rged as the political, 
socioeconomic alternative to white capitalism and exploitation - and established a unique 
obstacle before the New Afrikan revolution. By 1970, the U.S. government managed to 
consolidate a national bourgeoisie neo -colonial class comprising Black businessmen, civil rights 
leaders and elected officials. In the process of this development, evolved a Black middle class 
whose political alliance remained with the oppressed Black masses, and recognized a political 
responsibility that in essen ce contradicts the economic realities of Black capitalism, they now 
find themselves at lost to the real ideals, program, and objectives of the Black struggle. While the 
national bourgeoisie aspires integration and assimilation into the mainstream 'of monop oly-
capitalism, the Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie are split in their sociopolitical aspirations; 
although economically, the Black middle class can't afford to negate their tie to the system of 
national oppression without forfeiting material advantag e and livelihood. But as the crisis of 
monopoly-capitalism worsens (inflation/recession), the existence of the Black middle class is 
threatened, as the national bourgeoisie intensifies their integrationist program on the deaf ear of 
the U.S. conservatism. The overall roll -back of affirmative action and economic programs that


--- PAGE 11 ---
11 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  11 
 
served the needs of the Black masses during the late 60s and throughout the 70s, provides the 
basis in which the New Afrikan (Black) revolution will be mounted; the socioeconomic 
contradiction between the owners of the means of production (ruling class imperialist) and the 
laborers (managers and manual labor) becoming antagonistic - the principle ideal of Black 
capitalism in juxtaposition in capitalist-imperialism is refuted.  
 
From a Ne w Afrikan revolutionary nationalist analysis of the developing struggle, dialectical 
historical materialism must be the basis in which such an analysis serves to manifest an ideology, 
theory and political program that will strengthen the socioeconomic and political determination 
of the New Afrikan Independence Movement. In this way, the New Afrikan revolution will not 
become short-sighted and bend to reformist concessions the national bourgeoisie neo -colonialist 
- in behalf of their class interest and the i nterest of colonialism - may throw in the path of the 
revolution via the Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie and working class. Hence, this New 
Afrikan revolutionary nationalist analysis must be a class analysis of national significance. It 
then becomes f irst to identify the classes of neo -colonial oppression; the national Black 
bourgeoisie, neo -colonialists are identified as those business people/ corporations such as 
Johnson Publication and Products, Motown music/movie industry, etc. whose economic policy in 
class collaboration and collusion with monopoly -capitalism serves as. financiers to political 
entities/ individuals who espouse the neo -colonialist dictates of integration and assimilation; 
those sociopolitical personages of the national bourgeoisie a re identified historically as the Rev. 
Jesse Jackson, Rev. Joseph Lowery, Rev. Benjamin Hooks, Rev. Leon Sullivan, Ron Brown, 
Reginald Lewis, Percy Sutton, Coretta S. King, Dorothy Haight, Eleanor Holmes Norton, and 
other such national neo-colonist representatives. 
 
These individuals and organizations maintain direct ties to the colonial (U.S.A.) government in 
their relationship to the oppressed neo -colony, and espouse the sociopolitical illusion of 
integration-assimilation and non-violent struggle for Black survival in racist-imperialist America. 
They are the bulwark of neo -colonialist leaders who serve the colonial government by 
institutionalizing the concept of gradualism, reformism, and Black capitalism as the 
socioeconomic policy for political struggle by the oppressed New Afrikan masses. Their entire 
program is based on acculturation, assimilation, and integration on a monopoly capitalist  
platform. Such a program has influenced the established Black middle class -petty bourgeoisie 
skilled laborers in the ir efforts to gain material wealth and status in the colonial system of 
oppression. In many cases, the petty bourgeoisie comes face to face with racist institutions and 
standards ( i.e., housing, employment, promotions, etc.) that cause them to reconsider socio-
politically the aspects in which acculturation, integration and assimilation are realistic. But 
because of their socioeconomic ties to the system of oppression, they aren't totally able or willing 
to sever their relationship and join the oppressed New  Afrikan masses in the national 
independence movement. Hence, the Black (upper) middle class attempts to employ a cultural 
identity to the development of Black capitalism, which is progressive in form and reactionary in 
content. This bourgeois cultural nat ionalism has evoked socioeconomically an exploitative 
relationship to the oppressed neo -colony by developing Black business, employment, etc., in the 
Black community but taking the profit out of the community -- while politically they espouse 
Black communi ty self -control in which Black capitalists and politicians will overwhelmingly


--- PAGE 12 ---
12 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  12 
 
benefit. Their most recent scheme to enhance this development is the building of a National 
Black Independent Political Party. 
 
The question of a National Black Independent Political Party as elucidated by the Black 
bourgeoisie cultural nationalist (upper and middle class) would consolidate in a program for 
independent Black capitalism and conformity to white capitalism/imperialism , thus a neo -
colonial relationship to colonial (U.S.A.) rulers. The political determination of the National 
Black Independent Political Party as developed by the National Black Political Assembly, would 
seek to compete with the Democratic and Republican Pa rty(s), running Black politicians for 
various local (mayoral, governor), regional (congress, senate), and national (president) offices 
and fight for federal funds, laws and policy in response to the needs of the New Afrikan neo -
colony, and/or against U.S. foreign policy to Afrika. Whereupon, the need for such a National 
Black Independent Political Party is real, the Political goal and direction of this party cannot be 
based on the development of Black capitalism nor hold to a concept of co -existence to 
imperialism. The Black middle class petty bourgeoisie cultural nationalist, economic and 
political aspiration as currently forged is progressive in form by collecting and consolidating our 
talented, educated and skilled Black people in a national formation to supposedly represent the 
interests of the oppressed New Afrikan masses; and reactionary in content by developing Black 
capitalism intricately tied to U.S. monopoly -capitalism. It is illusionary, as it would not evolve 
independent of U.S. monopoly -capitalism, since Black capitalism would rely on capitalist 
imperialism for its own growth and development, strengthening a neo-colonial relationship to the 
oppressed New Afrikan masses of whom are a colonized nation. Hence, Black capitalism 
perpetuates class explo itation of New Afrikans, and neo -colonial subjugation to U.S. 
imperialism. 
 
It can thereby be determined, the Black middle class petty bourgeoisie cultural nationalist can be 
allied to the New Afrikan working class upon realizing Black capitalism is a tool  of the colonial 
ruling class oppressors, utilized by their neo -colonialist agents - the national Black bourgeoisie. 
Furthermore, where Black capitalism is tied to monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, its 
existence and development is based on the existence  and development of imperialism and 
imperialism is based on colonial domination of oppressed people -nations. Thus, socioeconomic 
and politically Black capitalism is a neo -colonialist institution demanding continued Black 
exploitation and colonial oppressio n domestically and U.S. imperialist expansion in the Third 
World.


--- PAGE 13 ---
13 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  13 
 
 
 
THREE PHASE THEORY FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE: 
 
With a full understanding of our history in relationship to the colonial (U.S.A.) government and 
its economic system of monopoly -capitalism and imperialism, we are then able to develop a 
practical theory to formulate a decisive working strategy by which to educate, organize and 
mobilize our oppressed New Afrikan Nation for complete sovereignty and independence. It is 
important that recogn ition is given to our task for a social, political, economic and cultural 
perspective. That we totally commit ourselves to an arduous struggle for national emancipation 
and liberation, allowing absolutely nothing from preventing our success and freedom fro m racist 
colonial and neo-colonial subjugation. 
 
Our Three Phase Theory for National Independence  is based on the historical manifestation 
of our national oppression in racist capitalist America. This theory negates nothing from our 
history although it establishes its pragmatic foundation on prevailing conditions, and moves from 
these conditions, buil ding conceptual understanding of how our practice must conform to given 
realities, if we are to be free. The Three Phase Theory for National Independence is based on the 
principles of dialectical materialism, determining the need of both class and national struggle. 
1) We recognize we are a subjugated and oppressed colonized nation in the imperialist 
government of the United States of America; 
 
2) That racist national oppression and monopoly-capitalism are the two all pervasive 
means in which U.S. imperialism maintains a colonial strangle-hold on the New Afrikan 
Nation, with miscegenation, acculturation, assimilation, individualism, sexism and 
competition being the character of control and our super exploitation; 
 
3) Our colonial condition is re-enforced by the institutionalization of class-divisions and 
neo-colonial control by members of the New Afrikan Nation; 
 
4) That the New Afrikan Nation is entitled to restitution/reparations from the U.S. 
government for four (4) centuries of colonial domination, including, monetary 
compensation, land, machinery (industrial and technological), and military equipment to 
establish our sovereignty and security to defend against future aggression; 
 
5) As an oppressed nation of colonized people, we are the third largest nation of Afrikan 
people in the western hemisphere. We have a population of 30+ million with a 
purchasing power of $250 to $350 billion dollars and must be afforded international 
recognition and status in both United Nations and Organization of Afrikan Unity.


--- PAGE 14 ---
14 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  14 
 
 
 
First Phase - Class Struggle for National Unity: 
 
It is first important to identify the various classes in which national unity is to be brought. We 
recognize the fact that the New Afrikan people are a colonized nation in the United States. We 
also recogni ze that New Afrikans' colonization is one of the race and class oppression. The 
division of oppression between Euro Americans and New Afrikans is buffeted by a system of 
neo colonization established and maintained by members of the New Afrikan Nation who a re in 
essence neo-colonialist agents of the oppressor nation government. 
 
 
 
These neo-colonialists are the National Bourgeoisie of the oppressed New Afrikan Nation. The 
national bourgeoisie are Black politicians and business people (capitalist) who are int egrationist 
and assimilationist, they aspire (by policy making in organizations) to have the oppressed New 
Afrikan people to integrate and assimilate into the government of oppression. This ideal, as it has 
been historically manifested, is in essence an il lusion in which it is the national bourgeoisie who 
benefits, with token concessions from the colonial government, rewarded for their efforts to 
maintain order and control of the New Afrikan people. The national bourgeoisie are identified 
historically as le aders of the NAACP, PUSH, National Urban League, Congressional Black 
Caucus, Johnson Products, Motown, etc. All of them work in the interests of the colonial 
government and in the own interests, aspiring integration and assimilation into this system of 
capitalist imperialism; and by seeking to stifle the militant struggle of the oppressed New 
Afrikan people for independence. 
 
 
The political wing of the national bourgeoisie is financed by Black capitalist and liberal white 
institutions (i.e., foundations) an d corporate groups. Essentially they epitomize by the structure 
of -the colonial government to represent the interests of New Afrikan people. They attempt to 
persuade New Afrikans what is in their interest to struggle for or against in relation to the 
policies of the colonial government. Their policy and interests are that of neo -colonial capitalist 
and integrationist in relation to the oppressed New Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
Under the national bourgeoisie are the petty bourgeoisie (cultural nationalist) middle class. These 
are the skilled Black professionals and marginal/small business people which can be divided into 
two segments in a socio -psychological conception, but are equally Black capitalist. On the one 
hand there are the assimilationist and integrationist who are in every way like the national 
bourgeoisie, and on the other hand are the cultural nationalist. The middle class cultural 
nationalist attempts to maintain a Black social consciousness in terms of identifying with the 
New Afrikan oppressed masses, b ut because they are in essence capitalist, their aspirations as 
pseudo-nationalist are  forsaken. They are economically and materially tied to the system of 
oppression and these ties are manifested politically as they tend to support and enhance the


--- PAGE 15 ---
15 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  15 
 
prospects of neo -colonialism, ensuring Blacks are the representatives of Blacks, who are the 
representatives of the colonial (U.S.A.) government. As an example, they seek to establish an 
independent Black political party to compete with other capitalist (ruling c lass) political 
institutions. They work to broaden and secure their class and national interest, working within 
the legitimate confines and avenues the colonial government allows for a given class or national 
to address their problems and seek redress to d isenfranchisement and aspects of colonial 
subjugation. I Hence, they are in actuality social and political reformist, utilizing the oppression 
of the New A frikan masses as stepping -stones to assure their own security and survival as 
capitalists. They also support upward mobility of other aspiring Black capitalists from the lower 
classes, building and strengthening their class status in competition with white middle and upper 
class capitalists. They are the bulwark supporters of the national bourgeoisie, eve n though as 
social reformers, potentially, they are capable of developing national Black social consciousness 
to motivate and influence the New Afrikan peoples' struggle for the end of colonial oppression, if 
they were to confront the colonial government for national emancipation and independence. 
 
 
The majority of New Afrikans are of the lower class - workers and laborers - the proletariat class. 
They are the semi -skilled and manual laborers, the office and factory workers, etc., whose 
standard of living i s just above or at poverty level, many of whom subsist on a combination of 
work, welfare (medical aid, social security or veterans benefits, etc.) and hustling. The Black 
proletariats suffer the brunt of the socioeconomic oppression of capitalist exploitat ion and are  
most politically disenfranchised by the system of colonial domination. In juxtaposition to 
neocolonial class divisions within the New Afrikan Nation, the capitalist system employs racist 
national oppression as the primary mechanism to keep the aspirations of the Black proletariat in 
check. This racist national oppression is found in every vestige of the Black proletariat existence, 
in housing, employment, health, and social institutions. The colonial government maintains the 
policies and regulates when and how such living means are to be dispensed in the New Afrikan 
community and/or to the benefit of the Black proletariat. Racist national oppression and class 
divisions, serves to trap the Black proletariat in a socioeconomic condition and -level o f 
subsistence where poverty is always close at hand. But, socio-politically, the Black proletariat 
aspires an end to colonial domination and racist oppression, and not for such conditions to be 
covered up in Black face. They are not in essence capitalist, but rather, recognize they live in a 
capitalist society, and thereby must live in accordance to the norms by which a livelihood can be 
maintained. When such conditions of oppression become unbearable, the Black proletariat and 
youth are more likely to rebe l (riots, strikes, boycotts, etc.) and demonstrate their frustration and 
anger to continued exploitation and racism. 
 
 
Beneath the Black working class are the subculture, lumpen -proletariat, the unskilled and menial 
laborers whose primary means of subsiste nce is based on hustling (selling drugs, thievery, 
prostitution, etc.), marginal employment and welfare. For the most part, the socioeconomic 
provisions within the subculture are maintained by the "illegitimate capitalist" activity of the 
lumpen-proletariat. In accordance to their aspirations to fulfill the social values of the 
bourgeoisie, they employ business acumen in criminal activity for subsistence and profit. As they 
seek material wealth and social status of the bourgeoisie within the confines of the  subculture, 
they are in many cases politically reactionary, unconcerned with nothing other than personal


--- PAGE 16 ---
16 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  16 
 
survival and individual gain. It is only when the lumpen -proletariat are educated and become 
politically aware of their socioeconomic condition, does the possibility exist for them to become 
staunch supporters of the revolution, recognizing their dire standard of living is based wholly on 
the system of oppression they are desperately trying to emulate. 
 
This brief description of the class break -down of the oppressed New Afrikan Nation provides 
some indication as to why it is so difficult for the oppressed Black masses to challenge the 
government of oppression in unity and struggle. This also determines why the first phase of 
Frolinan theoretical position is one in which struggle must commence within the class divisions 
of the neo-colony, before New Afrikans can adequately challenge the colonial government with a 
degree of strength and fortitude, and cause the enemy government to bend to the will of the Ne w 
Afrikan Nation for complete independence and sovereignty. 
 
By comprehending the class divisions within the neo -colony, we find the particularity of the 
principle contradiction that exists between the neo -colony and the colonial government with its 
national and international ramifications. Essentially, the particularity of the contradiction is one 
between the direction of the liberation movement; is it for integration or separation from this 
capitalist-imperialist system of oppression? It is this contradic tion within the movement that 
determines the necessity for class struggle within the New Afrikan Nation; such a struggle to 
evolve national unity towards a single and principle revolutionary program and strategy to 
confront the colonial government. The con tradiction as it presently exists, between the forces of 
integration and the forces for separation, is one in which each are building ideological, political 
programs and direction within the objective reality of the fight for civil and human rights. At thi s 
point, the contradiction is not antagonistic, but rather one of coexistence and in some cases 
mutual cohesion and accountability. It is this aspect of mutual accountability, if continued in 
unprincipled class collaboration that will prevent the forces fo r separation to build and sustain a 
revolutionary movement for complete independence. 
 
 
Thus, class struggle for national unity must begin by understanding the aspects of the particular 
contradiction existing between two contending forces within the neo -colony, and how these 
forces in unity and struggle - dialectically - attract and repel one another politically, and 
determine the basis of this relationship with the oppressed New Afrikan people in building and 
sustaining their aspiration to fight for indepe ndence. Here it can be said that the struggle must 
commence by drawing a line of demarcation between programs and objectives of the two forces 
in relation to the oppressed-New Afrikan masses. 
 
 
This line of demarcation must be forged through ideological an d political struggle, as well as 
socioeconomic programs addressing the concrete realities of the oppressed disenfranchisement. 
Where the forces of integration fights for civil rights, the forces for separation must fight for civil 
rights as the minimum obj ectives to attain within the process of building towards complete 
emancipation. In so doing, the forces for separation must at times call the forces of integration to 
do more, to fight harder, to make greater demands on the colonial government ( i.e., for B lack 
community control) and when they fail to do this, to condemn them for national betrayal, class 
collaboration and collusion with the enemy government. When such demands are made on the


--- PAGE 17 ---
17 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  17 
 
national bourgeoisie, for them to become responsive to the demands being made by the 
revolutionary forces (especially the working class), they will either have to capitulate and show 
the oppressed masses their true political nature, as boot licking lackeys, or antagonize the 
principle contradiction existing between the ne o-colony and the colonial government, leading to 
confrontation. This is the point in which class struggle for national unity broadens and 
strengthens the capacity for revolutionary forces to organize and mobilize the oppressed New 
Afrikan masses to support and fight for national liberation. 
 
 
At this time, the forces of integration ( i.e., National Bourgeoisie) have for the most part the 
greater influence over the New Afrikan people, because they are recognized as the official 
leaders- and speakers of the neo-colony by the colonialist; while the oppressed masses are for the 
most part politically integrated into - +-he working mechanism (Democratic and Republican 
Party or building a National Black Independent Political Party and as wage earners) of the 
system o f oppression, and thereby provides the neocolonialist a semblance of legitimacy as 
representatives. Hence, the purpose of class struggle within the neo -colony is to erode this ideal 
of legitimacy the neo -colonialist wields, expose their relationship as its  exists. To expose the 
means and method in which the colonial government maintains control over the oppressed New 
Afrikan Nation, by causing the contradiction between the neocolonial integrationist and the 
colonialist to become antagonistic. 
 
 
The mementos of the class struggle for national unity is for revolutionary nationalist forces to 
build support of the independence movement by discrediting the prospects of integration into this 
capitalist system. Class divisions within the structural foundation of ca pitalism determines the 
essential basis by which the particular contradiction rests, which in and of itself indicates 
integration in this system would be to perpetuate class division and exploitation of the neo -
colony. Thus, class struggle for national uni ty also holds the principle contradiction, whereby to 
end class divisions within the neo -colony would be to end the means and method of control and 
national oppression the neo-colony suffers by the system of capitalist colonial imperialism. 
 
 
The class str uggle will inevitably cause a contradiction to arise amongst the neo -colonialist and 
their supporters, and it will heighten political consciousness and combativeness amongst all 
classes within the neo-colony. The various segments of the middle class will s plit for and against 
the course of development between the national bourgeoisie of the neo -colony, and the 
revolutionary nationalist working class as epitomized by the forces for separation. The working 
class will gain a better understanding of the politic al determination of the movement, gaining a 
class consciousness that will re -enforce their nationalist fervor. The lumpen -proletariat 
subculture will also gain a class consciousness in which they will come to understand that their 
survival and development will be based on the fulfillment of the revolutionary nationalist 
direction of the independence movement. In this way, national unity can be attained and evolve 
to a level where a greater number of the oppressed New Afrikan people will support the 
endeavors of the forces for separation and become staunch supporters of the independence 
movement.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  18 
 
 
 
It must also be stated, during the course of the class struggle for national unity, the enemy 
government will seek to preserve the legitimacy -of the neo -colonialist. They will afford them 
greater amount of visibility in the media, become more politically friendly, giving larger 
concessions and authority to command the mode and direction of the struggle. This is why it is 
so important that revolutionary nationalist f orces make their programs for Black community 
control known amongst the New Afrikan people (especially the working class). They must 
diligently, relentlessly and vigorously challenge the national bourgeoisie civil rights program as 
minimum demands, and insufficient to the needs of the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
 
At first, the class struggle may appear to be divisive, but only until lines of demarcation have 
been drawn between two contending forces and directions in the neo -colony struggle for self -
determination and independence. Thereby, class struggle for national unity becomes an essential 
part of the liberation movement -- a fight for Black community control; a part in which the 
particularities of the contradiction of class divisions within the neo -colony becomes a motivating 
factor by which the principle contradiction between the neo -colony and the colonial government 
becomes acute and antagonistic; and separation/ independence become the ultimate goal to attain 
in a revolutionary nationalist struggle between the nationally oppressed and the national 
oppressor. 
 
 
Second-Phase - NATIONAL UNITY FOR SELF GOVERNMENT  
 
Within the development of the first phase, lies the seed of the second phase, the phase whereby 
national unity has been attained for the ideals of the independence movement. It then becomes 
possible to challenge the colonial government with a single national program to concretize our 
immediate demands as expressed during the first phase in terms of civil and human rights. The 
concrete social and poli tical struggle of New Afrikan peoples' fight for self -determination is 
characterized in economic and political terms of self-government. 
 
Hence, it can be established that the first phase is one in which the revolutionary nationalist 
forces fight to win the oppressed New Afrikan masses to support Black community control in the 
independence movement. The programs and struggle for civil and human rights are tactical 
initiatives to build and sustain the movement on the socioeconomic level, while ideological an d 
politically the class struggle evolves political class consciousness on a national level to the ideals 
of separation and self-government. 
 
Thereby, the New Afrikan Nation has become educated and organized into a national liberation 
front, a united -front in national unity, and in the second phase, they are mobilized for self -
determination and self -government. Our national unity is decisive, it is our strength and 
foundation for the future, and our fight for self -government is prerequisite to total and com plete


--- PAGE 19 ---
19 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  19 
 
independence. Encompassing this theory for emancipation is the objective and concrete realities 
of the fight for civil and human rights as expressed in the first phase. It is manifested, the 
fertilization of the seed for independence as planted in th e first phase - class struggle for national 
unity - is then cultivated in the second phase - national unity for self -government - and will be 
harvested in the last phase. 
 
The political programs of Frolinan in national unity for self government are  to conc retize the 
struggle for independence. To demand control of the socioeconomic and political institutions in 
the ghettos/barrios of the urban and rural areas where New Afrikan people comprise the 
majority, independent of the federal colonial (U.S.A.) governm ent control. To strengthen and 
intensify the political struggle between the nationally oppressed and the national oppressor; and 
socioeconomically consolidate the prospects for national independence, is the basic condition by 
which the movement will evolve  qualitatively in both the national and international political 
arena. This leads to the principle contradiction of two antagonistic contending political forces 
and national wills. Whereby the demand and struggle for complete control of institutions, 
resources and the wealth of the oppressed nation will be the character of the second phase. It then 
becomes essential at this phase to call for the assistance of Frolinan international supporters, to 
support and assist in the socioeconomic and political objecti ves in building New Afrikan 
communities independent of the colonial government. But at the same time, it will be incumbent 
of the colonial (U.S.A.) government to preserve a practical relationship with the New Afrikan 
Nation, a relationship of economic and political co -existence and interdependence. Hence, the 
dialectics of unity and struggle of opposites in the principle contradiction, between two 
contending forces and nationals. 
 
Thus, this second phase as a prerequisite to national independence is one in which the New 
Afrikan Nation begins to formulate the means and method of self -government in the 
geographical areas where New Afrikans constitute the majority; to control and direct the 
resources, labor, institutions and wealth which determines the extent of their livelihood. The 
demands of civil and human rights as applicable to these social, political, and economic 
conditions, will serve to preserve the growth and development of the liberation movement, as 
New Afrikans become self -determinative in manifes ting their future on all fronts. The federal 
colonial government will be called upon to relinquish taxation on New Afrikans, so that this tax 
money will be redistributed in accordance to the needs of the New Afrikan Nation communities, 
and for the establis hment of the New Afrikan sovereignty: it will also be called for the building 
of the New Afrikan security force/military; for the construction of New Afrikan industries in the 
national territory of Kush, building a national economic system to support the a utonomous 
regions (New Afrikan communities) across the country and developing economic ties 
internationally; to demand the release of New Afrikan prisoners to support the building of the 
New Afrikan Nation in both the rural and urban areas; to organize a n ational plebiscite and vote 
for independence, to be monitored by the United Nations and the organization of Afrikan Unity; 
to demand reparations for slave labor of over 400 years and damages for colonial exploitation 
and domination at a cost of $500 millio n at 6% semi -annual interest, since 1865 to the present. 
These and other aspects of Frolinan's national political program will become the predominate 
objective to rise in confrontation with the colonial government in national unity for self -
government.


--- PAGE 20 ---
20 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  20 
 
 
In this way, the New Afrikan people will consolidate their national aspirations to be independent 
of racist national oppression and capitalist-imperialist exploitation. While the first phase is to win 
the minds of Now Afrikan people in national unity -to the concept of Black community control, 
and an end to class divisions and neo -colonialism; the second phase is to mobilize the body of 
Now Afrikans to become self -determinative, self -governed, and bring an end to colonial 
domination toward the ultimate goal of national independence. 
 
 
Third Phase - SELF-GOVERNMENT FOR NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE:  
 
Where the first two phases were for building the movement and consolidating it - where New 
Afrikan people comprise the majority geographically - establishing a national  political 
consciousness, socioeconomic and cultural development for national independence. The third 
phase, golf-Government for National independence, is to fight for the national territory of Kush, 
to win the war and free the land. 
 
It can be easily dete rmined based on this proposition; the third phase depends much on the 
success of the first two phases. Once Frolinan has established a revolutionary nationalist social 
consciousness amongst the oppressed masses to want and fight for control of the Black 
community, and further consolidate this social and political consciousness toward self -
government; the prospects of substantiating the ultimate goal of national independence becomes 
more realistic and plausible in the overall scheme of this undertaking. Each  step is a tactical 
initiative within a national strategy, each tactical initiative being strategically developed to 
formulate the necessary socioeconomic, political and cultural ingredients into a national program 
in which the various segments of the independence movement can fulfill. 
 
 
The third phase is the final stage - to mobilize the entire nation to free the land - employing all 
the resources available to the movement in challenging the colonial government for complete 
independence. To recover the te rritory the oppressed nation once occupied and controlled by its 
labor and ownership of land, granted by the government when it first freed New Afrikans from 
chattel slavery in 1863. This is the phase in which the national aspirations of New Afrikans, as 
determined through the course of the struggle, will be called to task to wrestle the national 
territory from the colonial government. The mobilization of New Afrikans will be in national 
demonstrations, and strangling the economic development of the colonia l government, as well as 
intensifying the guerrilla war in both urban and rural areas, gaining international support on the 
specific objectives of national independence.


--- PAGE 21 ---
21 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  21 
 
 
This is a time when the call will be made for mass migration to Kush and where econ omic, 
social, political development will concentrate in the national territory. The transferring of 
economic, political resources and finances from out of the autonomous regions to the national 
territory will create a social, economic and political upheava l for the colonial government, 
greater than the struggles created in the first two phases. It will cause a major shift in the 
relationship of the autonomous regions with the colonial government in each area, diffusing and 
disrupting what may have been tent atively secured economic and political areas of co -existence 
between the colonial government and New Afrikan communities (or Provisional Government of 
the Republic of New Afrika and Frolinan). 
Of course, this fight cannot be fully developed until the cours e of the struggle 'for self -
government has evolved the mechanisms and institutions for governmental organization of 
national magnitude with international recognition: providing the essential tasks of a government 
in all socioeconomic and political fronts, such as in agriculture, industries (for food and 
employment), for national security, etc. It cannot be expected of New Afrikans to sacrifice 
beyond the exercise and expectations of a government to provide stable livelihood for its 
nationals. Hence, the reasons for the first two phases, in which’ New Afrikans will be organized 
in national unity and self -government, utilizing the skills and resources within the oppressed 
nation, establishing a national social consciousness and political determination for the inevitable 
fight to free the land. Thereby, the first two phases, lines -up the social, economic and political 
aspects of the struggle in a strategic position to challenge the colonial government weaknesses. 
In so doing, Frolinan will establish the criteria  by which the sacrifices for the fight for national 
independence will be minimized. To maximize the prospects of securing a liberated New Afrikan 
government in the national territory, having the government of New Afrika function with as 
much efficiency possible arising out of the national liberation struggle. 
 
 
Thus, self-government for national independence, the third phase of this theory -strategically - is 
the phase in which all others work to accomplish. The point in the national liberation struggle 
where New Afrikans are in a position of strength beyond the capacity of the colonial government 
to destroy the independence movement. The seed of independence planted in the first phase and 
cultivated in the second phase, will have blossomed in the third phas e, the phase in which 
national independence will become an accomplished reality. 
 
In conclusion, this theoretical proposition determines the need of the national liberation struggle, 
by first recognizing and organizing the New Afrikan Nation on the ideal of national 
independence, by having our talented, skilled and educated return to the Black communities; for 
them to live, work and build the political and social movement in the Black community under the 
guiding principles of class struggle for national un ity; and further develop a political and 
socioeconomic foundation toward self -sufficiency and self -reliance amongst New Afrikan 
people on the principle of national unity for self-government.


--- PAGE 22 ---
22 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  22 
 
 
This course of struggle will assure the independence movement will not become subjugated to 
the class struggle of Euro -Americans. Frolinan will not hold the class and national struggle of 
New Afrikans in abeyance or subject to the class struggle of Euro Americans. Frolinan maintain 
the New Afrikan Independence Moveme nt is independent of and held in juxtaposition to the 
class struggle of Euro -Americans. Thereby, the fulfillment of this proposition does not negate a 
relationship with the class struggle of Euro Americans, but rather base such a relationship on the 
political determination of the New Afrikan Independence Movement and not in reverse. 
Furthermore, Frolinan holds that building the national liberation struggle is to free New Afrikan s 
socio-psychologically, socio-economically, politically and culturally from neo -colonialism as a 
particular aspect of the principle struggle to end colonial domination. The course of the struggle, 
self-government for national independence is to free the land - the national territory of Kush. 
 
This theoretical proposition is not all e ncompassing addressing the current direction and 
sectarian condition of the national liberation struggle as it exists at this time. What is elucidated 
herein is the position of Frolinan to provide a motivating factor in which to play down 
sectarianism and heighten the prospect of united action amongst the many revolutionary 
nationalist organizations across the country. Such united actions that will embrace the New 
Afrikan Nation in national unity toward the objective goal of self -government as prerequisite to 
national independence. Therefore, it is Frolinan's position; - this theoretical proposition attaches 
to the national liberation movement a concept for the development of a national strategy. A 
national strategy which all authentic revolutionary national ist organizations must embrace and 
fulfill under the auspices of Frolinan in unity and struggle. It is this concept for the development 
of a national liberation strategy which will build, strengthen and fortify the national liberation 
struggle. Based on the revolutionary principle that without a revolutionary theory there can be no 
revolutionary movement. Here rests the theoretical proposition to build and sustain a 
revolutionary movement - the New Afrikan Independence Movement. 
 
NATIONAL STRATEGY- BASIC AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
PROGRAM FOR DECOLONIZATION 
 
The national strategy basic aim and objectives are to 
establish a Program for Decolonization that encompasses 
the strategic and tactical goals of the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement. It is within- the development of a 
Program for Decolonization that national liberation will be 
accomplished. The Program for Decolonization must afford 
a tactical initiative attack ing the social, political, economic 
and cultural manifestation of disenfranchisement New 
Afrikans suffers as a neo -colony; and seek the means to rid 
New Afrikans of this condition of oppression strategically 
leading to national independence. 
1) National Union of New Afrikan 
Workers 
2) National Alliance of New Afrikan 
Students 
3) New Afrikan Independence Academy 
4) Panther Youth Corps 
5) New Afrikan Children Center 
6) New Afrikan Community Health 
Clinic 
7) New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program 
8) The New Afrikan Community Alert 
Patrol 
9) New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance 
Program 
10) National Organization of New Afrikan 
Women


--- PAGE 23 ---
23 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  23 
 
 
The Program o f Decolonization is a program for national liberation and a strategy in the 
independence movement to be fulfilled tactically by the various members of Frolinan, and New 
Afrikan revolutionary nationalists across the country. 
 
We therefore call for the estab lishment of several national organizations to be constructed under 
the auspices of Frolinan:  
National Union of New Afrikan Workers:   
The National Union of New Afrikan Workers (NUNAW) is a national network of New Afrikan 
political activists in urban and rural areas, who function on the organizing principle of Frolinan 
in the work place (industries, companies, manufacturers, office workers, etc.). Their primary goal 
and objective is to raise the political consciousness of New Afrikan Workers of the 
socioeconomic condition inherent in the system of monopoly-capitalism. In so doing, to organize 
New Afrikan workers into labor federations who will call for the implementation of Frolinan's 
Program for Decolonization at the work place. 
 
It will be the responsibility of NUNAW to address the problems of affirmative action in the work 
place, to call for owners of the means of production to relinquish profits for the development of 
New Afrikan communities, and have them not engage -in economic ventures in South Afrika and 
other reactionary Afrikan countries. To further establish a national body of workers in a union 
formation to fortify the political thrust of the independence movement in the economic sphere. 
On the rural front, NUNAW will be responsible to organize agrarian collectives, co -ops, and the 
establishment of rural industries. 
 
Eventually, it will be the responsibility of NUNAW to develop a national economic system as. A 
foundation for the liberated national territory of Kush and the  establishment of the New Afrikan 
Nation. Hence, NUNAW is the backbone of the independence movement in building and 
strengthening the class struggle for national unity, by organizing the Black proletariat under the 
auspices of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. 
 
Furthermore, because of the role NUNAW will play in support of New Afrikan workers, it has 
the potential to become the most powerful sector within the New Afrikan communities across the 
country. As New Afrikans are victims of inequality in the economic system of monopoly - 
capitalism, they have often organized separately on the job to advance their interests and protect 
their rights. New Afrikan workers in general , and those who are employed by multi -national 
corporations in particular, should be organized around demands that more jobs be made available 
to our People by cutting back in the use of cheap labor abroad. New Afrikan workers should be 
organized against state and federal government sanctions allowing multi -national corporations to 
hire foreign workers aboard at less than the national minimum wage required by state and federal 
law in the U.S. There should be a minimum wage hiring act that applies to all U.S. owned 
business and corporations and that applies to all employees on their payroll  regardless of 
territory.


--- PAGE 24 ---
24 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  24 
 
 
These aims can be furthered through the following demands: 
1. Call for rank and file democratic control of the unions currently in existence and for the 
elimination of all racial practices in the labor movement. Equal rights for all New Afrikan 
workers. 
 
2. Call for preferential hiring and advancement of New Afrikan workers and free access to 
apprentice training programs, the skilled trades and higher paying supervisory posts in 
affirmative action. 
 
3. Call for an escalator clause in all union contracts to assure automatic wage adjustment to 
keep up with the rising cost of living (inflation/recession). 
 
4. Call for a shorter work week at standard living wages allowing the means for unemployed 
to gain employment preserving the need of productivity. 
 
5. Call for speedier grievance procedures and safety inspection with no restrictions on the 
right to strike. 
 
6. Call for the complete independence of unions from government interference. Repeal of all 
anti-labor laws. End prisoners slavery and uphold their right to unionize. 
 
7. Call for the establishment of a national import quota on products made by foreign 
corporations outside the U.S. territory, a balance in import/export trade. 
 
8. Call for workers control of industry through factory committees elected by the workers on 
the job. 
 
9. Call for big business taxes subsidize New Afrikan community projects, i.e., health clinic, 
child day care centers, drug rehabilitation programs, prisoners parole training programs, 
senior citizen care programs, etc. 
 
10. For multi-national corporations in conjunction with the U.S. government to give 
reparations to the New Afrikan Nation by subsidizing industrial construction and agricultural 
development in the New Afrikan Nation. 
 
These democratic demands within the Program for Decolonization builds the foundation in 
which Frolinan political activists can organize New Afrikan workers in NUNAW, and have 
NUNAW become a motivating factor in building the class struggle for national unity in the 
independence movement.


--- PAGE 25 ---
25 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  25 
 
National Alliance of New Afrikan Students:  
 
The National Alliance of New Afrikan Students (NANAS) is a national network of New Afrikan 
student groups and activists functioning under the auspices of Frolinan's Program for 
Decolonization. It will be the responsibility of NANAS to formulate a national direction on 
school campuses across the country, to support the development of the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement. To have New Afrikan history programs established, taught and 
maintained by professi onals who are in support of the independence movement. To also have 
New Afrikan students to become more aware of their responsibility in the independence 
movement, by organizing tutoring courses in high school and building liberation schools in the 
ghetto/barrio. It is important that New Afrikan students know they are the future of the 
independence movement and essentially are the principle leaders of the movement. With this 
understanding, they will be able to apply themselves in education and in other extr acurricular 
activity to the well being of the movement and the security of the Nation. Students must 
recognize that their education is not solely for individual gain and pleasure, but rather, for the 
building of minds to serve the movement and the Nation. They must become politically aware of 
their relationship to the Nation, and it is the responsibility of NANAS to assure New Afrikan 
students are organized in support of Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. This program 
dealing in the area of education wi ll allow NANAS to become the motivating factor in assuring 
its development and success.  
The following are NANAS program: 
 1. Election of community control boards to supervise schools in the New Afrikan 
community. 
 
2. Establish an educational system and curriculum which meets the needs of New Afrikan 
children, prepares them for the future in economic and technical skills, and technical 
security of the New Afrikan Nation. And gives them knowledge of themselves and an 
understanding of the true history and culture of Afrikan people. 
 
3. To involve parents in every phase of school life as part of the development of 
community involvement in the political life of the independence movement. 
 
4. Under the direction of Frolinan to support a program to train Black academicians, 
historians (so-called) intellectuals, and administrators in the principle and policy of class 
and national liberation struggle, and the objective of community control of the education 
system. 
 
5. To support Frolinan's position that community groups should be entitled to use school 
facilities to promote activities for the benefit of the community and the independence 
movement.  
 
6. In support of Frolinan's direction, to call for the dismissal of all school officials who 
victimize or insult students on racial grounds, or are found to be directly in cahoots with 
the colonial government efforts to suppress Frolinan's education Program for


--- PAGE 26 ---
26 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  26 
 
Decolonization. 
 
7. Support the establishment of community liberation schools to introduce special 
tutoring programs for all students who have fallen behind in their studies; to offer a full 
program of adult education; and teach the political motives and direction of the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement, the prospect of a national social democratic society. 
 
For High School Students: 
1. Establishing student policy-making boards to run student activities in the high schools handle 
disciplinary problems and participate in the general supervision of the schools. 
 
2. To hold regular school assemblies to discuss school-problems and ascertain the will of the 
student body in conjunction with the independence movement. 
 
3. Maintain the rights of all students and teachers. These include the freedom of expression, 
freedom to organize, to pass out literature, freedom from censorship of school newspaper, 
freedom of assembly and the right to invite outside speakers regardless of their political views. 
 
4. End disciplinary expulsions and suspensions, if there is a problem with a particular student, it 
must be brought to the policy making board, for them to deal with the problem - without having 
the student lose in education. 
 
5. Special tutoring for all students who fall behind in their studies, and for the development of a 
study program teaching New Afrikan history and the real nature of monopoly-capitalism, 
colonialism, and imperialism. To further upgrade job training programs and adequate preparation 
for all students to attend college. 
 
In this aspect of the Program for Decolonization, NANAS will be able to organize students on 
both the high school and college levels, working in conjunction with one another in support of 
Frolinan's political program. In this way, the political development of the independence 
movement becomes a total part of the education process of students, each working for the benefit 
of the other for as long as New Afrikan students must attend schools controlled by the colonial 
government. The primary objective is to control the schools in the ghetto/barrios and within  the 
development of the class struggle for national unity, to have New Afrikan educators become 
responsible to the needs and development of the independence movement. It is in the process of 
freeing our minds of cultural imperialism that our oppressed nati on will be able to free ourselves 
from national oppression and colonial domination. 
 
The building of NANAS will be the forging of a youth movement on school campuses under the 
auspices of Frolinan. This youth movement will have a practical program to devel op directly in 
relation to education and the political development of Frolinan. Hence, NANAS is the spirit of 
the independence movement, New Afrikan youth organized in a national network of groups and 
activists to establish Frolinan's Program for Decoloniz ation in the heart of the New Afrikan 
community, strengthening the foundation of the New Afrikan Nation.


--- PAGE 27 ---
27 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  27 
 
 
New Afrikan Independence Academy:  
The building of New Afrikan Independence Academy (NAIA) is the essential tool in which 
Frolinan broadens its organizing ability in the New Afrikan community. The New Afrikan 
Independence Academy is the needed liberation schools established for the purpose of teaching 
and training New Afrikan youth, adults and members of Frolinan in the political direction of the 
independence movement! These liberation schools will be organized in a national network by 
New Afrikan members of NANAS, NUNAW, political educators  and activist in support of the 
independence movement. It is Frolinan's position that the New Afrikan community should have 
universities which are in support of New Afrikan independence struggle and against national 
oppression, cultural imperialism and col onialism; where such universities do not exist, the New 
Afrikan Independence Academy will serve this purpose. 
 
These academies will be education centers, established in urban and rural communities to forge 
education in Afrikan history, political and social  science, economics, business and organization 
administration, and technical training conducive to the preservation of the independence 
movement. The curriculum of the academy will be divided to serve youth and adult education, 
especially developed to evolve leadership quality amongst New Afrikans and fulfill the needs of 
the national program and strategy of Frolinan. The New Afrikan Independence Academy will be 
established by a national education b oard consisting of progressive **academicians, historians, 
intellectuals. 
 
Panther Youth Corps: 
 
The Panther Youth Corps (PYC) is Frolinan's pre -teen and young adult youth organization 
whose primary activity in to learn the foundation in which the independence movement is being 
organized; similar to PLO's Fedayeen  youths-Simba, the PYC will serve to develop the young 
minds of our oppressed nation of the ideals, principles, concepts and fortitude of nationhood. 
 
 
In the course of the liberation movement, the most courageous brother and sisters that have yet to 
organize the New Afrikan community had been those of the Black Panther Party. This history 
must not be forgotten, but rather maintained in a principled and dialectical fashion that will 
preserve that spirit of resistance in the liberation movement.  Thusly, Frolinan will use the name 
Panther as the foundation in which the spirit of resistance will be taught to your young. They will 
become young Panthers progressively forging this determination of our history of struggle 
towards the finer and better m odes of struggle embodied in the socioeconomic and political 
program of Frolinan.


--- PAGE 28 ---
28 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  28 
 
 
 
The PYC will also serve the aspirations of the elementary grade school children in conjunction 
with NANAS in establishing a national curriculum conducive to their educatio n and 
development. An essential part of their activity will be field trips to sites of noted interest to New 
Afrikans, community recreation activity, history classes and other programs to strengthen their 
impressionable young minds in disciplined understan ding of their responsibility and place in the 
oppressed New Afrikan Nation. 
 
New Afrikan Children Center:  
 
The New Afrikan Children Center (NACC) is child day care centers established by Frolinan and 
operated by members of the oppressed New Afrikan commun ity and Frolinan organizers. These 
day care centers will operate to serve the needs of working parents and political activist who 
need someone to look after their children, while they are out securing a livelihood and/or 
fulfilling the political objectives of the independence movement. 
 
These centers depending on location, will also serve free breakfast for school children in the 
neighborhood, and generally be supportive of the development of the community in respects to 
the growth of children in conjunctio n with the PYC and other student related programs. 
Although, the New Afrikan Children Center -will mostly is responsible for children from the age 
of one to five years of age, these children will be taught basic skills and practices that will 
enhance their intelligence aptitude and understanding of the world around them. 
 
It is in the development of the New Afrikan Children Center's that will further the building of 
Frolinan and forge its program in the heart of the New Afrikan community, fulfilling a need and 
concern that affects most families. Whereby, having the community support the centers would be 
to have New Afrikan families support the political motivation by which Frolinan seeks to build 
the independence movement.  
New Afrikan Community Health Clinic:  
 
The New Afrikan Community Health Clinic (NACHC) is institutions established in the New 
Afrikan community for which preventive medicine will be the primary method of operation. 
These clinics will serve the New Afrikan community in regards to dentistry, abortion, drug 
rehabilitation, rape crisis, acupuncture, hypertensi on, stress and other forms of physical and 
mental complications New Afrikans suffers and find common in their communities. It will also 
be the responsibility of the health clinics to formulate Sickle Cell Anemia research and HIV -
AIDS prevention programs as  a central health awareness campaign in the New Afrikan 
community, in conjunction with the overall political program of Frolinan.


--- PAGE 29 ---
29 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  29 
 
 
 
These New Afrikan Community Health Clinics are essential tools by which Frolinan serves a 
particular interest in the communi ty, and as part of the campaign to combat genocides in health 
care New Afrikans suffers across the country. It is Frolinan0s position, we as a nation, have 
responsible trained professional doctors and medics to fill the various positions that these clinics  
will serve. Upon the development of the class struggle for national unity, these medical 
professionals will be organized to serve the needs of New Afrikan people and the independence 
movement. Thus, the establishment of NACHC is a necessary part of Frolin an's organizing 
platform, building its program for the survival and inevitable liberation of the New Afrikan 
Nation. 
New Afrikan Food Co-Op Program:  
 
The New Afrikan Food Co-op Program (NAFCOP) is a Frolinan project to organize members of 
the New Afrikan community to unite in cooperative economic planning in securing wholesale 
produce and food stuff. With the development of food co -ops and the socioeconomic interaction 
of members of the community, the community will formulate working relationships for the 
improvement of the entire group. This also is the basic means in which Frolinan educate New 
Afrikans of the ideals of community responsibility, develop ment and survival during the course 
of the independence movement. Efforts will be made to develop farming cooperatives, whereby, 
agriculture will be used in the supplying of food co -ops in urban areas. The establishment of 
food co-op networks across the co untry for the distribution of foods will ensure the growth and 
development of Frolinan's national program and strategy. 
 
These food co -ops will strengthen the political determination of the need to free the land as an 
essential and recognize objective, as New Afrikans will understand the need for us to feed 
ourselves. The food co -ops will become a practical organizing tool both politically and 
organizationally, a central foundation to serve other aspects of Frolinan's national strategy, such 
as the free bre akfast program for school children. It is when New Afrikan Food Co -op Markets 
are established, comprising hundreds of community co -op groups throughout the New Afrikans 
community, will Frolinan be able to gauge the strength of its political determination i n 
organizing New Afrikans under the auspices of its national program towards self -government 
and independence. 
 
 
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol:  
 
The New Afrikan Community Alert Patrol (NACAP) will become a network of New Afrikan 
men and woman org anized for the defense of the New Afrikan community. It will establish 
security patrols against vigilantes, killer cops, racists, and black on black crime. These Now 
Afrikans will be trained in police tactics and codes to protect the New Afrikan community in 
patrols as security guards. They will compile information and intelligence of high crime areas


--- PAGE 30 ---
30 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  30 
 
that are frequented by outsiders; they will be responsible for the protection of our senior citizens 
and youth, a well as, various political programs, demonst rations, etc. Members of NACAP will 
be trained in martial arts, weapons, drilling, police science, crowd control and military science 
encompassing guerrilla warfare. 
 
 
One of the primary objectives of Frolinan's  political program is to have the colonial government 
occupation army (police) withdraw from the New Afrikan community. But in order to gain the 
support of New Afrikans in this endeavor, it is essential that community residences feel safe and 
confident. The folks in the community must believe their lives will not be in any greater danger 
once the occupying army in forced to withdraw from the community. It is important that the 
community understand the police, occupies our territory primarily to protect the property of the 
capitalists, who for the most part do not live in our communities. Frolinan's call for community 
control and self-government will become a motivating factor by which the establishment of 
NACAP is an essential part. 
 
It must also be put fort h, that drugs and black on black crime is a problem that causes the 
occupying (police) army to be called and stay in and around the New Afrikan community. It is 
with the liquidation of the distribution, selling and consumption of drugs and black on black 
crime; and when New Afrikans becomes responsible to each other in respects to the 
independence movement, the community will be organized in its highest operative development. 
Eventually, NACAP will be organized into a peoples' militia to serve the developme nt of the 
armed struggle for national liberation. These community alert patrols will be the means in which 
members of the New Afrikan community will gain experience in working in a disciplined 
security conscious apparatus. They will gain with the high idea ls and responsibility of protecting 
the New Afrikan community. 
 
 
New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance Program:  
 
The New Afrikan P.O.W. Assistance Program (NAPOWAP) will be developed to assure that 
Now Afrikan captives are assisted in their efforts to be released from prison. Such assistance will 
be formulated in legal support in defense of our captured; pre-release programs for those about to 
be release on parole or discharged; political assistance in building programs and campaigns of 
national impact concerning the prison movement; and when possible, financial aid for the family 
of captives. In the past, the Prison movement has lead significant political support to the general 
independence movement. Many of those captured had been principle leaders in the movement on 
the streets. Where they might be able to continue to give leadership and enhance the 
development of the independence movement, it will be the responsibility of NAPOWAP to 
ensure they are provided the essential assistance in mutual regards to the indep endence 
movement, and Frolinan's Program for Decolonization. Emphasis will be given to the 
development of national campaigns for amnesty and/or exchange of political prisoners of war; 
the ending of prison slavery and repeal of the 13th Amendment of the U.S . constitution as it


--- PAGE 31 ---
31 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  31 
 
upholds prison slavery; call for the unionization of prisoners labor and minimum wage 
remuneration for their labor; call for the release of New Afrikans prisoners nationally, for them 
to return to the national territory of Kush and sup port the agricultural development of the New 
Afrikan Nation; for the immediate end of the death penalty; and release of New Afrikans in 
military prisons. All of which is part of the Program for Decolonization and Ten Point Program.  
 
National Organization of New Afrikan Women:  
 
The National Organization of New Afrikan Women (NONAW) will become a national network 
of New Afrikan women organized under the auspices of Frolinan's  political direction. The 
express purpose of NONAW will be to fulfill the Program for Decolonization, and the problems 
effecting New Afrikan women in general. We do not separate the problems effecting New 
Afrikan Women from the major problem confronting the oppressed nation. We must differentiate 
the problem besetting New Afrikan women from those expressed by women of the oppressor 
nation and their movement. It is important that New Afrikan women recognize that their 
responsibility in the New Afrikan Indepe ndence Movement is wholly encompassing their 
liberation from sex discrimination, which is an essential aspect of colonial oppression. Once this 
understand is re -enforced in the political matrix of the independence movement, New Afrikan 
women will take lead ership roles and responsibility in the independence movement.  
 
Furthermore, Frolinan hold dearly to the ideal that our women are the backbone of the New 
Afrikan Nation. They nurture our young providing them with wisdom of life, and further secure 
a household and family, the very fabric of the nation. It is the women of the New Afrikan Nation, 
and their staunch support and participation in the various Programs for Decolonization, will 
ensure the independence movement is victorious. In their support of the Pr ograms for 
Decolonization, they will become liberated by working for the liberation of the nation. They will 
establish the basis for unity and equality among gender roles while working in their 
responsibility towards the oppressed nation. 
 
We hold that our women can become fighters for independence at whatever level of the struggle 
they wish to attend or are needed. We also maintain that the establishment of secure family 
households is the foundation in which women are most needed. We hold to this position, because 
over the years and due to slavery and vestiges of colonialism, the New Afrikan household has 
become disunited and fractionalized. Historically, it has been the women who have  held what 
family structure we now have together. It is most necessary that this development does not erode, 
but rather become stable and grow -stronger, as families become a part  of the independence 
movement. 
 
In this regards, particular ideological and social questions need to be address by our women, 
such as the ideal of pol ygamy, monogamy, and the effects of homosexuality; how to combat 
prostitution; the building of viable education institutions and develop positive images for our 
children in our communities; the establishment of health and day care centers, rape crisis and 
sterilization/abortion centers, etc. These are issues of social and political significance that has


--- PAGE 32 ---
32 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  32 
 
particular effects on women, and affects our oppressed nation. We therefore call upon our 
women to lead the fight against these social and political problem s, that has disastrous effects on 
our family structures in particular, and the social morass of the New Afrikan nation in general. 
These and other areas of concern embodied in the Program for Decolonization women will take 
leadership responsibility, encompassing the struggle in the home, in the community,, at the work 
place and within the political development of the New A frikan Independence Movement.  
 
These ten organizational programs are the essential determinations by which Frolinan will build 
its Progra m for Decolonization, establishing a national strategy within the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement. The emphasis is placed on organizing New Afrikans, and in doing so, 
educating them on the ideals of independence. To build towards national liberation by employing 
the Three Phase Theory for National Independence, and the manifestation of the Program for 
Decolonization. It is with the fulfillment of the Three Phase Theory, in conjunction with the 
Program for Decolonization, that Frolinan will build the New A frikan Independence Movement. 
Each organizational program compliments the other, broadening the prospects for unified and 
even development across the country. 
 
While these organizational programs are of socioeconomic and political significance of strategic  
magnitude, there are tactical political issues that need to be addressed. For instance, the question 
of voter registration; when and where time and energy may be exerted to register New Afrikans 
to-vote. This issue must be considered in respects to electi ng politicians within the framework of 
the colonial government. 
 
It is held within our theoretical outlook that those who work within the structure of the colonial 
(U.S.A.) government do not necessarily work in the interest of the independence movement. Fo r 
the most part, elected officials comprise those New Afrikans who are in actuality neo -colonialist 
bourgeois agents. It then becomes a matter of principle in organizational and political 
development to engage or not to engage in voter registration and the  electing of New Afrikans to 
function in the colonial (U.S.A.) government. The principle involved is one of not compromising 
our theoretical and political understanding of the nature of our national oppression. In this 
regards, we hold that where voter reg istration for the election of New Afrikans may have short 
range tactical significance, strategically, it is of no value. It is the strategic development of the 
New Afrikan Independence Movement we are concerned with foremost. Therefore, Frolinan will 
not seek to elect political candidates for office within the colonial government. It is our position 
the colonial government can do nothing other than relinquish our demands for national 
independence to relieve our condition of national oppression and colonial domination. If a 
political party within the New Afrikan Independence Movement seeks to have a member of their 
organization elected to a position within the colonial government; we will give critical support to 
then when it can be assured their aspirations does not conflict with the interest of the 
independence movement.


--- PAGE 33 ---
33 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  33 
 
The only exception to this position is when voting for positions or direction within the 
independence movement and the development of the struggle for community control. In this 
respect, it is important that New Afrikans takes part in the development of the movement, such 
as a plebiscite vote, or voting for supervisors to maintain control of the schools, the health 
institutions and police in our communities. Many of these political electoral positions are relative 
to forging social and political consciousness, towards substantiating the building of the 
independence movement under the auspices of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan 
Nation. 
 
RBG FROLINAN: WHAT WE WANT 
1. We want  National Independence and the power to determine the destiny of the New 
Afrikan Nation. We believe that New Afrikans will not be free or able to determine their 
own destiny until they have end neo -colonial and capitalist -imperialist domination. It 
hereby b ecomes essential that our struggle commences with the fight for Black 
community control, a fight that will be the first step towards self -government, which is 
prerequisite to national independence. 
 
 
2. We want full employment of our people. We believe that the federal government and 
this system of monopoly -capitalism are responsible for the  abject poverty and the basis 
for unemployment existing in the New Afrikan community. This provides the basis for 
underdevelopment in the New Afrikan community, giving rise to socioeconomic and 
political disenfranchisement of New Afrikans. Thereby, the fight for Black community 
control encompasses a fight for community development in which the federal 
government and multi -national corporation provide economic incentive to produce jobs 
in the New Afrikan community. This is the major formulation revolutionary nationalist 
are to establish a relations with the colonial (U.S.A.) government, to assure federal funds 
are allocated to th e New Afrikan community for constructive development and jobs.  
 
3. We want  the end of capitalist exploitation of the New Afrikan community, national 
liberation of the national territory of Kush, and reparations for over four hundred years of 
national oppression. We demand all tax money expropriation from New Afrikan people 
be appropriated for the development in national territory of Kush. 
 
 
4. We want decent housing and control of the land in which New Afrikans reside. In the 
past the landlord who owned the property of Now Afrikan residences, usually live outside 
the community, and did not care for the land and housing dwelling. Based upon that 
experience and the struggle for Black community control and self -government, we 
demand ownership of the property i n which we reside, to - be developed in cooperatives 
and communal central.


--- PAGE 34 ---
34 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  34 
 
5. We want  education for our people that not exposes the true nature of monopoly -
capitalism and imperialism, but also provides the historical foundation in which our 
cultural devel opment is based in this country, in relation to other people of color 
throughout the world; such an education that provides our youth with the essential skills 
and incentive to become a part of the independence movement. As we demand control of 
the community in which we reside, the development of academic institutions becomes a 
fundamental part of the security of the independence movement, to build leaders for the 
future, in preserving the prospects for self-determination. Hence, education is to evolve 
understanding of the development of the struggle for self -determination, but also the 
historical and practical academic foundation in which the New Afrikan Nation is to 
preserve its destiny. 
 
 
6. We want  all New Afrikans to be exempt of military service in the  colonial (U.S.A.) 
government as it is our position that all wars by the colonial government are wars of 
aggression for the colonial domination and imperialist exploitation of lesser developed 
nations/countries; and other people of color victimized by the same forces of racism and 
capitalist exploitation New Afrikans are currently under subjugation. -we demand 
exemption from military service in the colonial government and call for the building of a 
New Afrikan Peoples Liberation Army to fight for and establ ish the security and well 
being of New Afrikans. 
 
 
7. We want an immediate end to police brutality and murder of New Afrikan people. We 
believe that the police of the colonial (U.S.A.) government acts as an occupation force to 
maintain control and order fo r the benefit of the colonial government. That the police 
motives are not in the basic interest of New Afrikans and their community, but rather, for 
the interest of the capitalist class who have business and own property in the New 
Afrikan community. In  the course of establishing Black community control, we call for 
the immediate withdrawal of the occupation police army from our communities, and for 
New Afrikans to establish their own security system. We also maintain the right of self -
defense against racis t police repression -and brutality, to bear arms, and organize self-
defense groups to preserve the security of the New Afrikan community. 
 
 
8. We want  the immediate release of all New Afrikan people held in federal, state, 
county and city prisons and jails . We believe that the system of national oppression has 
not provided New Afrikans with fair and impartial trials or hearings, in which the bias 
and prejudice inherent in the system served to assure their imprisonment Furthermore, the 
judicial system is one of the major tools by which the system of oppression uses to stifle 
the fruition of the national liberation struggle and every aspects in which New Afrikans 
fight for civil and human rights. It is therefore held that the police, courts and prisons are 
all a part of the system of oppression and ar e unable to  dispense justice and impartiality 
towards New Afrikans who might come before them for a trial or hearing. We call for all 
New Afrikans when brought to trial to be tried by a jury of their peers or  people from 
their New Afrikan community, and if found guilty of a charge for them to be sentence to


--- PAGE 35 ---
35 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  35 
 
areas of confinement in or near the New Afrikan community. We maintain the colonial 
(U.S.A.) government has no right to try any New Afrikan for as long as a stat e of war 
exist between two nations and colonial domination persists; and that all captive members 
of NAPLA or the Black underground be recognized as political prisoners of war and 
afforded Geneva Accord status. 
 
 
9. We want  the right to be free of colonial  domination, capitalist exploitation and 
national oppression. We demand full control of the New Afrikan community where we 
are a majority, for the express purpose of self -government towards nation independence. 
We call on the United Nations and the Organiz ation of Afrikan Unity to recognize the 
existence of a nationally oppressed New Afrikan people and nation in the United States 
and for them to conduct a national plebiscite for the purpose of a vote of independence, 
giving recognition to the New Afrikan nation in the western hemisphere. 
 
 
10. We want  the right to migrate to the national territory of Kush and establish an 
independent nation separate from the colonial (U.S.A.) government of the United States 
of America. We believe New Afrikans have had enough  of over four hundred years of 
national oppression and are willing to establish their own nation employing the resources 
and labor inherent in the New Afrikan nation. We claim the five (5) states of the black 
belt as our national homeland in this country h aving named the national territory Kush 
and are bound to liberate this territory in a national liberation struggle; to eventually 
migrate to the national territory and establish the government of the Republic of New 
Afrika.


--- PAGE 36 ---
36 National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 
RBG Street  Scholars Think Tank  36 
 
RBG FROLINAN CORE STUDY GUIDES: 
 RBG FREEDOM FIGHTERS CLASSROOM  
 The RBG Freedom Fighters -On the BLA by the BLA 
 RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation 
 The Murder of Chairman Fred Hampton Sr. by Chicago Police and F.B.I. 
 Who is Dr. Mutulu Shakur - a Lifelong Activist in the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement 
 A Biography of New Afrikan Attorney Chokwe Lumumba 
 The New Afrikan Liberation Front-Honorable Herman Ferguson 
 History and Select Documents of the Provisional Government of the REPUBLIC of NEW 
AFRIKA 
 A Brief History of the Black Panther Party- Positives and Negatives-By Sundiata Acoli 
 The Official Black History Mixtapes 2010 Press Booklet 
 The Wisdom of Dhoruba Al Mujahid Bin Wahad 
 Who Are New Afrikan Political Prisoners and Prisoners of War and a Brief History of the 
New Afrikan Prison Struggle

