=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: From Toussaint to Tupac.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 337
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:54:06.119833
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
from  toussaint to tupac


--- PAGE 3 ---
from toussaint


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Black International since the Age of Revolution
to tupac
edited by
michael o. west, william g. martin,  
& fanon che wilkins
The University of North Carolina Press Chapel Hill


--- PAGE 5 ---
©2009 The University of North Carolina Press
All rights reserved
Designed by Rebecca Evans
Set in Arno Pro and Seria Sans by Rebecca Evans
Manufactured in the United States of America
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for permanence 
and durability of the Committee on Production Guidelines for 
Book Longevity of the Council on Library Resources.
The University of North Carolina Press has been a member 
of the Green Press Initiative since 2003.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
From T oussaint to Tupac : the Black international since 
the age of revolution / edited by Michael O. West, 
William G. Martin, and Fanon Che Wilkins./uRELfk.d1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8078-3309-4 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-0-8078-5972-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. African diaspora. 2. Blacks/uRELfk.dPolitics and government. 
3. Internationalism/uRELfk.dHistory. 4. Blacks/uRELfk.dIntellectual life. 
5. Black power/uRELfk.dHistory. I. West, Michael O. (Michael Oliver)
II. Martin, William G., 1952  – III. Wilkins, Fanon Che.
DT16.5.F766 2009
320.54v6/uRELfk.ddc22
2009003100
cloth 13 12 11 10 09 5 4 3 2 1
p a p e r 1 31 21 11 00 9 54321
Marc D. Perry’s essay 
appeared previously in 
different form as “Global 
Black Self-Fashionings: 
Hip Hop as Diasporic 
Space,” Identities 15, 
no. 6 (December 2008) 
(http://www.informaworld
.com), and is reprinted 
here with permission.


--- PAGE 6 ---
for the next generation of students of global africa


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
contents
Preface xi
Acknowledgments xv
introduction
Contours of the Black International
From T oussaint to Tupac1
michael o. west & william g. martin
part 1
The American Revolution and the Creation of a Global 
African World 47
sylvia frey
Haiti, I’m Sorry
The Haitian Revolution and the Forging of the Black International 72
michael o. west & william g. martin
part 2
Nothing Matters but Color
Transnational Circuits, the Interwar Caribbean, and the 
Black International 107
lara putnam
Providential Design
American Negroes and Garveyism in South Africa 130
robert vinson
The Negro Question
The Communist International and Black Liberation in the 
Interwar Years 155
hakim adi


--- PAGE 9 ---
part 3
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
Satyagraha and Black Internationalism 179
vijay prashad
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power 197
brian meeks
Merely One Link in the Worldwide Revolution
Internationalism, State Repression, and the Black Panther Party, 
1966–1972 215
robyn spencer
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness 232
marc d. perry
Bibliography 259
About the Authors 299
Index 303


--- PAGE 10 ---
illustrations
Queen Mother Moore xviii
General T oussaint Louverture 45
Isaac Theophilus Akunna Wallace-Johnson 105
Tupac Shakur 177


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
preface
This project has its origins in a search for something we could not find: a 
single volume that offers a broad overview of the black international in time 
and space/uRELfk.dfrom the late 1700s, the Age of Revolution, to the present, and 
on both banks of the Atlantic, west and east, from the Americas to Africa and 
points in between. The envisaged text would be grounded in the most recent 
and relevant sources, secondary and primary, and would at once attract the at-
tention of scholars, teachers, students, and engaged intellectuals. Furthermore, 
the text would cohere around the central theme of black internationalism from 
the outset, that is, struggle. T o qualify as black internationalist, those struggles, 
although situated mainly in specific localities, would have to be connected 
in some conscious way to an overarching notion of black liberation beyond 
any individual nation-state or colonial territory. That is to say, at the core of 
black internationalism is the ideal of universal emancipation, unbounded by 
national, imperial, continental, or oceanic boundaries/uRELfk.dor even by racial ones. 
Such are the aims of this volume. They make for an ambitious goal. Our readers 
will have to determine how much, or little, success we have had.
Epistemically, the volume makes no claim to novelty. Its subject, the story of 
the black international, is as old as the black international itself. This narrative, 
as told by scholars, became more intellectually sophisticated and ideologically 
diverse in the early decades of the twentieth century. Black internationalism 
fared less well in the Western (or, for that matter, the African, Caribbean, or 
Latin American) academy in the post–World War II era, when regional area 
studies emerged as an intellectual handmaiden to the Cold War. Still, a hardy 
band of scholars, some within the academy (often in black studies and related 
ethnic studies programs) and others outside, continued to produce scholarship 
on black internationalism during this period. The end of the Cold War, and 
with it a loosening of the hegemony of area studies, along with concomitant 
efforts to demarginalize ethnic studies, opened new prospects for scholarship 
on black internationalism. The resulting output, often presented under the 
label of African Diaspora or Black Atlantic studies, attests to the renaissance in 
the black international narrative. This is not the place to offer an accounting of


--- PAGE 13 ---
preface
xii
this fine body of work. Perusal of the volume’s endnotes will, however, reveal 
our debt to the previous literature, the old as well as the new.
What, then, is the rationale for this book? T o begin, and as already noted, 
it tells, in a single volume, major aspects of the story of the black international, 
from the beginning to the present, that is, over a period spanning four differ-
ent centuries (the eighteenth to the twenty-first). But that is just a beginning, 
albeit an important one.
The volume is organized into three parts, plus an expansive introduction 
that ranges far beyond a summary of the individual chapters and offers an inter-
pretive overview of black internationalism as a whole. The first part breaks new 
ground, recentering the U.S. and Haitian revolutions as epochal and founda-
tional events in the making of the black international. Especially curious here 
is the Haitian case. Strange as it may seem, the black internationalist dimen-
sions of the Haitian Revolution, so self-evident to contemporaries, has been 
woefully neglected by scholars (with a few notable exceptions), particularly 
in works produced since the end of World War II, including the most recent 
output.
In the second part of the volume, we move forward in time more than 
a century, to the years following the end of World War I. By this point, the 
black international had expanded in space to include the African continent, 
an unintended consequence of the European conquests of the late nineteenth 
century. (Previously, only relatively small coastal areas of Africa, some of them 
populated by scions of returnees from the diaspora in the Americas and Eu-
rope, partook of black internationalism.) Among other things, the chapters in 
Part 2 highlight two well-known groups, the Garvey movement and the Com-
munist International (the Comintern), which competed furiously to articulate 
and channel black grievances and asp irations on both banks of the Atlantic. 
Some of the material here presented is new, from both the geographical (world 
areas covered) and documentary (archival sources) standpoints. Additionally 
the two movements, Garveyism and the Comintern, are seen to interface in 
unusual ways, and thus new interpretive vistas are opened.
The main subject of Part 3 is Black Power, which is to say the rebirth of 
black internationalism in the 1960s, following the post–World War II strug-
gles against colonialism and legalized racism on both banks of the Atlantic, 
the battle for decolonization and desegregation. As with many other black 
internationalist struggles, so also with Black Power: too often it is presented, 
whether implicitly or explicitly, as a singular movement, specific to this or that 
nation-state. The chapters in Part 3, on the contrary, show not just the wide


--- PAGE 14 ---
preface
xiii
spatial range of Black Power but also the global interlocution it set in train. This 
section includes, too, discussions of Black Power’s transnational and transracial 
antecedents, and of hip hop, a movement th at, at least in its origins, claims 
ideological descent from Black Power.
Such, we contend, are the claims and achievements of this volume. It is 
offered as an installment in the ongoing narrative of the black international, in 
the hope that it will stimulate further discussion, research, and production.


--- PAGE 15 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 16 ---
acknowledgments
As editors, our greatest debt is to our contributing authors, who have waited 
entirely too long for this project to come to fruition. In some small way, we 
hope, their patience and forbearance have been rewarded. As editors and au-
thors, we could not have asked for more diligent and searching manuscript re-
viewers than those chosen by the press. Their thorough and thought-provoking 
reports pinpointed omissions, uncovered errors of both fact and interpreta-
tion, and forced us to rethink many of our assumptions. The reviewers, later 
revealed to be Lisa Brock and Komozi Woodard, helped to make this a better 
volume. We remain in their debt. Indeed, Professor Woodard went so far as 
to convene a workshop, “The Black International: The Haitian Revolution to 
the Black Consciousness Movement. ” Held at his institution, Sarah Lawrence 
College, the workshop was inspired by this volume. Greater solidarity hath few 
in the academy. We are grateful, too, to our editor, David Perry. From our first 
substantive encounter, at a meeting of the Southern Historical Association in 
Birmingham, Alabama, David posed a series of critical questions that helped to 
frame the volume. David’s assistant, Zachary Read, has proven to be a wonder-
ful conduit and invaluable resource in his own right. We also give thanks to 
Stephanie Wenzel for splendid work as project editor, to Margie T owery for 
indexing, to Mary Caviness for proofreading, and to Ravi Palat for moral and 
material support.
For their many and random acts of kindne ss, friendship, and solidarity, 
intellectual and personal, we wish to  thank Ibrahim Abdullah, Mark Beittel, 
Merle Bowen, Joye Bowman, Horace Campbell, Jacques Depelchin, John 
Higginson, Savi Horne, Lashanda Ingram, David Johnson, Robin D. G. Kel-
ley, Ricardo Laremont, Marcus Rediker, Marjorie Thomas, Nigel Westmaas, 
and Coltrane and Irie Zerai-Che, along with Harpur College, Binghamton 
University; the Graduate School of American Studies at Doshisha University; 
the Department of African-American Studies and the Research Program and 
Department of History at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; 
and the Black Atlantic/African Diaspora Seminar at the Rutgers Center for 
Historical Analysis.


--- PAGE 17 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 18 ---
from  toussaint to tupac


--- PAGE 19 ---
Queen Mother Moore (1898–1997) in an undated photograph. Queen Mother Moore 
was a legendary freedom ﬁghter throughout the twentieth century, across Garveyite, 
communist, black nationalist, and pan-Africanist organizations. (“Queen Mother Moore” 
from Brian Lanker, I Dream a World: Portraits of Black Women Who Changed America [1989]; 
courtesy of Brian Lanker Photography)


--- PAGE 20 ---
introduction
Contours of the Black International
From Toussaint to Tupac
michael o. west & william g. martin
This volume is an act of recuperation. It seeks to reclaim and advance an old, 
but largely unheralded, story of black struggles worldwide. The subject, in 
brief, is black internationalism. The black international, we argue, has a single 
defining characteristic: struggle. Y et struggle, resistance to oppression by black 
folk, did not mechanically produce black internationalism. Rather, black inter-
nationalism is a product of consciousness, that is, the conscious interconnec-
tion and interlocution of black struggles across man-made and natural bound-
aries/uRELfk.dincluding the boundaries of nations, empires, continents, oceans, and 
seas. From the outset, black internationalism envisioned a circle of universal 
emancipation, unbroken in space and time.1 It is a vision personified, respec-
tively, by the Haitian revolutionary T oussaint Louverture and the U.S. rap 
impresario Tupac Shakur, the one illustrating the struggles against slavery and 
the other signifying contemporary cultural insurgencies.
Our collection examines a variety of events and movements that manifest 
the multilayered and interconnected character of black internationalism. First, 
the essays show the emergence of black traditions of struggle and resistance in 
particular localities. Second, the contributions demonstrate how local strug-
gles intersected with one another across diverse boundaries to form, loosely 
and informally, a black international that was greater than the sum total of its 
constituent parts. Third, the black international, in its turn, variously quick-
ened, inspired, and stimulated local struggles. These essays chart aspects of 
that black internationalist resistance, from the onset of modern capitalism to 
the current postmodern era, in sum, since the Age of Revolution.2
Historical scholarship, including most of the writings on black experiences, 
has not been kind to black internationalism. Two dominant scholarly tradi-


--- PAGE 21 ---
tions, the metanarrative and the national narrative, have intellectually mar-
ginalized the black international. The metanarrative, despite its vaunted claim 
to universality, pays scant attention to most of humanity outside the white 
Atlantic, while the national narrative, with its singular focus on the nation-
state, is largely oblivious to transnational concerns.3 Caught between these two 
hegemons/uRELfk.dthe Eurocentric metanarrative and the exclusivist national narra-
tive/uRELfk.dthe discourse of black internationalism, although never fully silenced, 
has been much muted.
The recuperation we attempt in this volume necessarily runs counter to 
the dominant master narrative, whether in the form of the metanarrative or of 
the national narrative. Contrary to the existing literature on social movements 
and revolutions,4 we argue that black movements have been a leading force 
in the search for emancipation since at least the second half of the eighteenth 
century. In contrast to those who celebrate globalization as a new phenom-
enon,5 we maintain that black movements have long imagined and operated 
on a world scale. Against the master narrative, we posit that successive waves 
of black international struggles have countered, shaped, and at times destroyed 
central pillars of capital and empire, racial as well as political. In short, the story 
of the black international requires nothing less than a rethinking of received 
wisdom about life under capitalism over the long durée/uRELfk.dand the possibility 
of alternative social worlds in the past and the future.
Our project, as noted, is more reclamation than innovation. Black activists, 
scholars, and movements have long made many of the claims we sketch here, 
in broad outline if not in specific detail.6 But the master narrative, as produced 
especially in the historically white academy, has steadily and effectively effaced 
the black internationalist counternarrative. Thus we have been told of an “ Age 
of Revolution” with little, if any, mention of the Haitian Revolution. Repeat-
edly, we hear stories of twentieth-century revolutions that conveniently elide 
black internationalism. Incessantly, we are regaled with praise poems about 
the good, nonviolent 1960s and the new social movements it spawned, with 
scant reference to their black internationalist antecedents.
In our own time, the erasure of global black histories, which is to say the 
story of the black international, may be attributed primarily to the remaking 
of the Western academy, and especially the U.S. academy, after World War II. 
The demands of the Cold War, as determined by the national security state, 
gave rise to a new Orientalist-style branch of knowledge, area studies, of which 
African studies was a component part. African studies, as we have argued else-
michael o. west & william g. martin
2


--- PAGE 22 ---
where,7 separated and isolated continental Africa from black North America, 
and both from the Caribbean and Latin America. Thus did an iron curtain, to 
appropriate a formulation made famous elsewhere, descend over the study of 
African peoples. With the possible exception of Atlantic slavery, the resulting 
intellectual segregation generally precluded investigation of shared black or 
African experiences, much less shared black struggles for emancipation across 
nations and empires, continents and oceans. Accordingly, black studies in 
North America, which emerged out of later struggles in the 1960s and 1970s,8
were increasingly confined to a narrower, national locale. Likewise, black Brit-
ish studies remained separate from African studies in the British academy, just 
as African American studies and African studies were distinct areas of inquiry 
in the leading U.S. universities.9 T aking the nation-state as the unit of analysis, 
and utilizing a comparative method that required isolated cases, the Cold War 
academy effectively ruled out the notion of a black international that cohered 
the freedom struggles of African peoples globally.
But no condition, it has been noted, is permanent. More recent scholar-
ship, driven by forces as diverse as the Afrocentric protests of the 1980s and 
the end of the Cold War, has challenged the master narrative, including the 
African studies one.10 By the beginning of the new millennium, more and 
more scholars and activists were being drawn to the connections, old and 
new, between peoples and movements across the globe. As area studies and 
African studies receded, along with the Cold War, insurgent forces within and 
without the academy forged new ties between the previously discrete fields of 
African, African American, Caribbean, Latin American, and Black European 
studies. These trends resulted in the appearance of new journals (e.g., Con-
tours, Diaspora, and Black Renaissance), new Ph.D. programs in diaspora and 
Africana studies, and new conferences and associations dedicated to the black 
world (e.g., the Association for the Study of the Worldwide African Diaspora). 
The resulting synergy has, among other things, sparked renewed interest in the 
forces/uRELfk.dideological, cultural, and organizational/uRELfk.dthat have long linked black 
life and activity in various parts of the globe.11
The studies brought together in this volume represent some of the first 
fruit of the most recent labor. Collectively, they demonstrate the multiple and 
complex ways in which local black struggles and revolts have been conjoined 
to larger processes and movements among black folk here and there,12 such 
that one can credibly speak of globally connected waves of struggles by Afri-
can peoples over the past two and ha lf centuries. These struggles, and their 
introduction
3


--- PAGE 23 ---
cumulative effect, are fundamental to a full accounting of the early formation 
and transformation of capitalism in the Atlantic world, specifically, and more 
generally to the story of humankind in the modern world.
Such a project, furthermore, recovers a past within the world of activist 
scholarship. Already at the turn of the twentieth century, circles of movements 
and bodies of scholarship had emerged with a common mission: to challenge 
scientific racism worldwide, to contest colonialism and its reputed civilizing 
mission in Africa and the Caribbean, and to confront new forms of racial op-
pression in postemancipation societies such as the United States, Brazil, and 
Cuba.13 These antinomian expressions, in turn, were built on still older tradi-
tions of common resistance, traditions that date back to the second half of the 
eighteenth century. In that era of ferment throughout the Atlantic world, local 
struggles for emancipation, although expressing a wide range of lived experi-
ences in specific societies, began to link together in a broad insurgency against 
imperial and racial orders.14 The linkages were forged amid the iconic move-
ments of the modern North Atlantic, notably the Enlightenment, the Evan-
gelical Revival, and the U.S., French, and Haitian revolutions. These were not 
just European and European-settler phenomena but, rather, world-historical 
events that were fundamentally shaped by the African agency and the African 
presence, literal and figurative. Such lines of inquiry, however, were largely 
foreclosed by the post–World War II rise of U.S. hegemony and, more specifi-
cally, by what it wrought: area and African studies. Exiled from the mainstream 
academy, black counternarratives were literally driven underground.
Reclaiming and advancing that intellectual tradition is a huge task, one that 
will have to be collaborative and can only be achieved over the long haul. We 
certainly make no pretense here of offering anything approximating a compre-
hensive accounting of the emergence and evolution of black internationalism. 
What we attempt, rather, is a rough outline of such a project and its prom-
ise. Our volume unearths moments when struggles against a racially ordered 
world system coalesced, creating black international moments of consider-
able/uRELfk.dand often violent/uRELfk.dforce. In so doing, we claim uniformity of neither 
conditions, identities, nor movements; just the contrary, racial identities and 
forms of protest varied over spac e and time. The notion of black or African 
remained in constant flux, changing over time. At certain moments, however, 
racial struggles and identities cohered across vast masses of land and bodies 
of water, challenging and changing dominant modes of white supremacy. The 
volume focuses on three such moments of black internationalism/uRELfk.dand their 
legacy.
michael o. west & william g. martin
4


--- PAGE 24 ---
Part 1: Foundations of the Black International
The foundational moment of black internationalism occurred in the second 
half of the eighteenth century. In that Age of Revolution, the black interna-
tional began to coalesce around opposition to the central fact of black life on 
the west bank of the Atlantic: racial slavery. This is not, most assuredly, to argue 
that resistance to slavery began in the Age of Revolution. Clearly that was not 
so. From the very beginning of their involuntary sojourn in the Americas, 
enslaved Africans resisted racial bondage in multiple ways, overt and covert, 
violent and nonviolent.15 It is to say, however, that black antislavery increas-
ingly became more interconnected, ideologically and organizationally, in the 
Age of Revolution.
A key event in this evolution of black struggles was the rise of a signifi-
cant and articulate free black community on the North American mainland, 
consequent on the U.S. Revolution.16 No less significant, from the black in-
ternationalist standpoint, were the newly freed black people who escaped the 
United States in the wake of the patriot victory, “fleeing the founding fathers,” 
as one writer has termed it.17 The free North American black community, along 
with its diaspora, whose members settled on both banks of the Atlantic, east 
and west, powerfully shaped an emerging discourse about the possibilities of 
universal emancipation.18 The idea of universal emancipation, in turn, would 
become the foundational core of black internationalism.
If the first principle of black internationalism was universal emancipation, 
then its foundational language often had a biblical accent.19 That particular 
inflection derived from the Evangelical Revival, better known in the United 
States as the Great Awakening, an important episode in the making of the 
black international. A major reformation within Protestant Christianity, the 
Evangelical Revival was a transatlantic phenomenon, spreading from England 
to its American colonies in the second ha lf of the eighteenth century.20 Al-
though it did not target them exclusively, the Evangelical Revival succeeded in 
converting large numbers of enslaved Africans, one of its main achievements. 
The ensuing Afro-Christianity was the first of its kind in the Anglo-American 
world.21 This was quite unlike the situation in the Catholic-dominated areas 
of the Americas, where church, state, and masters collectively had long em-
braced mass conversion, or at least mass baptism, for the enslaved Africans.22
British Protestant slaveholders, by contrast, initially equated Christianity with 
freedom, assuming manumission would necessarily follow conversion. Even 
after laws were passed explicitly rejecting any such connection, most Anglo-
introduction
5


--- PAGE 25 ---
American slaveholders remained averse to the conversion of their human chat-
tel. Then came the Evangelical Revival, which began the mass Christianization 
of slaves in British lands, a task that would be completed by black preachers and 
evangelists, slave and free. In time the Evangelical Revival, originally no friend 
of slavery, morphed into the institutional church of the slaveholders, notably in 
the United States. On the North American mainland, at least, white evangeli-
calism had parted company with black liberation. The blacks, on the contrary, 
kept faith with the nascent liberationist theology of their conversion, encap-
sulated in the notion that God is no respecter of races or nationalities, having 
“made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on the face of the earth. ”23
This biblical passage appeared repeatedly in the earliest black internationalist 
narratives and had special resonance for slaves.24 Thus the Evangelical Revival 
helped to create an intellectual scaffolding for the black international, or at least 
a particular expression of black internationalism.
The U.S. Revolution, coming hard on the heels of the Evangelical Revival, 
opened up new possibilities for black liberation. Seizing the moment, a small 
but important minority of the enslaved people in British North America defi-
antly claimed freedom. It was the first such assertion of the black agency in the 
Age of Revolution, but it would not be the last, or even the most significant. 
Notably, the rise of a free African American community was not part of the 
blueprint of the U.S. Revolutionary leadership, in which the slaveholders were 
well represented, if not hegemonic. Of the three institutions/uRELfk.dcolonialism, 
slavery, and white supremacy/uRELfk.don which European rule in the Americas had 
been constructed since the advent of the Columbian era, the U.S. Revolu-
tion challenged just one, colonialism. The other two institutions, slavery and 
white supremacy, most of the leading U.S. patriots were content, if not eager, 
to keep.
As Sylvia Frey’s chapter demonstrates, the enslaved people upset such 
plans. Striking a blow against slavery and white supremacy amid the chaos of 
war, they ran away, enlisted for military service in return for freedom (espe-
cially but not exclusively on the loyalist or British side), waged guerrilla war-
fare, and petitioned for manumission, among other acts of self-emancipation.25
Enslaved Africans, too, would claim the rights and freedoms enunciated in the 
Declaration of Independence, despite its attack on them and on the Native 
Americans.26 This was not, however, solely an American story. As Frey nar-
rates, African Americans, drawing upon both evangelical and Revolutionary 
traditions, played a foundational role in the development and transnational 
dispersion of a diasporic consciousness and of pan-Africanism.
michael o. west & william g. martin
6


--- PAGE 26 ---
The consequences of these developments emerged as the U.S. Revolution 
approached its denouement and cataclysm struck the French colony of Saint 
Domingue, announcing the advent of that canon-busting event of that era, the 
Haitian Revolution. For the second time in less than a generation, political 
upheaval among the oppressors, this time the revolution in France, opened 
up self-emancipatory possibilities for enslaved Africans, this time on Saint 
Domingue. Originating in the most magisterial of slave revolts, the Haitian 
Revolution would decisively determine the contours of the emerging black 
international.
Our chapter on the Haitian Revolution charts how Haitian revolutionar-
ies/uRELfk.din sharp contrast to the dithering of those who led the U.S. and French 
revolutions/uRELfk.ddemolished the unholy trinity of slavery, white supremacy, and 
colonialism.27 Curiously, however, the centrality of the Haitian Revolution in 
the rise of black internationalism is largely unacknowledged in the literature 
on black revolts. That literature, which even in its more recent diasporic and 
Black Atlantic variations displays a consistent Afro-Saxon bias,28 relegates the 
Haitian Revolution to the status of a nonevent, to use Michel-Rolph T rouillot’s 
felicitous phrasing.29 Contemporaries of the Haitian Revolution knew bet-
ter. In turning the world that was Saint Domingue upside down, the Haitian 
Revolution electrified the enslaved a nd oppressed far and wide, firing their 
enthusiasm and broadening their horizons. A common wind, as one historian 
has acclaimed it,30 appropriating the words of the poet William Wordsworth 
in his sonnet to T oussaint Louverture,31 swept through the greater Caribbean 
and the Atlantic world more generally. The ideological current consisted of 
underground networks of sailors and other maritime workers, runaways, and 
itinerant traders, individuals who collectively linked the city and the sea, the 
port and the plantation.
Thus were hopes of liberation fueled well beyond the shores of Saint 
Domingue. Indeed, as our chapter recounts, summarizing the work of others, 
the Haitian Revolution marked the apex in a long series of revolts across the 
Atlantic that both preceded and followed it. Among other things, the Haitian 
Revolution drew on the legacy of the evangelical revivalist tradition that so 
forcefully propelled the black internationalism that emanated from the U.S. 
Revolution. At the same time, the Hait ian Revolution lent a powerful impe-
tus to a second tradition in black internationalism, namely, the revolutionary 
tradition, as discussed in both Frey’s chapter and ours. It was heady stuff, this 
wind of change, and the Haitian Revolution stood as the powerful exemplar of 
its potential. Nor did it matter that, for the most part, the leaders of indepen-
introduction
7


--- PAGE 27 ---
dent Haiti made little attempt to export revolution and, fearful of retaliation 
by neighboring powers, even disavowed the idea. The Haitian example was 
enough of an incitement: it provided the spark that fired a new and revolution-
ary black internationalism.
Part 2: The Great War and the Black Internationalist Revival
The second moment of black internationalism that the volume takes up coin-
cided with World War I, known to contemporaries as the Great War, and its 
aftermath. Here, the chapters examine the elaboration and refinement of the 
black international in response to the transformation wrought by the war. In 
this second moment, the black international moved from the realm of ideologi-
cal coherence to actual political organization. Not only was this latest wave of 
resistance and revolts better coordinated than ever, but it also encompassed a 
much wider geographical area. By the era of the Great War, the African conti-
nent, now under the colonial yoke, had become a full and integral part of the 
black international, which previously had been confined to the west bank of 
the Atlantic and a few outposts along the At lantic coast of Africa, areas set-
tled disproportionately by freed people from the west bank and their descen-
dants.32 The widening circle of the black international revealed, once again, 
how particular struggles in different locales came to a common appreciation 
of the global nature of the racialized systems of oppression that everywhere 
diminished the lives of black folk, making a mockery of their aspirations for 
full emancipation.
African peoples were centrally involved in the Great War. More than 2 mil-
lion continental Africans served in the war, many of them forcibly recruited. 
Organized mainly in labor brigades, they worked under horrific conditions 
and had a higher mortality rate than non-Africans. Even more Africans than 
went to the military theater were mobilized for the war on the home front, 
in many cases also involuntarily. The result was a massive increase in mining, 
agricultural, forestry, and industrial production, along with an expanded infra-
structure (roads, railroads, and harbors) to move the increased production to 
Europe.33 Africans of the diaspora, too, played their part in the war. The British 
and French recruited tens of thousands of soldiers from their Caribbean pos-
sessions, while the United States, which finally joined the fray in 1917, some 
three years after hostilities began, conscripted African Americans in dispro-
portionate numbers, around 400,000.34
On both banks of the Atlantic, the wa rtime demand for industrial and 
michael o. west & william g. martin
8


--- PAGE 28 ---
related labor on the home front led to a vast upsurge in black urbanization. 
Although global in scope, the migration of black folk to the city was most 
conspicuous in the United States, which witnessed a “Great Migration” (so 
called after the Great War) of African Americans from the rural South to the 
urban North.35 Actually, the Great Migration occurred in two waves: a bigger 
one from the U.S. South and a smaller one from the Caribbean and Central 
America, which also sent tens of thousands of African-descended people to the 
United States, mainly to the northern cities, New Y ork above all.36 All told, the 
Great War set in motion a massive movement of black folk (and many others, 
too). Everywhere, African peoples were crossing boundaries/uRELfk.dregional and 
provincial, national and imperial, continental and oceanic/uRELfk.don a scale unseen 
since the end of the Atlantic slave trade.
The upsurge in migration and urbanization was matched by an upsurge in 
consciousness. There was a rise in expectations among peoples of African de-
scent everywhere. Pronouncements by the leaders of the Allied powers, most 
notably U.S. president Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points/uRELfk.da document that 
seemed to advocate global peace, democracy, and self-determination/uRELfk.den-
couraged hopes for a better postwar deal.37
In fact, African peoples were not repaid for their contributions to the Great 
War, and the global black revolution in expectations would be frustrated. In-
stead of getting better, in many respects black life became worse after the war. 
The formal postwar settlement, contained in the T reaty of Versailles, offered 
black folk nothing. In Africa, state repression of waged workers, the proletariat, 
which had grown in both numbers and consciousness, intensified after the war. 
Repression also increased in the diaspora, most notably in the United States, 
where the government set out to crush radicalism, including black radicalism, 
while the mob unleashed its fury on entire black communities, most deadly in 
the “Red Summer” of 1919.38 Nor were violent attacks on the physical presence 
and political assertiveness of African pe oples limited to the United States: 
there were similar manifestations against black folk and other colonial subjects 
in Britain and France.39
As Lara Putnam demonstrates so vividly in her chapter, virulent white su-
premacy in the Central American states in the 1920s and 1930s led to increased 
oppression of black folk, many of whom were from the British Caribbean.40 In-
deed, and as Putnam further charts, a British Caribbean–centered, black trans-
national network had already emerged in the opening decades of the twentieth 
century, a migratory community that stretched from northern Venezuela to 
southern Harlem. Bound together by church and culture, voluntary and formal 
introduction
9


--- PAGE 29 ---
organizations, this world developed a “race consciousness” as it came under 
increasing attacks. The results included explicit black internationalist critiques 
of imperial and colonial orders.
The phenomena Putnam describes were part of a larger renaissance across 
the black world, a reaction to the hopes and dreams so brutally repudiated by 
the reemergent global white Thermidor. At the core of the rebirth stood the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). Officially, the UNIA was 
founded in 1914 in Jamaica under the leadership of Marcus Garvey, back on the 
island from an odyssey that included a stint among the Caribbean diaspora in 
Central America and an extended stay in England. In reality, the UNIA that me-
teorically rose to the forefront of black internationalism after the war had only 
a faint likeness to its original incarnation. Now headquartered in the United 
States, the reconstituted UNIA was a product of wartime developments far 
beyond Jamaica/uRELfk.dnamely, the Great Migration, both the southern U.S. and 
Caribbean waves, including Garvey himself, who arrived in New Y ork in 1916; 
the broader global African urbanization; the growth of the urban and indus-
trial black proletariat globally; and the violent repression, after the war, of the 
revolution in expectations on both banks of the Atlantic.41
Garveyism gave black internationalism, for the first time, a return ad-
dress. From its headquarters in Harlem, New Y ork, newly transformed into a 
pan-African metropolis, the UNIA, with its secretariat, entered into sustained 
communication with movements and individuals throughout global Africa. 
Most significantly, the message of Garveyism was carried far and wide by its 
official organ, the Negro World, published mainly in English but with Spanish 
and French supplements. Colonial and national powers waged war against the 
paper, banning and interdicting it, even imprisoning readers. An underground 
distribution network, at the center of which were black sailors, proved equal 
to the challenge, and despite the attempts to suppress it, the Negro World con-
tinued to circulate worldwide.
Garveyism, like the Haitian Revolution more than a century earlier, engen-
dered fear and alarm among the guardians of empire, territorial and racial. The 
hostility of white imperial powers and white-dominated nation-states to the 
UNIA was even more widespread than in the case of the Haitian Revolution, 
although not as intense; the attacks on Garveyism extended from the west to 
the east bank of the Atlantic. What made Garveyism dangerous was not just its 
demand for a modern black nationality in Africa in the face of colonialism, but 
that it was making the demand in the changed circumstances of the postwar era 
and then mobilizing a mass constituency behind it. “ Africa for the Africans, at 
michael o. west & william g. martin
10


--- PAGE 30 ---
home and abroad,” Garvey cried out, reducing his program to a slogan. From 
the centers of power, the power of existing states and empires, came a uniform 
denunciation of the agitation and a determination to suppress it.
Suppression was no easy task because Garveyism, despite its formal struc-
ture and hierarchy, mirrored the historic informality and looseness of the black 
international. In its day, Garveyism was the pan-African potter’s clay: it could 
be molded any which way. Globally, Garveyism was more metaphor than 
movement/uRELfk.da rhetorical, stylistic, and organizational model easily replicated. 
Black folk everywhere with grievances against the system could find in Garvey-
ism an archetype for seeking redress, as indeed many did, from dockworkers 
in South Africa to sharecroppers in the United States, from cocoa farmers 
in Ghana to intellectuals in Nigeria, from ethnic mobilizers in Zimbabwe to 
activists in Cuba, from the Anglophone to the Francophone black world.42
Outside the United States, perhaps even outside New Y ork, Garveyism was a 
hydra with multiple heads,43 more inspirer than executor. In global Africa as a 
whole, Garveyism, in the inspirational sense, remained independent of Garvey 
and the UNIA.
Garveyism, as both inspirer and executor, was on full display in South 
Africa, as Robert Vinson’s chapter recounts. South African Garveyism blended 
two strands of a long-standing interconnection between black South Africans 
and “ American Negroes” (a category that included West Indians as well as 
African Americans). The first of these  was the nineteenth-century notion of 
Providential Design, which was an outgrowth of the revivalist tradition in black 
internationalism and which promoted the “redemption” of Africa through 
Christianity and commerce, a project that would be spearheaded by Africans 
of the diaspora. This was the black version of the “civilizing mission,” and it was 
allied with emigration, or the “return” of diaspora blacks to the African conti-
nent.44 The most noted exponents of Providential Design were the West Indian 
Edward Wilmot Blyden and the African American Alexander Crummell, both 
of whom resettled to Africa, although Crummell eventually returned to the 
United States.45 In addition to Providential Design, South African Garveyism 
drew on a tradition of black South African celebration of African Americans 
as agents of modernity and models in the quest for a modern, regenerated 
Africa. South Africa and neighboring territories would become key centers of 
Garveyism in Africa, its transmitters including not just sailors, preachers, and 
newspapers, the usual vectors, but also migrant workers.
Women were a key part of the new Garveyite mass constituency. Women 
were seen, and heard, in the UNIA to a degree without precedence in black 
introduction
11


--- PAGE 31 ---
internationalism. Those women included such high-profile figures as Henrietta 
Vinton Davis, Laura Kofey, Amy Ashwood Garvey, and Amy Jacques Garvey, 
the latter two wives of Marcus Garvey. Every UNIA branch had a “lady presi-
dent,” complementing the (male) president. Rank-and-file Garveyite women 
were organized into the Black Cross Nurses and the Motor Corp, the female 
branches of the uniformed services.
Despite the visibility of women in the movement, Garveyism would not 
have been confused with feminism. The ideal Garveyite woman was the help-
meet. Official UNIA propaganda extolled the roles of mother and housewife, 
emphasizing women’s reproductive as well as productive work in the domestic 
realm. Marcus Garvey, now assuming the role of poet, celebrated the queenly 
black woman, an object of worship and an arbiter of (Victorian) morality. 
Such images bore little relationship to the lived experiences of most Garvey-
ite women, who belonged to the workin g class. It is another anomaly of the 
UNIA that despite the formal reverence for bourgeois domesticity, practi-
cal Garveyism required women not in the private realm of the home but in 
the public arena. They were drawn there by, among others, the Black Cross 
Nurses and the Motor Corp, whose missions centered on social work, health 
care, and manufacturing. Meanwhile, Garvey continued to indulge his po-
etical imagination, obliviously composing panegyrics to motherhood and to 
home and hearth.46 A group of women in New Orleans, where female (and 
working-class) leadership in the local UNIA was especially strong, offered an 
all-encompassing assessment of the movement. The UNIA, they averred, “is 
our church, our clubhouse, our theatre, our fraternal order and our school, and 
we will never forsake it while we live; neither will our men forsake it. ”47
T rue to its reputation for being all things to all black folk,48 Garveyism 
doubled as a religious movement/uRELfk.dof the big-tent, Christian ecumenical sort. 
The UNIA had an official religious head , the chaplain-general, while branch 
meetings could often be mistaken for Sunday morning services, complete 
with hymns and prayers. Garveyism also inspired the creation of the African 
Orthodox Church, a pan-Africanist denomination whose founder, the for-
mer Anglican clergyman George Alex ander McGuire, previously served as 
the UNIA’s chaplain-general. Despite a temporary tiff between Garvey and 
McGuire, everywhere in global Africa the UNIA and the African Orthodox 
Church became fellow travelers, the one movement helping to promote the 
other, including through their respective publications, the Negro World and 
the African Churchman.49
More fascinating, perhaps, is Laura Kofey’s African Universal Church and 
michael o. west & william g. martin
12


--- PAGE 32 ---
Commercial League, a riff on the Garvey movement’s full name, the Universal 
Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League. A charis-
matic personality, preacher, and organizer, Kofey deployed her considerable 
talents in the service of the UNIA in Florida and elsewhere. In time, she became 
a victim of her own success. Her star, having already surpassed that of many 
of the movement’s male leaders, seemingly began to rival Marcus Garvey’s, at 
least in her particular sp here of influence. Garvey, who in happier times had 
received the UNIA’s “female John the Baptist” in his prison cell in Atlanta, 
publicly repudiated Kofey. Excommunicated from the UNIA, Kofey turned to 
inspirational Garveyism. Her vehicle for preaching Garveyism without Garvey 
was the African Universal Church and Commercial League, which, rather like 
the UNIA, elided the boundaries between religion and politics. Kofey’s career 
as an independent operator was short lived; she was soon assassinated/uRELfk.dnot
the first ex-Garveyite to suffer that fate.50
Kofey’s African Universal Church, along with the African Orthodox 
Church, was a direct offspring of the UNIA. But it was not just executive 
Garveyism that spawned religious progeny; so, too, did inspirational Garvey-
ism. New manifestations of spiritualism, stimulated by the Garvey phenom-
enon to varying degrees, appeared in a number of places. Although assuming 
different forms, these groups were in variably syncretic: they fused multiple 
traditions/uRELfk.dsacred and secular, old and new, eastern and western.
In the United States, for instance, a highly unorthodox form of Islam 
emerged, one decisively determined by black nationalist discourses and prac-
tices. The first group to organize on such principles was the Moorish Science 
T emple of America, but black-nationalist-determined Islam eventually found 
its most enduring redoubt in the Nation of Islam. Both groups were greatly 
influenced by Garveyism, although the Moorish Science T emple had been 
founded on the eve of World War I, before the postwar black renaissance.51
Islam, with its deep roots in the Western black diasporic past, was never fully 
erased by the slavery and postslaver y experiences but became ensconced in 
the deep recesses of African America n culture and consciousness.52 More 
overtly, the African American “rediscovery” of Islam coincided with the post-
war renaissance, or the second moment of black internationalism. The engage-
ment with Islam was promoted from various quarters; some of these were 
missionary efforts from outside the United States, while others were more 
indigenous.53 Scholars have largely ignored the fact that the latter included 
groups like the African Blood Brotherhood (ABB), the Harlem-based black 
radical formation that initially, though critically, supported the UNIA.54 A 
introduction
13


--- PAGE 33 ---
staunchly secular movement, the ABB commended the Muslim religion to 
black folk purely on political grounds, arguing that Islam, in sharp contrast to 
Christianity, opposed colonialism and supported racial equality. Christianity 
and Islam, ran a typical broadside in the ABB’s official organ, “have an exactly 
opposite reaction upon the mind of the Negro convert. One as clearly induces 
to a servile state of mind and slavish acquiescence in white tutelage on the part 
of the Negro convert as the other inspires self-respect and love of liberty. ”55
It is a cry that would later be taken up by representatives of the Nation of 
Islam, most famously by a second generation of converts led by Malcolm X, a 
descendant of Garveyism two times over/uRELfk.dby religious-political choice and 
by family heritage, his parents having been ardent Garveyites.
Concurrent with the evolving black-nationalist-determined Islam in the 
United States, another variant of the new religious-cum-political movement 
emerged in Garvey’s native Jamaica. Rastafari, even more so than the Moorish 
Science T emple and the Nation of Islam, was a testament to the impact of 
inspirational Garveyism and its ideological antecedents. Similarly Rastafari, 
like black-nationalist-determined Islam, appealed largely to the weaker seg-
ments of the working classes and the Lumpenproletariat. Both movements were 
steeped in a biblicism descended from the revivalist tradition in black interna-
tionalism, the founders of black-nationalist-determined Islam having much 
greater familiarity with the Bible than with the Koran. But Rastafari, hew-
ing closer to the biblical line, eventually arrived at a novel theological conclu-
sion. Its founders determined that Ras T afari, the prince who in 1928 ascended 
the Ethiopian throne as Emperor Haile Selassie, was really the messiah.56 A 
decisive factor in sealing Selassie’s divinity in Rastafarian theology was the 1935 
Italian invasion of Ethiopia, by far the single most important event in black 
internationalism in the years between the two world wars, and one that out-
raged African peoples everywhere.57 If Selassie was the God of Rastafari, 
then Garvey was his noted forerunner/uRELfk.done who came, in the style of the 
biblical John the Baptist, to make straight the way of the Lord. Significantly, 
Garvey was assigned a similar role in the holy book of the Moorish Science 
T emple, the Holy Koran (not to be confused with the Koran of orthodox 
Islam), where he became the advance man for the Moorish leader Noble 
Drew Ali.58
Garveyism, in both its executive and inspirational incarnations, may have 
ruled the roost of black internationalism in the period following the Great 
War, but its reign was not uncontested. One important contestant was the 
Pan-African Congress under the leadership of the African American intellec-
michael o. west & william g. martin
14


--- PAGE 34 ---
tual W. E. B. Du Bois. Four sessions of the Pan-African Congress were held 
between 1919 and 1927.59 The inaugural session was convened in Paris in 1919 
to coincide with the conference that produced the T reaty of Versailles, which 
the first Pan-African Congress, like the UNIA, tried but failed to influence.
The UNIA and the Pan-African Congress represented opposing tenden-
cies in the black international. Initially, at least, the split was grounded in real 
programmatic and ideological differences. The UNIA, with its mass base, stood 
for transformation, while the Pan-African Congress, with its elite constituency, 
advocated accommodation. Whereas postwar Garveyism was founded on an-
ticolonialism, the first two Pan-African Congresses called for reforming rather 
than ending colonialism. Indeed, the second Pan-African Congress, which offi-
cially condemned Garveyism, stood out for its decidedly procolonial rhetoric, 
especially by the Francophone delegates.
Y et by 1923, the year of the third Pan-African Congress, there was some-
thing of a seesaw change in the black international. Although a puny affair, 
even compared with the first two congresses, which were hardly mass events, 
the third Pan-African Congress heralded an important ideological revision, 
Du Bois having now rid himself of the procolonial Francophone contingent. 
The fourth Pan-African Congress of 1927 confirmed and deepened the critique 
of colonialism and global black oppression begun at the previous session. As 
Du Bois and the Pan-African Congress moved to the left, executive Garveyism 
headed in the opposite direction, since Garvey had drifted rightward in re-
sponse to a number of political and personal challenges.60 Meanwhile, though, 
the personal animus and bitter polemic between Garvey and Du Bois,61 each 
more bullheaded and egotistical than the other, had come to overshadow the 
substantive differences, and similarities, of the movements they represented.
Among the many resolutions passed by the fourth Pan-African Congress 
was one commending the Soviet Union for its “liberal attitude toward the col-
ored races. ”62 The nod to Soviet racial policy represented a marked departure 
from the first two congresses, which were no more hospitable to Bolshevik 
communism than to Garveyism. The fourth Pan-African Congress, held in 
New Y ork (the previous three convened in Europe), broke new ground in 
another, related manner: the delegates included black members of the U.S. 
Communist Party and black fellow travelers.
The communist presence at the fourth Pan-African Congress highlighted 
another important tendency in black in ternationalism in the period after 
the Great War, namely, Black Bolshevism.63 Black Bolshevism battled with 
Garveyism and the Pan-African Congress for leadership of the black inter-
introduction
15


--- PAGE 35 ---
national/uRELfk.dthat is, in articulating and mobilizing the grievances and aspirations 
of black folk globally.
Black Bolshevism resulted from the interface of the black international and 
the more formally organized communist international, the Comintern. After 
the triumph of the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917, the leaders of Soviet Russia 
declared for worldwide revolution, motivated by idealism and “internationalist 
duty” as well as by enlightened self-interest. Rejecting “socialism in one coun-
try,” an idea Joseph Stalin would later embrace, the “old” Bolsheviks, facing 
global capitalist hostility, even outright aggression, argued that the survival of 
Soviet Russia depended on successful revolutions in other parts of the world, 
especially in western Europe. The result was the Moscow-based Comintern, 
formed in 1919 and charged with promoting world revolution, the Bolsheviks 
having decided to throw down the gauntlet to the capitalists or, rather, to pick 
up the gauntlet the capitalists had thrown down.64
Two items on the Comintern’s agenda commanded the attention of expo-
nents of black internationalism: colonialism and racism. Bolshevism’s “liberal 
attitude toward the colored races,” as the fourth Pan-African Congress would 
style it, was the starting point of the black engagement with the international 
communist movement.
Hakim Adi’s chapter demonstrates the Comintern’s reach in the black 
world, extending from the United States to South Africa, from the Caribbean 
to Europe, from French-ruled to British-ruled Africa. In contrast to its com-
petitors, the Garvey movement and the Pan-African Congress, the Comintern 
was an ideologically and organizationally coherent network, and it proclaimed 
the “Negro Question” a central part of the coming world revolution. The bold-
ness of this assertion, together with the strength of its network, underpins 
Adi’s conclusion that the Comintern was, “perhaps, the era’s sole international 
white-led movement to adopt an avowedly antiracist platform, and certainly 
the only one formally dedicated to a revolutionary transformation of the global 
political and racial order. ”
The Comintern’s great contribution to pan-Africanism, then, was its role 
in internationalizing, beyond global Africa, the black liberation struggle. In 
declaring the Negro Question integral to the world revolution it sought to 
promote, the Comintern broke new ground. For the first time, an organized 
body of white revolutionaries officially and unequivocally made nonracialism, 
even antiracism, part of a global struggle for social transformation.
The Haitian Revolution had arrived at a similar global antiracist posture 
nearly a century and a half previously, dur ing an earlier age of revolution. In 
michael o. west & william g. martin
16


--- PAGE 36 ---
making this ideological breakthrough, the Haitian revolutionaries practically 
stood alone. Their contemporaries, the French revolutionaries, granted equality 
to the free people of color, but only to cement the backing of Saint Domingue’s 
mulattos, many of whom were slaveholders, in the campaign against the slave 
rebellion. Then, under military threa t from Britain and Spain, each desiring 
to seize Saint Domingue, revolutionary France abolished slavery, aiming to 
retain control of the colony by wooing the slave revolutionaries to its side. Y et 
even these decisions, which were driven by expediency rather than principle, 
eventually would be reversed. The third great political transformation of that 
era, the U.S. Revolution, fared even worse on black liberation. Whereas the 
foundational French Revolutionary document, the Rights of Man and Citizen, 
passed over African slavery in silence, its U.S. equivalent, the Declaration of 
Independence, did the same and then hypocritically lambasted black folk as 
potential British allies. The other major document that came out of the U.S. 
Revolution, the Constitution of 1787, went  further and explicitly endorsed 
slavery.
In seeking to make the Negro Question part of the world revolution, there-
fore, the Comintern broke decisively with the revolutionary tradition of the 
white Atlantic. Y et even in the international communist movement, white su-
premacy died hard. Indeed, as Adi shows, the Comintern often encountered 
obstacles from unexpected quarters: its own affiliates, the national commu-
nist parties. The communist parties of the United States and South Africa, 
along with those of Britain and France, were the most important so far as 
the Negro Question was concerned. White-minority-ruled South Africa was 
to Africa what the United States was to the world: its top industrial power. 
Each country had relatively large numbers of black industrial workers, the class 
the Comintern considered the linchpin of the revolution. Britain and France, 
for their part, were the major colonizers of black folk, ruling over far-flung 
empires in Africa and the Caribbean, among other places. T ogether, the four 
nations/uRELfk.dthe United States, South Africa, Britain, and France/uRELfk.dcontrolled the 
greater part of global Africa, including its most economically dynamic sections. 
The communist parties of the same four nations frequently were uncooperative 
on the Negro Question; in many cases, they refused outright to implement the 
Comintern’s antiracist and anticolonial policies.
Behind the Comintern’s struggle with its national affiliates on the Negro 
Question stood the Black Bolsheviks. Whether in South Africa, the United 
States, France, Britain, or Cuba, Black Bolsheviks had little faith in the national 
communist parties and their predominantly white leaders, who often pan-
introduction
17


--- PAGE 37 ---
dered to nationalist, racist, and colonialist sentiments. On racial and colonial 
issues, black party members everywhere turned to Moscow for redress. From 
the national parties they expected little/uRELfk.dexcept neglect, and perhaps worse. 
Accordingly, Black Bolsheviks looked to the Comintern to enforce its writ 
on the Negro Question and to impose the correct antiracist and anticolonial 
Bolshevik line on the national parties.
Those expectations would be fulfilled only in part, and then just for a sea-
son. Soon after its formation, the Comintern promised to hold a special Negro 
Congress, a conclave that would showcase its commitment to black liberation. 
Meanwhile, and as part of the disillusionment with the national parties, sev-
eral Comintern congresses created Negro commissions. The idea was straight-
forward enough: a Negro commission, funded by the Comintern, staffed 
largely by Black Bolsheviks, and authoritatively backed by an extraordinary 
Negro Congress, would bypass the national parties and directly engage black 
struggles and strugglers globally. However, the proposed Negro Congress 
never materialized, while the various Negro commissions hardly functioned, 
explaining why successive congresses had to form new ones.
Finally, in 1930 the Comintern, in its most important organizational foray 
into black liberation ever, formed yet another Negro commission: the Inter-
national T rade Union Committee of Negro Workers. The acronym-unfriendly 
Committee of Negro Workers descended lineally from the Comintern’s water-
shed sixth congress of 1928, which ratified, on the stage of international com-
munism, the new Soviet dispensation. Following the death of Vladimir Lenin, 
the chief architect of the Bolshevik Revolution, Stalin variously eliminated and 
sidelined his rivals in a brutal succession struggle, before emerging triumphant. 
In the Comintern, as in the Soviet Union, Stalinism meant increased centraliza-
tion of power. As originally constituted, the Comintern was a clearinghouse 
of revolution, organizing congresses and seeking to enforce their decisions. 
Real power over the national parties, however, the Comintern never had, as 
evidenced by its inability to impose its will on the Negro Question. Stalinist 
centralization inaugurated unprecedented Soviet dominance over the Com-
intern and its affiliates. Still, some affiliates remained defiant, including on the 
Negro Question, demonstrating that Soviet control of international commu-
nism, even in the Stalinist era, was never as complete as the anticommunist 
school of communist studies has claimed.65
Stalinism intensified confrontation within and without the communist 
movement. The sixth Comintern congress, consequently, declared war on the 
noncommunist Left worldwide. For black internationalism, this meant doing 
michael o. west & william g. martin
18


--- PAGE 38 ---
battle with “Negro reformism,” as Adi shows. According to the Comintern, 
Negro reformist organizations and leaders, or rather, “misleaders,” abounded 
on both banks of the Atlantic. The Comintern’s chief black target, however, 
was Garveyism. By the time the campaign against Negro reformism began, the 
UNIA, or executive Garveyism, was in terminal decline, a mere shadow of its 
former self. Y et the Comintern’s battle with Garveyism was no phantom war. 
The UNIA’s collapse as an organized body did not unduly affect Garveyism’s life 
as metaphor. In sum, the Comintern had taken up arms against the UNIA’s great-
est legacy: inspirational Garveyism. The T rinidadian-born George Padmore, 
later to emerge as the most conspicuous combatant against Negro reformism, 
admitted as much. Although celebrating the disintegration of the UNIA, which 
he considered “the most reactionary expression in Negro bourgeois national-
ism,” Padmore bewailed that Garveyism, as an inspiration, “continues to exert 
some influence among certain sections of the Negro masses. ”66
Soon after it was established, Padmore became head of the International 
T rade Union Committee of Negro Workers. Although it held the occasional 
meeting, the committee’s most important work was carried out through its of-
ficial organ, the Negro Worker. Edited by Padmore during its most febrile phase, 
the Negro Worker was a monthly journal published from 1931 to 1937, initially 
in Hamburg, Germany. It was the Comintern’s answer to the Negro World, the 
now defunct Garveyite organ. T endentious and polemical, the Negro Worker
emphatically set Black Bolshevism apart from its black internationalist rivals, 
the Pan-African Congress and, especially, Garveyism. The Negro Worker fo-
cused on two broad, and related, themes. First, the Negro Worker argued that 
the black toilers, not the black middle classes/uRELfk.dthe despised reformists and 
petit bourgeois Negro misleaders/uRELfk.dwere the vanguard of black liberation glob-
ally. Second, and in accordance with the Comintern’s founding claims, the 
Negro Worker advanced the view that black liberation was inextricably linked 
to the global proletarian revolution.
But then the global proletarian revolution, as defined by the Stalinist Com-
intern, began to backpedal on black liberation. The rise of fascism in Europe 
led the Soviet Union to abandon its overt antagonism to the noncommunist 
Left, and even to the nonfascist colonial powers, meaning concretely Britain 
and France. Presently, communists everywhere received orders from on high 
to tone down the campaign against the “democratic imperialists,” Britain and 
France, and to focus instead on the “fas cist imperialists,” Germany and Italy, 
which posed a more immediate threat to the Soviet Union. Ever the nationalist 
champion of socialism in one country, Stalin now determined on a course he 
introduction
19


--- PAGE 39 ---
believed to be best for the Soviet Union. It was not, however, a policy con-
sistent with black liberation. With the exception of certain individuals and 
organizations that supported Japan as a champion of the “darker races,”67 black 
internationalism broadly agreed on the dangers of fascism to African peoples. 
Seeing fascism and colonialism as two sides of the same coin, however, most 
black internationalists rejected the notion of privileging antifascism above 
anticolonialism. After all, the “democratic imperialists,” Britain and France, 
were the preeminent colonizers of black folk. By contrast, fascist Italy was a 
minor colonial power in Africa, despite its brutal invasion of Ethiopia in 1935. 
Previously, the T reaty of Versailles had punished Germany by, among other 
things, dismantling its African empire and turning most of it over to Britain 
and France.
Black Bolshevism now faced a dile mma that was felt most acutely in the 
Comintern’s leading organs on the Negro Question globally, the International 
T rade Union Committee of Negro Workers and its mouthpiece, the Negro 
Worker. Deciding they could not support the most recent directive from Mos-
cow, two of the committee’s leading lights bolted. The first to go was Tiemoko 
Kouyaté of French West Africa, the Comintern’s most prominent black Franco-
phone. An organizer of black and other colonial sailors and allied workers in 
France, Kouyaté had long been a thorn in the side of the French Communist 
Party on account of his championship of the Negro Question. Following his 
close ally Kouyaté, George Padmore then resigned his positions as head of 
the Committee of Negro Workers and editor of the Negro Worker.68 Short on 
forbearance and long on denunciation, as always, the Comintern retaliated by 
formally expelling both men, charging them with the same offense Padmore 
had so often leveled against others: Negro petit bourgeois nationalism. The 
Negro Worker survived intermittently for some time longer. For all practical 
purposes, though, the Comintern had abandoned its founding commitment 
and called off the engagement with the black international. For sure, individual 
communist parties, especially in the United States and South Africa, continued 
to engage black toilers and intellectuals, but mostly as part of a national rather 
than an international strategy.69
Black women, a small but determined band among the Black Bolsheviks, 
were more consistent. In the United States, where they were most prominent, 
women were present at the founding of Black Bolshevism, and they would 
remain a crucial bloc in that tendency of black internationalism in the decades 
to come. The first outstanding female leader of Black Bolshevism was Grace 
Campbell. A charter member of the ra dical and black internationalist ABB,
michael o. west & william g. martin
20


--- PAGE 40 ---
Campbell pioneered a kind of Black Bolshevik feminism. She did not write 
much, but her ideology may be inferred from her actions, notably her keen 
interest in the “Woman Question. ” Hers was a socialism attuned to the im-
peratives of women’s liberation, in and out of the workplace, including the 
particular gendered and racialized  oppression of black women. Campbell 
remained with the ABB when it made its great metamorphosis, even as she 
retained her commitment to women’s liberation. The ABB, previously an un-
easy ally of the UNIA, supporting as well as critiquing it, formally broke with 
executive Garveyism in 1921 and melded into the emerging U.S. communist 
movement.70
The generation of female Black Bolsheviks that came after Campbell built 
on her work. Most of these women ha d proletarian backgrounds, but a few 
came from the ranks of the black middle classes; a number had Caribbean 
roots. Some/uRELfk.dlike Hermina Huiswoud, Maude White, Louise Thompson, 
Claudia Jones, and Esther Cooper/uRELfk.dbecame political activists upon joining 
the U.S. Communist Party. Others/uRELfk.dmost signally Audley Moore, later Queen 
Mother Moore, who began her political career as a Garveyite/uRELfk.dmigrated to 
communism from black nationalism. T o varying degrees all of these women, 
along with other black comrade sisters, were committed to the fusion of so-
cialism, black internationalism, and women’s liberation initiated by Grace 
Campbell. Theirs was often an uphill  struggle. They fought not just against 
male chauvinism in the party, including on the part of black male members, 
but also against the party’s ideology, which emphasized class unity above all 
other considerations, including those centered on gender and race.71 On the 
Woman Question, at least, the fight of female Black Bolsheviks, like that of 
their Garveyite sisters, was at once external and internal.
Part 3: The Long Black Sixties
The second wave of black internationalism was followed, in the post–World 
War II era, by the rise and improbable success of independence movements 
in the colonies and civil rights struggles in the United States. As Vijay Prashad 
traces in his chapter on the “Black Gandhi,” many of these struggles drew upon 
strategies and leaders forged in the black international cauldron of the inter-
war years. Certainly this was the case with Gandhi, whose philosophy and 
movement developed first in South Africa, matured in British colonial India, 
and later inspired movements around the world, including in South Africa, 
the Gold Coast (later Ghana), and most famously in the United States.72 Y et 
introduction
21


--- PAGE 41 ---
this postwar order, even as it resulted in independence for scores of African, 
Asian, and Caribbean states and civil rights gains for African Americans in the 
United States, was inimical to black internationalism. As self-determination 
became equated with state sovereignty, black identities increasingly assumed 
a national, even nationalist, form.
Black internationalism, however, witnessed a remarkable reversal of for-
tunes in what we call the long black Sixties, which is the subject of Part 3 of 
the volume. This moment in black internationalism was a reaction to the un-
finished struggles of the previous two centuries, and especially the previous 
generation. The movements and activists that made up the long black Sixties 
were driven into combat by the unfulfilled dreams and broken promises of abo-
lition, decolonization, and desegregation. The two decades before the onset of 
the long black Sixties were a period of heady changes in global Africa. World 
War II, which came at the end of the revival in black internationalism that fol-
lowed the previous global war, introduced a new order in international politics, 
as the fifth Pan-African Congress of 1945 readily noted.73 The subsequent con-
test between the United States and the Soviet Union for global hegemony, the 
Cold War, opened up new opportunities as well as posed new challenges for 
black liberation.74 For global Africa as a whole, the major accomplishments of 
the Cold War era were juridical independence and formal racial equality/uRELfk.dthat 
is, the termination of colonial rule in most of Africa and parts of the diaspora, 
notably the Anglophone Caribbean, and the end of legalized racism and state-
sponsored segregation, most significantly in the United States.
Decolonization and desegregation were far-reaching and costly achieve-
ments, wrenched from the claws of oppression, even terror, and paid for in 
blood, sweat, and tears. In the end, however, decolonization and desegregation 
failed to deliver on their major promise: a better life for the masses of black 
people. Kwame Nkrumah, who in 1957 led Ghana to independence, the first 
country in sub-Saharan Africa to achieve that status, had argued that the better 
life could be achieved by ending European rule and transferring political power 
to the colonized. “Seek ye first the political kingdom,” Nkrumah, a sometime 
former preacher, exhorted in a riff on the King James Bible, “and all other things 
shall be added unto you. ”75 In many cases the addition amounted to little, if 
there was any addition at all.
The result was the onset of a new black internationalist wave. The long 
black Sixties lacked the organizational coherence of the preceding wave, devoid 
as it was of any umbrella movement with the global reach and influence of 
the UNIA, or even the Comintern or the Pan-African Congress. Ideologically, 
michael o. west & william g. martin
22


--- PAGE 42 ---
however, the third wave of black internationalism was more cohesive than the 
second one. Unlike the previous two waves/uRELfk.dwhich culminated in abolition 
and decolonization, respectively/uRELfk.dthe movements and activists of the third 
wave did not succeed in their avowed aims. Their success lay elsewhere, in 
undermining the postwar liberal order and U.S. hegemony, while showing the 
way to postliberal identities, alliances, and movements.
Signs of a new wave appeared in the early 1960s, when radical protest began 
to erupt in widely disparate locales across the black world. Among the most 
notable on the African continent was Patrice Lumumba’s outburst at inde-
pendence day celebrations in the Belg ian Congo (presently the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo). Affronted by King Baudouin’s speech celebrating 
Belgium’s reputed civilizing mission in Africa, Lumumba, the incoming Con-
golese prime minister, seized the podium and denounced the whole colonial 
enterprise:
We have known ironies, insults, blows that we endured morning, 
noon, and evening, because we are niggers. . . . We have seen our lands 
seized. . . . We have seen that the law was not the same for a white and 
for a black, accommodating for the first, cruel and inhuman for the 
other. . . . We have seen that in the towns there were magnificent houses 
for the whites and crumbling shanties for the blacks, that a black was not 
admitted in the motion-picture houses, in the restaurants, in the stores 
of the Europeans. Who will ever forget the massacres where so many of 
our brothers perished, the cells into which those who refused to submit 
to a regime of oppression and exploitation were thrown? [applause].76
There was to be no replay in the Congo of Nkrumah’s long and felicitous transi-
tion to power in Ghana (1951–57). An incensed Baudouin fled from the stage 
and returned to Belgium before independence came at midnight. Lumumba 
simultaneously became a marked ma n. Within months he would be dead, 
the victim of neocolonial intrigues emanating from Belgium and the United 
States.77
The confrontation at Congo’s independence celebration was not an isolated 
event: Baudouin and Lumumba were well aware that a new wave of radical na-
tionalism had broken out to the north and south as well as to the east and west 
of where they were standing. T o the north, the armed revolt against French 
rule in Algeria was peaking amidst white settler and French army mutinies.78
T o the east, a state of emergency remained in effect in Kenya after the brutal 
suppression of the Land and Freedom Army, the armed resistance movement 
introduction
23


--- PAGE 43 ---
the British colonialists called Mau Mau.79 T o the west and south, nonviolent 
nationalist movements were giving way to armed struggles, especially in the 
Portuguese colonies of Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique.80 In apart-
heid South Africa, the police shot down scores of unarmed demonstrators in 
March 1960 in the town of Sharpeville. Following the Sharpeville Massacre, the 
apartheid regime declared a state of emergency and banned the Pan-Africanist 
Congress and the African National Congress, South Africa’s leading liberation 
movements. Both movements, in turn, declared armed struggle against the 
apartheid state.81
Each of these developments rejected, implicitly or explicitly, previous na-
tionalist struggles, their strategies, a nd the statehouses their leaders increas-
ingly came to inhabit. Most prophetic was Frantz Fanon, the Caribbean-born 
theorist who made his name in the Algerian Revolution. Speaking on the “pit-
falls of national consciousness,” Fanon warned of the predatory nature of the 
African middle class, the group that would inherit the colonial administrative 
apparatus and corrupt the postcolonial state, turning it into a handmaiden of 
neocolonialism.82 Armed struggle, and the support it required from peasants 
and the urban Lumpenproletariat, led to new analyses of popular participation 
and the racial and class bases of colonial rule. Amilcar Cabral, the leader of 
the struggle in Guinea-Bissau, became renowned for working through these 
problems on the ground. In Cabral’s view, there would be no greater obstacle 
to emancipation than the postcolonial state.83
Similar eruptions and explorations were taking place on the other side of 
the Atlantic. In the United States, younger activists in the civil rights movement 
became increasingly impatient as white southerners countermobilized against 
any substantive dismantling of white power, wealth, and privilege. Meanwhile 
nonviolent, multiracial protest and an increasing number of elected black poli-
ticians failed to change de facto segregation in the North.84 It was in this con-
text that Malcolm X’s voice found such a receptive audience, from his calls for 
the renewal of the tradition of self-defe nse and the necessity of independent 
black organizations, through his rejection of nonviolence and assimilation, 
to his emphasis on a common white enemy and international black action 
for human/uRELfk.das opposed to civil (state)/uRELfk.drights.85 Central to this vision was a 
relinking of African American and Afr ican identities and struggles, a project 
facilitated by Malcolm’s own trips across Africa. As the draft program of his 
Organization of Afro-American Unity stressed, “The time is past due for us to 
internationalize the problems of Afro-Americans. We have been too slow in rec-
ognizing the link in the fate of Africans with the fate of Afro-Americans. ”86
michael o. west & william g. martin
24


--- PAGE 44 ---
Members of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
were reaching similar conclusions. By the mid-1960s nonviolence training ses-
sions were being abandoned and attention increasingly turned to African affairs 
and armed movements worldwide. When SNCC chairman Stokely Carmichael 
(later Kwame Ture) famously raised the cry of “Black Power” at a gathering in 
Mississippi in 1966, he found an immediate, explosive response.87 In Oakland, 
California, the cry for Black Power found organizational expression in the 
formation in 1966 of the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, which would 
eventually draw in so many stars of the young black movement. Thirty chapters 
quickly sprung up around the United States, and the Black Panther Party at 
one time or another worked with almost every radical U.S. organization of the 
day, including women’s and gay movements.
These developments gave rise to debate over sexuality and women’s par-
ticipation within the wider black nationalist movement and the Black Panther 
Party in particular. As the paths of Elaine Brown, Kathleen Cleaver, and Angela 
Davis (to mention only the most celebrated) attest, a few women rose to prom-
inent positions within the party, notwithstanding its masculinist character. 
Still, the Panthers were light years ahead of more openly patriarchal organiza-
tions, such as the Nation of Islam and Maulana Karenga’s U.S. organization.88
By the early 1970s the Black Panther Party was publicly calling for alliances 
with the Women’s and Gay Liberation movements, reflecting internal gender 
struggles within the party and the Panthers’ public engagement with gay and 
feminist activists.89 In contrast to women involved in the white New Left, fewer 
black women left black nationalist organizations to join feminist groups. And 
when they did, the continuing racism and class privilege within the emerging 
white feminist movement led them to launch new organizations, such as Third 
World Women’s Alliance, formed by Frances Beal and other SNCC women in 
1968.90 As the emphasis on “Third World” suggests, black feminists remained 
linked to an anti-imperialist and pan-Africanist vision.
As the chapter by Robyn Spencer traces, the Black Panther Party created an 
organizational network and a consciousness that were radically internationalist, 
weaving into a single tapestry a critique of U.S. imperialism abroad and capital-
ism at home. No longer was it possible to imagine national solutions to black 
international problems. Global solidarity links rapidly expanded, propelled in 
part by Panther leaders who had been driven into exile. This led inexorably to 
calls for a new black identity that was not wedded to U.S. citizenship but was 
based on international black alliances. Huey Newton, the top Panther leader, 
put it in words that Malcolm X (assassinated in 1965) would have appreciated: 
introduction
25


--- PAGE 45 ---
“We cannot be nationalists when our country is not a nation but an empire. ”91
Newton offered instead an alternative vision of a world of independent and 
allied communities, what he called “revolutionary intercommunalism. ”
As Spencer demonstrates, the theory of intercommunalism was a long way 
indeed from the ideological and programmatic beliefs of the Old Left, the 
civil rights movement, liberal social democrats, and the white student move-
ment. It even marked out new ground in relation to Stokely Carmichael’s and 
Charles V . Hamilton’s influential 1967 book Black Power: The Politics of Lib-
eration, which paved the way not only by reje cting essentialized notions of 
race but by recasting liberal “race relations” as a colonial relationship between 
global white supremacy and the “black nation within the nation. ” The future, 
Newton proclaimed, was one of linking oppressed communities worldwide 
in opposition to a common enemy.
By the late 1960s, local eruptions had given way to international networks 
operating across the Americas, Africa, and Asia and beyond. Leaders of na-
tional liberation movements in Africa , such as Amilcar Cabral and Eduardo 
Mondlane of Mozambique, visited the United States, while U.S. movement 
leaders and personalities/uRELfk.dincluding Muhammad Ali, Malcolm X, Stokely 
Carmichael, Eldridge Cleaver, Kathleen Cleaver, and Robert Williams, among 
others/uRELfk.dtraveled widely in Europe, the Caribbean (especially Cuba), and Asia, 
spreading the message of black revolt.92 African and Caribbean students resi-
dent in Europe and North America did likewise, protesting in support of vari-
ous causes at home and elsewhere. In this way, a common language of black 
liberation gained worldwide prominence and currency.
Even old imperial centers were shaken. In Britain, West Indians and Asians 
in the early 1960s coalesced to oppose racism and increasing attacks on their 
basic rights, most notably by lobbying against the key 1962 Commonwealth 
Immigrants Bill. These efforts failed, and the incumbent Labour Party subse-
quently moved against immigrants, particularly after losing seats in 1964 to 
T ory candidates who campaigned on the slogan “If you want a nigger neigh-
bour, vote Liberal or Labour. ”93 In this climate the stirrings of Black Power, 
disseminated in part by visits by Malcolm X in 1965 and Stokely Carmichael 
in 1967, met a ready response among a new generation of British-born and 
-educated young people of African and Asian descent. As black militancy rose, 
older organizations pursuing integrationism and a legislative strategy, such 
as the National Committee against Racial Discrimination, collapsed. In their 
place arose new organizations espousing black consciousness and black control 
of black communities.
michael o. west & william g. martin
26


--- PAGE 46 ---
In Britain, 1967 was to prove a breakthrough year, marked by the founding 
of the Universal Coloured People’s Association (UCPA), led by Obi Egbuna 
(who had traveled to the United States in 1966);94 the banning of Stokely Car-
michael; and the arrest of a major Black Power figure for “stirring up hatred. ”95
More than fifty other radical black organi zations joined the UCPA to create 
a broad Black Power movement. By 1969 the Home Office’s Special Branch 
estimated that there were 2,000 active Black Power militants in Britain.96
As elsewhere in the black world, Black Power organizations in Britain 
expressed local concerns. Y et these concerns were now no longer directed 
toward state-sponsored amelioration of the condition of new immigrants but 
were placed within global black networks, consciousness, and demands. As 
Sivanandan, a key activist of the time, recalls,
We related to both the struggles back at home and the struggles here, the 
struggles then and the struggles now, the struggles of Gandhi and Nehru, 
of Nkrumah and Nyerere, of James and Williams, of Du Bois and Garvey 
and the ongoing struggles in Vietnam and “Portuguese Africa”/uRELfk.dGuinea 
Bissau and Cape Verde/uRELfk.dand the struggles for Black Power in the 
United States of America. . . . And black was a political colour.97
The language of Black Power was even heard in places without direct diasporic 
or African slave histories, such as Australia, where an avowed Black Power 
movement, formed in 1972, directly confronted the government. Australian 
black activists, like their counterparts elsewhere, deployed the term “black” to 
reject state-imposed classifications and to express solidarity with racially op-
pressed peoples everywhere. In the words of Bobbi Sykes, “In an effort to ele-
vate the broad struggle being undertaken here [in Australia] to a Third World 
level, use of the word ‘black’ becomes highly desirable. ”98
Back on the west bank of the Atlantic, the new black assertiveness sprouted 
forth from roots in Brazil’s favelas, nightclubs, and schools, as military rule 
in that country became increasingly unpopular. Buoyed by the examples of 
national liberation movements in Portugal’s African colonies and by growing 
ties to Black Power and soul culture in North America, black activists in Brazil 
charted new paths. Exposing the myth that Brazil was a “racial democracy,” 
they unearthed local racial inequalities and practices, reclaimed ties to Africa 
and global black resistance, and began to redefine “black” to encompass both 
“preto” (literally, black) and “pardo” (roughly, mulatto or mestizo).99 By 1978 
this cultural and political renaissance led to the formation of a national orga-
nization, Movimento Negro Unificado (Unified Black Movement).100
introduction
27


--- PAGE 47 ---
Symbolically, and significantly, the Unified Black Movement rejected 
May 13, the traditional day for celebrating nationally the abolition of slavery 
in 1888. Instead, black activists created a National Black Consciousness Day, 
November 20, to mark the anniversary of the death of Zumbi, renowned leader 
of the Republic of Palmares, which was created by runaway slaves in the sev-
enteenth century. As links with activists and movements in the Americas and 
continental Africa deepened, participants argued quite boldly, “Perhaps the 
most important contemporary phenomenon in the African world is the emer-
gence and re-assertion of the African people of South and Central America 
within the context of Pan-Africanism. A new militancy and black conscious-
ness has burst in Latin America. ”101
Black Power arose, too, amidst the horrors of apartheid. This was no 
isolated affair, peculiar to South Africa. As one chronicler of the movement 
there charted, “Waves generated by African independence lapped at American 
shores, slogans shouted in American ghettoes echoed in Africa. ”102 In South 
Africa, the interlocution was most evident in the rise of Black Consciousness, 
the local name for Black Power. Inspired by radical movements and writings 
elsewhere in Africa, black students led by Steve Biko and the South African 
Students’ Organisation (SASO) found SNCC’s rejection of white liberalism and 
Fanon’s rejection of Europe especially apt as they struggled as subordinates 
within multiracial organizations.103 SASO training meetings, for example, 
involved close study of SNCC’s work and its struggles with U.S. white liberals. 
In South Africa, again as elsewhere, the term “black” was radically recast along 
political lines, in this case to encompass all oppressed peoples defined as “non-
white” by the apartheid state. Thus Indians, “Coloureds,” and Africans were 
all included under a single flexible category, namely, black. As the SASO con-
stitution stated, “We define Black people as those who are by law or tradition, 
politically, economically, and socially discriminated against as a group in the 
South African society, and identifying themselves as a unit in the struggle. ”104
This redefinition marked a radical departure from South African norms, in-
cluding those of the African National Congress, which had operated through 
links among racially distinct organizations.
Black international crosscurrents fused in the events of 1968 and its imme-
diate aftermath. In the United States, the assassination of Martin Luther King 
was followed by a nationwide rebellion: revolts erupted on the streets of more 
than 100 cities, with scores killed, thousands injured, and tens of thousands of 
troops called out across the country to restore order. In Mexico City, coming 
on the heels of the Mexican government’s slaughter of hundreds of protesting 
michael o. west & william g. martin
28


--- PAGE 48 ---
students, U.S. athletes T ommie Smith and John Carlos raised the Black Power 
salute on the Olympic reviewing stand. They were immediately expelled from 
the U.S. team, banished from the Olympic village, and sent back to the United 
States, where they were greeted with death threats.105 In Detroit, a wildcat 
strike by the recently formed Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement shut 
down the Dodge Main auto plant.106 The year 1968 also saw Huey Newton on 
trial for his life, while the Panthers came under murderous police attacks in 
California and Chicago. Again in 1968, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover announced 
that the Black Panther Party was the greatest threat to U.S. internal security.
In Africa, student protests against corrupt governments and neocolonial 
domination exploded in 1968 and later. In the Congo, student agitators declared 
that “the deep discontent from which we suffer is the colonialist spirit. . . . The 
[university] is an enclave of Belgium in the Congo. ”107 Next door in T anza-
nia, students at the University of Dar es Salaam marched in 1969 against the 
“ American” curriculum. In the same year, but on the other side of the conti-
nent, Guinean students protested “an anti-Guinean plot hatched by French 
imperialism,”108 even as their counterparts in Burkina Faso (then Upper Volta) 
denounced “the politic-bureaucratic opportunist bourgeoisie” and attacked 
the U.S. Peace Corps as a “nest of spies. ”109 Still in West Africa, similar senti-
ments at Senegal’s University of Dakar propelled a rolling confrontation with 
the state in 1968–69 that eventually led to a strike supported by unions, the 
closure of the university, and the arrest of hundreds of students. Back in East 
Africa, student protests in 1968–69 in Kenya and Ethiopia followed similar 
trajectories.110 All across the continent, meanwhile, students demanded action 
against the rebel white regime in Rhodesia (later Zimbabwe).111
The global ideological commerce that was Black Power, and the attendant 
political protest, also crisscrossed the Caribbean.112 As Brian Meeks states in 
the opening line of his chapter, “In 1968, Black Power swept across the Carib-
bean. ” During the next three years, Black Power demonstrations, strikes, and 
riots would erupt in, among other places, Curaçao, Bermuda, the Bahamas, 
Aruba, Anguilla, Jamaica, and T rinidad, where a civil uprising/army mutiny 
threatened to topple the government.
The most visible trigger for the Black Power cascade across the Caribbean 
was the banning from Jamaica in 1968 of Walter Rodney. A Guyanese national 
and Black Power activist, Rodney taught at the Jamaican campus of the Uni-
versity of the West Indies. Even then, he was emerging as a key theorist of the 
drive to unite poor communities of African and Indian (South Asian) descent 
behind an international Black Power program/uRELfk.das revealed in his 1969 book, 
introduction
29


--- PAGE 49 ---
The Groundings with My Brothers. University students marching in protest of 
Rodney’s banning were joined by urban youths; the result was a virtual upris-
ing.113 Nothing of the sort had been seen in Jamaica since the colonial era, in 
the 1930s.
The “Rodney riots” highlighted the interchange between Black Power in 
the Caribbean and on the North American mainland. The emergence of black 
nationalist groupings in Canada, part icularly among West Indian students, 
provided a critical focal point for Caribbean intellectuals as well as a link 
to more prominent movements in the United States.114 Caribbean govern-
ments moved to cut those ties, including banning the works of U.S.-based 
black radicals, along with the radicals themselves. But the genie could not be 
returned to the bottle: protests continued, including by Caribbean students 
in North America, most notably in Canada.115 Indeed, protests in Canada 
would powerfully influence events in T rinidad, where things came to a head in 
1970. Eric Williams/uRELfk.dprime minister of T rinidad and T obago, noted historian, 
and erstwhile anticolonial bête noire/uRELfk.dhad little patience for Black Power. 
Its advocates, Williams announced, were “hooligans. ” Challenged by a Black 
Power movement reaching out to ever-expanding segments of society, Wil-
liams declared a state of emergency and arrested Black Power leaders. When 
the regime called on the army to enforce the state of emergency, however, a 
unit headed by junior officers mutinied, refusing to move against fellow “black 
brothers. ” The government appeared close to collapse.116
But then the wily Williams opened negotiations with the mutineers, agree-
ing to some of their demands, only to arrest them once they laid down their 
arms. Williams had been emboldened by the hemisphere’s forces of order, 
which rushed to his support: Venezuelan gunboats appeared on the horizon, 
the British navy went on alert, U.S. warships set sail at high speed from Puerto 
Rico, and a U.S. airlift delivered fresh su pplies of arms to Williams’s govern-
ment. Bereft of leadership, and unprepared to seize power, as a Leninist party 
might have done, the insurgency collapsed in the face of the countermobiliza-
tion by Williams and his allies. Soon the island was still, the regime secured.
T rinidad’s “aborted revolution” of 1970 would prove to be the apex of Carib-
bean Black Power, as Meeks argues in his chapter. Subsequent Black Power–
inflected or –inspired attempts at mobilization receded or collapsed entirely, 
despite some initial successes. These include attempts at armed struggle, as 
in T rinidad in 1972–74;117 Indian and African working people’s comity, as in 
the work of Walter Rodney (assassinated in 1980) and the Working People’s 
Alliance in Guyana in the mid- to late 1970s;118 Black Power mobilization, as in 
michael o. west & william g. martin
30


--- PAGE 50 ---
South Africa leading up to the 1976 Soweto rebellion;119 and Leninist vanguard 
politics, as in the Grenada revolution of 1979–83.120 In the United States, Brazil, 
and elsewhere, once-vibrant black movements also declined.
An attempt in 1974 to create an international network, through the sixth 
Pan-African Congress, achieved little success, in no small measure because of 
the pitfall Amilcar Cabral had warned  against: the unreformed postcolonial 
state. The state sponsors of the sixth Pan-African Congress, held in T anzania, 
insisted on respect of the Organization of African Unity’s principle of non-
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign states. This decision excluded 
opposition activists not only from Africa but from the Americas and else-
where as well. Pan-Africanism, as conceived by the sixth Pan-African Con-
gress, would be an affair of states, standing firmly against civil society and 
black internationalists outside the state sector. The conference’s plenary ses-
sions naturally descended into “the self-adulation of governments as diverse 
as Cuba and Mobutu Sese Seko’s Zaire. ” Amidst the hubbub, there she was, the 
ubiquitous and always resplendent Queen Mother Moore, appearing alongside 
the equally redoubtable Ras Makonnen, the longtime clearinghouse of black 
internationalism and chef extraordinaire of pan-Africanism.121
The demise of Black Power globally remains a puzzle for its analysts and 
exponents alike. As Meeks deftly charts in his chapter, by the late 1970s, Black 
Power in the Caribbean, as in the United States and elsewhere, had become a 
shadow of its former self, increasingly isolated from its social base, particularly 
the working classes, and supplanted by Marxist-Leninist, vanguard party prin-
ciples. Explanations for this rapid descent vary. Like the movements that came 
after it, Black Power’s emphasis on identity and its rejection of bureaucratic 
state power posed a fundamental and unresolved dilemma. For some analysts, 
Black Power thus failed to appreciate the need to overthrow the postcolonial 
and post–civil rights orders and instead became rooted in community work, 
emphasizing race over class and rejecting vanguard revolutionary parties. In 
T rinidad, for example, it is argued that Black Power organizations could have 
seized power in 1970 but, at the critical moment, lacked the necessary ideo-
logical and organizational maturity.122 C. L. R. James’s posthumous critique 
of Rodney’s political practice in Guyana argued along similar lines.123
Others point to the patriarchal and masculinist limitations of Black Power,124
and to the emergence of alternate identities and new social movements for 
which Black Power could not provide a home. In the United States, the pre-
dominance of cultural black nationalism, often expressing the interests of a 
rising black petite bourgeoisie and political elite, is often cited for the inability 
introduction
31


--- PAGE 51 ---
of black nationalists to construct broad-based political organizations.125 InSouth 
Africa, the resurgence of the African National Congress after the 1976 Soweto 
rebellion is similarly attributed to its bureaucratic capacity to absorb the thou-
sands of activists who fled the country in the wake of the repression that fol-
lowed the rebellion.126 This was so despite the fact that the Soweto rebellion 
was rooted in Black Consciousness, an ideology that explicitly rejected the 
form of political mobilization the African National Congress had pursued be-
fore it was banned in 1960. Organization, it seemed, had trumped ideology.
In addition to its own internal weaknesses, organizational and ideologi-
cal, Black Power’s demise was due to another major consideration: the sheer 
weight of the counterrevolution directed against it globally. The Thermidor, 
white and black, expressed itself most immediately in violent repression, as 
charted in the chapters by Meeks and Spencer. National liberation and Black 
Power leaders were everywhere imprisoned, exiled, and, assassinated/uRELfk.dinclud-
ing Malcolm X, Amilcar Cabral, Steve Biko, Fred Hampton, George Jackson, 
Eduardo Mondlane, Samora Machel, and Walter Rodney. In the United States, 
Africa, and the Caribbean, state repression resulted in death, exile, and impris-
onment for thousands of lesser-known activists, even as their organizations 
were disrupted, infiltrated, and banned. In Africa, student activists were often 
arrested and impressed into the army. And although COI NTELPRO, the U.S. 
intelligence operations against Black Power and other radicals, has received 
the most attention, it was hardly the only such undertaking.127 Spymasters 
worldwide linked up to pursue black radicals, as seen in the cooperation of 
Jamaican, Guyanese, and U.S. (and apparently British) intelligence services 
in tracking the activities of Walter Rodney.128
By the early 1980s, a more formative response, less dependent on overt 
repression, had emerged. Faced with unruly populations at home and abroad, 
powerful states and some of their leading intellectuals conceded key pillars 
of the postwar liberal order. The que st for integration was abandoned, the 
hubris of equality and progress was jettisoned, and national development plan-
ning, so extensively promoted by theorists of modernization in the preceding 
decades, was cast aside as the detritus of a bygone era. In their wake arose a 
new program, neoliberalism, which dictated the end of the welfare and social 
democratic state in the global North and the developmental state in the global 
South.129 Simultaneously, the language of assimilation and equality was re-
placed with the discourse of a neoracist “multiculturalism,” whereby difference 
could be accepted and celebrated even as racial and ethnic inequality acceler-
ated.130 These innovations went hand in hand with increasing racial and social 
michael o. west & william g. martin
32


--- PAGE 52 ---
controls, marked most vividly by the criminalization and incarceration of black 
communities in the Americas and Europe and the erection of new barriers to 
protect white communities.131
This time around, as before, the white Thermidor provoked a black coun-
termovement. Drawn from and appealing to communities increasingly mar-
ginalized by state design, a younger generation began to forge new forms of 
protest rooted in cultural, as distinct fr om organizational, politics. This re-
flected, in turn, the legacy of the long black Sixties, from which cultural na-
tionalists emerged relatively unscathed and were thus well placed to seize the 
opportunities of a new stirring of black internationalism. A common thread 
connected the efforts of cultural nationalists across global Africa, from Afro-
centrists in North America to promoters of Ubuntu in southern Africa. They 
all denounced the traducers of black folk and celebrated a common African 
humanity.
The channels of communication were  global, coursing most notably 
through today’s black telegraph, namely, the world-embracing black music 
community. One of its iconic figures, Tupac Amaru Shakur, was quite literally 
the product of the long black Sixties: his Black Panther mother, Afeni Shakur, 
was pregnant with him while in jail on bombing charges. Tupac, like many 
others, was inspired by the revolutionary chants of early rap that called for a 
return to a radical, African consciousne ss.132 Even those artists who became 
commercially visible/uRELfk.dsuch as KRS-One, Public Enemy, and NWA/uRELfk.drevived 
the historic black internationalist chant against the forces of Babylon and sang 
for those who were, increasingly, assigned to social death in the growing U.S. 
prison archipelago.133
This miniwave in black mobilization reached its peak in the United States 
with the Million Man and Million Woman marches, apparently the largest 
black public political events ever in the United States.134 Led and organized 
by neither black politicians nor civil rights organizations, the 1995 Million 
Man March marked a startling affirmation of a black nationalism that had 
been growing throughout the new neoliberal, neoracist era. It also marked 
the flourishing of cultural nationalism, but not yet any organized, political 
black nationalism. Thus it was left to cultural nationalist Maulana Ron Karenga 
to compose the founding statement of the Million Man March, while Louis 
Farrakhan, committed to both patriarchy and black capitalism, emerged as 
its most prominent figure. None of this prevented the now legendary Queen 
Mother Moore/uRELfk.done of the most redoubtable freedom fighters of the twen-
tieth century, having made the journey from Garveyite black nationalism to 
introduction
33


--- PAGE 53 ---
communism and then back to black nationalism/uRELfk.dfrom making her last major 
public appearance at the Million Man March. She would die less than two years 
later, just shy of her ninety-ninth birthday.
The Million Woman March, held in 1997, offered a far more trenchant cri-
tique of the new world order than did the Million Man March. Indeed the sec-
ond march, which attracted nearly as many participants, was a counterpoint to 
the first. The Million Woman March singled out the U.S. state, attacking its so-
cial retrenchment at home and imperial ambitions abroad. Unlike the Million 
Man March, whose leading lights saw much virtue in the fact that they made 
no demands on the state, the Million Woman March advanced a twelve-point 
program and excoriated U.S. policy at all levels. Going well beyond the Mil-
lion Man March’s mantra of personal redemption, the Million Woman March 
rejected the rule of capital and called for protection of the environment.
Sentimentally, the Million Woman March set the stage for the Black Radi-
cal Congress (BRC). Organized in 1998, the BRC’s goal was to give organiza-
tional coherence to the insurgent ideas that had surfaced and spread in this 
period.135 It was a bold attempt to mo bilize the political consciousness that 
the two marches had so vividly displayed, but with an explicit rejection of the 
“end-of-politics” tendency associated with the Million Man March. Espousing 
a program that was proletarian, feminist, and internationalist, the BRC sought 
to be a big tent for all self-identified black radicals. Its inaugural meeting in 
Chicago was the most significant gathering of the African American Left since 
the Gary Convention of 1972, which attempted a similar undertaking in black 
radical coalition building.136 The BRC, which soon became inactive, would 
prove to be no more enduring than the Gary Convention.
The consciousness that the BRC set out to cohere was hardly confined to the 
United States. Already in 1994, black activists from various parts of the world 
had gathered in Kampala, Uganda, seeking to stimulate black mobilization 
globally. Convened in a region that had just witnessed the Rwanda genocide, 
and one close to the center of the AIDS pandemic that has wreaked such death 
and destruction on global Africa, the seventh Pan-African Congress illustrated 
the revival of civil society in black internationalism. Accordingly, the state ac-
tors that had so thoroughly dominated the sixth Pan-African Congress of 1974 
were conspicuous by their absence at the seventh Pan-African Congress.137
These organizational efforts have yet to bear full fruit in the new millen-
nium. What has formed a new, international black consciousness of surpris-
ing and continuing strength is hip hop culture, which has blossomed through 
music, dance, fashion, video, television, and advertising. Infused by rhythms 
michael o. west & william g. martin
34


--- PAGE 54 ---
from beyond the shores of the United States, and infusing them in turn, hip 
hop emerged out of and brought togethe r very diffuse youth cultures and 
music genres. As Marc Perry’s chapter demonstrates, the growing global 
space of hip hop has also mobilized new black struggles that have at times 
contested and attempted to transcend nationally imposed racial identities and 
the neoliberal era’s marginalization of black youth. Perry shows that this is a 
worldwide phenomenon rooted in local contexts, struggles, and identities. In 
Cuba, raperos have opened new black spaces and identities as the dollarization 
of the economy has exacerbated social and racial inequalities; in Brazil, rappers 
target racist police violence and government corruption; in South Africa, rap 
has expressed the struggle to forge postapartheid black identities from within 
apartheid’s Coloured and African townships; in France, rappers from the elder 
statesman MC Solaar to younger artists like Disiz le Peste have challenged 
the neoliberal state and racism.138 If the lyrics everywhere express locality, 
they also everywhere chant against the global processes seeking to control, 
marginalize, and racialize youth.
This global communicative process, involving movement back and forth 
across continents, is highly conflicted. On one hand, it has resuscitated an op-
positional and transnational black identity attractive to black communities. On 
the other hand, hip hop’s movement from creative play in the streets of poor 
neighborhoods to global success has channeled hip hop into the commercial 
service of a few global firms. Indeed, a central tension in hip hop everywhere 
is the battle between the culture’s roots in oppressed communities and the cur-
rently dominant forces, propelled by corporate capital, that celebrate money, 
material things, and masculinity.139 Lament at the loss of artistic grounding 
due to success is an old refrain and can be widely heard in today’s hip hop.140
However, its hip hop counterpoint is singular, highlighting the power of rapa-
cious white corporations to control and profit from stereotypes of black men 
and women.141 The commodification and marketing of black youth culture is 
now very much in ascendance.
This speaks a common truth: both the political and cultural initiatives of 
the latest countermovement have yet to be carried forward to a new wave of 
black internationalism. Is the current moment a replication of the early 1960s, 
redolent of a latent sensibility that seeks to redefine the black and interna-
tional agenda? We do not know. Of one thing, however, we can be certain: the 
struggle for black liberation in all its changing hues and places is now, as ever, 
an international one.
introduction
35


--- PAGE 55 ---
notes
1. The writings of some of the foundational figures of black internationalism are con-
tained in various anthologies. See, for example, Potkay and Burr, Black Atlantic Writers,
and Brooks and Saillant, “Face Zion Forward.”
2. The point here is that black internationalism is a product of exile, and that it 
emerged among the Western diaspora (in the Americas and Europe) as opposed to 
the Eastern diaspora (in West Asia, the Mediterranean, and the Indian subcontinent). 
Although considerably older than the one in the West, the Eastern African Diaspora, 
for all its achievements, including any number of writers, soldiers, and leaders, never 
developed the transcendent sense of African consciousness that produced black inter-
nationalism. See, for example, Harris, African Presence in Asia ; Hunwick and Powell, 
African Diaspora in the Mediterranean; Catlin-Jairazbhoy and Alpers, Sidis and Scholars;
and Alpers, “Recollecting Africa. ”
3. The neglect of black experiences in the traditional Western metanarrative is dis-
cussed below. In the case of the national narrative, even studies that go against the grain of 
the standard storyline of “The Rise of the West,” as in the best social history from below, 
remain burdened by Western universalism–national historicism. See, for example, the 
otherwise admirable text produced by the American Social History Project, Who Built 
America?
4. See, for example, across a very wide literature and number of perspectives, such 
works as Tilly, Social Movements; Sanderson, Revolutions; and McAdam, McCarthy, and 
Zald, Comparative Perspectives on Social Movements.
5. Among a wide range of highly cited works, see, for example, Appadurai, “Disjunc-
ture and Difference”; Castells, Information Age; and Hardt and Negri, Empire.
6. Representative samples from the early twentieth century include Du Bois, The 
Negro; Padmore, Life and Struggles; and James, History. Subsequent scholarship in this 
vein includes Shepperson and Price, Independent African; Harris, Global Dimensions;
Robinson, Black Marxism; Walters, Pan Africanism; Lemelle and Kelley, Imagining Home;
Okpewho, Davies, and Mazrui, African Diaspora; and Zachernuk, Colonial Subjects. Then 
there is Appiah, In My Father’s House, which denies the existence of an African world.
7. West and Martin, “Introduction: The Rival Africas”; Martin and West, “ Ascent, 
T riumph, and Disintegration. ” On the history and crises of African studies, see also 
Guyer, African Studies, and Zeleza, Manufacturing African Studies.
8. Huggins, Afro-American Studies; Hall, In the Vineyard; Rojas, From Black Power to 
Black Studies; Grady-Willis, Challenging US Apartheid, 143–68; Joseph, “Black Studies. ”
9. On the isolation and the decline of the Briti sh African studies establishment, see 
Bundy, “Continuing a Conversation”; Fyfe, “Emergence and Evolution of African Stud-
ies”; Hodder-Williams, “ African Studies”; and McCracken, “ African History in British 
Universities. ”
10. See, for example, Asante, Afrocentric Idea. Asante was widely attacked in the culture 
wars of the 1990s, as in Howe, Afrocentrism. Bernal was also targeted for his criticism of 
European classicists’ treatment of Africa in his Black Athena. For Bernal’s critics, see 
Lefkowitz and Rogers, Black Athena Revisited, along with Bernal’s response in Moore, 
Black Athena Writes Back.
michael o. west & william g. martin
36


--- PAGE 56 ---
11. On the revival and extension of the key term “diaspora,” see Brock, “ African 
[Diaspora] Studies”; Palmer, “Defining and Studying”; Patterson and Kelley, “Unfin-
ished Migrations”; Manning, “ Africa and the African Diaspora”; Harris, “Expanding the 
Scope”; Alpers, “Recollecting Africa”; Ak yeampong, “ Africans in the Diaspora”; and 
Zeleza, “Rewriting the African Diaspora. ”
12. The phrase is borrowed from St. Clair Drake, who in turn partly riffs on Du Bois. 
See Drake, Black Folk Here and There, and Du Bois, Black Folk.
13. The critique began at the Pan-African Conference of 1900 and continued in other 
forums in the years leading up to World War I, including the Universal Races Congress. 
See Mathurin, Henry Sylvester Williams; Geiss, Pan-African Movement; and the Radical 
History Review special issue on the First Universal Races Congress of 1911.
14. Scott, “Common Wind”; Santiago-Valles, “World-Historical Ties. ”
15. See, for example, Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts ; Craton, Testing the 
Chains; and Price, Maroon Societies.
16. Quarles, The Negro; Frey, Water from the Rock; Rael, Black Identity; Nash, Forgotten 
Fifth; Egerton, Death or Liberty.
17. Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom, 57–72.
18. Sanneh, Abolitionists Abroad; Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom; Rael, Black Identity;
Byrd, Captives and Voyagers.
19. Callahan, T alking Book; Wimbush, African Americans and the Bible; Kidd, Forging 
of Races, 247–70.
20. Bebbington, Evangelicalism; Ditchfield, Evangelical Revival; Hempton, Methodism;
Kidd, Great Awakening.
21. Raboteau, Slave Religion; Frey and Wood, Come Shouting to Zion. The Evangelical 
Revival was not the first serious attempt to convert enslaved Africans to Protestant Chris-
tianity. A previous revival in the Danish Caribbean, one in which the black missionary 
Rebecca was centrally involved, proved quite successful. But, in contrast to the black 
internationalism that would become associated with the Evangelical Revival, “Rebecca’s 
revival” developed no sustained critique of black oppression or offered any vision of black 
liberation. See Sensbach, Rebecca’ s Revival.
22. Rout, African Experience; Palmer, Slaves of the White God; Thornton, Africa and 
Africans; Sweet, Recreating Africa.
23. Acts 17:26.
24. It is cited, for instance, in Cugoano, “Thoughts and Sentiments,” 140, and Equiano, 
“Interesting Narrative,” 178.
25. See also Frey, Water from the Rock.
26. The Declaration of Independence denounced the British monarch because, among 
other reasons, he “excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to 
bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the me rciless Indian Savages, whose known 
rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions. ” The 
reference to “domestic insurrections” recalled the proclamation of Lord Dunmore, the 
royal governor of Virginia, who offered slaves freedom in return for joining the British 
army.
27. In addition to our chapter below, for the broad scholarly treatment of the Haitian
introduction
37


--- PAGE 57 ---
Revolution, see, most notably, James, Black Jacobins ; Fick, Making of Haiti; Geggus, 
Haitian Revolutionary Studies; and Dubois, Avengers.
28. See, most famously, Gilroy, Black Atlantic. But see, too, Edwards, Practice of 
Diaspora, which artfully bridges the Anglophone/Francophone divide.
29. T rouillot, Silencing the Past, 70–101.
30. Scott, “Common Wind. ”
31. The sonnet is titled “T o T oussaint Louverture. ” See <http://thelouvertureproject
.org/index.php?title=T o_T oussaint_Louverture_-_poem_by_Wordsworth>.
TOUSSAINT , the most unhappy man of men!
Whether the whistling Rustic tend his plough
Within thy hearing, or thy head be now
Pillowed in some deep dungeon’s earless den;
O miserable Chieftain! where and when
Wilt thou find patience? Y et die not; do thou
Wear rather in thy bonds a cheerful brow:
Though fallen thyself, never to rise again,
Live, and take comfort. Thou hast left behind
Powers that will work for thee; air, earth, and skies;
There’s not a breathing of the common wind
That will forget thee; thou hast great allies;
Thy friends are exultations, agonies,
And love, and man’s unconquerable mind.
32. Fyfe, History of Sierra Leone; Shick, Behold the Promised Land; Zachernuk, Colonial 
Subjects.
33. Farwell, Great War; Strachan, First World War; Journal of African History, special 
issue; Echenberg, Colonial Conscripts; Page, Chiwaya War.
34. Howe, Race, War, and Nationalism; Sweeney, History of the American Negro ;
Barbeau and Henri, Unknown Soldiers.
35. T rotter, Great Migration; Harrison, Black Exodus.
36. Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations; James, Holding aloft the Banner.
37. Ferrell, Woodrow Wilson.
38. Kornweibel, “Seeing Red”; Schneider, We R eturn Fighting.
39. May and Cohen, “Interaction”; Jenkinson, “Glasgow Race”; Stovall, “Colour Blind 
France?”; Wilson, “Britain’s Red Summer. ”
40. See also Putnam, Company They Kept.
41. The standard works on Garveyism include Vincent, Black Power; Martin, Race 
First; Hill, Marcus Garvey; Stein, World; and Lewis and Bryan, Garvey. Recent specialized 
studies include Rolinson, Grassroots Garveyism, and Harold, Rise and Fall. There is also 
Colin Grant’s recent biography, which, although offering few new revelations, is highly 
readable and engaging, if satirical at points. See Grant, Negro with a Hat.
42. Hill and Pirio, “‘ Africa for the Africans’”; Rolinson, Grassroots Garveyism;
Okonkwo, “Garvey Movement”; Williams, “Garveyism”; West, “Seeds Are Sown”; 
Robaina, “Marcus Garvey in Cuba”; Baba Kake, “L’influence”; Garcia Dominguez, 
“Garvey and Cuba. ”
michael o. west & william g. martin
38


--- PAGE 58 ---
43. The metaphor has been popularized of late in Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-
Headed Hydra.
44. Adeleke, UnAfrican Americans, accuses African American supporters of Providen-
tial Design of complicity in European colonialism and of even being its advance guards. 
The censure of Providential Design is fair enough, if a tad ahistorical, but the African 
Americans had nothing like the power and influence Adeleke ascribes to them. The 
critique further fails to note that many among the first generation of Western-missionary-
educated continental Africans, notably in the British colonies, also subscribed to Provi-
dential Design, albeit with an emphasis on the indigenous rather than the external black 
agency. Hence its currency with black South Africans, among others. See, for example, 
Willan, Sol Platjee, and Zachernuk, Colonial Subjects.
45. Crummell, Future of Africa; Moses, Alexander Crummell; Blyden, Christianity, 
Islam, and the Negro Race; Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden.
46. T aylor, Veiled Gar vey; Martin, Amy Ashwood Garvey; Bair, “‘Ethiopia Shall Stretch 
Forth’”; Satter, “Marcus Garvey”; Martin, “Women in the Garvey Movement”; Ford-
Smith, “Women and the Garvey Movement in Jamaica”; McDuffie, “Black Women”; 
Martin, Poetical Works.
47. Quoted in Harold, Rise and Fall, 45.
48. This includes the black underworld, most notably Casper Holstein. The top 
“numbers” man in Harlem, Holstein was also patron of the arts; defender of his native 
Virgin Islands against the United States, which had recently acquired the islands from 
the Dutch; supporter of the UNIA; and frequent contributor to the Negro World, largely 
on the Virgin Islands question. See Grant, Negro with a Hat, 235–36.
49. Burkett, Garveyism as a Religious Movement ; T erry-Thompson, History; New-
man, “Origins. ” On the African Orthodox Church in Africa, see Natsoulas, “Patriarch 
McGuire”; Johnson, Archbishop Daniel William Alexander; Wentink, “Orthodox Church”; 
and West, “Ethiopianism and Colonialism. ”
50. Bair, “‘Ethiopia Shall Stretch Forth. ’”
51. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism; Lincoln, Black Muslims; Clegg, Original Man ;
Turner, Islam in the African American Experience ; Gomez, Black Crescent; Curtis, Black 
Muslim Religion.
52. Gomez, Black Crescent, 128–275.
53. Turner, Islam in the African American Experience, 47–67, 109–46.
54. On the ABB, see Makalani, “For the Liberation. ”
55. Valentine, “Two Religions. ” “C. Valentine” was a pseudonym for the ABB leader 
and Crusader editor Cyril Briggs. Other black radicals, such as the learned Hubert Har-
rison, also evinced a keen interest in and knowledge of Islam. See, for example, Perry, 
Hubert Harrison Reader, 310–19. See also Jeffrey Perry’s biography, Hubert Harrison.
56. Post, “Bible as Ideology”; Hill, “Dread History”; Barrett, Rastafarians; Campbell, 
Rasta and Resistance; Murrell, Spencer, and McFarlane, Chanting Down Babylon; Zips, 
Rastafari.
57. Asante, Pan-African Protest; Scott, Sons of Sheba’s Race; Harris, African-American 
Reactions. The assault on Ethiopia, which for the black internationalists marked the onset 
of World War II, would have a profound effect on black politics in various localities. As is 
often the case, the literature on the United States is richest; see, for example, Plummer, 
introduction
39


--- PAGE 59 ---
Rising Wind; Von Eschen, Race against Empire; and Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be 
Africans.
58. Ali, Holy Koran.
59. Geiss, Pan-African Movement, 229–62; Langley, Pan-Africanism and Nationalism,
58–88; Esedebe, Pan-Africanism, 80–94; Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois, 37–84.
60. On this point see, most authoritatively, Hill, “Introduction. ”
61. See, for example, Garvey, “Exposé of the Caste System,” and Du Bois, “Back to 
Africa. ”
62. Daily Worker, August 30, 1927.
63. The term, apparently an old one, appears in Haywood, Black Bolshevik.
64. On the Comintern, see Degras, Communist International.
65. See, for example, Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia , and Klehr, 
Haynes, and Anderson, Soviet World of American Communism.
66. Padmore, Life and Struggles, 125–26 (emphasis in original).
67. See, for example, Gallicchio, African American Encounter.
68. On Padmore, see Hooker, Black Revolutionary. On Padmore, Kouyaté, black inter-
nationalism, and communism, see Edwards, Practice of Diaspora, 241–305.
69. Naison, Communists in Harlem; Kelley, Hammer and Hoe; Solomon, Cry Was 
Unity; Maxwell, New Negro, Old Left; Mullen and Smethurst, Left of the Color Line; Ellis 
and Sechaba, Comrades against Apartheid; Drew, South Africa’s Radical Tradition; David-
son, Filatova, Gorodnov, and Johns, South Africa and the Communist International.
70. James, Holding aloft the Banner, 155–84; Solomon, Cry Was Unity, 3–21.
71. McDuffie, “Long Journeys” and “Black Women Radicals”; Turner, Caribbean Cru-
saders and the Harlem Renaissance; Sherwood, Claudia Jones; Davies, Left of Karl Marx.
72. The connection between Gandhism and black internationalism is well exemplified 
in the life and labor of the African American Bill Sutherland, who expatriated to Ghana 
in the 1950s and moved on to T anzania in the 1960s, working for both governments in the 
process. He was also engaged with anticolonial and peace (including nuclear prolifera-
tion) struggles and activists in Africa, the United States, and Europe. See Sutherland and 
Meyer, Guns and Gandhi in Africa; Sutherland, “Bill Sutherland”; and Gaines, American 
Africans in Ghana. On Gandhi and South Africa, see Brown and Prozesky, Gandhi and 
South Africa, and Swan, Gandhi.
73. Geiss, Pan-African Movement, 385–408; Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism?,
152–70; Adi and Sherwood, 1945 Manchester Pan-African Congress.
74. Among the challenges were Cold War–inspired, anticommunist attacks on move-
ments and individuals most committed to radical change and black solidarity across 
national boundaries, including blacklistings, expulsions, deportations, and, in the case 
of British Guiana (Guyana), the termination of self-rule under colonial tutelage. Such 
attacks were carried out both by colonial and national powers and by nationalist move-
ments fearful of being red-baited. See, variously, Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Commu-
nism?; Morgenthau, Political Parties; Anderson, Eyes off the Prize; Horne, Black and Red
and Red Seas; Duberman, Paul Robeson; Smith, Becoming Something; and Rabe, U.S. 
Intervention in British Guiana.
75. Matthew 6:33: “But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all 
michael o. west & william g. martin
40


--- PAGE 60 ---
these things shall be added unto you. ” For Nkrumah’s own account of the rise of Ghana, 
see his Ghana. The standard scholarly treatment is Austin, Politics in Ghana.
76. Lumumba, “Independence Day Speech. ”
77. De Witte, Assassination of Lumumba.
78. See, among others, Horne, Savage War of Peace; Quandt, Revolution and Political 
Leadership; Amrane and Djamila, Femmes en combat.
79. Anderson, Histories of the Hanged; Elkins, Imperial Reckoning; Presley, Kikuyu 
Women.
80. Birmingham and Ranger, “Settlers and Liberators in the South”; Davidson, People’s 
Cause.
81. Lodge, Black Politics in South Africa, 231–60.
82. Fanon, Wretched of the Earth, 148–205.
83. Cabral, Revolution in Guinea and Return to the Source.
84. Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon.
85. Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks.
86. Malcolm X et al., “Program of the Organization of Afro-American Unity,” 2.
87. On the radicalization of SNCC, see Carson, In Struggle; Payne, I’ve Got the Light 
of Freedom; and Carmichael with Thelwell, Ready for the Revolution. For a guide to the 
growing literature on Black Power (still largely on the United States), see the historio-
graphical surveys by Joseph, “Introduction,” and Self, “Black Panther Party. ” As these 
surveys note, many of the hallmark elements of the radical black 1960s, such as armed 
self-defense and the critique of state power, predated the mid-1960s (on this last point, 
see also Wendt, “Protection or Path?”). For internationalist perspectives on the period, 
see Edmondson, “Internationalization of Black Power”; Singh, “Black Panthers”; Kelley, 
“Stormy Weather”; Wilkins, “Making of Black Internationalists” and “‘In the Belly’”; and 
Johnson, Revolutionaries, 131–72.
88. The party’s misogyny and homophobia are cast wide in Wallace, Black Macho and 
the Myth. See, by contrast, the perspective of former Panther Party chair Elaine Brown, 
T aste of Power; Cleaver, “Women, Power, and Revolution”; and more broadly, contrasting 
the United States and the party, Matthews, “‘No One Ever Asks,’” and Brown, Fighting 
for US.
89. Newton, “Women’s Liberation and Gay Liberation Movements. ”
90. On black and other feminisms of the per iod, see Collier-Thomas and Franklin, 
Sisters in the Struggle; Matthews, “‘No One Ever Asks’”; Ward, “Third World Women’s 
Alliance”; Springer, Living for the Revolution; and Roth, Separate Roads to Feminism. For 
an overview that places gender at the center of the movement, see Grady-Willis, Chal-
lenging US Apartheid.
91. Newton, “Message to the Vietnamese,” 595.
92. The international connections of the Black Panther Party are summarized in 
Clemons and Jones, “Global Solidarity,” and Cleaver, “Back to Africa. ” See also Carmi-
chael with Thelwell, Ready for the Revolution; Marquese, Redemption Song; Tyson, Radio 
Free Dixie; and Woodard, Nation within a Nation.
93. Hiro, Black British, 44; James and Harris, Inside Babylon.
94. See Obi Egbuna’s biography, Destroy This T emple.
introduction
41


--- PAGE 61 ---
95. Shukra, Changing Pattern of Black Politics, 24–25.
96. Hiro, Black British, 64.
97. Sivanandan, Communities of Resistance, 66 (emphasis in original).
98. Sykes, “Opening Statement,” 11–12.
99. Hanchard, Orpheus and Power; Leal, “Fárígá/Ifaradá”; Mitchell, “Blacks and the 
Abertura Democrática”; Fontaine, “T ransnational Relations and Racial Mobilization. ”
100. Gonzalez, “Unified Black Movement. ” For the postemancipation backdrop to 
these developments, see Butler, Freedoms Given.
101. Nascimento, Pan-Africanism and South America, 1.
102. Gerhart, Black Power in South Africa, 273.
103. Biko, I Write What I Like, especially the chapter “White Racism and Black Con-
sciousness,” 61–72.
104. South African Students’ Organization, “South African Students’ Organization 
Amended Constitution,” C210.
105. Hartmann, Race, Culture, and the Revolt of the Black Athlete.
106. Georgakas and Surkin, Detroit, I Do Mind Dying; Geschwender, “Marxist-Leninist 
Organization. ”
107. Hanna and Hanna, “Cynical Nationalists,” 54–55.
108. Cited in Hanna, “Student Protest in Independent Africa,” 180; for an overview, 
see Legum, “Y ear of the Students. ”
109. Legum, “Y ear of the Students,” A9.
110. Hanna, Hanna, and Sauer, “ Active Minority,” esp. 71–78; Dirlik, “Third World in 
1968. ”
111. Hanna and Hanna, “Cynical Nationalists,” 53; Legum, “Y ear of the Students,” A12, 
A14, A26.
112. See, among others, Meeks, Radical Caribbean; Oxaal, Black Intellectuals; Nettle-
ford, Identity, Race, and Protest; and Thomas, Modern Blackness.
113. On Rodney, see Alpers and Fontaine, Walter Rodney; Bogues, Black Heretics,
125–50; Lewis, Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political Thought; and Rohlehr, Transgres-
sion, 338–73.
114. Austin, “ All Roads Led to Montreal. ”
115. Ibid.; Forsythe, Let the Niggers Burn!
116. Meeks, “1970 Revolution. ”
117. Millette, “Guerrilla War in T rinidad. ”
118. Abraham, “Exceptional Victories”; Lewis, Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political 
Thought, 202–53; Westmaas, “Resisting Orthodoxy. ”
119. Gerhart, Black Power in South Africa, 257–316.
120. Meeks, Caribbean Revolutions and Revolutionary Theory, 129–86.
121. Nascimento, Pan-Africanism and South America, 137. On the sixth Pan-African 
Congress, see also Rodney, “T owards the Sixth Pan-African Congress,” and Fuller, 
“Notes. ” Born George Griffith in Guyana, Makonnen eventually made his way to En-
gland, where he came to prominence during the 1935 Italian invasion of Ethiopia, when 
he assumed the persona of an Ethiopian prince (ras), changing his name to Ras Makon-
nen. His restaurants served the dual funct ion of meeting places and eating houses for 
pan-Africanists in England during the interw ar years. Unlike Queen Mother Moore, 
michael o. west & william g. martin
42


--- PAGE 62 ---
Makonnen left a published testament of his pe rsonal and political peregrinations. See 
his Pan-Africanism from Within.
122. Meeks discusses such views in “1970 Revolution. ”
123. James, “Walter Rodney”; Bogues, Black Heretics, 143–46.
124. See Wallace, Black Macho and the Myth; Brown, T aste of Power; and for Africa, 
Campbell, Reclaiming Zimbabwe.
125. This reflects the long-standing classification, based on the writings of Harold 
Cruse, dividing the integrationist tradition from the nationalist tradition and, subse-
quently, cultural nationalists from political nationalists. See Cruse, Crisis of the Negro 
Intellectual; see also Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon, 292–308, and Bush, We Are Not 
What We Seem, 194–213.
126. Marx, Lessons of Struggle, 91–105; Lodge, Black Politics in South Africa, 321–62.
127. Grady-Willis, “Black Panther Party”; Churchill, “‘T o Disrupt, Discredit, and De-
stroy’”; Churchill and Vander Wall, COINTELPRO Papers.
128. West, “Walter Rodney and Black Power. ”
129. Harvey, Brief History of Neoliberalism.
130. Balibar, “Is There a ‘Neo-Racism’?”
131. The literature is diffuse and expanding. See, for example, Garland, Culture of Con-
trol; Sudbury, Global Lockdown; and Wacquant, Deadly Symbiosis.
132. See Dyson, Holler If You Hear Me; Keeling, “‘Homegrown Revolutionary’?”; 
Cobb, T o the Break of Dawn; and as memoir, Bastfield, Back in the Day.
133. Allen, “Making the Strong Survive”; Rose, Black Noise, 99–125; Kelley, “Kickin’ 
Reality”; Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop; Neal, What The Music Said, 134–35; Basu and 
Lemelle, Vinyl Ain’t Final. For a discussion of the broader cultural context in which hip 
hop emerged, see Cheney, Brothers Gonna Work It Out.
134. Madhubuti and Karenga, Million Man March/Day of Absence ; West, “Like a 
River. ”
135. Cha-Jua, “Black Radical Congress”; Zerai and Campbell, “Black Radical 
Congress.”
136. Woodard, “ Amiri Baraka. ”
137. Abdul-Raheem, Pan-Africanism; Bankie, Globalising Africans.
138. In addition to Marc Perry’s chapter, on these and related instances, see the essays 
in Basu and Lemelle, Vinyl Ain’t Final; Durand, Black, Blanc, Beur (France); West-Durán, 
“Rap’s Diasporic Dialogues” (Cuba); and Condry, Hip-Hop Japan.
139. Compare, for example, the interpretation of Kelley’s “Kickin’ Reality,” which 
celebrates and defends black youth culture, with Queely’s more critical stance in “Hip 
Hop”; see also Lipsitz, Dangerous Crossroads.
140. See, for example, the Black Eyed Peas, “Going Gone. ”
141. As in this sample from the Pete Rock and Black Ice collaboration, “T ruth Is”:
So the business feed you all the weed and ecstasy
and a little bit of paper to provide some pacification
from all the bullshit frustration they serve you
Meanwhile they corrupt your perception of what the real is
See they takin’ all our businessmen, and givin’ ’em the mindsets of drug dealers
introduction
43


--- PAGE 63 ---
T ook all our messengers, made ’em rappers
just flappin’ they jaws afraid to admit their treason
T ook all our soldiers for the cause, made ’em killers for no reason. . . .
I just know what the truth is
Been intertwined in this puddin’ for ’bout a year now so I know where the proof is
See, it lines these midtown Manhattan skyscrapers
where former hustlers like myself sign papers
and pull off fucked capers like, 16 infamous stars of the time
They got us choppin’ and baggin’ and
servin’ that shit to niggaz 16 bars at a time now . . . .
michael o. west & william g. martin
44


--- PAGE 64 ---
General Toussaint Louverture (1743–1803), as conceived by Jacob 
Lawrence. Leader of the Haitian Revolution, Toussaint Louverture was 
born into slavery but led African armies that defeated French, British, 
and Spanish forces and abolished slavery in Haiti and Santo Domingo. 
He was eventually captured and shipped to a cold and damp prison 
fortress in France, where he died in solitary conﬁnement. (Jacob 
Lawrence, “General Toussaint L’Ouverture” [1986], ©2009 The Jacob 
and Gwendolyn Lawrence Foundation, Seattle/Artists Rights Society 
[ARS], New York)
part 1


--- PAGE 65 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 66 ---
The American Revolution and the Creation of a
Global African World
sylvia frey
The second half of the eighteenth centur y was a period of breathtaking his-
torical change. It was an era in which peoples and ideas, commodities and 
cultures, crossed and recrossed regional and national boundaries from multiple 
corners of the world, transforming global demographics, building new Atlantic 
economies, and making connections in a variety of arenas/uRELfk.deconomic, politi-
cal, linguistic, and religious. Africa was among the key points of circulation in 
this emerging world order, and African peoples made up a disproportionately 
large share of the human cargoes that traversed global waters. The African 
continent and its inhabitants were centrally involved in a vast process with 
overlapping and interacting parts, some of which were engaged in struggles 
against slavery and the expansion of capitalist modes of production. Within 
those transnational circuits lay the foundations of black internationalism, or 
pan-Africanism.
In this essay I argue that the era of the American Revolution played a 
seminal role in the development and spread of pan-Africanism. By contrast, 
North American historiography usually locates the origins of pan-Africanism 
in the nineteenth century, with the rise of emigration and colonization move-
ments. An even more constricted temporal approach marks pan-Africanism 
as a twentieth-century phenomenon, associating it with W. E. B. Du Bois and 
the five Pan-African Congresses (1919, 1921, 1923, 1927, and 1945), along with 
Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association.1 In fact, 
African Americans of the American Revolutionary era played a significant part 
in the foundational wave of pan-Africanism: they helped to create and spread a 
diasporic consciousness unified by a collective memory of a lost homeland.
Definitional problems bedevil the subject of pan-Africanism. I use the 
term in the sense suggested by George Shepperson, who distinguished Pan-


--- PAGE 67 ---
Africanism as a “clearly recognized movement associated with the five Pan-
African Congresses” from pan-Africanism as “a group of movements, many 
very ephemeral,” in which cultural elements often predominate.2 My concep-
tual boundaries are the Black Atlantic created by the Atlantic slave trade, as 
distinct from the African Diaspora, a term that refers to the worldwide migra-
tion of African peoples, which began some 1,500 years before the emergence 
of the Atlantic diaspora.3
The phenomenon of pan-Africanism did not sprout by happenstance but 
was driven by ideological forces with truly complex origins. Its lineage can be 
traced to three main sources: evangelical Protestantism, whose affirmation 
of a millenarian future was a source of inspiration and promise; the era of 
the American Revolution, when the messianic destiny seemed to be at hand; 
and the black writers whose living memories of Africa served as a cultural 
anchor for exiled African peoples. An essential first step in the development 
of pan-Africanism was the emergence of a corporate African or racial identity 
in place of numerous ethnic identities. This occurred at different rates in dif-
ferent places, developed in multiple centers and institutional structures, and 
drew from diverse sources, the threads of which twisted into a knot during the 
tumultuous era of the American Revolution. For generations of enslaved men 
and women born in Africa, memory of the homeland remained strong and 
vital. Such memory was not just visibly present in architecture and dance but 
was also preserved aurally in language and music. African consciousness faded 
more quickly in slave societies that ceased to import slaves directly from Africa 
early, such as Virginia and Barbados. As direct imports slowed and the slave 
trade gradually ended, firsthand knowledge of Africa faded. Africa, however, 
lingered in the collective memory secretly passed down through the genera-
tions, whispered as the home of the ancestors and a place of freedom, once 
upon a time. Indeed, it seemed that the greater the distance in time, and the 
more removed from its physical reality, the more compelling Africa became 
as a symbol for people exiled from their homelands.
Evangelical Pan-Africanism, Black Seafaring, 
and the New Black Identity
A preliminary step in the rise of pan-Africanism began in the eighteenth cen-
tury, with the forging of a spiritual community within autonomous black 
churches that sprung up throughout the Caribbean and North America under 
black leadership during the period of international revivalism.4 Evangelical 
sylvia frey
48


--- PAGE 68 ---
revivalism was black and white, slave and free, more female than male, and 
unfolded within wide regional and transatlantic networks. At just about the 
time that John Wesley launched the Methodist movement in England, the 
Moravians, a pietistic offshoot of the Lutheran Church, inaugurated a revolu-
tionary system of evangelization known as itinerancy. One of the pioneers of 
that system was a Dutch-speaking former slave named Rebecca Protten. Born 
in the Caribbean, Rebecca was in the vanguard of the first phase of a trans-
atlantic black evangelical movement that had its genesis in white evangelical 
Protestantism but developed its own distinctive theology and ritual practices 
and provided some of the core beliefs of the black Atlantic revolutionary tradi-
tion. Decades before such better-known black evangelists as Olaudah Equiano, 
John Marrant, John Jea, George Liele, and David George began their world-
wide itinerancy, Rebecca had traveled thousands of miles over two continents 
and several islands, broadcasting the evangelical message of divine deliverance 
from the bonds of sin.5
Rebecca is unique, but her story is not. David Margate was almost certainly 
the only black British missionary to work in the American colonies and quite 
possibly the first to articulate in unequivocal terms the biblical story of Exodus 
as both a spiritual pilgrimage and literal freedom from captivity, an idea that be-
came a crucial motif in black diasporic discourse. “David the African” arrived in 
Charleston, South Carolina, in 1775. Claiming he was a second Moses “called to 
deliver his people from slavery,” David “not only severely reflected against the 
laws of the Province respecting slaves but even against the thing itself; he also 
compared their state to that of the Israelites during their Egyptian Bondade 
[sic]. ” David preached in South Carolina only seven months before he had to 
be spirited out of the colony to escape a lynch mob. But he had planted the seed 
of African consciousness and antislavery that continued to flower in all kinds 
of ways and in a variety of different contexts.6 The journey from international 
evangelical revivalism to evangelical pan-Africanism had begun.
One of the forces driving the change was the black seafaring tradition. It 
is impossible to exaggerate the importance of black sailors in the creation of 
a diasporic consciousness. Black seafaring men were broadcasters of news, 
creators of a black literary tradition, and prime movers of rebellion. By the 
middle of the eighteenth century, the maritime industry employed a significant 
percentage of the Atlantic male slave populations as sailors, wharf workers, 
or fishermen.7 Sailing vessels functioned as global conveyor belts circulating 
around ocean basins, connecting Caribbean island communities to the great 
metropolitan ports of Europe, the docks of Atlantic North America, and the 
The Creation of a Global African World
49


--- PAGE 69 ---
village markets and forts of Atlantic Africa. There were remarkable men among 
the black crews, pioneers in the antislavery movement and architects of a new 
diasporic consciousness formed around a remembrance of Africa.
Olaudah Equiano, John Jea, John Marrant, and others were not just sailors 
but, equally important, Christian ministers. In their professional identities as 
sailors, merchant mariners, fishermen, and preachers, they circulated through 
what Paul Gilroy calls “the black Atlantic world. ”8 Men like Jea, who signed on 
as a ship’s cook, were as much part of the transnational circuit of evangelical 
preachers as John Wesley and George Whitefield, who launched the interna-
tional movement known as the Great Awakening. Sailors wrote the first six 
autobiographies of blacks published in English before 1800. They included 
celebrated figures like Equiano, Marrant, Jea, Briton Hammon, Quobna Ot-
tobah Cugoano, James Albert Ukawsaw Gronniosaw, and Paul Cuffe. Their 
writings speak of a new sense of energy and power derived for the most part 
from a variety of religious and secular ideas, and they collectively contributed 
in major ways to shifting consciousness away from ethnicity and toward a col-
lective psyche.9
Equiano embodied that experience, and his memoir served as a fascinating 
chapter in the development of a black diasporic consciousness. His ethnic or 
national identity was fluid. Whereas Jea and Cugoano identified closely with 
their native land, Equiano was not really from any single place, but an inter-
national figure. His Interesting Narrative related his personal journey from his 
birth in 1745 in Benin, Africa, to his kidnapping at age eleven. Subsequently he 
became, like so many other pan-African pioneers, a sort of vagabond, moving 
from country to country as an enslaved sailor, his name changing with the 
same frequency as he changed owners and crossed cultural and geographic 
boundaries/uRELfk.dfrom Michael to Jacob to Gustavus Vassa, the last the name he 
came to use most often.10
Equiano’s writings are an extraterritorial mirror on pan-Africanism, more 
a state of mind than a specific place. Like Briton Hammon, Equiano demon-
strated no unified sense of racial identity; if anything, he came to view himself 
as both African and European, an Afro-Bri ton perhaps.11 In describing his 
native country and his fellow Ibos, Equiano used personal pronouns to char-
acterize a certain “collective belonging,” which referred to his identity either 
or both as a European and as an African. Gradually, however, as his travels as 
a mariner took him through the Caribbea n islands, he came to experience a 
sense of solidarity with the sufferings of enslaved people and to assign to them 
a collective identity as “ Africans. ” By the time he published his autobiography 
sylvia frey
50


--- PAGE 70 ---
in 1789, Equiano had finally come to understand himself as African and to 
return to the use of his Ibo name, Olaudah Equiano.
As Equiano’s case demonstrates, the appropriation of Christianity by slaves 
and free black men and women did not obliterate their African identity. Rather, 
Christianity helped them to forge a new pan-African identity out of disparate 
and often antagonistic ethnic identities. Cugoano probably spoke for many 
Africans of the diaspora who asserted themselves as Christians. Kidnapped 
from his birthplace in the Fanti region of modern-day Ghana in 1770 and 
enslaved in the Caribbean for two years, Cugoano was brought to England 
in 1772, at age fifteen. A year later he was baptized. Cugoano accepted the 
Christian name of John Stewart as part of his ritual incorporation into the 
church but insisted it did not alter his ethnic identity: “Christianity does not 
require that we should be deprived of our personal name, or the name of our 
ancestors, but it may very fitly add another name unto us, Christian, or one 
anointed. ”12 The same cultural past that was so crucial to Cugoano’s sense of 
personal identity also centrally determined a collective sense of historical iden-
tity for diasporan Africans as a whole. The naming of black institutions offers a 
window onto that collective identity. It is impossible to say exactly when black 
churches in the United States began to assume racially specific designations, 
but with such names as the First African Baptist Church of Savannah, Georgia, 
in 1775, African Americans celebrated both an African heritage and a Christian 
identity.13
For enslaved people, becoming Christian was more than simply a meta-
phorical escape from the bonds of sin into the land of spiritual freedom. Little 
by little, the connection between religion and politics emerged, and religious 
identity began to meld with a national, African American one. The American 
Revolutionary era was a key moment in that transformation. The congru-
ence of an evangelical idiom with secular republican ideology dramatically 
shifted the intellectual basis and the actual grounds for the construction of 
pan-Africanism. Petitions, sermons, and the writings of the emerging black 
leadership reflected that process. In them are found the historical antecedents 
for what Marcus Garvey and various nineteenth- and twentieth-century black 
intellectuals would preach: race pride, African redemption, and the return to 
Africa, in some cases in spiritual form, in others physical.
Some of the embryonic pan-African tendencies are apparent in slave peti-
tions of the American Revolutionary era. All of them tentatively contemplated 
an unfamiliar possibility, a return of freedom. Some contained seemingly mod-
est notions of what freedom meant and what to do with it. Most made it clear 
The Creation of a Global African World
51


--- PAGE 71 ---
that enslaved people were cognizant of the antislavery principles articulated by 
churchmen and Revolutionary leaders, on one hand, and of British policies, on 
the other. The petitions marked the first phase in the development of an aboli-
tionist movement. Black protests against slavery moved in tandem with white 
antislavery arguments, the two mutually influencing each other. In affirming 
the natural right of enslaved people to freedom, the petitions universalized 
the Revolutionary principles of liberty and equality. Some of the documents 
defined behavioral and moral values differ ent from those practiced by white 
Americans; in many cases, they implied that white Americans had corrupted 
Christian teaching. This sense of spiritual superiority foreshadowed race pride 
and race memory and anticipated the politicization of spiritual salvation.
The back-to-Africa movement is clearly evident in a 1773 petition to the 
legislature of Massachusetts by four Boston slaves, Peter Bestes, Sambo Free-
man, Chester Joie, and Felix Holbrook. The petitioners identified themselves 
as “Africans,” suggesting that they saw Africa as their historic homeland and a 
place to which they wished to return after years in exile. Their request for per-
mission to work one day a week for themselves to “procure money to transport 
ourselves to some part of the coast of Africa, where we propose a settlement,” 
made them the ideological forebears of Prince Hall, Paul Cuffe, and Marcus 
Garvey.14 Though embryonic in form, this search for justice and representation 
in a racially hierarchical society would, over the course of the next decade, be-
come the mission and motivation of emerging black politics in the Atlantic.
The American Revolution, Revolutionary Pan-Africanism, 
and Emigrants of Revolution
Eighteenth-century African consciousness was not limited to inchoate expres-
sions in petitions and sermons. Side by side with the development of a cul-
tural and essentially nonviolent diasporic consciousness emerged a tradition 
of armed resistance; thus a double heritage was created. Both traditions/uRELfk.dthe
nonviolent and the revolutionary/uRELfk.ddrew from Christian theology, even though 
the two were quite at odds with each other in important ways.
No single event of the American Revolutionary era was more important 
in constructing a consciousness of kind, and in laying the basis for revolu-
tionary pan-Africanism, than the organization of the Ethiopian Regiment by 
Virginia’s colonial governor, Lord Dunmore, who offered freedom to slaves 
who joined the fight on the British side. Dunmore’s designation of his black 
volunteers as “Ethiopian” represented a defining moment in the history of 
sylvia frey
52


--- PAGE 72 ---
the black diaspora’s response to Africa. Since ancient times, the word “Ethio-
pian” referred to all of Africa and all Africans, not simply those from northeast 
Africa. Biblical references to Ethiopia in Psalm 68:31 proclaim that “Princes 
shall come out of Egypt, and Ethiopia shall soon stretch forth her hands unto 
God. ” Whether Dunmore consciously used the term to imply that enslaved 
Africans would soon be free is, of cour se, purely conjectural. Regardless, the 
Ethiopian Regiment of armed black men fearlessly demanding “Liberty to 
Slaves” was visual language that needed no translation. It asserted a common 
heritage shared by all peoples of African descent and explicitly linked New 
World blacks to Africa. As such, the Ethiopian Regiment was a key factor in 
both the development of an African American diasporic consciousness and 
the history of pan-Africanism.15
The organization of the Ethiopian Regiment, furthermore, was an arche-
typal event in the history of a black revolutionary tradition. It marked the 
incorporation of the Exodus story into a militant self-liberation ideology that 
projected an image of the enslaved man as a latter-day Moses and, more broadly, 
proclaimed black people as agents of their own fate, responsible for the fulfill-
ment of the biblical promise of deliverance.16 That historical development not 
only heightened African American participation in the Revolutionary War; it 
also foreshadowed a succession of formidable rebellions in the Caribbean and 
the United States in the nineteenth century.
Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment was eventually defeated, but its remnants 
independently kept alive the tradition of armed resistance. One of the most 
distinguished of those independent fighters, Colonel Tye, formerly Titus, fled 
his Quaker owner in New Jersey when the revolution began. On joining Dun-
more’s regiment, he changed his name to Colonel Tye, thereby signifying his 
personal transformation from slave to warrior-soldier. After Dunmore’s de-
feat at Norfolk, Virginia, in 1776, Colonel Tye retreated to Staten Island, New 
Y ork, with about 100 men, “the remains of the Aetheopian Regiment. ” Tye and 
twenty-four black former British soldiers continued their military service as 
members of the Black Brigade. In 1779 they joined the Queen’s Rangers and 
waged guerrilla warfare in New Y ork and New Jersey, until Tye’s death from a 
gunshot wound.17
For some, like the African-born Thomas Peters, Dunmore’s offer of free-
dom in return for military service opened an actual path back to Africa. A 
member of the Y oruba ethnic group, Peters was captured in what is now Ni-
geria around 1760 and enslaved on a sugar plantation in French Louisiana. 
Beaten, branded, and shackled, he was later sold into North Carolina, where he 
The Creation of a Global African World
53


--- PAGE 73 ---
was working as a millwright when news of Dunmore’s proclamation broke. He 
escaped and joined the Black Guides and Pioneers, small companies of about 
thirty each that were assigned to various noncombatant duties, thus beginning 
a protracted personal struggle that would culminate in the 1790s in his African 
homeland. At the end of the war, Peters was evacuated to Nova Scotia along 
with thousands of other black loyalists, as the black supporters of the British 
cause were called. In Nova Scotia he became the principal spokesman for black 
emigrants dissatisfied with their land allotments and the discrimination they 
encountered at every turn. In 1791 he went to England to plead their case. There 
he met Granville Sharp, the noted British abolitionist, who put him in touch 
with the company that had founded the Sierra Leone colony as a haven for free 
blacks from the British Empire. Peters ended up serving as an intermediary for 
the resettlement of black loyalists from Nova Scotia to Sierra Leone.18
Thomas Peters was an acknowledged leader of the movement to Sierra 
Leone, but the task of articulating the biblical, theological, and historical mean-
ing of the journey was left to John Marr ant. In roughly a hundred sermons 
between 1785 and 1790, Marrant argued that African Americans, including the 
black loyalists who had fled the United States, were “a chosen generation,” “an 
holy nation, a peculiar people” with a divine ordination to restore Zion, God’s 
holy city. His call to face “zion forward” struck a chord of racial consciousness 
among black loyalists in Nova Scotia, coming as it did at the moment when their 
dream of racial utopia had become a nightmare under the combined weight of 
white intimidation, violence, and fraud.19 A similar process was unfolding in 
England, where London’s black community was also expanding on account of 
the global black dispersal in the wake of the American Revolution.
The result was the creation of Sierra Leone as the first permanent resettle-
ment community in Africa for blacks from the diaspora. Its capital city, signifi-
cantly, was named Freetown. Sierra Leone, and Freetown in particular, became 
a physical anchor for a variety of nineteenth-century pan-African projects de-
signed by members of the black revolut ionary generation. These included a 
trading society established by Paul Cuffe, the black nationalist and sea captain, 
to create economic opportunities for “my scattered brethren and fellowmen”; 
the West African Methodist Church, founded by Daniel Coker, cofounder with 
Richard Allen of the African Methodist Episcopal Church; and the American 
Baptist mission movement, led by Lott Carey.
In a significant variation on the same institutional-building theme, Prince 
Hall, a strong advocate of African colonization, “domesticated” the Freetown 
ideal in the United States. He appropriated the history and ritual of Free-
sylvia frey
54


--- PAGE 74 ---
masonry as African history, the rightful legacy of Africans worldwide. In 1775, 
Hall, a Barbadian by birth, and fourteen other free black men joined a Masonic 
lodge attached to the British army in Boston. Rejected by segregated, pro-
slavery white Masonry in the postrevolutionary era, the black Masons struck 
out on their own. Under Hall’s leadership, they secured a full warrant from the 
Grand Lodge in London for their African Lodge, becoming a separate branch 
of Freemasonry in the United States.20 As grand master of the African Lodge, 
Hall subsequently organized and chartered a network of black Masonic lodges 
in Boston, Philadelphia, and Providence.21 Hall also established a direct link-
age between black churches and black Freemasonry, a nexus that became the 
primary institutional vehicle for disseminating ideas of race pride and race 
unity among ordinary black men and women.
African American Freemasonry, furthermore, promoted pan-African con-
sciousness. At Hall’s request, John Marrant, fresh from his itinerancy in Nova 
Scotia, delivered A Sermon to the African Lodge, in which he used sophisticated 
biblical arguments to reconnect historical Africa with African Americans. In 
an appeal to race pride, Marrant reminded his listeners that they, too, were 
descendants of the builders of Solomon’s T emple. The development of a theol-
ogy of social action was the logical and inevitable next step. The resulting pan-
African civil religion, a fusion of the so cial and the spiritual, came into clear 
focus in Hall’s Charge to the Brethren of the African Lodge, which elaborated 
on the theme of Ethiopianism while emphasizing a political mission of racial 
uplift. One of the duties of Masons, Hall to ld his audience, was to “help and 
assist all his fellow-men in distress, let them be of what colour or nation they 
may, yea even our enemies, much more a brother Mason. ”22 Marrant’s Sermon
and Hall’s Charge can, in fact, be read as two parts of a single text. T ogether 
they contain all of the elements later associated with modern black liberation, 
black nationalism, and Afrocentric thought.23
The Black Literary Tradition and the Articulation of 
Evangelical and Revolutionary Pan-Africanism
The link between pan-African consciousne ss and pan-African practice was 
mediated by the black literary tradition. Here, the discourses of John Marrant 
and Prince Hall, along with Richard Allen and Absalom Jones’s 1794 Narrative 
of the Proceedings of the Black People du ring the Late Epidemic in Philadelphia,
represent “the first black texts that publicly expressed a corporate conscious-
ness. ”24 The emergence of a black print tradition in the late eighteenth cen-
The Creation of a Global African World
55


--- PAGE 75 ---
tury was an important factor in shaping and articulating certain global themes 
and in broadening the geographic scope of pan-Africanism, evangelical and 
revolutionary.
The official separation of the thirteen colonies from Britain in 1783 marked 
a new era in the development of an African diasporic consciousness. The chaos 
of the Revolutionary War years created, for the first time, an opportunity for 
people to choose a national identity. T ens of thousands of people of African 
descent who fled to British lines chose to identify themselves as Afro-Britons. 
So, too, did a number of black writers, such as Equiano and Gronniosaw. Oth-
ers opted for a new political identity as African Americans.25
Regardless of national identity, black writers of the generation after the 
American Revolution spoke with one voice in constructing an intellectual ge-
nealogy of an African cultural unity, which was based on two principal biblical 
themes: Ethiopianism and the exodus fr om Egypt. Although modern crit-
ics of the New Y ork slave poet Jupiter Hammon and the African-born Phillis 
Wheatley have complained about their failure to explicitly address issues of 
slavery and race, both affirmed black affinity.26 Despite Hammon’s seeming 
preoccupation with Christian salvation over social action and Wheatley’s ap-
parent preference for Christian America over Africa, their poetry and prose 
represent the biblical beginnings of not only African American literature but 
also a pan-African intellectual tradition linked to a new black global culture. 
One finds in Hammond and Wheatley an awareness that the Bible had been 
used as a tool for the historical oppression of African peoples.
Hammon’s writings set out the major narrative skeins of the evolving black 
thought. The first black writer to describe enslaved people as a separate corpo-
rate nation, he repeatedly referred to his “brethren” as “ African,” “Ethiopian,” 
and “ African by nation” and as “a poor despised nation. ” His distinctive reading 
of sacred texts reenvisioned the landscape of the biblical world and populated 
it with Africans, whose “ancient” history and culture were older than those of 
their masters. Hammon was also the first black writer to establish the connec-
tion between Israel’s bondage and African slavery. His admonition to black 
people to “stand still and see the salvation of God” recalled Moses’ speech to 
the Israelites when he parted the Red Sea: “Fear ye not, stand still, and see the 
salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to day: for the Egyptians who 
ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more for ever” (Exodus 14:13).27
Hammon and Wheatley appropriated the Bible abstractly. Some of their 
black contemporaries went further, mining biblical scriptures, along with natu-
ral rights philosophy, for their liberatory potentials. Writers who belonged to 
sylvia frey
56


--- PAGE 76 ---
this category included John Marrant, Prince Hall, Richard Allen, Absalom 
Jones, Boston King, David George, George Liele, Olaudah Equiano, and 
Quobna Ottobah Cugoano. Collectively, their prose and sermons brought into 
clear focus a pan-African Christianity with race unity at its core. One skein 
linking all such voices is the idea of an ancient black history rooted in Africa 
as a source of common identity. Black Christian mariners like Equiano were 
acutely conscious of their relationship to the global African presence. Without 
surrendering their adoptive national identities, they embraced Africa as their 
special domain. Like Wheatley, who described her native Senegal as “the sable 
land of error’s darkest night,” Equiano was often torn by a contradictory desire 
to defend Africa from its detractors and to “redeem” it from “paganism. ” But 
like Hammon, he stressed its biblical origins and traced the “pedigree of the 
Africans from Afer and Afra, the descendants of Abraham by Keturah his wife 
and concubine. ”28 In his sermon to the black Masonic lodge in Boston, Marrant 
suggested that paradise might have been in “ African Ethiopia. ” He also elabo-
rated on Hammon’s efforts to ennoble the African origins of enslaved people: 
“If you study the holy book of God, you will find that you stand on a level . . . 
with the greatest kings on the earth, as Men and as Masons. . . . Ancient history 
will produce some of the Africans who were truly good, wise, and learned men, 
and as eloquent as any other nation whatever, though at present many of them 
in slavery. ”29
Consciousness of common African roots paved the way for an international 
network of descendant Africans. By the end of the American Revolutionary War, 
evangelical itinerancy and maritime slavery had produced a cadre of black leaders 
whose lives intersected at various points. The result was a transnational black net-
work, which in turn was tied to the larger fabric of international revivalism and 
Atlantic revolutions. In terms of origins, the members of this network were a 
diverse lot. George Leile, a pioneer in the black foreign missionary movement, 
was a native Virginian; David George, Liele’s disciple, was the son of African 
parents; John Marrant was born into a free black family in New Y ork; Ukaw-
saw Gronniosaw hailed from modern-day Nigeria; Ottobah Cugoano was a 
member of the Fanti ethnic group in what  is now Ghana; Olaudah Equiano 
was born in Nigeria’s Iboland region. Although ethnically diverse, the emerg-
ing black leaders were drawn together into a self-defined network of Africans
by their common experiences in slavery, as Christians, and often as Masons.
Members of the black evangelical network had achieved an international 
presence by the turn of the nineteenth century, even if their presence is largely 
ignored in the grand narrative of revivalism. The American Revolution was 
The Creation of a Global African World
57


--- PAGE 77 ---
followed by the largest migration of free blacks in the Atlantic world up to 
that point. In this way, the rolling waves of the Atlantic Ocean carried black 
forms of Protestantism outward in a continuously moving flow of ideas and 
people/uRELfk.dacross the Caribbean to Jamaica, north to Nova Scotia, and east to 
Sierra Leone. Each current had its own characteristics, but all overlapped and 
intersected at various points to form a global process that forged spiritual link-
ages between Africa, Europe, and the Americas.
Consider some individual cases of the black evangelical network. George 
Liele, a Baptist who began his itinerant ministry in Georgia, launched Afri-
can American foreign missionary work with the founding of Jamaica’s first 
Baptist church, out of which sprang the island’s Native Baptist movement. 
David George’s mission to Sierra Leone preceded the first West Indian Church 
Association missionaries to Africa by three-quarters of a century.30 John Jea 
preached to large crowds in Methodist, Baptist, and Presbyterian churches in 
Liverpool and Manchester as well as in Lancashire and Y orkshire. Jea’s travels 
took him to Ireland, where he preached in country villages from Limerick to 
Cork, then moved on from there to Amsterdam and Rotterdam. On return-
ing to the United States from Europe, Jea traveled overland, enjoying success 
everywhere but in New Orleans, where, he complained, “the people were like 
those of Sodom and Gomorrah. ”31
The pan-African pioneers embraced a variety of evangelical creeds. Collec-
tively, their spiritual lives reflected the cosmopolitanism of the emerging black 
leadership as well as the remarkable degree of interracial harmony that char-
acterized eighteenth-century evangelicalism. Linked in dynamic relationships 
among themselves, the blacks were enmeshed in the larger Atlantic evangelical 
culture through personal relationships with one another and with the white 
leadership of the international revival movement. For instance, Gronniosaw 
was enslaved in New Y ork by the evangelical Dutch Reformed pastor Theodous 
Frelinghuysen. Baptized in England by the Baptist theologian Andrew Gifford, 
Gronniosaw was befriended by the Methodist founder Whitefield, whom he 
claimed as his “dear friend. ” Whitefield prayed daily with Marrant as the latter 
struggled through the throes of conversion. Marrant, a Huntingdonian Meth-
odist, who may have learned of the Countess of Huntingdon’s Connexion from 
David Margate, the first black British missionary in North America, was later 
ordained a minister in the countess’s chapel in Bath.32 White evangelicals like 
Whitefield and Frelinghuysen influenced black evangelicals and were, in turn, 
influenced by them.
Brought into close contact with one another through their peripatetic lives, 
sylvia frey
58


--- PAGE 78 ---
the members of the black evangelical network skillfully navigated multiple 
connections, all the while maintaining close contacts with white abolitionists. 
The pan-African bond is explicit in Cugoano’s pointed references to details in 
the lives and writings of Gronniosaw and Marrant.33 As friends and “country-
men,” the blacks provided the avenues through which British abolitionists like 
Granville Sharp and William Wilberforce were directly exposed to the conse-
quences of slavery and to Afro-Atlantic cultures. In 1783, Equiano persuaded 
Sharp to intervene in the Zong case, in which slave traders dumped scores of 
their human cargoes at sea; through Cugoano’s intervention, Sharp managed 
to free Harry Demane, who had been seized in London and put on a slave 
ship bound for the Caribbean.34 John Wesley was one of the subscribers of 
Equiano’s Narrative and was moved enough by it to write to Wilberforce, who 
was leading the antislavery fight in Parliament. Organized as the Sons of Africa, 
a name that might have been inspired by the American Revolutionary Sons of 
Liberty, twenty-four black men, including Equiano and Cugoano, petitioned 
Sharp and members of Parliament. T ogether, the black and white antislavery 
advocates created the abolitionist movement in England and America, estab-
lishing an immediate point of departure for liberationist struggles in the United 
States, Britain, Saint Domingue, and Jamaica.
The convergence of black theology and republican ideas that flourished at 
the grassroots level crystallized in the 1780s and 1790s in the globalization of 
the struggle against slavery and racism, with the aim of mobilizing black com-
munities and transforming Atlantic societies. Although Christian salvation 
remained a constant, increasingly the emphasis came to center on temporal 
freedom and an end to racism. The geographic scope and intellectual reach of 
the black freedom struggle is nowhere more apparent than in the antislavery 
writings of the Afro-Britons Equiano and Cugoano. From England, both men 
tapped into the growing interest in the Atlantic slave trade and the less restric-
tive racial climate of Britain, writing powerful antislavery essays.
Although deploying conventional biblical and moral arguments, Equiano 
and Cugoano also displayed a “secularized consciousness” that reflected the 
growing influence of natural rights philosophy. In his Thoughts and Sentiments,
Cugoano appealed to “the light of nature” and the “dictates of reason” to argue 
“that no man ought to enslave another. ” Slavery was, he contended, “the gross-
est perversion of reason,” while its defense was an “inconsistent and diabolical 
use of the sacred writing. ” Equiano’s Narrative likewise charged that slavery 
“violates that first natural right of mankind, equality and independency, and 
gives one man a dominion over his fellows which God could never intend. ”35
The Creation of a Global African World
59


--- PAGE 79 ---
While Equiano’s firsthand account of the physical and moral abominations of 
slavery is rightly considered by some to be “the most important single literary 
contribution to the campaign for abolition,”36 it was the slave trade, not the 
institution of slavery, that his 1788 ant islavery petition to Queen Charlotte 
addressed.37 Despite Cugoano’s bold demand that “a total abolition of slavery 
should be made and proclaimed; and that an universal emancipation of slavery 
should begin,” like most eighteenth-century abolitionists, black and white, he 
proposed a gradual form of emancipation.38
Conservative though they might seem in retrospect, the early black nar-
ratives of liberty disseminated ideas of racial unity, rebellion, and resistance 
in all directions, intensifying pan-Africanism even while leaving its meaning 
open to interpretation in different contexts. Although they did not propose 
a course of action, and indeed seemed to postpone action to a later date, the 
narratives brought the plight of suffering slaves to public attention and, in so 
doing, advanced the moment of action. But eighteenth-century black writers 
did more than that. In the face of violent racial injustice, they implicitly invoked 
the inalienable right of revolution espoused  by white revolutionaries and so 
established two distinct processes of racial construction, one nonviolent and 
the other revolutionary. Noting the “artless tale” told him by a black creole 
in Montserrat who had his catch of fish repeatedly seized by whites, Equiano 
raised the possibility of violent action through his expression of sympathy for 
Moses as the slayer of an Egyptian (Exodus 7.1–25): “I could not help feeling 
the just cause Moses had in redressing his brother against the Egyptian. ”39 The 
threat of violence also hung heavily over Prince Hall’s lecture to black Masons 
in Boston. Reflecting on the frequent insults and injuries suffered by black 
people, Hall expressed admiration for the violent means of self-liberation pur-
sued by Haitians, with whom, he emphasized, black Bostonians were united 
through common experience. “Let us remember what a dark day it was with 
our African brethren six years ago in the West Indies, but blessed be God, the 
scene is changed,” Hall noted, before invoking the Ethiopianist trope. “Thus 
does Ethiopia begin to stretch forth her hand, from a sink of slavery to freedom 
and equality. ”40
The American Revolution and the Spread of 
Revolutionary Pan-Africanism
One of the principal mediums for the transoceanic voyage of pan-Africanism 
was the dispersal of black war veterans at the end of the American Revolution. 
sylvia frey
60


--- PAGE 80 ---
The postrevolutionary migration scattered thousands of black Americans to 
islands throughout the Caribbean and Europe and halfway across the world to 
T asmania.41 It is impossible to argue with any degree of certainty that revolu-
tionary ideology inspired them. It is probably safe to say that, at the very least, 
their military experience in British regiments and the example of Dunmore’s 
Ethiopian soldiers and the Black Carolina Corps, raised among ex-slaves and 
free blacks, were part of their political transformation.42 The black veterans 
carried their political experiences throughout the Atlantic world and beyond. 
Over time, the notion of military service as a political strategy became recon-
figured, charged with new meaning in different social and racial settings.
Black veterans of the American Revolutionary War took to heart the idea 
that service to the king entitled them to freedom. The 1787 rebellion in the Ba-
hamas clearly shows that connection. T ransported from New Y ork and Florida, 
the ex-slave soldiers claimed freedom by virtue of loyal military service. Instead, 
on arrival in the Bahamas many were reduced to a form of apprenticeship, or 
even outright bondage. Predictably, they resisted, fleeing to the bush. White 
militias rounded up some, but the rest continued to create havoc.43 While there 
is no direct evidence of a connection between the Ethiopian Regiment and 
the 1787 Bahamas rebellion, the two were symbolically linked in the person of 
Dunmore, who was governor of the Bahamas from 1787 to 1796. Dunmore set 
up a court to hear black claims for freedom. Believed by whites to be a “friend 
of the Negroes,” Dunmore’s court ruled against the black claimants in all but 
one case.44
The 1787 Bahamas rebellion marked the beginning of black soldiers’ long 
march across multiple cultural frontiers that ended in West Africa, complet-
ing for many a geographic return to ancestral homelands and a journey from 
slavery back to freedom. During the turbulent decade of the 1790s, something 
profound began to change in politics and philosophy. Different ideas about 
humanity were emerging, some encouraged by the growing power of the an-
tislavery movement, others by the 1791 slave revolution in Saint Domingue 
that eventually dismantled the old colonial hierarchies, and still others by the 
insatiable need of the European powers for soldiers during the long wars of 
the French Revolution. The Black Carolina Corps, like the Ethiopian Regi-
ment, was both a model and a catalys t for a profound reorientation of black 
political culture based on an expansion of the meaning of military service as 
the prerogative of free, white propertied men to a new definition that included 
the enslaved. Following the British surrender in 1783, veterans of the corps 
were scattered throughout Europe and the Caribbean. The experience of one 
The Creation of a Global African World
61


--- PAGE 81 ---
veteran, Richard Durant, was perhaps not so much typical as generic, and it 
suggests how the personal decisions of hundreds, indeed thousands, of anony-
mous individuals affected the course of Atlantic history. Durant was born in 
America, and at the end of the war he shipped to Martinique, where he enlisted 
in the British army. By age thirty-eight he had sixteen years of military experi-
ence in British operations in the long wars of the French Revolution.
Roughly 300 of Durant’s fellow soldiers from the Black Carolina Corps 
ended up on the neighboring island of Grenada, where they were reconsti-
tuted into a new military unit.45 Ostensibly loyal to Britain, black veterans in 
Grenada and T obago, in what can be considered a first step in the transition 
from slave-soldier to citizen-soldier, revolted against British authority on learn-
ing of the French Revolutionary decree of 1794 abolishing slavery. Already 
heavily dependent on black combat troops in the long and costly wars of the 
French Revolution, the British responded by creating a new system of Ca-
ribbean defense based on permanent black regiments.46 The policy proved a 
success. The regiments, recruited mainly from slave ships, came to make up 
a third of all British forces in the Caribbean. In 1807, almost 10,000 members 
of the British West India regiments were freed, one of the largest single acts 
of manumission prior to the abolition of slavery in the British Empire.47 After 
the War of 1812, several hundred freed American black veterans were settled 
in T rinidad, where they founded the famous “company towns. ” However, the 
majority of discharged soldiers and their families ended up in military com-
munities in Sierra Leone, finally closing the Atlantic circle.48 T aken together, 
these events permanently established a connection between military service 
and abolition, providing continuity between the revolutionary movements of 
the late eighteenth century.
Pan-Africanism and the American, French, 
and Haitian Revolutions
The logical consequences of the developments set in motion by the American 
Revolutionary War were fully revealed in the French Caribbean. The tendency 
of Anglo-American historians to examine the American Revolution through 
the narrow lens of Anglo-American history obscures the links between black 
history on mainland North America and in the Caribbean. Recent studies 
suggest that the American Revolution significantly influenced black popular 
politics in the French Caribbean. Ideas of liberty and equality penetrated the 
Caribbean during the Revolutionary War, when American corsairs and mer-
sylvia frey
62


--- PAGE 82 ---
chant ships used some of the islands as strategic bases. Contraband trade was 
so extensive that the islands became, in the words of one historian citing a 
governor, “le principal theatre de la guerre d’ Amerique,” where “aux idees de 
liberte et d’egalite, que tout de monde a la bouche. ”49 This contraband trade, 
in ideas as well as goods, constituted a Caribbean backdrop to the French and 
Haitian revolutions.
American Revolutionary War veterans formed human links in a chain that 
flowed from the American Revolution through the French Revolution and 
the Haitian Revolution and back around to mainland North America. The 
emerging scholarship on black resistance in the French Caribbean reveals 
deep connections between the islands and to the French and Haitian revolu-
tions, including links in leadership and the circulation of words, symbols, and 
slogans. The story began with the American Revolution. Under the Franco-
American alliance of 1778, France dispatched a force of about 4,000 to fight on 
the American side. The French forces consisted of regular French troops and 
units of Saint Domingue’s all-white militias, along with free black and mulatto 
volunteers from Saint Domingue, Guadeloupe, and Martinique.50 Almost a 
thousand men of color responded to the call for service and were deployed 
with the rest of the French forces to Savannah, Georgia, in 1779. Among the 
volunteers of color were such future leaders of the Haitian Revolution as Andre 
Rigaud, Henri Christophe, Jean Baptiste Villatte, Louis-Jacques Beauvais, and 
Christophe and Martial Besse.51
Only a small number of the colored troops returned immediately to Saint 
Domingue at the conclusion of the Savannah campaign. More than a third were 
sent to Grenada and remained there for more than two years. Several detach-
ments initially went to France, only later returning to Saint Domingue.52 The 
French interlude, occurring as it did amid an emerging discourse on notions 
of citizenship, identity, and equality, offered the men of color an opportu-
nity to broaden their education in revolutionary politics. As early as the 1760s 
and 1770s, French writers like Rousseau, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Raynal, and 
Diderot were using African slavery to criticize the monarchy and advocate 
radical equality. More than a decade before the formation of the Amis des 
Noirs, the French abolitionist group, French lawyers were developing argu-
ments against slavery. In pleading the case of a Louisiana slave before a Paris 
naval court, one lawyer condemned the entire institution of slavery.53 At just 
about the same time, the islands received news about the abolition of slavery 
in the northern states of the United States and the formation of the Amis des 
Noirs.54 The convergence of events, exacerbated by the French Revolution, 
The Creation of a Global African World
63


--- PAGE 83 ---
precipitated a series of slave plots and revolts, beginning with the Martinique 
rebellion of August 1789.
Although largely a response to local issues, slave rebellions in French Marti-
nique and Guadeloupe occurred in a broader context that included the circula-
tion of Revolutionary news during and after the American Revolution. More-
over, individuals with ties to the American Revolution frequently appeared 
as leaders of rebellions and conspiracies. Martinican veterans of the siege of 
Savannah had witnessed the Revolutionary ferment firsthand, had been ex-
posed to the new ideas of liberty and e quality, and carried those experiences 
back home with them. An event in August 1789, two weeks before the news of 
the storming of the Bastille and the advent of the French Revolution reached 
the French Caribbean, reveals the evolution of a radical vision of emancipation 
to which Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment had given practical meaning. A group 
of enslaved Martinicans sent two anonymous letters to the governor and the 
military commander of Martinique, signing them “us blacks. ” The immediate 
inspiration for this action might well have been the publications of the Amis 
des Noirs, which were read to slaves in the main towns, except that the letters 
departed radically from the standard abolitionist advocacy of gradual eman-
cipation and embraced violent self-liberation instead. “Remember that we the 
Negroes . . . are ready to die for this freedom, for we want to and will obtain 
it at any price, even with the help of mortars, canons, and rifles,” the letters 
boldly announced. The repeated reference to “the entire Nation of the Black 
Slaves,” even if used, as David Geggus suggests, in “a local, particularist” sense 
of ethnic consciousness rather than the “universalist outlook” of revolutionary 
France, showed how far notions of racial solidarity had progressed.55
Geggus calls the subsequent 1789 St. Pierre rebellion in Martinique “a 
strikingly novel departure in Afro-American resistance. ” It represented, he as-
serts, a new type of rebellion based on false rumors of a royal emancipation 
decree allegedly blocked by local slaveowners and local authorities.56 In fact, 
this strategy was part of a historical process that began as early as 1730 in Vir-
ginia, emerged again in South Carolina during the American Revolution, and 
came to full maturity during the turbulent revolutionary years in the French 
Caribbean. It was a rumor that “there was a great War coming soon to help the 
poor Negroes” that convinced the South Carolina slave Jeremiah that change 
was possible and that the time was ri ght for enslaved people to seize their 
freedom through organized rebellions.57 This same logic became generalized 
in the wave of revolts that spread through the French Caribbean between 1789 
and 1791.58 Conscious that “the whole nature of political rights and institutions 
sylvia frey
64


--- PAGE 84 ---
was being redefined and discussed,”59 black people throughout the French Ca-
ribbean used rumors of expanded rights to demand the extension of rumored 
rights, as Laurent Dubois puts it.60
Black politics in the French Caribbean navigated between two tendencies, 
one pressing for equality within the dominant white society and the other 
demanding an end to slavery. In the complex world of island politics, free 
colored and slave populations formed two distinct social and juridical groups. 
The free coloreds generally owned modest amounts of property, including one 
or more slaves, but were subject to va rious legal restrictions and social and 
economic limitations.61 Gabriel Gruel was typical of this group, which in 1789 
began to agitate for political rights. The Gruel family exemplified what Anne 
Perotin-Dumon calls the integrationist faction of Guadeloupe’s free black pop-
ulation, those who formed an uneasy alliance with the “petits blancs” against 
the overwhelming black majority. In August 1791, Gabriel Gruel was chosen 
by a group of free people of color to present their request for full citizenship 
rights. Significantly, the petitioners emphasized that Gruel had served ten years 
in the colonial militia and had fought with the French forces in the American 
Revolution.62 Although framed in deferential language, the proud record of 
military service represented the political vitae of the free people of color. In 
the context of the 1789 French Revolutionary Declaration of the Rights of Man 
and Citizen, the coloreds, however moderate their tone, were demanding full 
citizenship rights by virtue of demonstrated loyalty to la patria.63
The 1793 T rois Riviere rebellion in Guadeloupe also stood on the geo-
graphic path between the American Revolution and black resistance in the 
French Caribbean. Although not directed against slavery, the rebellion inspired 
slaves to assert their rights. The T rois Riviere rebellion began on the plantation 
of Jacques Coquille Dugommier, a veteran of the American Revolution and the 
leading republican in Guadeloupe. Dugommier acted after the local authorities 
refused to supply troops under his command with wine to celebrate the feast 
of Saint-Louis. For days, Dugommier’s soldiers paraded through the streets, 
loudly proclaiming the republican ideals of equality and liberty. No one was 
quicker to perceive the connection between the rhetoric of freedom and the 
reality of slavery than slaves themselves. Led by Jean-Baptiste, a manager on 
Dugommier’s plantation, the enslaved people arose, mobilizing the language 
of republicanism to formulate their own notion of rights and defend their 
actions.64
Again in 1793, and in the same T rois Riviere area of Guadeloupe where the 
Dugommier rebellion occurred, a remarkable transference of revolutionary 
The Creation of a Global African World
65


--- PAGE 85 ---
symbols, mediated by the American and French revolutions, reportedly helped 
to inspire a slave insurrection in which some twenty whites were killed. The 
event is said to have been triggered by “an unknown individual . . . walking 
around, saying that since a liberty tree had been planted, there would be no 
more slaves. ”65 The notion of the tree as a symbol of liberty and fraternity had 
ancient roots, but its use as a political metaphor became associated with the 
American Revolutionary tradition and was used after 1765 to protest British 
policies. The liberty tree later emerged as a staple of the French Revolution.66
Its appropriation by black insurgents in Guadeloupe was a compelling link to 
both the American and French revolutions, but of a radically different sort. The 
circulation of rumors that “the liberty tree had been planted for all” apparently 
emboldened the insurgents, who transformed the symbol into a demand to 
end chattel slavery.67
Nowhere did the liberty tree, as defined by the enslaved, sink deeper roots 
than in Saint Domingue, where the slave revolt of 1791 opened a new chapter in 
Atlantic revolutionary history. The Haitian Revolution regrouped descendant 
Africans in the Atlantic world around a revolutionary ideal and a newfound 
sense of African ethnicity, and so reconnected through a human chain the 
histories of Africa, North America, and the Caribbean. The mostly unforeseen 
revolt required a new ideology, one that transcended the muted abolitionism 
of the period. The revolution occurred in a region swept by powerful currents 
emanating from the American and French revolutions. But that was not all. 
European ideological currents gained force and energy from the new political 
tide of black self-liberation initially sparked by Dunmore’s recruiting of fugitive 
slaves as soldiers, a process amplified by radical black theology and by rebel-
lions in Martinique and Guadeloupe.
Ideas and peoples of the black Atlantic united in a new way in Saint 
Domingue to produce what Michel-Rolph T rouillot has called “the most radi-
cal revolution of that age. ”68 If some of its leaders were mulattos with military 
experience in European armies, the revolution itself had genealogical links that 
reached back to Africa. The majority of enslaved men who fought in the ranks 
were born in Africa. Many of them may have served in African armies. Their 
military skills, as John Thornton has argued, contributed greatly to the success 
of the revolution in Saint Domingue.69 Haiti, in throwing off the shackles of 
slavery and becoming an independent nation, also became a birthing ground 
for self-liberation movements around the Atlantic. The revolutionary violence 
from which Haiti emerged may have confirmed white opinion that blacks were 
a separate and degraded people, incapable of participating in civil society, but 
sylvia frey
66


--- PAGE 86 ---
people of African descent everywhere in the Atlantic drew inspiration for their 
own struggles for freedom and equality and recognized the black republic as 
“their spiritual fatherland. ”70
The violent conflict in Saint Domingue sent thousands of black and white 
refugees into permanent exile. After wandering in search of safe havens, some 
members of this diasporic community settled in American cities from Philadel-
phia to New Orleans. There, displaced black Haitians made transnational con-
nections based on common experiences of oppression with other black com-
munities, such as African, Afro-Louisianan, and Afro-Virginian. In Virginia, 
the migration from Saint Domingue greatly accelerated a shift in conscious-
ness. On one hand, the refugees helped to create a common identity based 
on skin color. On the other hand, their presence increased black cultural dis-
tinctiveness, between the largely Baptist, native-born, English-speaking Afro-
Virginians and the French-speaking black Catholics from Saint Domingue.71
The success of the Haitian Revolution encouraged revolutionary under-
takings in other slave societies. Althou gh not a “race” war, the 1795 Pointe 
Coupee Conspiracy in Louisiana was inspired by both the Haitian Revolution 
and Revolutionary developments in France. Well-organized, the Coupee Con-
spiracy was linked to an anticipated French invasion of Louisiana and was one 
of a series of actual or planned insurrections that swept the Atlantic world in 
the revolutionary era.72 The slave revolt in Saint Domingue was also a source of 
inspiration for Gabriel Prosser’s Revolt in Virginia in 1800, although Gabriel’s 
plan to march on Richmond, Virginia, under the banner of “Death or Liberty” 
was a deliberate reference to Dunmore’s Regiment as well as a paraphrase of 
an iconic slogan from the American Revolution: Patrick Henry’s demand for 
“liberty or death. ”73 Haiti’s revolution also helped to inspire the aborted slave 
revolt in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1822 under the leadership of Denmark 
Vesey. The biblical story of Exodus provided the basis for Vesey’s liberation 
theology, while Haiti was the promised land to which he expected to lead his 
followers out of slavery.74
Conclusion
In sum, pan-Africanism has a complex genealogy. It emerged from an inter-
weaving of revolutionary principles of liberty and religious notions of spiritual 
equality, on one hand, and the wartime experiences of enslaved people, on the 
other. Black evangelicalism helped to transform the religious and political land-
scape of the Atlantic world. T ransported abroad during the postrevolutionary 
The Creation of a Global African World
67


--- PAGE 87 ---
exodus, black evangelicals left as their legacy black forms of Protestantism in 
Nova Scotia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Jamaica, and other Caribbean islands. Not 
coincidentally, their nonviolent struggles for the expansion of human rights 
coincided with the great Atlantic revolutions and the burgeoning antislavery 
movement of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.75 The Exodus 
story that lay at the heart of evangelical expectations for the coming of the 
divinely appointed mill ennium melded easily with the impatient dreams of 
those who sought to hasten the day of deliverance. The impatient ones offered 
another historical model from which Afro-Atlantic peoples drew inspiration. 
Thus did the two traditions in early pan-Africanism emerge: the evangelical 
and the revolutionary.
The revolutionary tradition would incubate in curious places. Whatever 
Dunmore’s intention, the Ethiopian Regiment he organized initiated rebel-
lion aimed at changing the system of slavery. The words “Liberty to Slaves,” 
emblazoned on the soldiers’ uniforms, had a message that could not be missed. 
Dunmore may not have succeeded in suppressing the American Revolution, 
but the legend of the Ethiopian Regiment lived on. It was of paramount im-
portance as an inspiration for other revolts throughout the Atlantic world, 
creating a tradition of resistance that grew in size and intensity and culminated 
in the revolution in Saint Domingue. Indeed, one could argue that the Haitian 
Revolution began not in Le Cap Francais in 1791, but onboard the William,
near Norfolk, Virginia, in 1775, when Dunmore issued his famous proclama-
tion. By the same token, one could say that the revolts in the United States led 
by Gabriel Prosser and Denmark Vesey began not in Richmond in 1800 or in 
Charleston in 1822, but in Le Cap Francais in 1791. Put another way, the cluster 
of rebellions and conspiracies that began with the American Revolutionary 
War and culminated in the Haitian Revolution must be viewed in a trans-
national and transcultural context. Only then will it be possible to appreciate 
the cumulative power of revolutionary pan-Africanism.
notes
1. The literature is vast. Some representative samples include Martin, Race First;
Stuckey, Ideological Origins; Ullman, Martin L. Delany; Griffith, African Dream; Miller, 
Search for a Black Nationality; Walters, Pan Africanism; Lemelle and Kelley, Imagining 
Home; and Moses, Classical Black Nationalism.
2. Shepperson, “Pan-Africanism. ”
3. My definition follows that of Nelson, Black Atlantic Politics, 3–4.
sylvia frey
68


--- PAGE 88 ---
4. Wilder, In the Company of Black Men, 36, 37, points out that the founding of African 
voluntary associations “preceded the establishment of the black church” in New Y ork 
and served as a “prerequisite of the African church. ”
5. Sensbach, Rebecca’ s Revival.
6. Frey and Wood, Come Shouting to Zion, 112–14.
7. The seminal work on the subject of black seamen is Scott, “Common Wind. ” An 
important work that portrays seamen as central to the formation of black America is 
Bolster, Black Jacks, 18–20, 36. See Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-Headed Hydra.
8. Gilroy, Black Atlantic.
9. Bolster, Black Jacks, 37.
10. Carretta, in Unchained Voices, 16 n. 13, writes, “I accept Equiano’s assertion of his Af-
rican identity” but notes that it is possible that Equiano “invented an African identity for 
rhetorical and/or marketing ends. ” Carretta’s argument is based on baptismal and naval 
records, which give Equiano’s birthplace as South Carolina. See also Carretta, “Olaudah 
Equiano or Gustavus Vassa?” and Equiano, the African. The most recent contribution to 
the question of Equiano’s identity is Byrd, “Eboe, Country, Nation. ” Byrd concludes, 
contrary to Carretta, that “the ethnographic language of his [Equaino’s] memoir supplies 
good internal evidence that the origins of The Interesting Narrative lie decidedly in the 
Biafran interior and were profoundly African” (125).
11. Bolster, Black Jacks, 35.
12. Quoted in Potkay and Burr, Black Atlantic Writers, 3, 126, 149.
13. Frey and Wood, Come Shouting to Zion, 114–17. Scholars do not agree on the mean-
ing of the use of the term “ African. ” Stuckey, Slave Culture, 199–200, argues that “direct 
African cultural influence” was a primary factor in institutional naming by people of 
African descent in the northern United States. Melish, Disowning Slavery, 248–49, main-
tains that terms such as “black” and “Negro” were used indiscriminately, sometimes in 
the same document. Melish traces the prefere nce for “ African” to Absalom Jones and 
Richard Allen’s establishment of the Free African Society in Philadelphia in 1787. Al-
though Sobel makes no specific claim for when the name “ African” became common 
usage, her chronological listing of early black churches implies that, at least in the South, 
the practice developed much earlier. See Sobel, Trabelin’ On. See also Mitchell, Black 
Church Beginnings, 62–66.
14. Aptheker, Documentary History, 1:7–8.
15. For a very important discussion of the significance of Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regi-
ment for racial identity, see Sidbury, Ploughshares into Swords, 32–34. T ony Martin also 
points to the centrality of Ethiopia to the Garvey movement. See his Pan-African Con-
nection, 20–24. See also Schmeisser, “‘Ethiopia Shall Soon Stretch Forth Her Hands,’”
265–67. At the climax of his conversion Equiano exclaimed, “Now the Ethiopian was 
willing to be saved by Jesus Christ. ” See Equiano, Interesting Narrative, 144.
16. See, for example, the story of Y ellow Peter, who escaped in 1775 or 1776 and was 
seen “in Governor Dunmore’s regiment with a musquet on his back and a sword by his 
side. ” Significantly, Y ellow Peter changed his name to Captain Peter. See Holton, Forced 
Founders, 156.
17. Hodges, Root and Branch, 144, 152.
18. Nash, “Thomas Peters. ”
The Creation of a Global African World
69


--- PAGE 89 ---
19. See Marrant, “Journal,” and Saillant, “Origins of African American Biblical 
Hermeneutics. ”
20. Davis, “Documents Relating to Negro Masonry in America. ”
21. Wilder, In the Company of Black Men, 115–16.
22. Hall, “Charge,” 192.
23. Brooks and Saillant, “Face Zion Forward,” 17–18.
24. Brooks, “Early American Public Sphere,” 82.
25. Carretta, Unchained Voices, 1.
26. For favorable assessments of Hammond, see O’Neale, Jupiter Hammon, and 
Gilyard, “Bible and African American Poetry,” 209; for Wheatley, see Grimstead, “ Anglo-
American Racism. ” For a less sympathetic rendering, see Wilder, In the Company of Black 
Men, 64–71.
27. O’Neale, Jupiter Hammon, 84, 86, 102, 103, 151, 152, 231.
28. Equiano, Interesting Narrative, 31. For Cugoano’s defense of Africa, see Cugoano, 
“Thoughts and Sentiments. ”
29. Marrant, “Sermon,” 88–89.
30. Jacobs, Black Americans and the Missionary Movement, 17.
31. Hodges, Black Itinerants of the Gospel, 123–27, 136–37, 141–44, 149.
32. Potkay and Burr, Black Atlantic Writers, 24, 40, 43, 45, 47, 78, 90.
33. Carretta, Unchained Voices, 154.
34. Potkay and Burr, Black Atlantic Writers, 127, 165.
35. Wimbush, African Americans and the Bible, 156, 221, 227.
36. Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-Headed Hydra, 337.
37. The petition is reproduced in Equiano, Interesting Narrative, 156, 221, 227; see also 
286–88.
38. Carretta, Unchained Voices, 171.
39. Ibid., xxv, 226.
40. Brooks and Saillant, “Face Zion Forward,” 204.
41. Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom, 123–38.
42. Military service increased political consciousness among black solders in Conti-
nental service as well. In her essay on Lemuel Haynes, Roberts points out that Haynes’s 
political awareness “increased while he was engaged in protecting the freedom of others. ” 
His “progression of thought from identificat ion with colonists to identification with 
slaves” developed during his military activity in 1775 and 1776 and is apparent in two 
documents, “The Ballard of Lexington” and his antislavery essay “Liberty Further Ex-
tended: Or Free Thoughts on the Illegality of Slave-Keeping. ” See Roberts, “Patriotism 
and Political Criticism,” 570–71.
43. Craton and Saunders, “Seeking a Life of Their Own,” 2–3.
44. Craton and Saunders, Islanders in the Stream, 184, 200.
45. Buckley, Slaves in Red Coats, 4, 20–22. Two of the leading proponents of the use of 
black soldiers, Earl Balcarres, governor of Jamaica, and General Sir John Vaughan, were 
veterans of the American Revolutionary War. See ibid., 12, 43.
46. Ibid., 78–79.
47. Buckley, British Army in the West Indies, 201.
sylvia frey
70


--- PAGE 90 ---
48. Buckley, Slaves in Red Coats, 136–37; see also Buckley, British Army in the West 
Indies, 270–77.
49. Perotin-Dumon, Etre patriote sous les tropiques, 86, 106.
50. Rhodes, “Haitian Contributions to American History,” 79–80.
51. Haitian historiography tends to regard service in the American Revolutionary 
War as a major catalyst for the future leaders of the Haitian Revolution. See, for example, 
Laurent, Haiti et l’independance americaine, and Fick, Making of Haiti. For American his-
tory, see Steward, “How the Black St. Domingue Legion Saved the Patriot Army”; Frey, 
Water from the Rock, 192; and Garrigus, “Catalyst or Catastrophe?”
52. Garrigus, “Catalyst or Catastrophe?,” 119.
53. Peabody, “There Are No Slaves in France,” 96–97, 101.
54. Geggus, “Haitian Revolution,” 25–26.
55. In his analysis of the letters, Geggus discounts the influence of the French Revolu-
tion and concludes that the discourse in the letters was probably due more to the anti-
slavery movement. See Geggus, “Slaves and Free Coloreds of Martinique,” 286–88, and 
Reinhardt, “French Caribbean Slaves Forge Their Own Ideal of Liberty,” 26–27, 29.
56. Geggus, “Slaves and Free Coloreds of Martinique,” 288.
57. Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 62; Frey, Water from the Rock, 58.
58. Benot, “La chaine des insurrections d’esclaves,” 179–86. See also Dubois, Les 
esclaves de la Republique , 73–75, and Perotin-Dumon, “Emergence of Politics among 
Free-Coloureds,” 128.
59. Perotin-Dumon, “Emergence of Politics among Free-Coloureds,” 128.
60. Dubois, Les esclaves de la Republique, 135.
61. Perotin-Dumon, “Emergence of Politics among Free-Coloureds,” 104–6.
62. Perotin-Dumon, Etre patriote sous les tropiques, 274–76.
63. Garrigus, “Catalyst or Catastrophe?,” 116, 124.
64. Dubois, Les esclaves de la Republique, 82–83, 114–15.
65. Perotin-Dumon, “Emergence of Politics among Free-Coloureds,” 118–19.
66. Ozouf, Festivals and the French Revolution, 245–46, 286 n. 18.
67. Perotin-Dumon, Etre patriote sous les tropiques, 118–19.
68. T rouillot, “From Planters’ Journals to Academia,” 93.
69. Thornton, “ African Soldiers in the Haitian Revolution. ”
70. Hunt, Haiti’s Influence on Antebellum America, 99.
71. Sidbury, Ploughshares into Swords, 35–37, 40–41, 44, 47.
72. Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana, 236–74.
73. Egerton, Gabriel’s Rebellion, 42–47, 49, 51.
74. Egerton, He Shall Go Out Free, 114, 136–38.
75. Frey, “Cultural Migrations,” 91–98.
The Creation of a Global African World
71


--- PAGE 91 ---
Haiti, I’m Sorry
The Haitian Revolution and the Forging of the 
Black International
michael o. west & william g. martin
Haiti I’m sorry we misunderstood you. But one day we’ll turn around 
and look inside you. Haiti I’m so sorry. But one day we’ll turn our heads, 
restore your glory.—david rudder, “Haiti,” calypso song, 1988
Revolution came to the French slaveholding colony of Saint Domingue in 1791. 
When the upheaval finally ran its course more than a decade later, in 1804, the 
landscape had been completely remade. In one fell swoop, the Haitian Revo-
lution banished slavery, colonialism, and white supremacy, the three founda-
tional institutions of the post-Columbian dispensation in the Americas. It was 
a historical novelty, including a novel shock to the rising consumer culture of 
the Western world, now deprived of its foremost sugar bowl and coffee pot. 
The thoroughgoing transformation in Saint Domingue ended slavery in an 
entire society, the first such act of general emancipation in the annals of the 
human experience. And although it did not eliminate human bondage, mean-
ing concretely African bondage, from the hemisphere as a whole, the Haitian 
Revolution left a deep imprint on slavery in the Americas, for masters and 
slaves alike. Neither would be quite the same again. More broadly, the Hai-
tian Revolution powerfully influenced major changes in the Atlantic political 
economy, and thereby in the course of world history. The slave revolt turned 
revolution in Saint Domingue was, quite simply, the single most cataclysmic 
and transfiguring event of its time, the Age of Revolution, a historical verity 
recklessly omitted from the literature on that era.
For the black international, the events in Saint Domingue were iconic. The 
Haitian Revolution represented a culmination of decades of armed struggle


--- PAGE 92 ---
by enslaved Africans in the Atlantic world, even as it heralded exciting new 
developments in the black quest for universal emancipation. Like no other 
event before or since, the Haitian Revolution electrified African-descended 
people all over the Americas, the enslaved majority along with the nominally 
free minority. Haiti became the bellwether of black freedom in the Atlantic 
world, albeit one that would not be replicated, although not for want of trying. 
Haiti’s symbolic value to black internationalism was a primary reason for the 
hostility and isolation it faced from slaveholders and white powers everywhere. 
T o its great shame, however, the dominant historical narrative of the black 
international has largely neglected the Haitian Revolution, effectively repro-
ducing the scholarly silence of those who write about the Age of Revolution. 
Actually, the Haitian Revolution was a central moment in the evolution of the 
black international, forcefully demarcating the two major paradigms in black 
internationalism that emerged in the Age of Revolution: the revolutionary and 
revivalist traditions. The one tradition had its origins in the long series of slave 
revolts that reached its zenith in the Haitian Revolution, while the other de-
rived from the evangelical revival movement of the latter part of the eighteenth 
century. In time, the two black international traditions, the revolutionary and 
the revivalist, often merged. On the terrain of black international theory and 
practice, the Haitian Revolution continued to reverberate into the twentieth 
century, becoming both a cultural trope and a spark for activist politics in vari-
ous parts of global Africa following the U.S. invasion of Haiti in 1915.
The Haitian Revolution Outlined
The event that inaugurated the Haitian Revolution was but the latest example, 
and, it turned out, the most dramatic and successful one, of slaves seizing the 
moment. Enslaved Africans had a long history of taking advantage of the mis-
fortunes of their enslavers to seek freedom. So it had been since the onset of 
racial bondage in the Americas, and so it was with the slave revolt in Saint 
Domingue in 1791. When the French Revolution began two years earlier, in 
1789, another group in Saint Doming ue saw the potential for advancing its 
corporate interests and acted accordingly. The free people of color, consisting 
mostly, although not exclusively, of mulattos/uRELfk.dthat is, persons of African and 
European ancestry/uRELfk.dhad long felt the sting of white supremacy. In the Carib-
bean, even in the wider Atlantic world, Saint Domingue’s mulattos occupied a 
peculiar place. As a group, they were unusually wealthy, owning a fourth of the 
colony’s slaves and an equal proportion of its land. Y et the mulattos remained 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
73


--- PAGE 93 ---
pariahs in the larger white-dominated society, their low social and political 
status belying their economic prowess. In the mulatto struggle for equality 
with the whites, the upheaval in France came as a godsend. The most fervent 
partisans of the French Revolution in Saint Domingue were mulattos, their 
ideological armor its touchstone document, the Rights of Man and Citizen. 
Most of the colony’s whites, unmoved by revolutionary idealism and uncon-
vinced of the mulattos’ humanity, disdainfully rejected their demands for full 
citizenship rights. The ensuing confrontation worsened, and soon white and 
mulatto militias were at war.1
It was then that the slaves made their move, determined to extract free-
dom from chaos. The chief obstacle to this attempt at self-liberation was the 
French Revolution. Mindful that Saint Domingue’s slave-produced sugar and 
coffee accounted for the greater part of their country’s foreign trade, the French 
revolutionaries concluded that the Rights of Man and Citizen did not apply 
to enslaved Africans. High-sounding rhetoric about the universality of liberty 
could scarcely be allowed to trump the business of the nation. After all, the 
French revolutionaries, no less than the monarch they had replaced, were duty 
bound to protect the national interests. Accordingly, the French revolutionar-
ies declared war on their putative ideological equivalents in Saint Domingue, 
the revolting slaves. Eager to bring the insurgent bondsmen and bondswomen 
to heel, the French revolutionaries struck on two fronts, military and political. 
In addition to sending troops to Saint Domingue, they moved to impose a class 
alliance on the colony’s warring white and mulatto slaveholders, acting on the 
theory that the whites’ love of property exceeded their hatred of mulattos. Thus 
did the French Revolution grant the mulattos their long-sought wish: equality 
with the whites, which is not to be confused with full racial equality, since the 
shift left slavery intact; indeed, its whole purpose was to protect African bond-
age. Legalized racism, insofar as it applied to mulattos, would be sacrificed on 
the altar of slavery, now designated by the French revolutionaries as a nonracial 
gathering point for Saint Domingue’s diverse men of property.2
As a strategy for defeating the slave revolt, the granting of equality to the 
mulattos failed. Despite serious setbacks, the black servile revolution contin-
ued, now supported by the Spanish in the neighboring colony of Santo Do-
mingo (the Dominican Republic). Appalled by the overthrow of a fellow mon-
arch in France, the king of Spain, like his counterparts everywhere in Europe, 
pledged implacable enmity to the French Revolution. Supporting the slave 
rebellion in Saint Domingue was part of that policy. Subsequently Spain and 
michael o. west & william g. martin
74


--- PAGE 94 ---
Britain, at war with revolutionary France and coveting the rebellious colony, 
prepared to invade Saint Domingue.
For the second time, the French revolutionaries faced a momentous colo-
nial crisis. On the first occasion, they had officially abandoned racism against 
the mulattos in order to save slavery, to no avail. Indeed, the failure to check 
the slave rebellion had created an ope ning for France’s enemies, Spain and 
Britain, to invade Saint Domingue, causing a second colonial crisis. This time 
around, it was not just slavery but also colonialism/uRELfk.dFrench rule over Saint 
Domingue/uRELfk.dthat was at stake. The French obviously could not have slavery 
without colonialism, and yet they could not have both. Having already dis-
avowed racism, partly, in a futile attempt to safeguard slavery, France was now 
being forced to forsake slavery to preserve colonialism. Emancipation thus 
became a French political and military imperative, and suppressing the slave 
revolt was not just impossible but in the new circumstances also undesirable. 
The rulers of haughty France were reduced to supplicants before erstwhile 
chattels. T o hold Saint Domingue, the French would have to persuade the black 
revolutionaries to renounce their alliance with Spain and, what is more, turn 
their guns on the foreign invaders, the Spanish and the British alike. Official 
acknowledgment of the freedom the blacks had seized by force of arms was 
the price for winning them over to the French side. Notably the Spanish, who 
continued to practice slavery, had made no such abolitionist commitment, 
having backed the Saint Domingue rising out of sheer expediency, as part of 
the campaign against the French Revolution. France, realizing it would have to 
make the black revolutionaries a better offer, countered by abolishing slavery, 
or, to be precise, by ratifying the self-liberation of the enslaved.3
France having made an about-face and committed itself to emancipation, 
the black revolutionaries responded in kind. Now commanded by the ex-
slave and brilliant strategist T oussaint Louverture, they too reversed course, 
coolly abandoned Spain, and declared for French liberty, equality, and frater-
nity. It was an independent black revolutionary movement that allied with 
the French Revolution. The black revolutionaries, although receiving French 
support, were no more beholden to France than they had been to Spain, their 
late underwriter. As if to underscore the point, T oussaint, in his new role as 
the undisputed strongman of Saint Domingue, expelled a number of meddling 
French representatives, even as his army drove out the Spanish and British 
invaders.4
By 1798, peace had returned to the colony. The new order could not have 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
75


--- PAGE 95 ---
been more different from the one obtained on the eve of the revolution seven 
years earlier. Slavery had ended, the plantations lay in ruins, most of the whites 
had fled, and blacks were in charge. The world of Saint Domingue had been 
turned upside down. It was independent in all but name; T oussaint refrained 
from making an official declaration of sovereign nationhood, apparently be-
cause he thought the French connection useful, politically and economically. 
However, as he turned to the issue of reconstruction, in the wake of the ruinous 
years of war, T oussaint paid scant attention to France. Ever the authoritarian, 
he ordered a constitution that designated him ruler for life, and even beyond, 
since the constitution also allowed him to name a successor. On the economic 
front, T oussaint proposed a longer tenure still for the plantation system. In-
stead of redistributing the land to the freed people, as they evidently desired, 
he resurrected the plantations. The workers, although now paid, were bound 
to the worksite, as in the days of slavery. This was hardly the freedom the ex-
slaves envisioned, and they resisted the new regime, as they had the old one, 
including violent resistance. T oussaint put down such uprisings. For good 
measure, he executed the official most closely associated with the opposition 
to the plantation model of reconstruction, the military commander Moise, 
who was also his adopted nephew.5 T oussaint the liberator, it now seemed, 
was metastasizing into T oussaint the liquidator.
T oussaint could ill afford to alienate the masses of the freed people at this 
historical juncture, for a mortal threat to the revolution in Saint Domingue was 
brewing. Back in France, Napoleon Bonaparte had staged a military takeover, 
unofficially ending the French Revolution. Napoleon believed one dictator was 
enough for the whole French empire, if not the world, and could find no more 
suitable candidate for the post than himself. He certainly had no intention of 
sharing the stage with an upstart ex-slave in Saint Domingue. His hatred of 
black folk every bit the equal of his vainglory, Napoleon intended to reestablish 
the old regime in the colonies, beginning with Saint Domingue, where the 
freed people would be put back in chains and the mulattos returned to social 
and political helotry. As for the black consul, T oussaint, he would be retired, 
to a cold prison cell in the French Alps.
So important was suppressing the Saint Domingue revolution to Napoleon 
that he entrusted the task to his brother-in-law, dispatching him to the colony 
with an appropriate army in tow. On arrival, the French concealed their true 
intention. Nonetheless T oussaint, unconvinced they were on a fact-finding 
mission, attempted to mobilize against them. He failed. His base of support 
had fallen away. In opting for the plantation model, he had given the masses 
michael o. west & william g. martin
76


--- PAGE 96 ---
nothing to fight for. After initially resisting the invaders, T oussaint’s army also 
seemed to lose the will to fight. One by one his military commanders, lulled 
by French reassurance of the safety of their positions and perquisites, defected 
to France. Increasingly isolated, T oussaint’s government fell. He retired to his 
plantations, but not for long. The French soon put him in chains and bundled 
him off to the alternate retirement home they had prepared.6 There he would 
die a cruel death. This was, perhaps, the nadir of the Haitian Revolution. What-
ever his flaws and failings, and they were numerous and serious, T oussaint 
had guided the struggle from near collapse to its greatest triumphs. With his 
strong and determined hand, he became the great helmsman of the revolution. 
Now he was gone. No single person, however, was indispensable, not even 
T oussaint Louverture. There was more leadership material where he came 
from, as he avowed in a parting note of revolutionary humility. In taking him, 
he assured his French captors, they had cut down “only the trunk of the tree 
of the liberty of the blacks; it will grow back from the roots, because they are 
deep and numerous. ”7
With T oussaint out of the way, the French revealed their mailed fist and 
ferociously set out to re-create the old order. Concluding that the freed people, 
hardened in battle, were no longer fit for slavery, the French determined on a 
genocidal solution to the Saint Domingue problem. Sparing only those who 
had not yet reached their teenage years, they would exterminate the population 
and restock the colony with fresh supplies of human cargo from Africa. It was 
an astonishing blueprint for mass murder, even by the dastardly standards of 
European colonialism in the Americas, and the French began actually to im-
plement it. Their weapons included live burnings, crucifixions, and imported 
killer dogs specially trained to tear black people apart.8
The people of Saint Domingue now had something to fight for: their lib-
erty, indeed, their very lives. Urgently recalled to revolutionary struggle, they 
proved equal to the atrocious French challenge.9 Their new leader was Jean-
Jacques Dessalines, who had a reputation as the most fearsome officer in the 
revolutionary army. Dessalines’s background was notably different from that 
of T oussaint, his former commander in chief. T oussaint had obtained his free-
dom before the revolution began; even as a slave, however, he was relatively 
privileged, serving as a coachman. Dessalines, by contrast, never became more 
than a field hand in his career as a slave and only tasted freedom with the re-
volt of 1791. Perhaps more than any other top official, he was a product of the 
revolution. On joining the struggle, he rose rapidly through the military ranks 
to become T oussaint’s top deputy. As a commander, Dessalines was partial to 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
77


--- PAGE 97 ---
scorched earth and left little in his wake. T oussaint, always fond of the arborist 
metaphor, once reprimanded him for overzealousness, noting he had been 
ordered to prune the tree, not to chop it down. Dessalines, with his blunt ax 
and avid demeanor, was ill-suited for the precision of pruning, demolition 
being his forte. The slaveholder’s lash still vivid in his memory, reputedly even 
engraved on his body, he vowed never again. For ruthlessness and cunning, 
Napoleon had nothing on him. The French had met their match.
Dessalines may have been at its head, but the final campaign of the Haitian 
Revolution was not of his making. The bloody path to his ascendance, rather, 
was the handiwork of others. Indeed, he was complicit in the shedding of some 
of that blood. Dessalines, it turned out, was among the commanders who went 
over to the side of the French invaders, even if his defection was tactical and 
temporary. As he contemplated defecting, Dessalines, speaking in the third 
person, told soldiers under his command, “If Dessalines surrenders to them 
[the French] a hundred times, he will betray them a hundred times. . . . Then 
I will make you independent. There will be no more whites amongst us. ”10 He 
would prove to be as good as his word, but only because of the steadfastness 
of various guerrilla groups, which kept up the resistance, even as Dessalines, 
in the service of France, deployed his fierce military skills against them.11 Y et 
it was that very resistance that made it possible for Dessalines to fulfill his 
promise to betray France and to return to the revolutionary fold. Rallying 
under a single banner the whole nation, the freed blacks and the mulattos alike, 
Dessalines ultimately proved his mettle, presiding over the fiercest struggles of 
the Haitian Revolution. In victory, he made good on the rest of his promise, 
declaring independence and getting rid of the whites, expelling or killing the 
ones who remained. “I have given the French cannibals blood for blood,” he 
exulted triumphantly.12
The Haitian Revolution, of course, was far bigger than the colony of Saint 
Domingue. It was not just imperial powers  and slaveholders, however, who 
staked out claims on revolutionary Hai ti. Enslaved and oppressed people 
throughout the Atlantic world also became stakeholders, political and emo-
tional, in the unfolding drama. By its very nature and its impact on world 
history, the Haitian Revolution had major black internationalist implications, 
among others. Independent Haiti’s first constitution, commissioned by Dessa-
lines in his capacity as head of state, acknowledged as much. It defined Haiti as a 
“black” nation and offered citizenship to anyone of African or Native American 
descent. Symbolically as well as substantively, the Haitian Revolution reshaped 
the Age of Revolution in ways European and North American policymakers 
michael o. west & william g. martin
78


--- PAGE 98 ---
and image-shapers would not understand or appreciate, and indeed still refuse 
to do.
The World-Historical Impact of the Haitian Revolution
In the grand narrative of Western scholarship, the Age of Revolution ushered 
in the modern world. From the United States and France, it is said, came mod-
ern democracy, while an industrial revolution in Britain changed the world of 
work forever. If, however, revolutions are defined by mass participation and 
social and political transformation, the n the most substantial revolution of 
the Age of Revolution did not take place in Europe or North America. Rather, 
that revolution, forged in a black internationalist cauldron, happened in Saint 
Domingue.
Haiti’s pride of place in the Age of Revolution is absent from the historical 
accounts of that era, which stress the achievements and continuing legacy of 
the U.S., French, and British revolutions. None of the classic works on ei-
ther the period or revolutions generall y/uRELfk.dsuch as those by Crane Brinton, 
Eric Hobsbawm, Barrington Moore, and Theda Skocpol/uRELfk.dmakes more than 
passing mention of Haiti, if that.13 With few exceptions,14 more recent work 
equally fails to address the Haitian Revolution, whether the subject is the past 
and future of revolutions15 or specific studies on the 200th anniversary of the 
French Revolution.16 Y et by comparison to the revolutions of the white At-
lantic, the revolution in Saint Domingue effect ed far greater political, social, 
and economic change. In Britain an industrial revolution proceeded during a 
period of political stability, while in the United States and France radical politi-
cal changes brought little transformation in either the world of work or class 
and racial hierarchies. Haiti, by contrast, would experience not only the violent 
overthrow of an old political regime, but the thoroughgoing destruction of 
the ruling class (the white slaveho lders) and the economic system (planta-
tion slavery). Indeed the drive to replace Haiti’s slave plantations, which had 
produced half the coffee and sugar consumed in Europe and the Americas,17
led to the expansion of slavery elsewhere, most notably in the United States, 
Cuba, and Brazil.18 Attempts to circumvent the implications of the Haitian 
Revolution over the long run would also lead to innovative forms of labor, race, 
and empire, as the world economy extended from the Americas to Africa, Asia, 
and the Pacific.
In the Americas, there is much evidence of Haiti’s contribution to the 
demise of colonial empires and, more broadly, in shaping the balance of 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
79


--- PAGE 99 ---
power among the great powers of Europe. British, Spanish, and French forces 
suffered staggering losses in defending their colonies and in invading Saint 
Domingue. Britain’s attempt to secure its Caribbean colonies and defeat the 
Saint Domingue rebels cost the lives of tens of thousands of British troops and 
untold millions of pounds. Spain would eventually lose its American colonies, 
with direct Haitian support. Haiti assisted movements to overthrow Spanish 
rule in Venezuela (1806) and Mexico (1816) and, most notably, Simon Bolivar’s 
expeditions in Venezuela (1816).
For France, the Haitian Revolution meant the loss of its greatest source of 
colonial products, trade, and profits; Saint Domingue alone had accounted 
for two-fifths of France’s overseas trade.19 Millions of jobs in port cities like 
Bordeaux depended on the slave trade, of which Saint Domingue was the 
center, while state revenues were highly dependent on the slave and colonial 
trades. Napoleon’s attempt to reconquer Saint Domingue and reimpose slav-
ery/uRELfk.dwith the blessing this time of the United States and Britain/uRELfk.dled to the 
greatest losses of all, almost the entire French expeditionary force of 80,000. 
In the continuing war between France and Britain for global hegemony, the 
French struggled with fewer and fewer colonial resources after being defeated 
in Haiti. In desperation, France pulled out of the North American mainland 
altogether, selling those colonial possessions to the United States in the Loui-
siana Purchase in 1803.20
In the realm of human consciousness, the Haitian Revolution was the 
single most important event in bringing about that epoch-making shift of 
the Age of Revolution: the demise of the legitimacy of slavery in the West-
ern world.21 This did not translate into equality: freedom for slaves over the 
course of the nineteenth century moved hand in hand with the rise of new 
ideologies of domination, most notably scientific racism.22 At the same time, 
the major European powers set out to create a new international division of 
labor that would be less dependent on chatt el slavery and less vulnerable to 
slave revolts. Accordingly, vast new pools of coerced labor were opened up, 
with Asia coming to replace Africa. By the mid-nineteenth century, coerced 
labor from China and South Asia was flowing into the Americas, other parts 
of Asia, the Pacific, and even Africa.23 Furthermore, the obstacles to colonial 
accumulation imposed by the abolition of slavery and decolonization in the 
Americas, of which Haiti remained the most dreaded example, led the Euro-
peans to turn to Asia and Africa for raw materials and precious metals.24 In 
this sense, the Haitian Revolution sealed off the history of Atlantic slavery: 
michael o. west & william g. martin
80


--- PAGE 100 ---
the new British-dominated world economy that emerged in the nineteenth 
century was explicitly constructed to be less vulnerable to black revolt.
The Haitian revolutionaries were not unmindful of the world-historical 
drama they had wrought. Dessalines, at the moment of final victory, paid hom-
age to the past: he dedicated the Haitian Revolution to the vanquished Native 
Americans, in whose honor the country was also named, Haiti reputedly mean-
ing “rugged, mountainous” in the T aino Arawak language. Personalizing the 
tribute at that foundational and inebriating moment of nationhood, Dessalines 
famously asserted, “I have avenged America. ”25 This was the autobiographical 
rendition of the Haitian Revolution, a transgression for which the remarkable 
field slave turned head of state may be forgiven. Of course, Dessalines had 
many coauthors. In fact, it was the Haitian masses who paid dearest of all for 
victory; half of Haiti’s population, some 250,000 souls, died during the course 
of the revolutionary upheavals. The imperial “we” would have better served 
the emperor, a title Dessalines assumed at the time of independence in 1804.
The Haitian Revolution, Black Struggle, 
and Black Internationalism
The violent course of the Haitian Revolution, as charted in C. L. R. James’s 
magisterial The Black Jacobins and subsequent monographs, involved shifting 
alliances among competing world powers, local white colonists, free people 
of color, and slaves.26 Most accounts tightly contain the revolution within the 
boundaries of Saint Domingue, admitting only the determinant influence of 
the French Revolution. Few scholars dare to broach the broader lessons of 
the Haitian Revolution and its potential for replay in other slave societies. 
Noted slavery historian Seymour Dresher is typical. Citing David Geggus, 
the most widely published current chronicler of the Haitian Revolution, 
Dresher pronounced, “The one successful slave revolution was the outcome 
of a unique combination of circumstances. Haiti was both unforgettable and 
unrepeatable. ”27
That the Haitian Revolution was unforgettable is beyond doubt. It was not, 
however, the unique and isolated event that Dresher’s assertion of unrepeat-
ability implies. Whatever the ex post facto judgment of modern historians, it 
was not at all self-evident to the ruling and governing classes of the day that 
Saint Domingue–like events could not happen elsewhere. How else to explain 
the vast expansion in the regime of control instituted in the other slave societ-
Haiti, I'm Sorry
81


--- PAGE 101 ---
ies of the Americas in the wake of the Saint Domingue rising, or the severe 
repression visited on anything smacking of attempts at another Haiti? Further, 
the unrelenting hostility to the Haitian Revolution, including major military 
campaigns against it by the three leading Atlantic powers/uRELfk.dFrance, Spain, and 
Britain/uRELfk.dwas driven by more than just a desire to return Saint Domingue to its 
former status as the crown jewel of Caribbean slave colonies. Political leaders 
and slaveholders everywhere in the Americas, fearing the contagion of revo-
lutionary slave insurrection, also wanted to create a military cordon sanitaire 
around Haiti and isolate it from the rest of the hemisphere.
The issue of the Haitian Revolution and its potential for replication turns 
on conception. It is a matter of imagining black resistance and political orga-
nization outside territorial boundaries and Euro–North American categories 
(the institutionalized, nonviolent social movement; the modernizing state-
centered revolution; and the modernizing national identity).28 Africans in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were unencumbered by such Enlighten-
ment classifications. The freedom stru ggles of enslaved Africans throughout 
the Americas showed little of the modern historian’s deference to imperial 
and national sovereignty; slave insurrectionists, on the contrary, were blithely 
oblivious to established political boundar ies. Interrogating the hemisphere-
wide African quest for emancipation on its own terms makes it possible to 
chart the interlocution between events in disparate localities and, in so doing, 
uncover a formative phase in black internationalism.
The starting point of such a project is a recognition that the Haitian Revo-
lution, for all its majesty and iconoclasm, did not emerge in a historical void. 
It had a prehistory in black resistance. A long series of revolts throughout 
the Atlantic preceded the Haitian Revolution, revealing a widespread anti-
slavery surge. This trend, paradoxically, was not apparent in prerevolution-
ary Haiti, with the possible exception of the Makandal poison conspiracy 
of 1757. Elsewhere in the Americas, however, slave revolts and conspiracies 
advanced steadily from the 1730s onward, notably in North America, the 
Caribbean, South America, and even Atlantic West Africa.29 Jamaica’s mas-
sive T acky’s Revolt of 1760 rounded out more than a generation of violent 
antislavery resistance.30 With the Hait ian Revolution standing at the apex, 
another round of revolts began in the 1790s, including uprisings in Saint Lucia 
(1795–97), Grenada and Saint Vincent (1795–96), and Guadeloupe (1802) and 
wars against maroons in Surinam (1789–93) and Jamaica (1795–96).31 These 
events emerged from lived experiences in a highly racialized Atlantic political 
economy and, as such, defy portrayals that cast them as atavistic and isolated. 
michael o. west & william g. martin
82


--- PAGE 102 ---
Indeed, a transnational slavery underground was alive and well throughout the 
eighteenth century, if not before, and various individuals, acting as itinerant 
revolutionaries, personally linked multiple revolts in different territories. As a 
group, these revolts were bound together by a common rejection of plantation 
slavery, the most fundamental pillar of mass production and accumulation in 
the capitalist world. In this sense, even apparently disconnected revolts, by 
their very character and synchronicity, reveal a transnational African response 
to capital and the political masters of the capitalist world.
The claim for a nascent black international before the advent of the Haitian 
Revolution runs counter to a scholarly tradition that stresses the difficulty of 
even local coordination among Africans, in view of the linguistic and cultural 
differences that separated them. Such divisions, to be sure, were real enough. 
Moreover, the massive mortality rate among the enslaved everywhere in the 
hemisphere (with the exception of North America, and then only after the late 
eighteenth century), and the attendant need to continuously introduce new 
slaves reinforced the diversity of the various slave societies.32 Y et, as T acky’s 
Revolt and, even more emphatically, the Haitian Revolution demonstrate, in-
ternal divisions among enslaved Africans was no impassable barrier to mass 
antislavery insurrections. Revolutionary activity by the enslaved did not re-
quire homogeneity/uRELfk.dlinguistic, cultural, or religious.
In their majestic work The Many-Headed Hydra, Peter Linebaugh and Mar-
cus Rediker show how the construction of Anglo-Atlantic capitalism gave rise 
to an unruly, multiethnic, “motley crew” of coerced workers, slaves, and sea-
men on all sides of the Atlantic. Impressed seamen, working under extremely 
oppressive conditions, carried ideas a nd tactics of resistance throughout 
the Americas, with black seaman playing a central role. Julius Scott’s equally 
magnificent work on black resistance in the greater Caribbean in the era of 
the Haitian Revolution offers detailed evidence of the “common wind” that 
propelled resistance, showing how sailors, including enslaved ones, carried 
news of revolts and revolutions and rumors of freedom to come.33 Nor were 
seamen the only traveling vectors of revolution and discontent. Uprisings in 
British Honduras drew on the hundreds of rebels exiled there after T acky’s 
Revolt, while veterans of the French brigade that fought for the U.S. Revolu-
tion later emerged as leaders of the Haitian Revolution (e.g., Henri Christophe 
and André Rigaud).
The Haitian Revolution electrified the nascent black international circuits, 
which irrupted with news of emancipation, of slave armies defeating great 
white powers, and of the emergence of a mighty black republic. Slaves every-
Haiti, I'm Sorry
83


--- PAGE 103 ---
where celebrated Haiti, from Philadelphia to T rinidad, from Havana to Cu-
raçao. In Kingston, Jamaica, captives yearning for freedom composed a hymn 
to the anticipated new order, singing, “black, white, brown, all the same. ”34
Surveying the political landscape, slaveholders feared ruin for themselves and 
a dim future for their scions. Thomas Jefferson, ever the spokesman for his 
class, summed up the apprehension. “The revolutionary storm now sweeping 
the globe,” he allowed, “will [soon] be upon us. ”35 The prediction was not 
unfounded. Veterans of the Haitian campaigns, or witnesses to them, could 
be found in the vanguard of revolts in other territories. Some of the seeds of 
insurrection were unwittingly sown by masters who fled Saint Domingue with 
their human chattel; at the new destinations, a number of slaves so transported 
promptly took to the revolutionary path, as in Curaçao, Venezuela, and most 
notably, Louisiana.36 In some cases, slave revolutionary leaders looked to Haiti 
for inspiration, even direct assistance, or else falsely created the impression of 
such assistance, apparently as a way to gain and solidify support among the 
enslaved. Thus Denmark Vesey, head of the 1822 conspiracy in Charleston, 
South Carolina, told his followers Haitian help would arrive to support the 
capture of the city.37 Aponte had done pretty much the same in Havana, Cuba, 
in 1812, using portraits of T oussaint, Dessalines, and Christophe to solicit sup-
port and to inspire fellow rebels.38 These connections, forged by Julius Scott’s 
common wind, point to the existence of vast antislavery efforts among the 
enslaved across imperial and national boundaries, in fine, to a nascent black 
international.
Black internationalism in the Atlantic world was defined by the emergence 
of a common black identity rooted in the struggle against slavery and, despite 
the efforts of some revolutionaries to counter such trends, the polarization 
of racial identities. Notably, the racial and territorial contours of the black 
international rested not on biology nor on a single ancient culture, but on com-
mon experiences, that is, actual struggles against white world supremacy.39 The 
black international, then, only emerged with racial slavery and Atlantic capital-
ism and altered, waxed, and waned with successive emancipatory struggles. 
Such dynamics can be seen in the great struggles of the late eighteenth and 
early nineteenth centuries, when racial as well as class conflicts accelerated, 
driven by black insurrections and the ensuing counterrevolution of the white 
Thermidor.
The juxtaposition of black revolution and white reaction throws into sharp 
relief a major achievement of the black international in its formative stages: 
common visions of life outside the bounds of capitalism, and the active pur-
michael o. west & william g. martin
84


--- PAGE 104 ---
suit of those visions. Such a reading flies in the face of accounts that portray 
black revolts and uprisings as premodern, backward-looking, and seeking only 
to return to a precapitalist mode of production. In this interpretation, it was 
the bourgeois-democratic revolution, and specifically its French incarnation, 
that opened the door to the modern black pursuit of freedom, beginning with 
the Haitian Revolution.40 Actually, neither the French nor the U.S. republic 
facilitated, much less promoted, slave emancipation, a fact stubbornly ignored 
in French Revolutionary studies, especially.41 Rather, it was black rebels who 
opened the door to freedom. Only black resistance and black revolution con-
sistently stood for liberty without regard to race, class, or condition of ser-
vitude. Black struggles, culminating in the Haitian Revolution, did not just 
expand but redefined notions of freedom.
Negating the Black International: 
Haiti and the White Thermidor
The white Thermidor, full of fear and loathing for the black internationalism 
Haiti had come to symbolize, was brutal to the newly independent state. Faced 
with rebellious slaves and natives, white planters, merchants, and imperial pow-
ers coalesced to enforce white power. If the Haitian Revolution could not be 
rolled back, it would certainly be contained. Having won the war, the Haitians 
would be denied the fruits of victory: they would be made to lose the peace. 
The cost of throwing off the shackles of colonialism, slavery, and white su-
premacy would be very high, even crippling. European powers and white-run 
states variously isolated Haiti, embargoed its goods, demanded reparations, 
and barred from their shores its dangerous achievements and citizens. Every-
where in the Americas, the authorities circumscribed and repressed suspected 
black middle classes/uRELfk.dfree blacks and mulattos/uRELfk.dfurther cementing racial 
polarization and identities. Meanwhile, scientific racism as a mode of securing 
postabolition global racial hierarchies flourished, initially and not accidentally, 
in post-Napoleonic France, most notably in the writings of Count Gobineau, 
“the father of racist ideology. ”42 The multiracial motley crew that formed in 
the previous era of revolution, and about which Linebaugh and Rediker write 
with such feeling, could not survive the pressure and dissolved into separate 
racial and class components.43 This was irony of a large order: through coun-
terrevolution, the struggle for emancipation from racial slavery would result 
in a sharper and wider racial order than had existed in the eighteenth-century 
Atlantic world.
Haiti, I'm Sorry
85


--- PAGE 105 ---
Faced with the new order in Haiti and its possibilities, white revolutionar-
ies made an abrupt about-face. The case of the Jeffersonian republicans in the 
United States is instructive. The self-proclaimed keepers of the U.S. revolution-
ary flame, Jefferson and his acolytes recoiled in horror at the events in Haiti and 
attempts to reproduce them in the United States, most conspicuously in the 
Gabriel Prosser conspiracy of 1800.44 Accordingly, the Jeffersonians forsook 
the notion of global and permanent revolution, a notion they had previously 
affirmed. In their minds, the pursuit of liberty and happiness was no longer the 
exclusive preserve of orderly white men of property and scions of the European 
Enlightenment, since enslaved Africans and other lesser breeds had taken up 
the cry.45 In yet another irony, however, it was the Haitian Revolution that 
made possible Jefferson’s most enduring legacy as U.S. president: the humili-
ating defeat in Haiti forced France to abandon its imperial ambitions on the 
North American mainland. The resulting Louisiana Purchase, under Jefferson’s 
presidency, opened the door for the emergence of the United States as a “slave 
country. ”46
Naturally, the legacy of the Haitian Revolution was anathema to the United 
States in its capacity as both slaveholding power and emerging hegemon of 
the Americas. Accordingly, a letter from the Haitian government requesting 
diplomatic ties between the two countries elicited scorn; U.S. president John 
Quincy Adams (1825–29) penned in the margins, “Not to be answered. ”47
U.S. senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri, a slaveholding state, explained 
why:
Because the peace of eleven states in this Union will not permit the fruits 
of a successful negro insurrection to be exhibited among us. It will not 
permit black Consuls and Ambassadors to establish themselves in our 
cities, and to parade through our country, and give their fellow blacks 
in the United States, proof in hand of the honors that await them, for 
a like successful effort on their part. It will not permit the fact to be 
seen, and told, that for the murder of their masters and mistresses, they 
are to find friends among the white People of these United States.48
The resulting embargo on Haiti ran the gamut from the political to the eco-
nomic and the discursive. Haiti was the only independent state excluded from 
the pioneering Pan-American Conference of 1826.49 Writers of various stripes, 
scholarly and popular, joined the blockade. As Michel-Rolph T rouillot has so 
eloquently chronicled, Western scholarship declared a blackout of the events 
that unfolded in Saint Domingue from 1791 through 1804. Haiti was both cen-
michael o. west & william g. martin
86


--- PAGE 106 ---
sured and censored: the country having become a nonentity, its revolution be-
came, in T rouillot’s formulation, a “nonevent. ”50 Y et this intellectual embargo, 
which few dare to breach,51 was only imposed after the fact. Many Western 
observers and commentators, including slaveholders who had fled Haiti, wrote 
and published about the revolution while it was still in progress.52 The whit-
ing out, which came after Haiti became independent, negated, at the level of 
written historical memory, not just the Haitian Revolution but also the black 
internationalism it had come to symbolize. The one as well as the other would 
be suppressed, whether by omission or commission.
The Haitian Revolution and the Narrative 
of the Black International
T o contemporary friends and foes alike, the Haitian Revolution was an event 
of momentous black international import. Y et, incredibly, published accounts 
of the black international largely ignore the Haitian Revolution. Inspection of 
the literature reveals little about the Haitian revolutionary antecedents of black 
internationalism. There are two notable exceptions, standing two generations 
apart. The first is C. L. R. James’s little gem of 1938, A History of Negro Revolt,
which began with the Haitian Revolution and used it as a yardstick for judg-
ing a number of subsequent pan-African struggles.53 Julius Scott’s 1986 Ph.D. 
dissertation, which, alas, remains unpublished, greatly expanded on the black 
internationalism of the Haitian Revolution in its own era, using as an orga-
nizing principle the vast underground intelligence networks that circulated 
a common wind of revolutionary possibilities between Haiti and the greater 
Caribbean.54 The pioneering and exceptional work of James and Scott aside, 
the pan-African narrative has been most unkind to the Haitian Revolution. 
The silence relegates the epochal and black internationalist transformation in 
Saint Domingue to the status of a nonevent, to use T rouillot’s felicitous term 
for the burial of the Haitian Revolution in Western scholarship.
It need not have turned out that way. Some of the first chronicles of the 
struggling black international offered visions of a historiography much differ-
ent from the one that became dominant, a narrative that would have centered, 
rather than silenced, the Haitian Revolution. One such pioneering text, a key if 
often forgotten one, is The Life and Struggles of Negro T oilers, published in 1931.55
Its author, George Padmore, was himself an outstanding toiler in the realm of 
pan-African liberation in the twentieth century.56 Life and Struggles charted 
the struggles of black workers and peasants/uRELfk.dNegro toilers/uRELfk.din Africa, the 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
87


--- PAGE 107 ---
United States, the Caribbean, and Latin America. Such resistance/uRELfk.drevolts, 
strikes, and other forms of discontent /uRELfk.ddemonstrated, the 126-page booklet 
concluded, “the tremendous revolutionary potentialities of the Negro toiling 
masses. ”57
Where Padmore led, his fellow T rinidadian and boyhood friend, C. L. R. 
James, followed. Making his maiden appearance on the stage of black interna-
tional scholarship, James came out with A History of Negro Revolt in 1938, the 
same year he published his magnum opus, The Black Jacobins. The beauty and 
grace of the Haitian revolutionary book, at once a great work of history and 
literature, quickly overshadowed the comparatively puny ninety-seven-page 
booklet on the struggling black international. Y et A History of Negro Revolt
made manifest a point that was only implied in The Black Jacobins. A History of 
Negro Revolt demonstrated the impact and relevance of the Haitian Revolution 
for black internationalism, in its own era and later.
Unlike A History of Negro Revolt, Padmore’s Life and Struggles neglected 
the Haitian Revolution, although it had a section on the plight of the Haitian 
toilers “under the yoke of Yankee imperialism,” that is, during the U.S. occupa-
tion of 1915–34.58 Y et despite differences in emphasis, style, and interpretation, 
Padmore and James began their narration from a common foundation: both 
works privileged the toilers/uRELfk.dslaves, peasants, and workers. The contrast with 
later narratives of the black international could not be greater.
After A History of Negro Revolt, the black masses lost their position at the 
forefront of pan-African intellectual inquiry, dethroned in favor of the elite. 
Henceforth, the major narratives of the black international would highlight 
the activities of the transatlantic black petite bourgeoisie, especially the intel-
ligentsia. Not incidentally, the turn away from the toilers was also a turn away 
from the Haitian Revolution.
The first installment on the new narrative of the black international ap-
peared in 1956. Authored by no less a personage than Padmore, the volte-face 
came with a stark and provocative title: Pan-Africanism or Communism? The 
Coming Struggle for Africa.59 This was, above all, a Cold War text. Since writ-
ing Life and Struggles, Padmore had made a grueling political odyssey, from 
the pan-Africanism of the international communist movement to an anticom-
munist pan-Africanism. As such, his chief concern in Pan-Africanism or Com-
munism was to demonstrate that the anticolonial revolt then sweeping Africa 
in no way owed its inspiration to communism, as alleged by the defenders of 
empire and their consorts, political and intellectual.
michael o. west & william g. martin
88


--- PAGE 108 ---
In the process of cleansing pan-Africa nism of the communist taint, Pad-
more repudiated his 1931 work, albeit without actually saying so. All the es-
sential premises of Life and Struggles, epistemic and organizational, were aban-
doned in Pan-Africanism or Communism. Gone was the expansive definition of 
pan-Africanism. Where Life and Struggles focused on three continents/uRELfk.dAfrica 
and the Americas/uRELfk.dthe much longer Pan-Africanism or Communism singled 
out one: Africa, and then with a predominant emphasis on the British terri-
tories. In his later work, Padmore also narrowed the social foundations of the 
black international. If Life and Struggles placed the emphasis on the toilers as a 
class, then Pan-Africanism or Communism privileged particular individuals. The 
masses and their movements had given way to the thoughts and actions of great 
men. One of those men was W. E. B. Du Bois, whom Padmore had thrashed 
in Life and Struggles as a petit bourgeois reformist misleader but rehabilitated 
in Pan-Africanism or Communism, where he was elevated to the lofty status of 
“Father of Pan-Africanism. ” According to this rendition, pan-Africanism “came 
of age” in the immediate post–World War II era, when Padmore himself suc-
ceeded Du Bois at the helm. In a final changing of the guard, Padmore in turn 
gave way to his star student, the Gold Coast nationalist and future Ghanaian 
president, Kwame Nkrumah, the two men having jointly organized the pivotal 
fifth Pan-African Congress of 1945. In Padmore’s estimation, Nkrumah em-
bodied all the virtues of pan-Africanism as conceived by Du Bois and refined 
at the 1945 congress. In sum, Du Bois had planted, Padmore had watered, and 
Nkrumah was bringing forth the increase. The pan-African triumvirate, or 
rather, trinity, stood triumphant.
With such Whiggish tales of the heights that great men reached and kept, 
Pan-Africanism or Communism scarcely had a word to spare for the Haitian 
Revolution, even for such presumably towering figures as T oussaint and Des-
salines. But the die was cast. The framework of Pan-Africanism or Communism
would prove enduring. Imported into the academy, the Padmorian teleology 
exercised a determining influence on the narrative of the black international 
for the remainder of the Cold War and, indeed, continues to do so down to 
the present time.60
Even Imanuel Geiss’s The Pan-African Movement: A History of Pan-Africanism
in America, Europe, and Africa, a work widely considered the standard text on 
the subject, failed to break with Padmore’s framework, and indeed duplicated 
it.61 Although offered as a corrective to Padmore’s rendition of the black inter-
national, The Pan-African Movement accepted the major assumptions of Pan-
Haiti, I'm Sorry
89


--- PAGE 109 ---
Africanism or Communism. Geiss merely transposed Padmore’s interpretations, 
casting as irrational many of the ideas, actions, and events that were celebrated 
in Pan-Africanism or Communism/uRELfk.dbut without questioning its basic structure 
or the validity of its narrative line. On the great slave revolt turned revolution 
in Saint Domingue, Geiss was not quite as silent as Padmore. Still, the various 
references to the Haitian Revolution in The Pan-African Movement remained 
peripheral and were never systematically developed.62
The rise in the post–Cold War era of African Diaspora studies in the Anglo-
American academy and beyond has hardly disrupted the dominant narrative 
of the black international. The reigning teleology, so fundamentally shaped by 
Pan-Africanism or Communism, remains ascendant in its main features. Thus the 
text that would become the touchstone of the revived African Diaspora studies, 
as well as a virtual canon of postmodern and cultural studies black interna-
tionalism, reproduced in important ways the narrative line of Pan-Africanism 
or Communism. That text, of course, is Paul Gilroy’s The Black Atlantic: Double 
Consciousness and Modernity, with its quintessentially Du Boisian subtitle.63
The Black Atlantic, despite mentioning Padmore only in passing,64 has much 
in common with Pan-Africanism or Communism. For one, the authors share an 
Afro-Saxon bias: Padmore for the east bank of the black Atlantic and Gilroy for 
the west. In substance, if not in tone, Gilroy is no less fulsome than Padmore 
in celebrating the great pan-African man, most tellingly Du Bois and his fellow 
African American Richard Wright, a c ommunist apostate like Padmore and 
the contributor of a laudatory foreword to Pan-Africanism or Communism. The 
corollary snubbing of masses and mass movements explains, to a large extent, 
the virtual silence of both texts on the Haitian Revolution. Y et Gilroy could 
well have accommodated the Haitian Revolution within his own paradigm, 
even if not as a mass movement. Few figures in black internationalism, surely, 
exemplify the ordeal of modernity and double consciousness more poignantly 
than T oussaint/uRELfk.dwho, in the event, does not even merit a single reference in 
The Black Atlantic.65 Despite such limitations, Gilroy’s book skillfully deploys 
certain tropes, most notably the ship, that offer the possibility for a different 
kind of narrative of the black international/uRELfk.done that would reserve a right-
ful place for the Haitian Revolution. Seven years before The Black Atlantic
appeared, Julius Scott had done just that , deepening the pioneering insights 
offered by James in A History of Negro Revolt . Gilroy’s influential work, on 
the contrary, took the well-trodden path on the Haitian Revolution, thereby 
perpetuating a serious lacuna in pan-African scholarship.
michael o. west & william g. martin
90


--- PAGE 110 ---
Emergent Black International Traditions: 
Revolutionary and Revivalist
Beginning in the Age of Revolution, the black international evolved into two 
traditions, which we will call revolutionary and revivalist. The Haitian Revo-
lution, which capped a long line of violent antislavery resistance, even as it 
qualitatively altered the nature of that resistance, became an emblem of the 
revolutionary tradition. Evolving alongside the revolutionary tradition, and 
serving as both its counterpart and its counterpoint, was the revivalist tradi-
tion, with its center in the Anglo-American world and its origins in the Evan-
gelical Revival. The dominant narrative of the black international is derived 
largely from the revivalist tradition and its permutations.
The two traditions in black internationalism, the revolutionary and the 
revivalist, emerged under different conditions, the one grounded in armed 
struggle and the other formally, although not always actually, committed to 
nonviolent resistance. Frequently, if not in all instances, epistemic distinctions 
further set the two traditions apart. Scholars of the Haitian Revolution, a defin-
ing event in the revolutionary tradition, are broadly agreed that it originally 
cohered around vodun, the dominant slave religion of Saint Domingue.66
Boukman Dutty, the first leader of the Haitian Revolution, was a noted prac-
titioner of vodun. Of syncreticism, a term that would later be used to describe 
the melding of African and European (and often Native American) cultures, 
Boukman was disdainful, at least in the realm of religion. At the Bois Caiman 
ceremony, simultaneously the inaugural moment of the Haitian Revolution 
and the most iconic of vodun events, Boukman categorically rejected Chris-
tianity. “The God of the white man calls him to commit crimes,” he informed 
the assembled vanguard of the coming revolution, in what amounted to the 
keynote address at Bois Caiman, whereas “our God asks only good works of 
us. ” But a good God demanded justice, even vengeance. “This God who is so 
good,” Boukman continued, “orders revenge! He will direct our hands; he will 
aid us. ” He then concluded, no doubt on a note of high drama and perhaps even 
to acclamation, “Throw away the image of the God of the whites who thirsts 
for our tears, and listen to the voice of liberty that speaks in the hearts of all 
of us. ”67
The adherents of the black international revivalist tradition also listened to 
the voice of liberty, even as they rejected Boukman’s binary religious catego-
ries. The revivalists did not so much discard the God of the whites as to make 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
91


--- PAGE 111 ---
him anew, transforming him into the God of the blacks, all the while preserving 
his universality. It was a deft maneuver, ideologically speaking, and it began 
with the Evangelical Revival.
Before the Evangelical Revival, enslaved Africans in the British colonies, 
whether on the North American mainland or in the Caribbean, had little real 
contact with Christianity. The Evangelical Revival inaugurated the meeting 
of African spiritualities and Protestant Christianity.68 A movement that came 
out of the Church of England, or the Anglican Church, the Evangelical Revival 
was, in part, a reaction to the European Enlightenment, then nearing its end. 
Rejecting Christianity as part of the dark past best consigned to the dustbin 
of history, the Enlightenment proposed to replace faith with reason, tradition 
with progress, and contentment with happiness. The Evangelical Revival came 
to defend faith and to affirm the truth of revealed religion. In the process, the 
Evangelical Revival launched a critique of the established church, insisting on 
a more vibrant, engaged, and relevant Christianity. The Enlightenment argued 
that Western society, which it assumed to be the human norm, was excessively 
religious. On the contrary, the Evangelical Revival countered, the problem was 
not too much religion but not enough of it.69
In the colonies, if not in the center of the empire, the message of the Evan-
gelical Revival appealed most to the disinherited and the dispossessed. In 
British North America, where it would become known as the Great Awaken-
ing, the outstanding organizing mechanism of the Evangelical Revival was 
the camp meeting. Spiritual conversion, not familiarity with the catechism or 
mastery of the minutiae of Christian doctrine, the evangelists insisted, consti-
tuted evidence of salvation. The Holy Spirit, they continued, was readily and 
freely available to all, irrespective of class, servile status, race, or gender. It was 
simply a matter of heeding the revelation, that is, the revelation of the Holy 
Spirit. T o the enslaved Africans and their descendants who flocked to the camp 
meetings, the concept of revelation would have been quite familiar; it was an 
established feature of most African religions. The correspondence facilitated 
conversion, allowing the slaves to accept the new without rejecting the old.70
Thus began the mass conversion of Africans in British lands, and with it the 
origins of the black international revivalist tradition.
The U.S. Revolution would prove to be a boon to the revivalist tradition. 
Out of the free black community that emerged from the U.S. Revolution would 
come some of the notable exponents of that tradition.71 Then there were the 
black refugees from the U.S. Revolution, a diaspora within a diaspora. Armed 
michael o. west & william g. martin
92


--- PAGE 112 ---
with the gospel of the Evangelical Revival, sometimes combined with the 
founding ideals of the U.S. Revolution, these refugees would have a profound 
effect on the societies in which they resettled. Scholars are still pursuing their 
footprints in places as diverse as the Bahamas, Bermuda, Jamaica, Sierra Leone, 
Canada, and England, among others.72 In this way, the U.S. Revolution unwit-
tingly produced vectors of black internationalism, in its revivalist guise, on 
both banks of the Atlantic.
It was not just the revivalist tradition, however, that benefited from the U.S. 
Revolution. As Sylvia Frey so incisiv ely shows in her essay, some among the 
enslaved seized the opportunity offered by the war for U.S. independence to 
launch armed struggles of their own making against racial bondage. A number 
of these self-organized freedom fighters previously belonged to the black units 
of the British army, and some were steeped in evangelical Christianity. The 
result was a merger of the revivalist and revolutionary traditions in black inter-
nationalism, or what Frey calls, respectively, “evangelical pan-Africanism” and 
“revolutionary pan-Africanism. ” In the main, though, the revivalist tradition 
was more closely linked to the U.S. Revolution and its black internationalist 
consequences than was the revolutionary tradition.
Pioneers of the revivalist tradition produced an important body of litera-
ture, part of it destined to be incorporated into later chronicles of the black 
international. These founding texts, which began to emerge in the late eigh-
teenth century, consisted of poetry, sermons, autobiographical accounts, and 
philosophical musings by ex-slaves, some of whom had personally experienced 
the transatlantic journey of the Middle Passage.73 Part of the Western canon, 
even as they challenged that canon, such works mirrored the position of black 
folk in the white-dominated Atlantic world. The founding texts thus occupied 
a peculiar intellectual and political space, precariously perched between the 
Evangelical Revival and its ideological nemesis, the Enlightenment. From an 
uneasy synthesis of the two/uRELfk.dthe Revival and the Enlightenment, the sacred 
and the profane/uRELfk.darose abolitionism, which became the first great organizing 
principle of the revivalist tradition.
Abolitionism, then, was not the exclusive product of the white imagina-
tion, as the Eurocentric master narrative would have it.74 For one, the black 
founding narrators of the revivalist tradition powerfully mediated abolition-
ism, as only they experientially could do. In any case, abolitionism was hardly 
an intellectual abstraction. Whether as an idea or as a movement, it emerged 
in concert with slave resistance, especially slave revolts.75 The violent attempts 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
93


--- PAGE 113 ---
at self-liberation spurred the literary and organizational exertions of the aboli-
tionists, whose campaign, it bears remembering, initially targeted not slavery 
but the slave trade. It remained for the enslaved themselves, in the midst of 
their essays in self-liberation, to formulate the “genius of universal emanci-
pation,” to borrow the title of an early-nineteenth-century African American 
publication. In sum, the plan to end slavery as a form of social organization 
was conceived not in the heads of the abolitionists, black or white, but in slave 
revolts, culminating in the Haitian Revolution, which decisively shifted the 
locus of abolitionism from the slave trade to slavery. The official termination of 
the slave trade by Britain in 1807, and by the United States the following year, 
confirmed that shift. In both cases, but especially that of the United States, a 
major consideration in abandoning the commerce in human cargoes was the 
fear of slave revolts, behind which stood the greatest specter of all, the Haitian 
Revolution.76
The boost to abolitionism was also a boost to the revivalist tradition in 
black internationalism, its ideological helpmeet. Broadly, the revivalist tra-
dition shared the goals of the revolution ary tradition/uRELfk.dnamely, antislavery, 
antiracism, and more equivocally, anticolonialism. Unlike the revolutionary 
tradition, though, the revivalist tradition was constrained by its alliance with 
white abolitionism. With few exceptions, white abolitionists throughout the 
Atlantic were committed to a pacific, and often gradual, approach to emancipa-
tion. Generally, white abolitionists saw the Haitian Revolution as unhelpful, 
even as a setback to their cause.77 Some revivalists rejected that depiction, 
extolling the emancipationist glory of the Haitian Revolution. Already in 1797, 
seven years before Haiti officially became independent, Prince Hall rejoiced 
in the outcome of the revolt there. A staunch revivalist and pioneer of Af-
rican American masonry, Hall assert ed that events in Saint Domingue had 
shown that “God hath no respect of persons,” paraphrasing a biblical passage 
(Acts 10:34) much beloved by the founders of the revivalist tradition. Invok-
ing another scripture (Psalms 68:31) that would gain even greater popularity, 
becoming a rallying cry in black internationalist circles down to the Garvey 
movement, Hall concluded of the Saint Domingue revolt, “Thus doth Ethiopia 
begin to stretch forth her hand, from a sink of slavery to freedom and equal-
ity. ”78 Not all revivalists, however, followed Hall’s lead. Others, more closely 
allied with white abolition, remained mum on the Haitian Revolution. Thus 
publicly, at any rate, the founding generation of revivalists was not of one mind 
on the subject of Haiti.
michael o. west & william g. martin
94


--- PAGE 114 ---
The heirs to the revivalist tradition would help to keep alive memory of the 
Haitian Revolution outside Haiti. One such individual was James Theodore 
Holly, the African American clergyman and staunch supporter of the emigra-
tion of free blacks to Haiti in the years leading up to the U.S. Civil War. A sectar-
ian Protestant, like so many of his generation of black international revivalists, 
Holly’s enthusiasm for Haiti was tempered only by his disdain for its official 
religion, Catholicism (he largely ignored vodun, the faith of most Haitians). 
Holly proposed to replace Catholicism, which he apparently considered effete, 
among other errors, with a “manly” Protestantism. Otherwise, Holly’s fervor 
for Haiti seemed boundless. In his view, the Haitian Revolution was an epochal 
event, “vindicating” as it did the capacity of black folk for “self-government and 
civilized progress,” in short, to attain modernity and rise in the scale of white 
bourgeois culture.79
The black masses were equally buoyant on Haiti. In various parts of the 
Caribbean and South America, enslaved people and free people of color in-
corporated tropes of the Haitian Revolution into their culture/uRELfk.dmusic, dance, 
visual art, and folkways.80 Meanwhile, free African Americans also embraced 
the Haitian revolutionary legacy, turning January 1, Haiti’s independence day, 
into a popular, if unofficial, public holiday. The embrace of Haiti was facilitated 
by the exclusion of black people, often by violent means, from U.S. indepen-
dence celebrations.81
David Walker had a keen appreciation of the legacy of the Haitian Revolu-
tion, at both the intellectual and popular levels. His iconic pamphlet hailed 
Haiti as “the glory of the blacks and the terror of tyrants,”82 even as he helped 
to organize Haitian independence celebrations in Boston, his adopted home-
town. Walker came a generation before his fellow African American James 
Theodore Holly, for whom he may as well have been a model, balancing en-
thusiasm for Haiti with a Protestant chauvinist aversion to its official religion, 
Catholicism, “that scourge of nations,” all the while displaying a vibrant black 
internationalism. Walker linked the fate of African Americans, slave and free, 
to the liberation of black folk globally, a pan-African connection evident in the 
title of his deeply biblical and black text, David Walker’s Appeal to the Coloured 
Citizens of the World. Walker wrote in the urgent tone of the prophetic tradi-
tion/uRELfk.dthe tradition of speaking truth to power, damn the consequences.83 In 
his vacillation between the pacific tendencies of abolitionism, on one hand, 
and armed struggle, on the other, he stood athwart the two traditions in black 
internationalism: the revivalist and the revolutionary. Similarly, Walker’s epis-
Haiti, I'm Sorry
95


--- PAGE 115 ---
tle was situated between a biblically based teleology of emancipation and a 
Christian theology of liberation/uRELfk.dthe one founded on providential predeter-
mination and the other appealing to the agency of the oppressed.
Two years after Walker wrote, the two conceptions/uRELfk.dthe hand of God 
and the human hand/uRELfk.dfound a synthesis in revolutionary praxis. The year of 
reckoning was 1831, when the Nat Turner Revolt in Virginia and the Christ-
mas Rising in Jamaica, two attempts at self-emancipation, occurred just four 
months apart. Whatever their other connections (and Julius Scott’s common 
wind, although calmed by repression, had hardly faded away), the two rebel-
lions were related, ideologically, through a common adherence to the Baptist 
faith. Turner was a Baptist preacher, while the Jamaican insurrection is also 
known as the Baptist War, black Baptist refugees from the U.S. Revolution, 
among others, having brought their faith to the island.84 With the Turner Re-
volt and the Christmas Rising/Baptist War, black Christianity had given rise to 
a liberation theology based on armed struggle, much more explicitly than the 
independent black revolutionary activities attendant on the U.S. Revolution. 
For the first time since the Haitian Revolution, the revivalist and revolutionary 
traditions in black internationalism had merged on the field of battle, if ever so 
briefly. It was a meeting, finally, of Boukman and the Baptists.
It was only partially, however, a rendezvous of victory.85 The revolutionary 
antislavery crusades of 1831, the Turner Revolt and the Christmas Rising, had 
quite different historical outcomes. In yet another demonstration of the dialec-
tical interrelationship between slave revolts and abolitionism, the Christmas 
Rising served as an important and final impetus for emancipation in the British 
Empire. Relative to its economic value in the emerging British industrial order, 
the cost of slavery had become prohibitively high.86 Moreover, suppressing 
revolts and maintaining armies in the slave colonies were burdens the British 
treasury had grown tired of bearing. Given the frequency and ferocity of such 
uprisings, Britain seemed to face two choices: risk another Haiti or decree 
abolition from above. With the Abolition of Slavery Act, which was passed in 
1833 and became effective the following year, the British authorities chose the 
safer option.87
The situation was quite different in the United States, where slavery had 
become more important than ever, centering increasingly on the produc-
tion of cotton, primarily for the British textile industry. Accordingly, the U.S. 
slaveholders and the state, over which they exercised ever more dominance, 
responded to the Turner Revolt with even more repression. The revolution-
ary tradition negated, there would be no more major slave insurrections in 
michael o. west & william g. martin
96


--- PAGE 116 ---
the United States. Y et, the tradition of black self-organization, everywhere 
the foundation of antislavery revolutionary activities, remained alive and well 
among African American slaves, in their cultural and religious institutions 
and practices. The “sable arm,” recalled to martial duty by a repentant state 
more than three decades after the Turner Revolt, during the U.S. Civil War, 
would play a major role in bringing about emancipation.88 For many of its 
black participants, the Civil War effectively constituted a synthesis of the revo-
lutionary and revivalist traditions in black internationalism. All they needed 
was President Abraham Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation, which actually 
freed not a single slave but, rather, appealed to the agency of the enslaved and 
incited them to rebellion. Thus unchained, the sable arm would become its 
own liberator.89 The Emancipation Proclamation, then, was the equivalent 
of the Bois Caiman ceremony in the Haitian Revolution/uRELfk.dnot a bestowal of 
freedom but a clarion call for the enslaved to revolt against bondage and make 
real the promise of liberty.
The connection between the two emancipation campaigns/uRELfk.dthe Haitian 
Revolution and the U.S. Civil War/uRELfk.dwas deeper still.90 Matthew Clavin has 
recently shown how the transformation of black men, free and slave, into 
soldiers during the Civil War at once de epened and brought to light hidden 
identification among African America ns with the Haitian Revolution, and 
especially with T oussaint Louverture. For many African American soldiers 
and their boosters, “T oussaint and the men who followed him into battle af-
firmed the redemptive quality of violence to prove black manhood. ”91 This 
black international legacy, in the form of memory of the Haitian Revolution, 
was transmitted through both the literary and oral traditions/uRELfk.dthat is, the writ-
ings of the free blacks and the word of mouth of the slaves, including a handful 
of old bondsmen who claimed to have seen action in T oussaint’s army. The 
resulting consciousness and cultural tropes deeply inspired African Americans 
in the theater of war and beyond, as revealed in matters ranging from martial 
music to naming practices, including the names of military units, places, and 
individuals.92 Here, indeed, was an affirmation of the unbroken circle of eman-
cipation envisioned at the foundational moment of black internationalism, a 
vision most readily symbolized by the Haitian Revolution and its legacy.
Coda
Since assuming more definite form in the latter part of the eighteenth century, 
the black international had ebbed and flowed. The revolutionary tradition, on 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
97


--- PAGE 117 ---
becoming associated with the Haitian Revolution, caused much excitement 
and helped to fuel insurrectionary activities among the enslaved throughout 
the Americas. But the vigilance and repression of colonial and slaveholding 
powers, not some preordained historical force, ensured that despite repeated 
attempts, the revolutionary tradition would not gain any real traction outside 
Haiti after the revolution there. Meanwhile, the other paradigm in black inter-
nationalism, the revivalist tradition, adopted as its guiding principle universal 
emancipation, a principle first proclaimed and put into practice by adherents of 
the revolutionary tradition. Later, champions of the revivalist tradition would 
draw inspiration from the Haitian Revolution and defend Haitian sovereignty. 
At certain moments, the two traditions merged, as in the black guerrilla warfare 
on the sidelines of the U.S. Revolution, in the Turner Revolt and the Christmas 
Rising, and rather more tentatively, among the black contingent in the U.S. 
Civil War. In the main, though, the revivalist tradition remained dominant in 
black internationalism in the post–Haitian Revolution era, certainly in Anglo-
American lands. In the United States, meanwhile, some among the free blacks 
advocated leaving the country in search of real liberty, and Haiti was one of the 
suggested destinations for potential African American emigrants in the period 
leading up to the Civil War.
Then, in the early twentieth century, H aiti and the legacy of the Haitian 
Revolution dramatically reappeared in black internationalism. The cause was 
the U.S. invasion of Haiti in 1915, followed by a generation-long military occu-
pation lasting until 1934.93 Historically and symbolically, this violent repudia-
tion of Haitian sovereignty constituted a payback for the revolution against 
slavery, white supremacy, and colonialism over a century earlier. As such, it 
amounted to Jefferson’s revenge. Accordingly, Haiti and the Haitian Revolu-
tion became an important, if not fully appreciated, trope in the black interna-
tional renaissance, political and cultural, that followed World War I.
Since the aggression emanated from the United States, the cause of “bleed-
ing Haiti” became especially dear to African Americans.94 Black folk in the 
United States were all the more outraged because the invasion of Haiti came 
just weeks after the premiering of the film Birth of a Nation , a vilely racist 
attack on African American political ri ghts and a vindication of the violent 
white-supremacist overthrow of Reconstruction, the brief but remarkable 
experiment in nonracial democracy that had followed the Civil War.95 In the 
circumstances, African American activists, writers, and artists swung into ac-
tion, protesting the occupation of Haiti in multiple forms, including demon-
strations, commissions of investigations, essays, books, paintings, plays, and 
michael o. west & william g. martin
98


--- PAGE 118 ---
poems. “Black Majesty,” an ode by Countee Cullen, among the most equivocal 
of the African American poets of that era, his racial eulogy frequently tinged 
with apologia, was typical of the outbreak of celebration of Haitian revolution-
ary figures:
These men were kings, albeit they were black,
Christophe and Dessalines and L’Overture;
Their majesty has made me turn my back
Upon a plaint I once shaped to endure. . . .
Stifle your agony; let grief be drowned;
We know joy had a day once and a clime.
Still in verse, the lesser-known Ben Burrell, in one of the radical, U.S.-based 
pan-African journals, went beyond celebration of the past and issued a call to 
arms against the U.S. occupation. Listen to Burrell’s “Haiti, Awake!”:
Haiti, Awake! A hundred years
Of toil is marked upon thy brow. . . .
Oh, brethren, for your fathers brave
Assert your free and ancient rights. . . .
The Haitian nation never dies. . . .
Great champion of the Indies West,
Arise! The world shall guard your fame. . . .
The memory of thy dead endure;
The Dessalinos of faith sublime.
The noble knight; L’Overture.96
In fact, the U.S. occupation did produce vigorous martial resistance in 
Haiti, guerrilla warfare, along with a cultural resurgence.97 Interestingly, a 
central figure in the Haitian cultural rebirth was the physician and man of 
letters Jean Price-Mars, a scion of the nineteenth-century African American 
emigration to Haiti.98 Concurrently, Haiti and its revolutionary inheritance 
also attracted the attention of the apostles of Negritude, the cultural movement 
produced on French soil by colonial subjects from Africa and the Caribbean, 
in dialogue with the Haitian and African American renaissances, among oth-
ers.99 Indeed, Price-Mars was a founder of Negritude, albeit an oft-neglected 
one.100 Aimé Césaire, in his long prose-poem, the single most famous work 
of Negritude, lauded “Haiti, where negritude stood up for the first time and 
swore by its humanity. ”101 The great irony is that the historical narrators of 
the black international, who began to emerge around the same time, failed to 
Haiti, I'm Sorry
99


--- PAGE 119 ---
take a cue from the literary figures. As is often the case in telling the story of 
African-descended peoples, “fiction” turned out to be truer than “fact,” imagi-
native productions offering a more accurate portrayal of lived experiences than 
historical accounts.102 Accordingly, the greater body of pan-African historical 
scholarship would pass over in silence an epic moment in the making of the 
black international. It remains for the reconstituted field of African Diaspora 
studies to correct the record and affirm the black international majesty that was 
the Haitian Revolution, sparing others from having to wail, like the calypso 
singer David Rudder, “Haiti, I’m sorry. ”
notes
1. For the broad scholarly treatment of the Haitian Revolution, see, most notably, 
James, Black Jacobins; Fick, Making of Haiti; Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies; and 
Dubois, Avengers. See also, most recently, Bell, T oussaint Louverture, which credits the 
claim, rejected by almost all modern historians, that the revolution began as a royalist 
conspiracy.
2. James, Black Jacobins, 163–98; Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 157–70; Fick, 
“French Revolution. ”
3. Geggus, Slavery, War, and Revolution and Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 171–78; 
Dubois, Avengers, 152–70.
4. James, Black Jacobins, 199–240; Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 119–36.
5. James, Black Jacobins, 241–68; Fick, Making of Haiti, 157–203.
6. James, Black Jacobins, 269–321.
7. Quoted in Dubois, Avengers, 278.
8. Ibid., 290–93.
9. Fick, Making of Haiti, 204–36.
10. Quoted in ibid., 211–12.
11. Long an autonomous force within the revolution, these guerrillas were heavily 
African-born, compared to the leadership of the mainline revolutionary army, which 
consisted mainly of Creoles (individuals born in the Americas), men like T oussaint and 
Dessalines. For a portrait of Sans Souci, whose career illustrates the African-born/Creole 
divide, see T rouillot, Silencing the Past, 31–69.
12. Quoted in Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 27.
13. Brinton, Anatomy; Hobsbawm, Age of Revolution; Moore, Social Origins; Skocpol, 
States.
14. The most notable except ion is perhaps Langley, Americas, which discusses the 
experiences of the United States (“the revolution from above”), Haiti (“the revolution 
from below”), and Spanish America (“the revolution denied”). See also Blackburn, Over-
throw, 161–211; Benot, La révolution française; and from the side of Haitian studies, Fick, 
“French Revolution. ”
15. See, for example, Defronzo, Revolutions; Foran, Future; and Goldstone, Revolutions.
michael o. west & william g. martin
100


--- PAGE 120 ---
16. See, for example, the special issue of Social Research, 56, no. 1 (Spring 1989), and 
the summary of bicentennial debates in Doyle, French Revolution, 98–108.
17. Geggus, “Haitian Revolution,” 402–20 (citation from 402).
18. Berlin, Generations of Captivity; Knight, Slave Society; Stein, Vassouras.
19. Geggus, “Haitian Revolution,” 402.
20. While most historians attribute this to European balance of power politics, the 
loss of Haiti had a key role; see Paquette, “Revolutionary Saint Domingue,” and Hunt, 
Haiti’s Influence.
21. See, especially, the following works by David Brion Davis: Problem of Slavery in 
Western Culture, Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, Slavery and Human Progress,
and Inhuman Bondage.
22. Drescher, “Ending of the Slave T rade”; Fields, “Slavery, Race, and Ideology. ”
23. Northrup, Indentured Labor; Jung, Coolies and Cane; Yun, Coolie Speaks.
24. See Lewis, Growth and Fluctuations; Wallerstein, Modern World-System III, 127–89; 
and Wolf, Europe and the People, 310–53.
25. Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 27, 207; Dubois, Avengers.
26. See, most notably, Fick, Making of Haiti; Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies;
and Dubois, Avengers.
27. Drescher, “Limits of Example,” 13.
28. Beckles, “Caribbean Anti-Slavery”; T rouillot, Silencing the Past.
29. Santiago-Valles, “World-Historical Ties. ”
30. Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-Headed Hydra, 221–24.
31. See the list of rebellions and conspiracies in Geggus, “Slavery, War, and Revolu-
tion,” 46–49.
32. Klein, African Slavery; Berlin, Generations of Captivity.
33. Scott, “Common Wind. ”
34. Geggus, “Slavery, War, and Revolution,” 14; Childs, “‘Black French General’”;
Branson and Patrick, “Étrangers dans un pays étrange. ”
35. Quoted in Newman, “ American Political Culture,” 79.
36. LaChance, “Repercussions”; Dessens, From Saint-Domingue.
37. Robertson, Denmark Vesey, 51–53; Starobin, Denmark Vesey.
38. Childs, “‘Black French General. ’”
39. Robinson, Black Marxism.
40. This argument is most clearly articulated in Genovese, From Rebellion to 
Revolution.
41. T rouillot, Silencing the Past; Fick, “French Revolution. ”
42. Biddiss, Father of Racist Ideology.
43. Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-Headed Hydra, 33–34.
44. Egerton, Gabriel’s Rebellion.
45. Newman, “ American Political Culture. ”
46. Rothman, Slave Country; Hunt, Haiti’s Influence.
47. Quoted in Fischer, Modernity Disavowed, 4.
48. Century of Lawmaking, col. 330 (emphasis in original). See also Logan, Diplomatic 
Relations.
Haiti, I'm Sorry
101


--- PAGE 121 ---
49. Fischer, Modernity Disavowed, 4.
50. T rouillot, Silencing the Past.
51. Among the most curious exceptions at the turn of the twentieth century was the 
white-supremacist ideologue Lothrop Stoddard, whose work on the Haitian Revolu-
tion studiously avoided that term, underlining T rouillot’s point. Stoddard considered 
the “French Revolution in San Domingo,” as he called it, “the first great shock between 
the ideals of white supremacy and race equality, which erased the finest of European 
colonies from the map of the white world and initiated that most noted attempt at negro 
self-government, the black republic of Haiti. ” See Stoddard, French Revolution, vii.
52. Popkin, Facing Racial Revolution.
53. James, History of Negro Revolt; this text was refurbished and published anew in 
1969 as A History of Pan-African Revolt.
54. Scott, “Common Wind. ”
55. Padmore, Life and Struggles.
56. On Padmore’s life and politics, see Hooker, Black Revolutionary, and Edwards, 
Practice of Diaspora, 241–305.
57. Padmore, Life and Struggles, 78.
58. Ibid., 64–68.
59. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism? This book reappeared in 1972 under a 
new, more politically anodyne title, simply, Pan-Africanism or Communism, without the 
question mark and the subtitle.
60. See, for example, such otherwise admirable works as Langley, Pan-Africanism and 
Nationalism; Esedebe, Pan-Africanism; and Zachernuk, Colonial Subjects.
61. Geiss, Pan-African Movement.
62. Ibid., 37, 80, 127–28.
63. Gilroy, Black Atlantic.
64. Ibid., 13, 18.
65. For a discussion of T oussaint and modernity, see Scott, Conscripts of Modernity,
132–69.
66. James, Black Jacobins, 86; Fick, Making of Haiti, 104–5; Dubois, Avengers, 101.
67. Some scholars of the Haitian Revo lution have questioned whether the Bois 
Caiman ceremony really happened. The weight of opinion, however, supports its au-
thenticity. See, most authoritatively, Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 81–92.
68. Raboteau, Slave Religion; Frey and Wood, Come Shouting to Zion.
69. Bebbington, Evangelicalism; Ditchfield, Evangelical Revival; Hempton, Methodism;
Kidd, Great Awakening.
70. Thornton, Africa and Africans, 235–71.
71. On blacks and the U.S. Revolution and the resulting free black community, see 
Quarles, The Negro; Frey, Water from the Rock; Rael, Black Identity; and Nash, Forgotten 
Fifth.
72. Fyfe, History of Sierra Leone; Walker, Black Loyalists; Sanneh, Abolitionists Abroad;
Pulis, Moving On; Whitfield, Blacks on the Border; Pybus, Epic Journeys of Freedom; Byrd, 
Captives and Voyagers.
73. Such figures include James Gronniosaw, John Marrant, Quobna Ottobah Cugo-
ano, Olaudah Equiano, Phillis Wheatley, and John Jea. A number of anthologies contain 
michael o. west & william g. martin
102


--- PAGE 122 ---
their writings, in whole or in part. See, for example, Potkay and Burr, Black Atlantic 
Writers; Gates and McKay, Norton Anthology; and Gates and Andrews, Pioneers. Marcus 
Rediker has discoursed incisively on the impact of the Middle Passage on the ideas of 
some of these figures, most notably Equiano. See Rediker, Slave Ship.
74. The standard statement in this regard is Coupland, British Anti-Slavery Movement.
For more recent, and nuanced, recapitulations, see Brown, Moral Capital, and Schama, 
Rough Crossings.
75. Linebaugh and Rediker, Many-Headed Hydra, 211–47.
76. Rothman, Slave Country, 19; James, Black Jacobins.
77. Geggus, Haitian Revolutionary Studies, 2.
78. Hall, “Charge,” 204.
79. Holly, Vindication.
80. Geggus, Impact; Fischer, Modernity Disavowed; Geggus, “Influence. ”
81. Sweet, “Fourth of July”; Rael, Black Identity, 223–26. See also White, “‘It Was a 
Proud Day. ’”
82. Walker, David Walker’s Appeal, 23.
83. On the black prophetic tradition internationally, see Bogues, Black Heretics. On 
the same phenomenon in the United States more specifically, see Howard-Pitney, Afro-
American Jeremiad.
84. Rugemer, Problem of Emancipation; Greenberg, Nat Turner; French, Rebellious 
Slave; Turner, Slaves and Missionaries, 148–78; Craton, Testing the Chains, 291–321; Pulis, 
“Bridging T roubled Waters. ”
85. The expression is borrowed from Césaire, Notebook of a Return, 140.
86. The classic statement on this subject is Williams, Capitalism and Slavery.
87. As J. R. Kerr-Ritchie has so ably shown, British emancipation would have con-
siderable impact on African Americans, notably the free blacks, including those who 
took refuge in Canada, especially after the U.S. Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act 
of 1850. See Kerr-Ritchie, Rites of August First. In the same connection, see also Rugemer, 
Problem of Emancipation.
88. Cornish, Sable Arm.
89. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction.
90. British emancipation, along with the H aitian Revolution, had provided an im-
portant template for the struggle between the defenders and opponents of slavery in the 
decades leading up to the U.S. Civil War. See Rugemer, Problem of Emancipation.
91. Clavin, “ American T oussaints,” 89.
92. Ibid., 87–113.
93. Schmidt, United States Occupation; Plummer, Haiti and the Great Powers.
94. Plummer, “ Afro-American Response”; Pamphile, “NAACP and the American 
Occupation”; Suggs, “Response. ”
95. Boston Branch, Fighting a Vicious Film.
96. Crusader, May 1920, 11.
97. For an effective roundup of the Haitian experience, from colonial times to the 
Duvaliers, including the impact of the U.S. occupation, see Dupuy, Haití in the World 
Economy.
98. Shannon, Jean Price-Mars.
Haiti, I'm Sorry
103


--- PAGE 123 ---
99. Irele, African Experience; Fabre, From Harlem to Paris; Ellis, “Nicolas Guillen and 
Langston Hughes. ”
100. See, however, Geiss, Pan-African Movement, 305–21, which places Price-Mars at 
the center of Negritude’s origin.
101. Césaire, Notebook of a Return, 66. Césaire would later write a play about Chris-
topher, Dessalines’s successor, in addition to a biography of T oussaint.
102. On this point, see Depelchin, Silences in African History.
michael o. west & william g. martin
104


--- PAGE 124 ---
Isaac Theophilus Akunna Wallace-Johnson (1894–1965). Born in Sierra 
Leone, Wallace-Johnson was an anticolonial activist, founder of the 
West African Youth League, a political prisoner during World War II, 
and a pan-Africanist. (Courtesy of Hakim Adi)
part 2


--- PAGE 125 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 126 ---
Nothing Matters but Color
Transnational Circuits, the Interwar Caribbean, 
and the Black International
lara putnam
In the first decades of the twentieth century, sojourners from the British West 
Indies created a migratory sphere that stretched from northern Venezuela to 
southern Harlem. Not only did individual lives and family units cross national 
boundaries, but so, too, did social networks, formal institutions, and cultural 
consumption. Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association 
(UNIA) had chapters across the region, and the UNIA’s newspaper, Negro 
World, everywhere read, published news and letters from correspondents in 
Cuba, Panama, Jamaica, Barbados, and beyond. The Anglican and Wesleyan 
Methodist churches, the Salvation Army, and other Christian missions had a 
similar spread and helped members of distant chapters keep in touch. Records 
and radios let sounds circulate even faster than singers, shaping a musical tradi-
tion in which calypso, mento, plena, son, and jazz acquired echoes of mutual 
influence.1
Local newspapers played an important role in uniting distant settlements 
into a single social world. British West Indian–owned newspapers published 
in Kingston ( Jamaica), Port Limón (Costa Rica), Panama City (Panama), and 
Port of Spain (T rinidad) circulated far and wide, as did the UNIA’s New Y ork–
based Negro World. News articles, social notes, and obituaries were commonly 
picked up and reprinted among these papers.2 Unusually high rates of literacy 
among British West Indian emigrants in these years assured a wide reader-
ship.3 The Negro World, the Kingston Daily Gleaner, the Limón Searchlight
and Atlantic Voice, the Bocas del T oro Central American Express, the Panama 
Tribune, and the “West Indian News” page of the Panama Star and Herald
bridged elite and popular culture within their sites of publication even as they


--- PAGE 127 ---
linked these sites together. The frequency of steamer traffic also facilitated 
private correspondence. As early as 1883–84 (the heyday of Jamaican migration 
to the French Panama canal project), more than 82,000 letters were dispatched 
from Jamaica to Colombia in the space of twelve months.4 Oral, epistolary, and 
print lines of communication together cycled rumors, ideas, and news around 
the region.5
At the height of migration in the late 1920s, British West Indian immigrants 
and their children made up roughly 16 percent of the population of Panama, 
3.8 percent of that of Costa Rica, 1.2 percent of that of Cuba, and almost one-
quarter of that of Harlem.6 Smalle r but significant communities resided in 
the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Colombia, and 
Venezuela. Put another way, by 1930, at least 150,000 first- or second-generation 
British West Indians lived in the Spanish-speaking circum-Caribbean, while 
145,000 more resided in the United States.7 Nearly 300,000-strong, then, the 
British West Indian diaspora was almost twice as large as the population of 
Barbados and fully six times that of Belize. Y et because these men, women, 
and children did not reside in a single nation, scholars have rarely seen them 
for the interrelated whole they were. T rue, the transnational world they cre-
ated did not endure. Economic crisis and racist immigration laws cut short 
the circulation of migrants in the 1930s, and post–World War II political and 
economic shifts redirected migratory circuits toward the North Atlantic. Y et 
the legacy of that early British West Indian diaspora is extraordinary and marks 
black internationalism to this day.
Scholars have long recognized the disproportionate number of foun-
dational pan-African thinkers that came from the Caribbean, among them 
Marcus Garvey, Amy Jacques Garvey, Cyril V . Briggs, Richard B. Moore, 
Claude McKay, George Padmore, C. L. R. James, and Eric Williams. Winston 
James has argued that the migration experience itself was a key factor in their 
radicalization.8 I would go further to note that they were not just products 
of one particular migratory system; they were also products of a particular 
moment in its history. All stepped on the public stage in the interwar years, 
a critical juncture for British West Indians abroad. Most importantly, these 
leaders were not unique. In this same era, voices across the Caribbean public 
sphere were speaking out about the common experiences of African peoples 
around the globe, about their common suffering and common aspirations, and 
about the need for collective action to make shared dreams a united reality.
Such a vision of brotherhood and siste rhood among African-descended 
peoples on all sides of the Atlantic w as built both against something and out 
lara putnam
108


--- PAGE 128 ---
of something. It was built against something: the racially defined nationalism 
of Latin American states, which across the region imposed race-based exclu-
sions (often for the first time) in the late 1920s and 1930s. It was also built 
in opposition to the racist imperialism of U.S. military interventions, most 
especially in Panama, Cuba, and Haiti. But it was at the same time built out 
of something: a diverse yet interdepe ndent array of voluntary associations, 
evangelical movements, and moral reform movements, all of which reinforced 
and in turn were reinforced by British West Indian newspapers that combined 
international circulation with detailed local commentary. Many of these moral 
reform movements and voluntary associations were of British origin (such as 
the Salvation Army and the Boy Scouts); others were originally British but 
reached the Caribbean via African American adaptations in the United States 
(such as the Independent Benevolent Order of Elks and the Oddfellows). With 
striking consistency, the lodges, churches, scouts, and newspapers preached 
a doctrine of racial uplift through individual self-improvement and collective 
brotherhood.
This essay presents a three-part argum ent. First, that migration and mi-
grants’ activities created a West Indian–centered black internationalist world 
in the first decades of the twentieth century; second, that this world came 
under attack as a result of the rise of narrow, racially defined nationalisms and 
imperial closures in the interwar years; and third, that the attacks reinforced 
“race consciousness” among migrants, spurring increasingly explicit black in-
ternationalist critiques of imperial and neocolonial power. The story unfolds 
in many places, at sites distant in space yet closely linked by individual travels, 
institutional ties, and the flow of news of shared concerns. It is a history made 
in places like the Methodist Episcopal church of Guachipali, Panama, where 
returned veterans of the British West Indies Regiment, barely out of adoles-
cence themselves, gathered boys and girls into troops, drilled them in marches, 
and instilled the gospel of a scout’s loyalty to fellow scouts.9 It was made, too, 
on docksides at ports across the Caribbean, where black merchant seamen 
surreptitiously passed along copies of the Negro World in the years when em-
ployers and officials did everything they could to block its circulation.10 It was 
made, as well, in the slums of West Kingston, where migrants returning from 
Cuba in the 1930s gathered in crowded yards to hear about the divinity of an 
Ethiopian monarch named Ras T afari.11 The saga here presented was made, yet 
again, on railroad sidings like the one in Ciego de Avila, Cuba, where one hot 
afternoon in 1925 a mother stood with her three children, looking in vain for 
the husband she had traveled all the way from Barbados to rejoin. Another man 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
109


--- PAGE 129 ---
walked by. She stared. “Joseph Goodridge, that’s you? Joseph, Joseph, Joseph. ” 
“Ms. Greaves? Wait, what you doing here?” They had known each other years 
before in the cities of Panama, and now they met by chance at a crossroads 
amid the canefields of Cuba. A Barbadian bar owner and his Jamaican wife fed 
the family that day, Mrs. Greaves’s son Earl would recall some seventy years 
later, while another gentleman went to tell Earl’s father his family had arrived 
two months ahead of schedule. “ And when Mr. Greaves was coming up to us 
mama says ‘Look at your father coming there. ’ And he says ‘Oh Lord, look at my 
children. Look at my children. ’ And he start to cry. ”12 Such repeat encounters, 
open doors, and long-awaited reunions wove distant sites into a single social 
world that stretched across the interwar Caribbean.
Self-Help, Salvation, and Solidarity: 
Overseas West Indian Civic Activism
A UNIA Mass Meeting Hymnal printed in Panama in 1948 lies today under glass 
in the tiny Museo Afroantillano (Afro-Caribbean Museum) in Panama City. 
“Blessed be the tie that binds / Our hearts in Christian love. / The fellowship 
of kindred minds / is like to that above,” read the lyrics labeled “Introduction 
Hymn. ” The Ethiopian National Hymn follows. Christian conviction suffused 
fraternal rituals in the early-twentieth-century Caribbean, and in this regard 
Garveyism was no different. Its collective affirmation of black brotherhood 
built upon familiar models. One elderly Jamaican, interviewed in 1973, de-
scribed how UNIA meetings in eastern Cuba in the 1920s always began with 
a “political song and a church song. . . . Y ou see we get up and we sing and 
after we sing, we talk about how the whites have us trampling and how they 
treat us. ”13
Like this man, countless Garveyites first encountered the movement while 
far from home.14 The UNIA was very much a phenomenon of the British West 
Indian diaspora. While the association had chapters in forty-two countries by 
1926, 45 percent of all non-U.S. chapters were located in just three countries: 
Cuba, Panama, and Costa Rica. The importance of the UNIA to British West 
Indian migrants/uRELfk.dand the migrants to the UNIA/uRELfk.dis evident when one com-
pares membership statistics from sending and receiving societies. The associa-
tion had four times as many chapters in Panama as it did in Jamaica.15 And the 
Garveyites were not the only black organization whose membership spanned 
the Caribbean in these years. Nor were the Garveyites the first to make black 
pride and racial solidarity the cornerstone of their philosophy. T o give just one 
lara putnam
110


--- PAGE 130 ---
example, the Mosaic T emplars of America was an African American fraternal 
society founded in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1882 that provided death, burial, 
and loan benefits to its members. By the 1920s, the Mosaic T emplars had chap-
ters totaling tens of thousands of members worldwide.16 Advertisements in 
Port Limón’s English-language press in 1911 read, “Join the people’s fraternity. 
No discrimination because of your color, no privileges debarred. A T emplar in 
Costa Rica is welcomed in the U.S. or elsewhere. A Policy by a member here is 
paid equally as in the U.S. We aim at the protection of our race and people as 
members of one family. If you deem yourself worthy of the name and claim, 
then be a member of our order. ”17
Within the Canal Zone in Panama, the U.S. authorities maintained strict 
Jim Crow segregation, affecting everything from pay scales (labeled gold and 
silver, after the different coinage that had been used for white and black em-
ployees at the start of canal construction ) to drinking fountains. White U.S. 
citizens, who drew their pay from the “Gold Roll,” enjoyed superior facilities in 
YMCA clubhouses, while the Jamaican, Barbadian, and other Afro-Caribbean 
immigrants on the “Silver Roll” were relegated to the “Colored” clubhouses. 
Y et, even in such circumstances of economic and social apartheid, West Indian 
workers created an extraordinarily vibrant civic life in the “Silver Y’s,” Angli-
can and Methodist churches, and UNIA halls in and around the Canal Zone. 
Among groups meeting in one month in 1920 were the West Indian Demo-
cratic Club, the Chorillo Dominoe T eam, the Boys Brigade, the Anti-Cussing 
Club for Boys, a half-dozen cricket teams, a like number of literary societies, 
multiple UNIA and Black Cross Nurse chapters, and dozens of local lodges of 
the Independent Benevolent Order of Elks, the Independent United Order of 
Mechanics, the Loyal Order of Ancient Shepherds, the Lebanon Foresters, and 
the Grand United Order of Odd Fellows (GUOOF).18 Memberships necessarily 
overlapped. Obituaries listed the highest offices the deceased held in each of 
the lodges to which he or she belonged, then specified the order in which those 
lodges were to march in the funeral procession.19 Island-specific friendly and 
benevolent societies, with primarily mutual aid and banking functions, made 
up an additional layer of associational life.20
Fraternal lodges blanketed overseas West Indian communities, literally one 
atop the other: in 1916, in the tiny town of Guácimo, Costa Rica, the “Beacon 
Lodge” of the Independent United Order of Mechanics rented hall space to the 
Mosaic T emplars, the Good Samaritans, and the Star of Bethlehem Lodge.21
Providing sickness, injury, and burial benefits; in some cases widows’ pensions; 
and a host of informal support from job referrals to help hiding from the law, 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
111


--- PAGE 131 ---
the lodges cushioned the risks and the sorrows of peripatetic lives. Printed 
“T raveling Cards” or “Clearance Cards” ensured that lodge brothers and sisters 
would be recognized as such wherever they went.22 The promise of welcome 
was no mere formalism. Lodge meeting minutes from Limón from the second 
decade of the twentieth century record constant arrivals of new brothers pre-
senting credentials from Panamanian lodges.23 Over the decades, emigrating 
Barbadian members of Court Western Star of the Ancient Order of Foresters 
(AOF)/uRELfk.dwhich had been founded in 1846 and included men and women of 
color from 1847 onward/uRELfk.dset up AOF lodges in St. Vincent, the United States, 
British Guiana, Grenada, St. Lucia, Panama, and British Honduras.24 The Brit-
ish West Indian migrants who moved north to Harlem from Panama or from 
the islands in the interwar years joined African American fraternal orders, but 
they also established U.S. branches of orders that had been exclusively British 
and British Caribbean until then, includ ing the Ancient Order of Shepherds 
and the Mechanics. Men who had joined the Lebanon Foresters in Panama 
found themselves obliged to found a new incarnation of that body in New Y ork 
after all-white local chapters refused to recognize black immigrants as lodge 
brothers.25
If the lodges most immediately linked members to other black lodges within 
the West Indian migratory sphere, they also tied members to a broader African 
American civic world. These were transnational voluntary associations, and the 
flow of paperwork they entailed meant no one could forget it. In the second 
decade of the twentieth century, the Limón Lodge of the GUOOF received 
quarterly circulars from the Sub-Committee of Management in Philadelphia 
and filled out annual reports to send to the same. The circulars included the 
names and addresses of lodge officers from Thelma, North Carolina, to Ponce, 
Puerto Rico.26 The “Ritual of the Juvenile Society of the Grand United Order 
of Odd Fellows” followed in Port Limón had been “Prepared by Sister Tillie 
M. Brooks, of Household of Ruth No. 48, Paducah, Ky., and Sister Rhoda A. 
Moore, of the Household of Ruth No. 197, Houston, T ex. ”; the juvenile society’s 
founding, readers of the printed ritual learned on page 15, had been proposed 
by the Grand Household in St. Louis, reaffirmed by the Grand Household in 
Chicago, and approved by the General Meeting of the Order at Indianapolis.27
This expansive geography of fraternal action stretched lodge members’ sphere 
of belonging beyond their own potential destinations to encompass the New 
World African Diaspora more broadly.
Enterprises from life insurance to evangelical missions followed the frater-
nal template in the British West Indian diaspora. For instance, the Salvation 
lara putnam
112


--- PAGE 132 ---
Army, founded in London in 1878, began missionary work in the West Indies 
in 1892. By 1912 it had twenty-nine local “Corps and Outposts,” carrying out 
spiritual “rescue missions” and social work in Jamaica, Panama, Costa Rica, 
British Honduras, Barbados, T rinidad, British Guiana, and the Leeward Is-
lands.28 This evangelical mission functioned much like the fraternal lodges 
described above, speeding the flow of information within the migratory system 
through interpersonal networks and publications, creating ready-made com-
munities for incoming immigrants, and innovating social services.29 The Salva-
tion Army’s regional newspaper, the West Indies War Cry, began publication 
in Kingston in 1905 and was sold by “boomers” on street corners and in ports 
across the Caribbean. By 1913, the paper had a monthly circulation of 10,000.30
Readers used the War Cry to reach across the political boundaries their own 
lives crossed so routinely. The “Enquiry Department” published notes like 
the following, from 1906: “News Wanted of Marcus Solomon Samson, native 
of Suriname, Dutch Guiana, who about twenty years ago left there for Brazil, 
Panama, or Colón. Age about 60. Any information will be thankfully received 
by his daughter. ”31
It is not coincidental that the War Cry sold best in the same places where 
Garvey’s UNIA was most popular. Both the Salvation Army and the UNIA
benefited from the heyday of Christian ci vic enthusiasm and “joining” that 
swept the British West Indian diaspora as it did North America.32 Migrants 
used the UNIA and the Salvation Ar my, as they did the far more numerous 
fraternal societies, to cushion the risks and loneliness of an economic system 
built on extreme mobility. Remittances from Panama fueled an explosion of 
friendly societies in Barbados during canal construction; migrants returning 
to the Leeward Islands from Central America and the United States led the 
burgeoning friendly society movement there in the same years.33 The lodges, 
the friendly societies, the UNIA, and the Salvation Army each linked members 
to broader circum-Caribbean or transatlantic social movements that promised 
collective uplift though clean living, Christian prayer, and brotherly love.
The enthusiasm for communal uplift through civic participation spawned 
another set of transatlantic associations in the interwar period, as enterprising 
young men founded “scout” troops across the western Caribbean. A generation 
after preachers William and Catherine Booth had founded the Salvation Army 
to transform London’s slum dwellers into stalwart Christian soldiers, Robert 
Baden-Powell, a former British regimental officer, decided to renew the vigor 
of the empire by providing a quasi-military outdoor experience for England’s 
youth. His foundational essay, Scouting for Boys, was published in 1908. By 1909 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
113


--- PAGE 133 ---
there were more than 130,000 “Baden-Powell boy scouts” enrolled in troops in 
Great Britain, and affiliated troops were being founded rapidly across the Brit-
ish Empire. Soon other international movements created youth brigades with 
similar aims and activities. Y outh scouting found eager adherents in Colón, 
Bocas del T oro, and Port Limón, destinations of the first generation of British 
West Indian emigrants and places that, by the post–World War I years, had siz-
able numbers of locally born youths. Repeatedly, we find boys’ groups founded 
by returning veterans of the British West Indies Regiment (BWIR), which had 
served in Europe, Egypt, and East Africa during World War I.
Black men had demanded the right to  serve in a spirit of proud imperial 
patriotism.34 Volunteers came from overseas West Indian communities as well 
as the islands. An open letter to “His Majesty’s Recruiting Agent for the Re-
public of Panama” in the Central America Express in 1917 applauded the “rush 
to the colors” in Panama and Colón and noted that some eager volunteers from 
Bocas del T oro had gone so far as to pay their own way to Jamaica in order to 
enlist. “ As Britishers we demand our share of the privilege of having you here 
in your official capacity. ”35 In the end the regiment’s volunteers totaled more 
than 15,000 men, including more than 2,000 from Panama alone.36 Those who 
survived returned home deeply disillusioned by the open racism and discrimi-
natory treatment they had endured. After BWIR troops rioted in Italy in 1918, 
colonial authorities feared violent uprisings would accompany their return to 
the Caribbean. In fact, returnees did lead violent protests in British Honduras 
and fueled a strike by longshoremen in T rinidad.37 Ultimately, though, few 
veterans led riots back home. Y et the war had changed all. New loyalties had 
been forged, new strategies learned, new possibilities revealed. In the western 
Caribbean, at least, wartime experiences seem to have fed renewed community 
activism with a view to the future of “the race. ”
In 1920, David Watson founded the Colón Boys Institute. A “native of Ja-
maica, and ex-corporal in the British West India Regiment,” Watson, “while a 
soldier at the front . . . formed his idea to help the unfortunate youths of the city 
of Colón, should he return. ”38 That same year, the “West Indian News” page of 
the Panama Star and Herald announced the founding of a “Boys’ Brigade . . . 
under the auspices of Grace Church, Methodist Episcopal, at Guachipali. The 
Staff of officers in command consists of ex-soldiers of the Ninth Battalion, West 
Indian Regiment. . . . The primary object of the brigade is to assist in the physi-
cal and moral training of our boys and girls and keep them out of mischief. ”39
Significantly, and perhaps not coincidentally, it was this very same unit, the 
Ninth Battalion, that had rioted in Italy during the war. In the weeks after 
lara putnam
114


--- PAGE 134 ---
the riot, fifty to sixty sergeants from the Ninth Battalion formed a “Caribbean 
League,” arguing that the black man “should have freedom to govern himself 
in the West Indies” and that “force must be used, and if necessary bloodshed 
to obtain that object. ”40
Some veterans seem to have brought this same vision to their work as scout 
leaders. Like their counterparts elsewhere in the region, in 1922 former BWIR
servicemen in Bocas del T oro organized a scout troop, this one loosely tied to 
the UNIA. As they led the boys in drills with wooden rifles, the scout leaders 
reputedly declared that they were training to seize control from “the white 
people. ” In response, the Panamanian authorities arrested twenty-seven men, 
who were then blacklisted by the United Fruit Company, the region’s chief em-
ployer.41 Why such fear over a group of boys with sticks? The authorities knew 
imperial experience, race consciousness, and local grievance to be an explosive 
mix. Three years earlier in Bocas, labor leaders had summoned United Fruit 
workers to a violent strike precisely by recalling the rhetoric of rights that had 
accompanied BWIR recruiting. “Do you remember what the white man told us 
during the war that we were fighting for democracy, equality and therefore to 
become free subjects? . . . If we could have given a good account of ourselves 
in the bloody war, why not here too. Why must we be afraid of the few white 
parasites around here, we will teach them a lesson for life. ”42 In arresting scout 
leaders in 1922, bosses may have been overreacting to a mocking joke. Or the 
scout leaders may indeed have been planning revolution. They certainly were 
not alone in pairing civic activism and racial allegiance. In the interwar years, 
West Indian community leaders of diverse class positions and ideologies came 
to a common conclusion: only by putting race first could people of African 
descent attain collective uplift in a modern, racist world.
Mestizo Nationalism, Antiblack Legislation, and the 
Impact of Returnees
Across Latin America in the 1920s and 1930s, faith in scientific racism was 
ceding to a new nationalism that celebrated mestizaje/uRELfk.dracial and cultural mix-
ing/uRELfk.din each nation’s distant past.43 But when global market crises devastated 
the export-based economies of the Caribbean basin, black immigrants and 
their children became nationalist politicians’ favorite scapegoat. Left- as well 
as right-wing leaders embraced xenophobia even as they insisted their opposi-
tion to black/uRELfk.dand only black/uRELfk.dimmigration was based on culture, and thus 
not racist.44 In 1927, a typical editorial asked, “Is Cuba Being Africanized?” 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
115


--- PAGE 135 ---
“The term Africanization is used, as all of the Cuban authors who have turned 
their attention to our ethnic problems have used it, in the sense of undesirable 
immigration, not because it is African, but ra ther because it is less civilized, 
weaker, and more easily exploited by foreign capitalism, more easily enslaved 
by it. ”45
Nationalist intellectuals’ diagnoses were strikingly similar across the re-
gion. A pamphlet titled The Antillean Menace in Central America (Defending 
the Race) went through multiple printings in Panama in the early 1920s.46 An 
influential newspaper there wrote in 1924, “The antillanos [Afro-Caribbeans] 
who abound in our terminal cities lower our standards of living and with their 
alien customs imprint upon Panama, Colón, and Bocas de T oro the appear-
ance of African cities; they constitut e one of the most serious problems that 
this country must solve. ”47 Meanwhile in Costa Rica, “the black race” found 
itself lumped together with the “vice-ridden Chinese” in official rhetoric and 
immigration law alike for the first time.48 In a 1934 interview on the occasion 
of El Día de la Raza (Columbus Day; literally, “The Day of the Race”), Limón’s 
school superintendent accused Costa Rican celebrants of hypocrisy. “Have 
we indeed conserved the purity of the Spanish race?” he asked. “Haven’t we 
instead darkened it a bit, or given it a yellowish tint?” He called for “the impo-
sition of drastic measures which will impede the crossing of our pure Spanish 
blood with other races, which we consider inferior, so that the gentility and 
grace of our ancestors may be reborn and we can take pleasure in celebrating 
with real pride the festival of the race. ”49 “Drastic measures” were in fact being 
implemented even as he spoke. The same issue of the newspaper announced 
the expulsion of undocumented Chinese residents. Two months later, Costa 
Rica’s congress passed a law forbidding the employment of “colored” workers 
on the United Fruit Company’s new Pacific coast plantations, devastating the 
country’s long-settled British West Indian community, who with their senior-
ity and expertise had dominated skilled employment in United Fruit’s opera-
tions on the Caribbean coast.50
Doors slammed shut across the region in the 1920s and 1930s. The United 
States, which had become the single most important destination for West 
Indian migrants in the postwar years, passed race-based restrictions in 1924 
that cut annual black immigration by 95 percent in a single year.51 Panama-
nian legislators incrementally restricted access to employment and citizen-
ship by “foreign” blacks in 1926, 1928, and 1941.52 Honduras limited foreign 
black employment in 1923 and 1926 and entry in 1929 and 1934; Venezuela 
prohibited black immigration in 1929; and the Dominican Republic limited 
lara putnam
116


--- PAGE 136 ---
seasonal migration by British West Indian workers in the same year.53 (Eight 
years later, the regionwide pattern of official scapegoating of black migrants 
reached a grotesque extreme with the massacre of some 15,000 ethnic Haitians 
by Dominican troops.)54 More than 100,000 British West Indian and Haitian 
migrants had flocked to Cuba during the immediate postwar sugar boom; but 
as exports collapsed, scores of thousands of Haitians were deported between 
1933 and 1939, while hunger and lack of work pushed tens of thousands of 
British West Indians out, in some cases back to islands where their parents or 
grandparents had been born but which they themselves had never known.55
With each large-scale wave of returnees, the islands witnessed new labor 
activism and political agitation by their disenfranchised black majorities. This, 
in part, reflected the fact that hard times spurred both return migration and 
popular unrest. Economic crises hit hard across the region, given that island 
and rimland economies alike depended on the same export crops (promi-
nently sugar, bananas, and cacao), the same sources of capital, and the same 
North Atlantic markets. Lean years triply impacted the sending societies. Is-
land economies contracted, remittances dropped, and emigrants (or, in the dire 
years of the 1930s, the children and grandchildren of previous generations of 
emigrants) returned to join the ranks of the unemployed. But the link between 
the returnees’ arrival and political and labor agitation seems to go beyond 
shared structural causes. Again and again, we find returnees playing leadership 
roles in island agitation. In a typical example among many, in 1918 a St. Kitts
police inspector warned the colonial secretary that the leaders of that island’s 
Universal Benevolent Association had apparently “associated in America with 
men of their own colour embued [sic] with racial hatred of the white man and, 
perhaps also with extreme labour movement views of a physical force type. ”56
The mix was unmistakable. Calls for black loyalty and white comeuppance 
rang out in every labor upheaval led by returnees in the interwar era.
A few examples must suffice to illustrate the trend.57 In Barbados, British 
West India Regiment veteran Clennell Wickham edited the Barbados Herald
from 1919 to 1930, providing the first sustained forum for working-class criti-
cism of planter hegemony.58 In Jamaica, where labor organizing surged in the 
1920s and 1930s, the most prominent leaders, from Marcus Garvey to Alexan-
der Bustamante, were veterans of the Caribbean migratory system. “The radical 
group of young, racially conscious, black labour leaders” of the Jamaica Work-
ers and T radesmen Union in 1936 included L. E. Barnett, who had become 
a UNIA and union leader in Costa Rica, and Hugh Buchanan, whose years 
in Cuba had brought him into contact with both Garveyite and Communist 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
117


--- PAGE 137 ---
organizing.59 Other returnees preached an even more radical rejection of colo-
nial rule, hailing Ras T afari, who had become Haile Selassie on being crowned 
emperor of Ethiopia in 1928, as the divine “King of Kings” and rejecting the 
legitimacy of imperial authorities. Indeed, all three initiators of what would 
become known as Rastafari were former emigrants who returned to Kingston 
in the 1930s from Cuba, Costa Rica, and Panama.60 Deprivation and hunger, 
together with the ever-more-explicit denunciations of the racist colonial order 
as the underlying problem, culminated at the end of the decade in a wave of 
“labour rebellions” across the British colonies. Returnees abounded among 
leaders and rank and file alike.61
In contrast to the labor activism and open insurgencies led by veterans of 
the British West Indian migratory sphere in the sending societies of the Greater 
Caribbean, their cousins, nieces, and nephews who remained in the receiving 
societies may at first glance appear to have been absent from the public stage 
in the 1930s. The West Indian communities of Panama, Costa Rica, and Cuba 
in the lean years of the 1920s and 1930s have been described as isolated, defen-
sive, and dependent; yet I would suggest that this judgment rests on a falsely 
truncated view of those communities’ boundaries. Y es, times were hard and 
xenophobic slander was common. Demography and employment patterns, 
combined with cultural divides and racist  suspicions, largely kept these first- 
and second-generation immigrants outside the expanding labor movement 
in each country.62 Y et such local isolation should not obscure the fact that 
the immigrants were connected, vitally so, to something much bigger. They 
were becoming “race enthusiasts”; they were speaking of, and speaking to, the 
“Negro World” the Atlantic system had wrought. T o the extent that nations 
are imagined communities, these West Indian emigrants were creating a new 
nation.63
Racial Uplift and the Overseas 
British West Indian Press
Sidney Y oung founded the Panama Tribune in 1928 in the wake of a new consti-
tutional amendment withholding citizenship from locally born West Indians 
until their twenty-first birthday. Y oung and others had mobilized unsuccessfully 
against the proposed amendment. The Tribune was Y oung’s vehicle to carry on 
the same battle by other means and to strengthen the West Indian community 
through civic participation and racial solidarity. Its masthead drawing was a 
radiant book with the inscription, “Let the people have light and they shall find 
lara putnam
118


--- PAGE 138 ---
their way. ” Y oung’s highest praise was reserved for “race enthusiasts”/uRELfk.dmen 
and women who chose to speak to and for the Negro race.64
This is the creed of the West Indian, to be exacting and hard with his 
own people and to be as meek as the lowly worm in his dealings with 
others of a different race and color, particularly those who do not give 
as much as the well known tinker’s damn about him. . . . We need a 
new sort of education. Unfortunately we have never developed either 
a fierce spirit of nationalism or a deep pride of race. . . . What we need, 
friends and countrymen, is a little more holding together, a little more 
toughness where other people are concerned and a little more softness, 
understanding and cooperation where we ourselves are concerned.65
The Panama Tribune would become an enduring community institution, in 
large part because Y oung and George Westerman, his protégé and the paper’s 
onetime sports writer, were extraordinary leaders.66 Y et Y oung’s articulation of 
the crises facing the West Indian diaspora in the 1930s was hardly unique. Up 
the coast in Costa Rica, British West Indian–run newspapers like the Limón 
Searchlight offered similar diagnoses and remedies. Like Y oung, the editors 
of the Searchlight insisted “cooperation” was the first step toward surviving 
antiblack racism.
In these Latin countries there is the tendency among the more ig-
norant, the unwashed to feel that because one is a Jamaican he is 
inferior to him; the most abject depraved wretch will be ignorant 
enough to feel that he is superior to you because you happen to be 
a Jamaican, be your intellectual abilities and moral standing in the 
Community ever so much appreciated by the best blood of the coun-
try. It is now necessary therefore that we ought to cooperate and put 
away trivial objections to the contrary, and strive to support any-
thing that will tend towards the improvement of the Negro Race.67
A similar letter published in the Searchlight in 1931 under the heading, “De-
plores Lack of Racial Sentiment,” called for unity in the face of hostility. “One 
of our black men,” a public employee, had called a Jamaican teen “Nigger Girl. ” 
“Well now, if this is the attitude our black men hold toward their black girls, 
what can we expect our white brothers to hold for us? . . . We should protect our 
women, especially those who try to lead righteous lives. ” The young woman 
in question, the writer explained, sang  in the Anglican church choir and was 
a founding member of a local civic club.68 “Therefore now is the time for us 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
119


--- PAGE 139 ---
to cultivate a better opinion of the race, and steer to national recognition and 
equal rights. Let us have a greater respect for our women, whether they be 
nearer white, or ebony black [they are all Negritos]. ”69
In the midst of calls for color-blind racial solidarity, the phrase “especially 
those who try to lead righteous lives” should give us pause. It was not atypical. 
The West Indian businessmen who published these papers and the men and 
women of the black middle class who wrote for them often promoted criteria of 
respectability that highlighted their distance from those they sought to uplift. 
Elite West Indian authors, like the one quoted above, indignantly complained 
that “ignorant . . . unwashed” Latins denied them the public respect that their 
“intellectual abilities” and “moral standing” merited. They also employed the 
identical criteria/uRELfk.d“intellectual abilities” and “moral standing”/uRELfk.dto distin-
guish among black people. The same correspondent quoted above demanding 
“greater respect for our women” frequently castigated the locally born genera-
tion of “our Negro community” for their lack of ambition and disinterest in 
education. “These people are contented to remain a dark race all the days of 
their lives,” he sneered.70
Class tensions were real, as were el ite notions of culture that denigrated 
the African in Afro-Caribbean popular culture. Y et equally real was the call for 
pan-African unity as the best form of communal defense in a hostile age.
The Negro who does not desire a betterment of his condition is today a 
dead man/uRELfk.done who is but an obstacle in the path of progress. Allow me 
to ask this pertinent question. “Can we attain our ends without a united 
resistance against the forces that are keeping us down?” . . . Instead of 
limiting our efforts to our own island groups, let us cultivate the tendency 
to devise plans for the Universal Coloured Brotherhood. When we have 
developed ourselves to that stage where we can sincerely say “brother, I 
am from Demerara, and because you are my own, as you hail from Domi-
nica, whatever hurts you hurts me also,” we will have entered a broader 
field where the opportunities for racial success will be unlimited.71
That success also depended on the appropriate union of male and female ef-
forts. The Tribune’s editors hoped that “women of our community will avail 
themselves of the opportunity to contribute articles that will help to uplift their 
sisters and thereby uplift our race. For is not the mother the one in whose hand 
the prosperity and the future of our race depends, and on whose shoulders the 
future advancement lies?”72 A follow-up letter from a female correspondent 
underlined the Victorian morality of the message. “It is said a people cannot 
lara putnam
120


--- PAGE 140 ---
rise higher than its women and so the responsibility hangs on us fellow West 
Indian women to raise the standard by aiming high and living clean lives. . . .
God first, business next, pleasure last, we must succeed. ”73
This language of gendered virtue and racial solidarity, with its implicit dis-
dain for the bawdier elements of lower-class culture, has far more in common 
with Baden-Powell’s mission of imperial renewal and with Latin American 
mestizo populism than with earlier ex pressions of African identities in the 
Caribbean. For centuries poor black Caribbeans had created and sustained 
cultural practices (in religion, song, dance, sport, speech, and collective action) 
whose signal elements and underlying aes thetics were manifestly African in 
origin.74 Far from embracing these expressions of Africa in the Americas, the 
same community leaders and newspaper editors who praised Garveyism and 
denounced white racism disparaged or even attacked Revivalism, Pocomia, 
and other popular religions with Afr ican associations.75 The black interna-
tionalism articulated by British West Indian migrants in the interwar years 
was not a revival of tradition but a particular vision of the future, developed in 
dialogue and in step with the other nationalisms that defined North Atlantic 
modernity.76
Unlike many of its interlocutors, though, black internationalism could be 
amply inclusive. Perhaps reflecting the experiences of West Indian troops in 
British colonial domains in World War I, or perhaps reflecting the frequency 
with which Chinese and South Asian migration was restricted alongside black 
migration to circum-Caribbean destinations, some authors stretched the no-
tion of racial solidarity to incorporate not only those of African origin but all 
“colored races. ” In 1930, the British West Indian press in Port Limón reported 
frequently on Gandhi’s anticolonial struggle on the Indian subcontinent, re-
printing sympathetic articles to demonstrate, the editors wrote, “how intrigues 
by religion, and other diplomatic propaganda, are brought to divide the soli-
darity of any subjected races. ”77 That same year the editors used the occasion of 
Empire Day to denounce the British government’s “indifference to these what 
she calls inferior races which in reality are only inferior in ‘opportunities. ’ . . . 
For after all what is it worth to be a British subject in foreign parts, especially 
to the Negro, the Chinese, or Hindu? Nothing but indignities by depreciation 
and discrimination against in trade, in labour, in social equality. ”78
These were not radical activists speaking, but the most upright of business-
men. Ultimately, the print circuits of the western Caribbean reinforced antira-
cism and anti-imperialism as essenti al components of an expansive sense of 
Afro-Caribbean commonality shared across class lines. While this was most 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
121


--- PAGE 141 ---
explicit in the pages of the UNIA’s Negro World, all the West Indian–run papers 
of the region contributed to the process. The Panama Tribune frequently criti-
cized U.S. racism abroad, including atrocities committed by “Yankee Marines” 
against “the Haitian People,” and, in 1929, denounced the violent arrests of 
editors of Le Petit Impartial in Port-au-Prince “for protesting against the vile 
policy and race prejudice of U.S. imperialism. ”79 The editors insisted that the 
“inability of the American occupation to regard the Haitians in any other way 
except as ‘niggers’ is responsible for the recent outbreaks on the island. ” The 
English-language press in Port Limón reprinted these and similar articles from 
the Panama Tribune at length.80 The Tribune, in turn, offered its readers a pan-
oramic view of the African Diaspora by reproducing articles from black papers 
around the globe, including the Chicago Defender, the Pittsburgh Courier, and 
La Depeche Africaine (identified for readers as “a Negro newspaper published 
in Paris”).81
This was a world peopled by outsized heroes, from Marcus Garvey to Ras 
T afari to boxer “Kid Chocolate, the Cuban ‘buzz-saw,’” to the first “Bantu” to 
obtain a bachelor of divinity degree at London University.82 It was also a world 
in which allies were not always black. Thus the editors of the Tribune could 
identify Clarence Darrow simply as the “hero of the celebrated Sweet case. ” 
They apparently trusted Tribune readers in Panama to remember that Darrow, 
a white lawyer, had won acquittal in 1926 for Dr. Ossian Sweet, a black man 
charged with firing on a threatening white mob. On that occasion, Darrow 
had acclaimed the right of blacks to “fight even to the death for their home, for 
each other, for their people, for their race, for their rights. ”83 Now the Tribune
reprinted the text of a speech by Darrow under the headline “Nothing Matters 
but Color. ” “The tariff, the labor question, the power question, even religious 
liberty, is of no consequence compared with the question of the right of the 
colored man to have an equal opportunity in the world with the white. ”84
Conclusion
Barbara J. Fields once wrote that while Euro-Americans invented the fiction 
that defined Afro-Americans as a race, “ Afro-Americans invented themselves, 
not as a race, but as a nation. They were not troubled, as modern scholars 
often are, by the use of racial vocabulary to express their sense of national-
ity. ”85 In the interwar Caribbean, West Indian migrants increasingly used racial 
vocabulary to capture a sense of belonging that went beyond the borders of 
any single nation. As they traveled from the commissaries of the Canal Zone 
lara putnam
122


--- PAGE 142 ---
to the army tents of northern Africa, as they read dispatches from Paris and 
Ethiopia and Bridgetown and Detroit mixed among their local news, they rec-
ognized a commonality of experience in the present even more than a unity of 
origins in the past. Like other working- and middle-class men and women of 
the turn-of-the-century Atlantic world, British West Indian emigrants sought 
self-improvement and collective betterment through fraternal “combination” 
and Christian faith. Like others, they founded lodges and chapters, and mis-
sions and publications, and they sought to organize and guide a young genera-
tion they perceived as menaced by the deceptive pleasures of modern life. But 
there are key particularities here. Buyi ng burial insurance and paying lodge 
dues, and singing “Onward Christian Soldiers” in Salvation Army halls and at 
UNIA assemblies, British West Indian emigrants partook of a civic world that 
had international membership and universal moral claims/uRELfk.dand a pervasively 
black public face.
Global commodity crises in the 1920s made anti-immigrant xenophobia an 
irresistible alibi for Hispanic nationalist politicians, and a wave of immigration 
restrictions truncated the travels on which the West Indian migratory sphere 
depended. Antiblack racism rang out in politicians’ oratory and scraped the 
soul in a thousand daily insults. Given the transatlantic frame of reference West 
Indian migrants had acquired, they had a panoramic vision of who was under 
attack: the members of the Negro Race, wherever they lived, whatever their 
citizenship or allegiance, whatever their claims to “intellectual abilities” and 
“moral standing,” and whatever the shade of their skin. If we think of ideology 
as “the descriptive vocabulary of day-to-day existence, through which people 
make rough sense of the social reality that they live and create from day to 
day,”86 we see clearly why black internationalist ideology achieved such wide 
currency throughout the British Caribbean in these years. It expressed a reality 
lived daily not only by well-known figures like Marcus Garvey, George Pad-
more, or C. L. R. James, but by their neighbors and classmates and bunkmates 
and kin: anonymous, indispensable interlocutors of the thinkers whose words 
we read to this day.
Recognizing the vast participation in the making of their black interna-
tionalist vision requires acknowledging the synergy between early-twentieth-
century moral reform movements and voluntary associations, often of British 
origin, and the emerging “race consciousness” that insisted “nothing matters 
but color. ” The former have generally been seen as British imperial imposi-
tions/uRELfk.dand, as such, the essence of accommodation/uRELfk.dwhile the latter has 
been seen as the vanguard of post–World War II anticolonialism and, as such, 
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
123


--- PAGE 143 ---
the essence of radical resistance.87 Y et for “race enthusiasts” like Sidney Y oung, 
or for the Ninth Battalion veterans who drilled Boy Scouts week after week, or 
for the loyal matrons of the Household of Ruth, collective civic engagement 
and political and economic empowerment, far from being mutually exclusive, 
constituted a single, indivisible mission.
notes
I am grateful to Rina Cáceres, William Martin, Rebecca Scott, Ronny Viales, Michael 
West, and the members of the Programa de Estudios de Diáspora of the Centro de 
Investigaciones Históricas de América Central of the Universidad de Costa Rica for 
comments on earlier drafts of this material . The research reflected here began under 
the auspices of the David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies at Harvard 
University and was financed by the Vicerrectoría de Investigación of the Universidad 
de Costa Rica as part of Proyecto No. 806-A2-047. An earlier version of this paper was 
presented to the Segundo Congreso NOL@N [Network of Latin American Studies in 
Nordic Countries], Ibero-American Center, Renvall Institute, University of Helsinki, 
Finland, May 13–14, 2004.
1. See Monestel, “El calypso en Costa Rica,” and Hutton, “Cuban Influence on Popular 
Jamaican Music. ”
2. Senior, “Colón People,” 62.
3. On literacy, see James, “Explaining Afro-Caribbean Social Mobility”; Putnam, 
Company They Kept, 170; Murphy, Dominican Sugar Plantations, 43; and McLeod, “Un-
desirable Aliens. ”
4. Senior, “Colón People,” 70 n. 47. Panama was a province of Colombia at the 
time.
5. Eloquent examples are provided by the Dowridge-Challenor correspondence 
excerpted in Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, chap. 2.
6. Conniff, Black Labor, 47; Putnam, Company They Kept, 64–75; McLeod, “Undesir-
able Aliens,” 4–5; Cuba, Dirección General del Censo, Informe general del censo de 1943,
888–89; Foner, “Introduction”; James, Holding aloft the Banner, 12.
7. James, “Explaining Afro-Caribbean Social Mobility,” 220; James, Holding aloft the 
Banner, 357. The clearest regionwide accounts of the timing and extent of the migratory 
movements that created overseas British West Indian communities are Thomas-Hope, 
“Establishment of a Migration T radition,” 66–81; Marshall, “History of West Indian Mi-
grations”; and Richardson, “Caribbean Migrations. ”
8. James, Holding aloft the Banner, esp. 50–100.
9. Cf. “Boys Brigade Organized,” Panama Star and Herald, December 3, 1920, 3.
10. Elkins, Black Power in the Caribbean, 29–45; United Fruit correspondence, Costa 
Rica Division, 1919, reproduced in Hill, Marcus Garvey, vols. 11 and 12.
11. Chevannes, Rastafari, 119–44.
12. Marshall, “Nothing in My Hands,” 22–23.
13. “Life in Jamaica in the Early Twentieth Century,” volume: St. James, Respondent: 
lara putnam
124


--- PAGE 144 ---
64StjMb, 3–4. Local chapters of the UNIA remained active in Costa Rica and Panama 
long after the movement had collapsed elsewhere. Indeed the “Black Star Line” UNIA 
meetinghouse in Port Limón was central to Afro–Costa Rican community life there 
through the 1970s. See Capelli, “Promised Ship. ”
14. Consider the example of Victor Cohen, who left Jamaica to work in Costa Rica, 
Bocas del T oro (where he first encountered Garveyism), Cuba, and eventually New 
Y ork, where he would become associate editor of African Opinion magazine. See Lewis, 
Marcus Garvey, 113.
15. Martin, Race First, 16; James, Holding aloft the Banner, 196–97, 366; Lewis, Mar-
cus Garvey, 97–123. A rich range of primary sources on Garvey and the UNIA in Cen-
tral America and the Caribbean will soon become available in The Marcus Garvey and 
Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, edited by Robert A. Hill, vols. 11–12, 
forthcoming.
16. See Smith, “John E. Bush. ”
17. See Times (Limón, Costa Rica), June 2, 1911.
18. Panama Star and Herald, November 28–December 31, 1920.
19. E.g., “Old Timer’s Lamented Death,” Panama Tribune, November 18, 1928, 5. Cop-
ies of the Tribune were consulted in the Museo Afroantillano in Panama City.
20. Cf. Conniff, Black Labor, 70–71; Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, 56–74; Wester-
man, Los inmigrantes antillanos, 113–15; Richardson, Panama Money, 223–28; Duncan, “El 
negro antillano”; and Fletcher, “Friendly Societies. ”
21. Costa Rica District No. 1, I. U. O. of Mechanics  (Kingston, Jamaica: Educational 
Supply Company Printers, n.d.), 13–14, Limón Lodge materials, personal collection of 
Miguel Guzmán Stein, Cartago, Costa Rica (hereafter PCMGS).
22. Clearance card, Costa Rica District No. 1, Independent United Order of Mechan-
ics, PCMGS.
23. See, for instance, bound minutes, Limón Lodge 16 (9180) G.U.O. of O.F., April 23, 
1910, through March 6, 1912, PCMGS.
24. 125th Anniversary of the Ancient Order of Foresters, Caribbean and Western Hemi-
sphere, Souvenir Brochure (n.p., 1971), Barbados Department of Archives, Pamphlet A 806. 
Apparently one year after the lodge was founded, many of its white elite members left  
in a dispute over whether persons of other classes and colors would be admitted; they 
set up an all-white lodge instead. See “Origins of A.O.F. in W.I.,” by Sister Enid Harris, 
in ibid.
25. Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, 72.
26. Fourth Quarterly Circular, 1915 . . . G.U.O. of O.F., Phila., PA, 10, PCMGS (printed 
book, title page lost).
27. Ritual of the Juvenile Society of the Grand United Order of Odd Fellows . . . Prepared 
by Sister Tillie M. Brooks, of Household of Ruth No. 48, Paducah, Ky., and Sister Rhoda A. 
Moore, of the Household of Ruth No. 197, Houston, Tex. (Philadelphia, 1912), 15, PCMGS.
28. “West Indian Progress,” All The World, May 1912, 243.
29. These functions are well-illustrated in the pages of the West Indies War Cry, a 
complete run of which is held in the internal archive of the Salvation Army regional 
headquarters in Kingston, Jamaica.
30. Jamaica, Blue Book, 6V .
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
125


--- PAGE 145 ---
31. War Cry, April 1906, 4. See, similarly, War Cry, September 1906, 3.
32. This was the heyday of joining in the United States as well, in a pattern shared 
across the stark divides of ethnicity, class, and region that fractured the nation. See, for 
instance, Beito, “T o Advance the ‘Practice of Thrift And Economy,’” and Gamm and 
Putnam, “Growth of Voluntary Associations. ”
33. Richardson, Panama Money, 205–12; Richards, “Friendly Societies. ”
34. The region’s black-owned newspapers, in particular T . A. Marryshow’s West Indian,
advocated black military service as a strategic move toward greater political rights. See 
Howe, Race, War, and Nationalism, 16–40, and Phillips, “‘Go Ahead, England; Barbados 
Is Behind Y ou. ’”
35. “ An Open Letter to Mr. Hitchens,” Central American Express (Bocas del T oro), 
June 23, 1917, 4, Hermeroteca, Biblioteca Central Simón Bolívar, Universidad de Panamá, 
microfilm roll 13. The authors wondered darkly whether “influential pressure [was] being 
exerted” to prevent direct recruitment in Bocas, presumably by United Fruit Company 
officials anxious to maintain their workforce.
36. Howe, Race, War, and Nationalism; James, Holding aloft the Banner, 52–62; Conniff, 
Black Labor, 68.
37. James, Holding aloft the Banner, 62–69; Elkins, Black Power in the Caribbean, 5–15, 
64–76; Bolland, Politics of Labour, 216–20.
38. “Colón Boys Institutes T ops All Community Effort,” Panama Tribune, December 
2, 1928, 13.
39. “Boys’ Brigade Organized,” Panama Star and Herald, December 3, 1920, 3. The 
Boys’ Brigade movement, like its more famous rival, Baden-Powell’s Boy Scout move-
ment, had been founded in England at the start of the century. See Rosenthal, Character 
Factory.
40. Elkins, Black Power in the Caribbean, 9. Richardson quotes a British observer 
who reported that “most of the men” of the Ninth Battalion had come from Panama; 
see Panama Money, 217.
41. Harpelle, West Indians of Costa Rica, 61.
42. Anonymous report from company informer to United Fruit Company manager 
H. S. Blair, April 16, 1920, reproduced in Bourgois, “One Hundred Y ears” (quotation on 
135).
43. Graham, Idea of Race in Latin America; Stepan, Hour of Eugenics.
44. Chomsky, “West Indian Workers” and “‘Barbados or Canada?’”; Tinker Salas, 
“Relaciones de poder y raza”; de la Fuente, Nation for All, 46–50.
45. Emilio Roig de Leuchsenring, “¿Se está Cuba africanizando?,” Carteles 10, no. 48 
(November 27, 1927): 27, cited in Chomsky, “‘Barbados or Canada?,’” 458–59. For simi-
lar antiblack declarations by Costa Rican anti-imperialists, see Chomsky, “West Indian 
Workers. ”
46. Olmedo Alfaro, “El peligro antillano en la América Central (La Defensa de la 
Raza)” (1925), quoted in Westerman, Los inmigrantes antillanos, 96–97 (author’s transla-
tion). For a subtle discussion of Panamanian nationalism in this era, see Szok, La última 
gaviota.
47. Gráfico (semanario de Panamá), August 30, 1924, quoted in Westerman, Los inmi-
grantes antillanos, 96 (author’s translation).
lara putnam
126


--- PAGE 146 ---
48. On the history of anti-immigrant thought in Costa Rica, including the long tradi-
tion of anti-Chinese discrimination, see Quirós, “Inmigración e identidad nacional. ” On 
antiblack policies in the 1930s, see Chomsky, “West Indian Workers”; Harpelle, “Racism 
and Nationalism” and West Indians of Costa Rica; and Putnam, Company They Kept, 71–75, 
165–72.
49. La Voz del Atlántico (Limón, Costa Rica), October 13, 1934 (author’s translation).
50. Harpelle, “Racism and Nationalism,” 29–51; Chomsky, West Indian Workers,
235–53.
51. Jacobson, Whiteness of a Different Color; King, Making Americans.
52. Davis, “West Indian Workers on the Panama Canal,” 141–42; Newton, Silver Men,
162–63; Conniff, Black Labor, 65–66, 80–84, 98–106, 127–30. The retroactive denational-
ization was reversed in 1945, but exclusions in employment and access to public educa-
tion persisted. See Westerman, Los inmigrantes antillanos, 95–101.
53. Euraque, “Banana Enclave,” esp. 152; Proudfoot, Population Movements, 15; Tinker 
Salas, “Relaciones de poder y raza,” 95–97; Richardson, “Caribbean Migrations,” 211–12, 
215; del Castillo, “La inmigración de braceros,” 49–54.
54. Turits, “World Destroyed. ”
55. De la Fuente, Nation for All, 104–5, 194–98.
56. Quoted in Richards, “Friendly Societies,” 142.
57. The best overall accounts of this era are Bolland, Politics of Labour , 155–211, and 
On the March.
58. Beckles, History of Barbados, 155; Howe, Race, War, and Nationalism, 191.
59. Richards, “Race, Class, and Labour Politics,” 358; Post, Arise Ye Starvelings, esp. 5, 
242.
60. Post, Arise Ye Starvelings, 159–95. On the influence of black newspapers from 
abroad, in particular the Pittsburgh Courier, on the developing Rastafarian philosophy 
in the 1930s, see Chevannes, Rastafari, 133–36. Coverage of the Italian invasion of Ethiopia 
by black-run newspapers in the islands and rimlands alike also contributed importantly 
to radicalizing black internationalism in this era. See Y elvington, “War in Ethiopia and 
T rinidad. ”
61. Think, for instance, of Charles Payne, the T rinidad-born child of Barbadian emi-
grants, whose speeches and eventual deportation sparked the 1937 riots in Barbados. See 
Beckles, History of Barbados, 154–69, and Richardson, Panama Money, 239–47.
62. There were exceptions, and Communist labor leaders in particular were consis-
tently antiracist and pro-inclusion in this era. Se e Carr, “Identity, Class, and Nation”; 
Chomsky, “West Indian Workers,” 28–31, 35–36; and Euraque, “Banana Enclave,” 157.
63. See Anderson, Imagined Communities.
64. See, for instance, “Happenings in the Zone T owns,” Panama Tribune, November 
11, 1928, 12.
65. “Sid Says,” Panama Tribune, January 20, 1929, 8.
66. Westerman’s collected papers today form part of the Schomburg Center for Re-
search in Black Culture of the New Y ork Public Library. On Y oung and the Tribune, see 
Westerman, Los inmigrantes antillanos, 123–28, and Conniff, Black Labor, 71–72, 80–81.
67. “Cooperate,” Searchlight (Limón, Costa Rica), January 4, 1930, 2.
68. See Putnam, Company They Kept, 169–70.
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
127


--- PAGE 147 ---
69. Dolores Joseph, “Deplores Lack of Racial Sentiment,” Searchlight (Limón, Costa 
Rica), June 13, 1931 (brackets and bracketed material in original).
70. Dolores Joseph, letter to editor, Searchlight (Limón, Costa Rica), June 14, 1930.
71. C. G. Whittingham, “Perils That Confront Our Race,” Panama Tribune, January 
13, 1929, 8.
72. “Hope for a Woman’s Page,” Panama Tribune, December 9, 1928, 16.
73. “ A Word to My People,” Panama Tribune, January 6, 1929, 16.
74. The literature on African culture and identity in the Caribbean is, of course, vast. 
A helpful point of entry is Bolland, “Creolization and Creole Societies. ” An interpretive 
synthesis is Burton, Afro-Creole. The risk of describing pan-Africanism as the fruit of a 
long tradition of Afro-Caribbean “resistance” to white hegemony is that such a perspec-
tive can obscure just how modern pan-Africanism was. On the fallacy of ascribing Afro-
Caribbean cultural creations to the realm of the “traditional” rather than the realm of 
“modernity,” see Palmié, Wizards and Scientists.
75. Harpelle, “Ethnicity, Religion, and Repression”; Putnam, Company They Kept,
165–72; Bryce-Laporte, “Crisis, Contraculture, and Religion. ” The Afro-Christian religion 
known in Jamaica as Pocomania or pukumina was known in Limón as Pocomia; see, for 
instance, Duncan, “Pocomia Rebellion. ”
76. The early twentieth century has been described as the heyday of “integral national-
ism,” in which racial/ethnic/language criteria were promoted to strengthen national ties 
and demote the importance of religion and class. See Alter, Nationalism, and Hobsbawm, 
Nations and Nationalism. Baden-Powell, writing about the British Empire, used rhetoric 
almost identical to the Tribune editors’: “If our empire is to stand Britain cannot be di-
vided against itself. . . . Remember that whether rich or poor, from castle or from slum, 
you are all Britons in the first place....  I f  y o u  a r e  d i v i d e d  a m o n g s t  y o u r s e l v e s  t h e n  y o u  
are doing harm to your country. Y ou must sink your differences” (Scouting for Boys, 278). 
See discussion in Pryke, “Popularity of Nationalism,” 317.
77. Searchlight (Limón, Costa Rica), August 23, 1930, 1.
78. Searchlight (Limón, Costa Rica), May 31, 1930. On the other hand, British West 
Indian writers could be as negative about Chinese immigrants as the societies around 
them. When a newspaper in Costa Rica’s highland capital published an antiblack carica-
ture, the Searchlight’s editors held it up as evidence of how right Garvey was in promoting 
a “spirit of clannishness and adhesion to the cause of Africa for Africans. . . . We could 
more understand the cartoonist if he had caught the Chinaman or the habitual drunkard 
as the subject of his theme, but no, the Negro is unprotected, so anything can be done 
with him” (Searchlight [Limón, Costa Rica], January 18, 1930).
79. “U.S. Charged with Atrocities in Haiti,” Panama Tribune, February 3, 1929, 3.
80. Searchlight (Limón, Costa Rica), May 3, 1930.
81. “Garveyites Warn Editor of Times,” Panama Tribune, November 18, 1928, 10; 
“French Officers Back Up Negro Colleague,” Panama Tribune, December 2, 1928, 4.
82. “Oh for a leader!!,” Panama Tribune, November 18, 1928, 1; “New Colored Cham-
pion Looms,” Panama Tribune, December 16, 1928, 6; “Bantu Wins Difficult Degree,” 
Panama Tribune, November 11, 1928, 14.
83. The passage is from Darrow’s closing arguments in Sweet’s trial. See Weinberg, 
Attorney for the Damned, 248.
lara putnam
128


--- PAGE 148 ---
84. “Nothing Matters but Color,” Panama Tribune, December 2, 1928, 8.
85. Fields, “Slavery, Race, and Ideology,” 115.
86. Ibid., 110.
87. But see the nuanced analyses of fraternal and voluntary associations in Downes, 
“Freemasonry in Barbados” and “Sailing from Colonial into National Waters. ”
Transnational Circuits and the Black International
129


--- PAGE 149 ---
Providential Design
American Negroes and Garveyism in South Africa
robert vinson
The Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities 
League (UNIA) was the largest and most widespread black movement ever. 
At its height in the early 1920s, the UNIA had an estimated 2 million members 
and sympathizers and more than 1,000 chapters in forty-three countries and 
territories. Founded and led by the Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, the New 
Y ork–based UNIA’s meteoric rise resulted from an agenda that included ship-
ping lines, corporations, and universit ies; a Liberian colonization scheme; a 
resolute desire to reconstitute African independence; and a fierce racial pride. 
Outside North America and the Caribbean, these aims and ideals/uRELfk.dgeneri-
cally called Garveyism/uRELfk.dhad their greatest impact in South Africa, as reflected 
in that country’s eight official and numerous unofficial UNIA chapters. Garvey-
ism, furthermore, pervaded black S outh African political, religious, educa-
tional, and socioeconomic movements throughout the 1920s and 1930s.1
In this essay I make three arguments. First, Garveyism in South Africa 
was related to notions of “Providential Design” and modernity, which were 
central to the racial interface betwee n black South Africans and “ American 
Negroes,” a category that encompassed black West Indians as well as African 
Americans. Second, an international black sailing community played a crucial 
role in transmitting Garveyism from the Americas into South African political 
culture. Third, in South Africa, as elsewhere in the black world, religion was an 
important aspect of Garveyism.
The conclusions here offered contrast sharply with interpretations that 
confine the UNIA to South Africa’s national boundaries, only to assert in the 
end that Garveyism was a “rather remote model” in that country’s black free-
dom struggle.2 Far from being peripheral, I argue, Garveyism was a central


--- PAGE 150 ---
aspect of black South Africa’s political culture in the interwar years. Besides 
charting a transnational dimension of the black South African experience in 
the twentieth century, I also seek to call attention to the relative neglect of 
Africa and Africans in African Diaspora studies. In short, I make the case for 
a “homeland and diaspora” model that  bridges the study of Africa and the 
African Diaspora.3
Segregation, Black Modernity, and Providential Design: 
The Making of a Transnational Relationship
Britain’s conquest of various independent African states in the nineteenth cen-
tury, along with its war against the Afrikaner Republics between 1899 and 1902, 
culminated in the creation of the Union of South Africa in 1910. The Union 
of South Africa was part and parcel of a crystallization of segregation, in both 
thought and legislation, into a race-based political and socioeconomic program 
that would spur rapid industrial growth. The discovery in the late nineteenth 
century of gold and diamonds made South Africa the world’s largest producer 
of both commodities, setting the stage for its transformation from a rural, ag-
ricultural society to an urban, industrializing one that relied on cheap African 
labor. Ultimately, segregation aimed to make the agricultural self-sufficiency 
of many Africans virtually impossible, thus compelling them to sell their labor 
to white-controlled mines, farms, and industry.4
As official government policy, South African segregation was implemented 
through a coordinated set of racially discriminatory legislation, the most sig-
nificant of which included the Natives Land Act of 1913 and the Natives (Urban 
Areas) Act of 1923. The Natives Land Act rendered millions of Africans land-
less, forcing them to sell their labor cheaply to white-owned mines, farms, 
and other industries. The architects of South African segregation were hardly 
bashful about their objectives. Jan Hofmeyr, one of the most prominent among 
them, stated, “It is inconceivable that the white man should be able completely 
to dispense with the black man’s labor on his farms, in his mines, in his facto-
ries; it is just as inconceivable that there should be set aside for the black man’s 
occupation land sufficient to provide for all his needs independent of the white 
man’s wages. ”5 The Natives (Urban Areas) Act was the urban equivalent of 
the Natives Land Act. The Urban Areas Act undergirded a policy that sharply 
controlled and restricted the movement of Africans from country to town, 
allowing them into the urban centers only insofar as their labor was necessary 
to “minister to the white man’s needs. ” Africans were also denied the right to 
Garveyism in South Africa
131


--- PAGE 151 ---
vote, were condemned to the lowest-paying jobs by “color-bar” legislation, and 
had little judicial recourse against their systematic subordination.
The rise of segregation in South Africa paralleled the emergence of Jim 
Crow in the United States, and there was a direct relationship between the two 
systems of racial oppression. In this context Garveyism arrived and flourished 
in South Africa. Indeed, the black South African encounter with Garveyism 
merely continued, and deepened, a de cades-long transatlantic relationship. 
Since the late nineteenth century, at least, black South Africans had seen Afri-
can Americans as quintessential modern black people and as models. African 
Americans, for their part, engaged black South Africa as part of Providential 
Design, a divinely ordained mission to forge a decolonized “ Africa for Afri-
cans. ” This transnational relationship, which became particularly close during 
the period of Garveyism, challenged an international color line that denied 
both groups full citizenship rights in their respective societies and also mani-
fested itself in European colonialism of Africa.
The African American presence in southern Africa began as early as the 
1780s, with a trickle of sailors, traders, and adventurers.6 In 1890 the Virginia 
Jubilee Singers, an African American theatrical troupe, began a five-year tour of 
South Africa. This launched a period of intense black South African admiration 
for African Americans that laid the groundwork for South African Garvey-
ism and a wide array of other transatlantic institutional and personal linkages. 
Orpheus McAdoo, the leader of the college-educated Virginia Jubilee Singers, 
had been born into slavery. He often opened performances with a Booker T . 
Washington–esque “Up from Slavery” recitation of African American history 
and culture, beginning with the degradation of slavery and ending with an 
impressive catalog of achievements during the first generation of freedom. 
Black South African journalist Josiah Semouse typified the rapturous African 
reaction to the Jubilee Singers: “Hear! T oday they have their own schools . . .
and also universities. They are run by them without the help of the whites. 
They have magistrates, judges, lawyers, bishops, ministers, and evangelists, and 
school masters. Some have learned a craft such as building, etc. When will the 
day come when the African people will be like the Americans? When will they 
stop being slaves and become nations with their own government?”7
In late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century South Africa, the Jubilee 
Singers and other African American vi sitors and residents were treated as 
“honorary whites,” exempt from the segregationist legislation that hobbled the 
lives of black South Africans. Such a status was a tacit admission by the South 
African authorities that African Americans possessed the supposed character-
robert vinson
132


--- PAGE 152 ---
istics of modern, “civilized” citizens.8 The concession was important, coming 
as it did at a time when European colonialism was becoming entrenched in 
Africa and Asia and South African whites were justifying the denial of citizen-
ship rights to black South Africans on the ground that blacks were an inferior, 
backward race that lacked the attributes of modern Western civilization. Such 
attributes included Christianity, Western education, Western dress, English 
language skills, an industrious work ethic, and an abiding faith in capitalism.
White South Africans further rationalized their dominance over blacks as 
the culmination of a 2,000-year European ascent from barbarism to a position 
as the world’s most “civilized” race. It was the “White Man’s Burden,” they 
claimed, to uplift the lesser race by “civ ilizing” the Africans. In 1884 James 
Stewart, South Africa’s most famous missionary and educator of the late 
nineteenth century, responded to African demands for equality by invoking 
a social Darwinist “racial time,” an argument popular among white South Af-
rican politicians, colonial officials, and scholars: “Starting but as yesterday in 
the race of nations, do you soberly beli eve that in the two generations of the 
very imperfect civilisation you have en joyed and partially accepted, you can 
have overtaken those other nations who began that race two thousand years 
ago, and have been running hard at it for a thousand years at least?”9 African 
Americans, including the members of the Virginia Jubilee Singers, debunked 
such claims because they seemed to possess all of the characteristics that de-
fined modern, “civilized” people, as acknowledged by their “honorary white” 
status. More importantly, they had “civilized” themselves in just one generation 
out of slavery, not two thousand years . Black South Africans eagerly pointed 
to African Americans as proof that the attributes of modern civilization, far 
from being racially exclusive, were a universal human heritage, and that such 
attributes could be acquired in a relatively short span, even a lifetime. With the 
acquisition of modernity, particularly Western education, there could be no 
justification for relegating Africans to the status of hewers of wood and drawers 
of water. Western-educated Africans, inspired by African Americans, would 
demand full participation in society and perhaps even seek to regain their lost 
independence in a modern, regenerated continent of “ Africa for Africans. ”
For African Americans, the engagement with South Africa centered on 
Providential Design, which assigned diasporic blacks a divinely ordained role 
in the “redemption” of Africa. Henry McNeal Turner was a leading exponent 
of Providential Design. A bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, 
an African American denomination founded in the late eighteenth century, 
Turner inaugurated his church’s mission in South Africa in 1896. In typical 
Garveyism in South Africa
133


--- PAGE 153 ---
Providential Design fashion, he argued that God had willed the enslavement of 
diasporic blacks so that they would be taught the “civilizing” traits of Christian-
ity, the Protestant work ethic, thrift, and moral rectitude, qualities they would 
then return to Africa to promulgate. In other words, diasporic blacks would 
transmit the “light of civilization” to a slumbering “Dark Continent” that would 
be regenerated as a modernized, independent Christian Africa resplendent in 
God’s favor. For diasporic blacks, an independent “ Africa for Africans” would 
be a “Promised Land”: an emigrationist homeland that would provide histori-
cal and cultural grounding and serve as a source of protection.10
The claims of Providential Design, along with notions of black modernity, 
cohered African-descended peoples across a wide spectrum, including many 
African Americans and black South Africans. In the diaspora, even such politi-
cal adversaries as Booker T . Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, and Marcus Garvey 
were linked by a common belief in various strands of Providential Design and 
black modernity. In the interwar per iod, those providential and modernist 
ideals were most powerfully expressed in Garveyism, which exploded across 
South Africa’s political landscape during those years.
Black Sailors and the Transmission of Garveyism 
to South Africa
A combination of black sailors, ships, and newspapers/uRELfk.dthe era’s most ef-
fective means of pan-African communication/uRELfk.dtransmitted Garveyism into 
South Africa. In May 1919, Garvey announced the UNIA’s plans to operate 
the Black Star Line, a steamship corporation.11 By September 1919, the UNIA
had purchased its first ship, the Yarmouth, which was promptly renamed the 
Frederick Douglass.12 Before the commonplace usage of airplanes, ships were 
quintessential symbols of modernity a nd nationhood. Black South Africans, 
relentlessly told by white segregationists that they were outside the realm of 
modernity, saw the Black Star Line as evidence to the contrary.
Black sailors, particularly from the Caribbean and North America, were 
especially effective pan-African vectors, disseminating news of Garveyism 
throughout the black world, including South Africa. In 1920 a Jamaican sailor, 
identified only as “Ennis,” proclaimed, “We all come out to South Africa to 
free our brothers and sisters out there. ”13 Subsequently, the Natal branch of the 
African National Congress (ANC), black South Africa’s leading political move-
ment since its founding in 1912, convened a meeting in Durban that reportedly 
attracted more than 1,000 people. The highlight of the affair was an unsched-
robert vinson
134


--- PAGE 154 ---
uled appearance by an “ American Negro” sailor known only as “Moses,” who 
had recently arrived from New Y ork, site of the UNIA headquarters. Moses 
told his audience that “Marcus Garvey was the man they relied upon, and 
[that he] would free Africa: that the first vessel of the fleet was named ‘Fred-
erick Douglass’ , and this vessel had been sailing to different places. . . . Africa 
would be freed . . . by Marcus Garvey. ”14 Vectors of Garveyism like Ennis and 
Moses had an important advantage over resident Garveyites: as sailors they 
could enter and leave South Africa before the authorities, who were openly 
hostile to Garveyism, even became aware of their presence.
Garveyism spread quickly in South Africa. In the port city of East London, 
there were persistent rumors that the “ Americans” would arrive in ships with 
weapons to help Africans kill whites.15 Kenneth Spooner, a West Indian mis-
sionary, joyously proclaimed that “his people were now on the seas coming 
to South Africa with a view to beating the European people here, and that in 
about six months time changes would be observed. ”16 Addressing a meeting of 
the T ransvaal branch of the ANC, an African known only as “Mgoja” raised the 
emphatic cry that “ America had a black fleet and it is coming. ”17 In neighbor-
ing Basutoland (now Lesotho), ardent nationalist Josiel Lefela editorialized, 
“Let us look forward to his Excellency Marcus Garvey the President of Africa, 
and the Americans, with anxious anticipation. ”18 These prophecies were also 
proclaimed in the Eastern Cape and the T ranskei. Gilbert Matshoba, a young 
African clerk, reported rapturously to his uncle, Enoch Mgijima, the leader of a 
religious group called the Israelites, that Garvey had predicted that the “blood 
of all wars is about to arrive” and that the UNIA would soon force European 
colonizers to leave Africa. “Father, that is the news of our black countrymen. 
It is published in the newspaper. ”19
West Indian Sailors and Garveyism in Cape Town
As transmitters of Garveyism, black sailors enjoyed a mobility that made it 
difficult for the authorities to apprehend them. But the peripatetic nature of 
their work also precluded the sailors from transforming rhetoric into sustained 
political organization. In South Africa, that task was assumed by, among others, 
a 200-member “ American Negro” community in Cape T own.20 Actually, most 
of these “ American Negroes” were West Indians, who, beginning in the 1880s, 
had fled the economically depressed Caribbean for the relatively brighter pros-
pects of South African port cities, especially Cape T own, where they formed 
distinct communities. According to a 1904 Cape Colony census, there were 298 
Garveyism in South Africa
135


--- PAGE 155 ---
black West Indians in the region, many of whom worked in the dockyards.21
The West Indians had a reputation as “tough, hard back-boned Negroes . . . of 
the he-man type, aggressive and daring,” and they displayed pan-African sen-
sibilities, fostering “notions of C ombination and Co-operation amongst the 
disparate ethnic groups” of Africans and mixed-race people called “Coloureds” 
in the Cape T own dockyards.22
The West Indians were especially attracted to Cape T own, the site of South 
Africa’s earliest European settlement, because of its employment prospects, its 
large English-speaking population, and its racially liberal reputation in rela-
tion to the rest of the country. Cape T own, as part of the Cape Province, had a 
nonracial franchise that accorded voting rights to blacks who met certain prop-
erty requirements, unlike South Africa’s other three provinces, which totally 
excluded Africans from the political process. By the early twentieth century, 
Cape T own had developed into an industrial town of approximately 80,000 
inhabitants, most of whom were Africans  and Coloureds. The Africans lived 
mainly in segregated townships outside the city, while the majority of black 
workers were subjected to the industrial color bar, which excluded them from 
many lines of work.
West Indians in Cape T own, many of whom were Garveyites, were promi-
nent in the leadership of the Industrial and Commercial Workers Union of 
Africa (ICU), South Africa’s first major black trade union, which claimed 
100,000 members at its peak in 1927.23 In January 1920, ICU members elected 
“out and out Marcus Garvey” West Indians A. James King as president and 
James Gumbs as vice president.24 Gumbs, a shipwright and former chem-
ist, would later become an executive officer of the Cape T own UNIA branch. 
Another Caribbean, Emmanuel Johnson, an agent for the Negro World, the 
UNIA’s official organ, and the future organizing president of the Cape Peninsula 
UNIA branches, also served as an ICU vice president.25 Clements Kadalie, the 
ICU founder and general secretary, came from Nyasaland (now Malawi), and 
he, too, exemplified the movement’s cosmopolitan character, including at the 
leadership level. By his own account, Kadalie’s “essential object is to be the 
great African Marcus Garvey and I don’t mind how much I shall pay for that 
education. ”26 These men, along with the mercurial Samuel Bennett Ncwana, 
suffused Garveyism into the Black Man, the ICU’s official newspaper, which 
proclaimed that “we should show our cordial appreciation of the very first step 
taken by the Hon. Marcus Garvey to show his solidarity with us. . . . Liberty 
and freedom calls upon . . . Africans to respond. ”27
Cape T own Garveyites established the earliest and largest number of South 
robert vinson
136


--- PAGE 156 ---
Africa’s UNIA chapters (five), and they also subscribed to claims of Providential 
Design.28 West Indians founded the first two chapters, but the leadership and 
membership included West Indians, Africans, and Coloureds/uRELfk.da demographic 
mix quite unusual for segregationist South Africa. The branches generally held 
weekly Sunday meetings that were an eclectic mix of Christian worship and 
political exhortation. Branch chaplains and officers led the membership in re-
ligious songs and made fiery sermons that cast Garvey as a new Moses, poised 
to lead his people from the Pharoah’s Egypt that was South Africa. William 
Jackson, the Cape T own UNIA president and a native of Jamaica, appealed to 
the Providential Design motif that linked blacks in Africa and the diaspora. 
For Jackson, Africans of the diaspora had been enslaved in the Western Hemi-
sphere as a necessary prelude to acquiring the technological, economic, and 
educational skills to liberate Africans: “Ethiopia will be taken naked from Egypt 
to a foreign country, there to be lynched, whipped, gimecrowed (jimcrowed), 
killed and finally, after experiencing many vicissitudes of torments and misery, 
will return to Africa and impart the civilization and knowledge obtained in the 
foreign country to his people. ”29 The agents of African liberation, according to 
Jackson, were the “15,000,000 negroes of America who have to-day reached the 
highest scientific attainments in the world. Those Negroes are now preparing 
to come back to the land of their forefathers and impart the knowledge gained 
in foreign countries to their brethren in Africa. Y our slogan must be ‘One Aim, 
One God, and One Destiny. ’”30 UNIA branch meetings were also occasions to 
collect membership dues, to sell stocks in the Black Star Line, and to promote 
the Negro World.31
The religious character of the UNIA in Cape T own was broadly similar to 
that of the U.S.-based parent body, the religiosity of which remains underap-
preciated. Clergy constituted one-fifth of the signatories to the UNIA’s “Magna 
Carta,” the 1920 “Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World. ”32
Garvey’s speeches, reprinted in the Negro World, often employed a sermonic 
character that utilized biblical references and imageries. In the United States, 
UNIA Sunday meetings featured processional, recessional, and missionary 
hymns, sermons, and bene dictions, while the organization’s official motto 
was “One God, One Aim, One Destiny. ” Predictably, Psalms 68:31 (“Princes 
shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hand unto God”), 
a passage much beloved by the exponents of Providential Design, was also a 
UNIA favorite. But other biblical verses were popular with the UNIA, too, such 
as Acts 17:26 (“He created of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all 
the face of the earth”), which appeared on the group’s stationery.33 In short, 
Garveyism in South Africa
137


--- PAGE 157 ---
providential religious language suffused the political objectives of the UNIA,
and its self-described “missionaries” set out to “convert” unbelieving blacks to 
the project of African “salvation” and “redemption. ”34
The Cape T own UNIA branches responded to Garvey’s 1925 incarceration 
for alleged mail fraud by inaugurating Garvey Day mass meetings on the first 
Sunday of each month. These meetings often included processionals through 
the streets of Cape T own, and members donated monies to their leader’s 
legal defense fund.35 The UNIA, in conjunction with the ICU and the ANC,
also organized against segregationist legislation, low wages, and massacres of 
blacks by the security forces in Port Elizabeth and Bulhoek, both in South 
Africa, and in Southwest Africa (now Namibia), the former German colony 
ceded to South Africa after World War I. Reaching out to other oppressed 
racial groups in South African society, the UNIA, ICU, and ANC made links 
with the Cape Indian Council and the Indian nationalist and poet Sarojina 
Naidoo, who visited South Africa. James Thaele, president of the ANC’s Cape 
T own branch and recipient of two degrees from Lincoln University, an African 
American institution, was a key player in all of these endeavors. Thaele, along 
with Jamaican Arthur McKinley, replicated the stepladder speeches that West 
Indian immigrants like Garvey had made famous in Harlem. Open-air political 
speeches, Thaele’s Garveyite newspaper the African World, and the frequent 
translation of Negro World articles into African languages all were instrumental 
in spreading Garveyism.36
The Cape T own UNIA branches also distributed Garveyite literature to 
other parts of South Africa, creating an internal black communication net-
work beyond the reach of white authorities. In 1920, for example, Cape T own 
Garveyites placed copies of the UNIA’s classic manifesto, the Declaration of 
Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World, in packages of goods to be shipped 
to stores in the country’s interior. Black workers who opened these packages 
would remove the documents and fur ther disseminate them. Cape T own 
Garveyites also sent Garvey’s books and pamphlets and copies of the Negro 
World to the diamond-mining town of Kimberley, where Garveyism found 
fertile ground in the House of Athlyi, a religious organization with interna-
tionalist links to the United States and Jamaica.37
Garveyism in Kimberley: The House of Athlyi
Joseph Masogha, the founder of the South African branch of the House of 
Athlyi, was the key disseminator of Garveyism in the diamond-mining town 
robert vinson
138


--- PAGE 158 ---
of Kimberley. Masogha distributed UNIA books and pictures, the Negro World,
and other “ American Negro” newspapers throughout South Africa and in his 
native Basutoland. Educated up to Standard IV (grade five), Masogha’s Garvey-
ite activities earned him the enmity of government officials, who considered 
him a “notorious agitator. ” He was dismissed from his jobs as a postman and 
a constable for “drunkenness,” presumably from the intoxicating ideology of 
Garveyism.38 White postal workers regularly pummeled Masogha with “kicks, 
punches, sneers, [and] insults” as he collected Negro World shipments from 
the Kimberley post office, threatening ominously that he would soon be a 
“dead nigger. ”39 Y et the indefatigable Masogha persevered, telling the UNIA
headquarters in New Y ork that he made professional and personal sacrifices 
to disseminate Garveyism in order to “spread this spirit of the New Negro. I 
have given my heart as an offering for this land of ours. I quite follow that there 
must be a sacrifice. I hope the UNIA will guide me. ”40
Masogha’s efforts were instrumental in making Kimberley a Garveyite 
stronghold. South Africa’s diamond center, Kimberley was an early model of 
urban segregation, with its townships, restrictive pass laws, closed compounds, 
migrant-labor system, and color-bar policies. De Beers Consolidated Mines, 
the world’s largest diamond company, was headquartered in Kimberley, giving 
it the feel of a “company town. ” Correspondents to the Negro World attested 
to the paper’s extensive circulation in Kimberley, and they railed against the 
town’s segregationist practices; one writer asserted that “the time has arrived 
for the black races to assert themselves and throw off the white yoke. ”41 James 
Charles Diraath, a Kimberley hospital work er and amateur photographer, 
noted of the Negro World that “every copy is carefully preserved and passed 
from hand to hand so that as many as possible may hear the truth. ” He con-
cluded, “Thousands of our native people here . . . are greatly encouraged by the 
efforts of the Hon. Marcus Garvey and the splendid work of the UNIA. ”42
Such were the circumstances in which Masogha, in 1924, established a 
branch of the House of Athlyi.43 Headqua rtered in Newark, New Jersey, the 
House of Athlyi was founded by Richard Athlyi Rogers, who hailed from the 
Caribbean island of Anguilla. Rogers articulated a version of the Providential 
Design ideal, and he assumed the title of shepherd, watching over his Ethiopian 
flock. God, he asserted, had commanded him to become a modern-day Moses 
to lead “Ethiopia’s generations from the oppressive feet of the nations” and to 
transform them into a “nation among nations. ”44
In 1922, after they both addressed a UNIA meeting in Newark, Rogers 
“anointed” Marcus Garvey as his chief apostle. Impressed by Garvey’s mes-
Garveyism in South Africa
139


--- PAGE 159 ---
sage, Rogers proclaimed him “an apostle of the Lord God for the redemption 
of Ethiopia and her suffering posterities. ” He commanded his congregation, 
estimated at 500, to join the UNIA, asserting further that he and Garvey “were 
anointed and sent forth by the Almighty God to lay the foundation of industry, 
liberty and justice unto the generations of Ethiopia that they prove themselves 
a power among the nations and in the glory of their God. ”45 Defending Garvey 
against his detractors, Rogers commanded, “Raise not the weight of your finger 
on Marcus Garvey, neither speak ye against Him. ”46
Rogers and Garvey agreed on a numbe r of issues, spiritual and material, 
including a belief that black people should conceive of God in their own image 
and seek economic empowerment. Garvey believed his program of economic 
self-reliance, which included the Black Star Line, the Negro Factories Corpora-
tion, and the Black Cross and Navigation Company, was a necessary comple-
ment to spiritual prophecies of African redemption. Rogers concurred: “For 
as much as the children of Ethiopia, God’s favorite people of old, have turned 
away from his divine Majesty, neglecting life economic, believing they could on 
spiritual wings fly to the kingdom of God, consequently became a dependent 
for the welfare of others. ”47
Rogers wrote the Holy Piby: The Black Man’s Bible, the preeminent sacred 
book of the House of Athlyi. The Holy Piby articulated an aggressive black lib-
erationist theology, and it would later become a foundational text of Jamaica’s 
Rastafarian movement.48 Rogers’s narrative included Twelve Commandments, 
otherwise known as the doctrine of Athlicanity. These commandments shared 
the Holy Bible’s injunctions to observe thriftiness, cleanliness, and honesty 
but made several significant departures. The Holy Piby interpreted the Battle 
of Adwa, in which Ethiopia defeated Italy in 1896, as a sign of impending black 
liberation.49 Rogers also claimed that blacks could only attain the “Kingdom of 
God” if they demanded social justice on earth, instead of passively waiting for 
heavenly rewards.50 The Holy Piby advocated the establishment of a powerful 
black nationality through unity and self-reliance and forbade blacks from fight-
ing one another. Rogers’s text further refuted the “Hamitic Hypothesis,” said to 
be a biblical curse on blacks as the supposed descendants of Ham, a claim long 
used by white Christians to justify the oppression of African peoples. Rogers 
warned black Christians to eschew such biblical interpretations: “Woe be unto 
a race of people who forsake their own and adhere to the doctrine of another. 
They shall be slaves to the people thereof. ”51 Rather, blacks should use the Holy 
Piby as their guiding religious text, as it contained “all worthy prophecies and 
inspirations endowed by God upon the sons and daughters of Ethiopia. ”52
robert vinson
140


--- PAGE 160 ---
The House of Athlyi, according to Rogers, had been established to provide 
“a real religious and material brotherhood among the children of Ethiopia” and 
to combat the “confusion and hatred” practiced by white Christians. Resorting 
to the language of Providential Design, Rogers asserted that God would “tear 
down the walls” of oppression he had “permitted to hold Ethiopia in bondage, 
that she may know the devil and his unrighteousness. ” “Now I shall send forth 
an army of Athlyians who shall redeem my children and deliver them again to 
my arms. ”53 “When the Lord God of Ethiopia is with us in the battle for that 
to which we are entitled, show me the foe so powerful to set us down? Verily 
I say unto you there is none. ”54
In South Africa, such doctrines predictably met with strong official reproof. 
The local authorities in Kimberley denied Masogha land on which to build a 
church and school, while the national government refused to grant him and 
his ministers marriage licenses, denying them the right to marry congregants.55
Considering the movement subversive, the authorities speculated that the 
term “Gaathly” was a contraction of Garvey and Athlyi, which “proved” that 
the “notorious Marcus Garvey” was a prime instigator of the House of Athlyi. 
Somehow, Masogha and his coworkers apparently managed to weather the 
storm of hostility: the House of Athlyi, or some remnants thereof, is reported 
to have been in existence as late as the 1980s.
“Dr. Wellington” and the Promise of American Negro 
Deliverance in the Transkei
Garveyism in South Africa took a particularly fascinating twist in the mid-
1920s in the T ranskei, when an African named Wellington Butelezi claimed 
the alternate identity of Dr. Butler Hansford Wellington, an “ American Negro” 
and Garvey disciple. A largely rural area, the T ranskei was quite different from 
Cape T own and Kimberley, the other two major centers of Garveyism in South 
Africa. Africans in the T ranskei (and other rural districts) were subjected to 
a dizzying array of taxes, restrictions on landholding and cattle, economic ex-
ploitation by white traders, and pass laws that controlled their movement.
Wellington became an “ American Negro” to legitimate his crusade against 
oppression in the T ranskei and, not coincidentally, to advance his personal 
interests. T aking advantage of the high esteem in which many Africans held 
African Americans, he found fertile ground for his millenarian prophecies of 
imminent liberation, the agents of which would come from the other side 
of the black Atlantic. Wellington’s ingenious, if opportunistic, use of existing 
Garveyism in South Africa
141


--- PAGE 161 ---
African American liberatory myths created a brief but electrifying Garveyism 
in the T ranskei, a movement that featured millenarian prophecies, churches 
and schools, and an increased identification with African Americans.
Wellington was an outsider to the T ranskei, which is populated largely by 
Xhosa-speaking Africans. Wellington, by contrast, was a Zulu-speaker from 
the neighboring province of Natal. The oldest of five children, he was born 
on January 26, 1899, and named Wellington Elias Butelezi.56 After attending a 
Lutheran mission school, he enrolled briefly at Lovedale Institute, a training 
ground for those aspiring to become members of the small African elite. On 
leaving Lovedale, Butelezi worked variously as salesman, clerk, teacher, and 
herbalist.57
Then, in 1923, Butelezi took an important step toward becoming an “ Ameri-
can Negro. ” He petitioned the government to “alter or conceal my name as Elias 
Butelezi and put it for Butler Hansford Wellington,” a “Homeopathic Medical 
Practitioner and Specialist in Pediatric Diseases. ”58 The nomenclatorial trans-
formation apparently was associated with an increasing interest in Garveyism. 
Wellington subsequently became acquainted with the Caribbean-born Ernest 
Wallace and other “ American Negroes,” who had established UNIA branches 
in various parts of South Africa.59 Soon, Wellington was organizing under his 
own UNIA banner, but he would achieve his greatest success in the T ranskei.
“Dr. Wellington” attracted numerous followers with an intriguing tale. 
African American troops under the command of “General Garvey,” he told 
transfixed audiences, would descend on South Africa in airplanes. Armed with 
flaming balls of charcoal/uRELfk.dthe imageries were drawn from the Book of Revela-
tion/uRELfk.dthe Americans would destroy the whites, along with those Africans who 
had refused to join the UNIA, or Wellington’s version of it. A modern black state 
would replace the segregationist regime, ushering in a new dispensation: “Y ou 
are not going to pay taxes nor dip cattle. . . . Forces are coming, armies coming 
from America to drive the white people from Africa, to go to their own coun-
try. . . . People who did not register their names with him in his book will die 
together with the white people. ”60 The transatlantic black liberators, according 
to Wellington, were motivated by pan-African racial affinities, by a desire to 
return to their African homeland, and by a determination to redeem a promise, 
made by the British during World War I, to cede South Africa to the United 
States in exchange for military assistance.61 As if to give credibility to these 
fantastic assertions, Wellington claimed personally to have been wounded in 
the war while serving as a general in an exclusively African American army.62
Wellington further maintained that the UNIA had sent him to Africa, along 
robert vinson
142


--- PAGE 162 ---
with forty other men, to ascertain African interest in African American emigra-
tion. Those in favor of the return of transatlantic blacks would take out UNIA
membership, which would offer them protection during the coming invasion.63
The UNIA’s shipping line, plus Garvey’s stated intention to establish an aerial 
fleet to liberate Africa, seemed altogether consistent with Wellington’s asser-
tions that a “new and powerful race from the sea . . . dreaded by all European 
nations . . . will end tyranny and wrong. ”64
So as to not be confused with unbelievers, who would perish with the ar-
rival of the Americans, Wellington’s followers took steps to distinguish them-
selves. They sported badges with red, black, and green (the colors of the UNIA),
symbolizing a determination to “pull down the British Empire”; painted their 
houses black; and slaughtered pigs, white goats, and white fowl.65 Wellington 
proclaimed the killing of pigs, which he said represented degradation, decay, 
and death, a necessary precondition for li beration.66 On his account, the in-
discriminate eating habits of the swine and its unsanitary ways made it an 
ideal carrier of tapeworms, which gave consumers of pork parasitic illnesses. 
Furthermore, the despised whites had introduced pigs and chickens into the 
region.67 For good measure, Wellington announced, the American libera-
tors would set pigs on fire with burning coals, using the animals as conduits 
to spread the fatal flames to unbeliever s and their properties alike.68 These 
apocalyptic predictions unnerved some unbelievers, whose public disavowals 
of Wellington did not prevent them from hiding in the forests to avoid detec-
tion by the coming Americans.69
Wellington’s American persona was crucial to his attempts to establish his 
legitimacy. He benefited from the fact that few Africans in the comparatively 
remote T ranskei had ever met an “ American Negro” and thus had difficulty 
uncovering his fraudulence. He also took advantage of the image of African 
Americans as quintessential black moderns, individuals with both the ability 
and the will to liberate their African fellow blacks. “Dr. Wellington” reinforced 
his modernist image by speaking only English at his meetings, by changing 
suits several times a day, and by touring the T ranskei in a chauffeur-driven, 
American-made Dodge sedan. His supposed American medical degree fur-
ther added to his allure.70 These mode rnist means of deliverance seemingly 
confirmed a widespread belief that African Americans possessed the requi-
site educational, technological, and milita ry capabilities to overthrow white 
supremacy in South Africa.
Wellington’s success was due, in part, to his ability to weld the unfamiliar 
with the familiar. Thus he framed his prophecies in ways that resonated with 
Garveyism in South Africa
143


--- PAGE 163 ---
existing religious conceptions of the co lonial state, to which many Africans 
attributed malevolent spiritual qualities. Africans believed Europeans to be 
“possessed of powerful materials for sorcery. . . . All ubuthi (magical substances) 
comes from Europeans. They are the real amagqwira (witches). ”71 For the colo-
nized Africans, taxation was a primary means by which the government dem-
onstrated its tyrannical power. Payment of hut taxes allowed Africans access to 
land; poll taxes facilitated the acquisition of the passes needed by prospective 
migrant workers; and livestock levies allowed one’s cattle to graze freely and 
enabled one to borrow money against the cattle’s value.72 By the same token, 
nonpayment of taxes could mobilize the state’s powerful ubuthi, which partly 
explains why the vast majority of Africans paid the onerous levies that con-
tributed to their material deprivation. This mindset also explains why Africans 
referred to the poll tax as impundulu, the common term for the destructive 
lightning storms that regularly killed people and livestock and burned homes. 
T ellingly, an alternate name for the poll tax was inkosi, or chief, a term that 
recognized the state’s dominant position.73
Wellington, the respected herbalist with reputed magical powers, was now 
arguing that the impundulu of African Americans would overwhelm that of 
the Europeans. In this context, the fact that the Mpondo, an ethnic group in 
the southern T ranskei, visualized the impundulu bird as red, white, and blue, 
the colors of the U.S. flag, is significant. Wellington beckoned his followers 
to gaze into a crystal ball that  showed American airplanes, ships, and flying 
automobiles ready to attack, once Africans demonstrated their receptiveness 
to the plan. His magic mirror, reputedly an American invention, would turn 
British bullets into water. T o alleviate widespread hunger exacerbated by recent 
droughts, Wellington held out to his followers the prospects of American ships 
loaded with cornmeal, which bounty could be supplemented by the harvests 
left by the vanquished unbelievers.74
Some of Wellington’s lieutenants claimed to have actually seen the Ameri-
cans and their military fortifications, and they repeatedly promised liberation 
on a date certain.75 Forsaking the theme song of the British Empire, “God Save 
the King,” Wellingtonite children’s choirs now sang “Nkosi’ Sikeleli Afrika,” 
the anthem of African liberation, and other freedom tunes.76 Other Welling-
tonites boldly informed shocked magistrates that they would pay their move-
ment’s membership dues instead of state taxes, and they refused to submit 
to mandated vaccinations.77 One flabbergasted magistrate exclaimed, “I have 
never known any man to get such an influence over the natives in such a short 
time. ”78 Another official concurred: “The natives who to some extent resent the 
robert vinson
144


--- PAGE 164 ---
increased taxation, firmly believe this man’s saying and look to a happy time of 
release from European rule which the American Government will bring. ”79
Wellington acolytes did not wait passively for the American liberators. 
They established some 200 churches and nearly as many schools as alternatives 
to white-controlled religious and educational institutions.80 These indepen-
dent churches and schools formed the institutional bedrock of Wellington’s 
movement.81 The churches allowed members a religious space to articulate a 
liberationist Christianity and a setting in which to perform such functions as 
marriage ceremonies, thereby avoiding the onerous fees, burdensome docu-
mentation, and other alien requirements demanded by the colonial state and 
European ministers.82 Wellington also established a pair of more ambitious 
educational institutions, which he generously dubbed universities. And while 
the number of his most ardent adheren ts is impossible to ascertain, inces-
sant complaints by government officials and other detractors suggest that his 
churches and schools were relatively, if perhaps fleetingly, well-attended. South 
African white supremacy ensured as much. As Wellington himself noted, “In 
schools you are taught to say Boss to any white man young or big all the same. 
Y our names are Jim, John, George, Jack, etc. Y ou go to Church but they won’t 
mix with you. ”83
Wellington’s institutions featured a political, religious, and educational 
content that reaffirmed Garveyite principles and had an overt Africanism. 
Walter Sisulu, a onetime secretary general of the ANC and mentor to Nelson 
Mandela, attended one such school. His mother also taught at a Wellington 
institution. Sisulu remembered that African cultural values infused a curricu-
lum that was otherwise similar to the one approved by the government. At the 
Wellington schools, for instance, the pupils prayed to “the God of Mtirara, or 
Langalibalele,” precolonial African political figures, not to “the God of Abra-
ham, Isaac and Jacob, because they were white people. ”84
Wellington’s schools were subsidized by a portion of the dues paid by the 
members of his movement. Additional collections were supposed to pay for 
new schools, textbooks, and teachers from the United States. School fees pro-
vided yet another source of income. Most teachers came from the surrounding 
communities. Few of them, however, were educated above the eighth-grade 
level or had undergone teaching training. The problem of poorly educated and 
poorly paid teachers was exacerbated by inadequate facilities and equipment. 
Some teachers, left without formal school buildings, resorted to scribbling 
lessons on the walls of huts.85 Harassment by the state, the missionaries, and 
other opponents of Wellington constituted another set of challenges. In time, 
Garveyism in South Africa
145


--- PAGE 165 ---
Wellington’s own supporters became increasingly frustrated with his unful-
filled promises, especially of American teachers and textbooks.
Still, many of the Wellingtonite schools and churches persisted for many 
years, and they contributed greatly to a generalized unrest that characterized 
much of the T ranskei in the late 1920s.86 The missionary-run educational cen-
ters suffered drastic declines in enro llment during this period, as students 
defected to the Garveyite schools, sometimes in the face of physical attacks 
by the “ Americans,” as Wellington’s followers called themselves. Government 
officials who sought to forcibly close the alternate schools were met with “as-
segais and sticks as though the enemy had approached. ” Some Wellingtonites 
even turned the tables, using boycotts and intimidation to force the closure of 
several white-run schools.
Y et, by the late 1920s, Wellington was under increased scrutiny from both 
friends and foes. His failure to produc e the American liberators and prom-
ised American teachers and textbooks caused much disillusionment. Support 
faded, as “the Americans were said to be coming to Africa and people will not 
join the movement as they don’t see the Americans. ”87 Members increasingly 
resented Wellington’s incessant demands for monies, much of which seemed 
only to line his pocket. External attacks joined the growing internal dissent. 
In 1927 the South African authorities banned Wellington from the T ranskei. 
Henceforth, followers had to journey to the Cape Colony, a considerable dis-
tance for many, to see him.
T o add insult to injury, Wellington’s claims to be tied to the UNIA were 
exposed as fraudulent. Garvey himself disavowed the “Doctor,” warning in 
the pages of the Negro World that Wellington was not a UNIA officer and had 
no authorization to collect money or establish chapters on its behalf.88 Mean-
while, detractors inside South Africa disproved Wellington’s other claim to 
fame, that is, his Americanness. Hecklers mocked Wellington by calling him 
Butelezi, his Zulu surname.89 A Zulu headman noted Wellington’s “Zulu tribal 
mark, a cut in the right ear, which he has sewn up. ”90 Samuel Bennett Ncwana, 
formerly an ardent Garveyite, spoke of his personal knowledge of Wellington’s 
Zulu birth.91 Wellington’s own father delivered the coup de grace, affirming his 
son’s Zuluness.92 Forced to abandon the charade that “nobody knows me in 
this country,”93 Wellington fell silent on his origins. He subsequently confined 
his pronouncements to the familiar themes of white injustice, black institution 
building, and black liberationist Christianity.
In 1935 Wellington sought to reverse his declining fortune by capitalizing 
on widespread African revulsion to Italy’s threats to, and eventual invasion of, 
robert vinson
146


--- PAGE 166 ---
Ethiopia. Attendance at his meetings increased dramatically. He demanded a 
South African economic embargo on Italy and urged black South Africans to 
embark to “East Africa to defend your own people. ”94 Despite the popularity 
of the cause he now espoused, however, Wellington could not live down his 
past. Considering him untrustworthy, at least where money was concerned, 
his newfound listeners rebuffed his requests for funds, allegedly to support the 
Ethiopian resistance.95
Throughout the 1930s Wellington repeatedly appealed to the government to 
reverse its ban and allow him to enter the T ranskei and other prohibited areas 
for “educational and spiritual purposes only” and to visit his wife and child. He 
disavowed any political intent. The hostility of many white (and some black) 
churchmen toward him, he argued, was due to jealousy, notably the defec-
tion of African parishioners and schoolchildren to Wellingtonite churches and 
schools. He also invoked America to support his claims, stating that “there are 
lawful private schools in the U.S.A. ”96 The government, however, adamantly 
rejected his requests. Instead, the authorities jailed Wellington several times 
between 1937 and 1944 for, among other offenses, entering the T ranskei with-
out a pass, nonpayment of taxes, theft, and possession of alcohol.97
An increasingly frustrated Wellington saw no end to government persecu-
tion and unsuccessfully attempted to leave the country. In the 1940s he resur-
faced in various parts of South Africa, including the industrial center of Johan-
nesburg. A somewhat sheepish sister, embarrassed by her brother’s infamy, 
admitted to one researcher that Wellington had visited her in the early 1950s, 
but she claimed no knowledge of his subsequent whereabouts. Wellington, 
who had electrified followers and vexed government officials in the 1920s and 
1930s, simply disappeared from the public record, with no indication of his 
final fate.98
In the end, however, Garveyism in the T ranskei transcended Wellington. 
Many of the churches and schools established during the heyday of his move-
ment continued to operate after his personal demise. Wellington’s decline and 
fall also opened the door for the emergence of an official Garveyite presence in 
the T ranskei. Paul Gulwa, in direct communication with Garvey, established 
UNIA chapters in the T ranskei, repeatedly donated monies to the international 
UNIA, and enrolled in Garvey’s School of African Philosophy. Furthermore, 
the prophetic tradition of externally driven liberation, which Wellington had 
exploited so well, survived him. During World War II, for example, UNIA ad-
herents improbably put out word that the “ Americans,” in conjunction with, 
of all forces, Hitler’s Germany, would overthrow the South African state.99 The 
Garveyism in South Africa
147


--- PAGE 167 ---
Wellington phenomenon may also be seen as representing, at the rural and 
popular levels, a culmination of the intense reverence black South Africans 
had for their black American cousins, a feeling that had been in the making for 
decades, since the time of the Virginia Jubilee Singers, if not before. Most fun-
damentally, perhaps, the considerable currency given to the mythic promises 
of “ American Negro” liberation reflected the profound alienation of the black 
South African masses from the segregationist state and their desperation for 
salvation from white domination.
Conclusion
“ American Negroes” as models, meta phors, political icons, and dissemi-
nators of political thought were central to black internationalist politics in 
South Africa between 1890 and 1940. Garveyism was the culmination of this 
dynamic between the two world wars, and its pan-Africanist race-conscious 
ideals would remain important to successive African political groupings, such 
as the ANC Y outh League of the 1940s and the Pan-Africanist Congress of the 
1950s. The pan-Africanism and self-determination ethos of Garveyism are also 
reflected in the ideologies of the Black Consciousness Movement in the 1970s 
and 1980s and, later still, in former president Thabo Mbeki’s African Renais-
sance. Garveyism itself surfaces in eclectic geographical and cultural spaces in 
postapartheid South Africa. The country’s expanding Rastafarian communities 
are impassioned followers of Garvey, and there is a Rasta squatter settlement 
named Marcus Garvey near Cape T own’s airport. A mural at the University 
of Cape T own bears Garvey’s image, while South African musical icons from 
Kwaito groups like Bongo Maffin to reggae superstars like the late Lucky Dube 
articulate Garveyite perspectives. The recently revived Johannesburg-based 
UNIA has sought to harness this diffused energy in organizational politics. In a 
state visit to Jamaica, Mbeki took time to lay flowers at Garvey’s tombstone.
African Americans, exemplified most prominently by the Council on 
African Affairs in the 1940s and 1950s and the Congressional Black Caucus 
and T ransAfrica in the 1970s and 1980s, were at the forefront of the antiapart-
heid movement in the United States. T oday, thousands of African American 
entrepreneurs, corporate employees, diplomats, religious personnel, exiles, 
and tourists flock to South Africa. African American entertainers are a par-
ticularly ubiquitous presence in South African theaters, television and radio 
programs, and newspapers, thereby complementing the physical presence of 
American blacks. Though a dwindling number of South African octogenar-
robert vinson
148


--- PAGE 168 ---
ians remember the Garveyite-dominated interwar years as “the time of the 
Americans,” it is clear that the time of the Americans has not yet passed.
notes
1. See Vinson, “In the Time of the Americans” and “‘ Americans Are Coming. ’” See 
also the important work of Edgar, “Garveyism in Africa,” and Hill and Pirio, “‘ Africa 
for the Africans. ’” A recent article on Garveyism in southern Africa is West, “Seeds Are 
Sown. ”
2. Rich, State Power, 39, 43. Standard texts on black South African politics include 
Walshe, Rise of African Nationalism; Odendaal, Black Protest Politics; and Gerhart, Black 
Power in South Africa.
3. The general lack of focus on Africa in African Diaspora studies is reflected in the 
“ African Diaspora” special issue of African Studies Review  43 (2000) and in the recent 
“transnational black studies” issue of the Radical History Review 87 (2003). Manning in-
vokes the term “homeland and diaspora model” in “ Africa and the African Diaspora. ”
4. Beinart and Dubow, Segregation and Apartheid.
5. Hofmeyr, South Africa, 313–14.
6. Atkins, “Black Atlantic Communication Network,” 6–11.
7. Leselinyana, October 1, 1890, cited in Erlmann, African Stars, 44.
8. After 1902, South African governments became increasingly concerned that “ Ameri-
can Negroes” were fomenting political di scontent amongst Africans. The popularity 
of Garveyism contributed greatly to the virtual ban of African Americans from South 
Africa and was the death knell of their “honorary white” status. The apartheid-era South 
African government would revive the “honorary white” designation for visiting Afri-
can Americans, including Max Y ergan, Roy Wilkins, Arthur Ashe, and Eartha Kitt. See 
Vinson, “Citizenship over Race?” On Y ergan, who had an especially long and complex 
history of engagement with South Africa, see Anthony, Max Yergan.
9. Cited in Moeti, “Ethiopianism,” 155.
10. For the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church in South Africa, see Camp-
bell, Songs of Zion. For historical context to the notion of Providential Design, see Moses, 
Alexander Crummell, and Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race. For Henry Mc-
Neal Turner, see Redkey, Respect Black.
11. Stein, World, 64; Martin, Race First, 152. Other essential texts on Garveyism include 
Garvey, Philosophy and Opinions; Hill, Marcus Garvey; Lewis and Bryan, Garvey; Vincent, 
Black Power; Cronon, Black Moses; and T olbert, UNIA and Black Los Angeles.
12. Martin, Race First, 153.
13. South African Government Archives (hereafter SAGA), Papers of the Union De-
partment of Native Affairs, T ransvaal Archive Depot (hereafter NTS), Interior Depart-
ment, Reports on Bolshevism 168/74B, vol. 2, file 7/168/74, “Ennis” to Marcus Garvey, 
May 9, 1920.
14. Ibid., Secretary for Justice to Secretary for the Interior, December 8, 1920.
15. SAGA, Cape Province Depot (hereafter CA), 1/KNT 40 N1/9/2, affidavit of 
“Golifili” to Kentani Assistant Magistrate, December 14, 1920.
Garveyism in South Africa
149


--- PAGE 169 ---
16. SAGA, NTS, Interior Department, Reports on Bolshevism 168/74B, vol. 2, file 
7/168/74, Secretary for Justice to Secretary for the Interior, October 18, 1920.
17. Hill and Pirio, “‘ Africa for the Africans,’” 211.
18. Josiel Lefela, article excerpt, Naledi, November 18, 1921, Public Records Office 
(England), Co 417/665/02597.
19. SAGA, GG 1728, file 51/6670, Gilbert Matshoba to Enoch Mgijima, August 1920. 
Matshoba was referring to the August 14, 1920, edition of Umteteli wa Bantu, which 
had reported on the 1920 UNIA convention in New Y ork City, which took place that 
month.
20. The Cape Argus, a Cape T own newspaper, estimated the “ American Negro” com-
munity at somewhat less than 200 persons; see Cape Argus, January 29, 1923.
21. “Census of the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope, 1904,” cited in Cobley, “Far from 
Home,” 358. For West Indians and black Americans in Port Elizabeth, see Kirk, Making 
a Voice.
22. James Ghazu in the Negro World, July 16, 1932. Ghazu was a black South African 
sailor who eventually became the president of the South African UNIA in the late 1930s. 
See Page, “Black America in White South Africa,” 332.
23. The union’s initials were ICU instead of the seemingly correct ICWU because the 
enunciation of ICU was an ominous threat by blacks to whites; “I see you” connoted 
the transparency and insecurity of white domination. The phrase has resonated in South 
Africa’s black nationalist circles, being powerfully revived during Nelson Mandela’s first 
speech after his February 1990 release from prison, when he rallied the crowd with the 
phrase, “I see you. ”
24. Kadalie, My Life, 220–21.
25. Wickins, Industrial and Commercial Workers’ Union, 85. For Johnson, see Black 
Man, August 1920, and Workers Herald, March 27, 1926.
26. Killie Campbell African Library, University of Natal, J. S. Marwick Papers, 
Clements Kadalie to Samuel Ncwana, May 20, 1920, in Hill and Pirio, “‘ Africa for the 
Africans,’” 215.
27. Black Man, August 1920.
28. The five branches were in Cape T own proper and in the city’s suburbs of Wood-
stock, Claremont, Goodwood, and West London. The July 24, 1920, meeting of the 
Goodwood branch is the earliest documented Cape T own UNIA chapter.
29. SAGA, T ransvaal Depot, 3/1064/18, Cape ANC meeting, 1923.
30. Ibid., GG 1556, 50/1058, June 3, 1923. Of course, the slogan “One God, One Aim, 
One Destiny” was a UNIA invention; it was ubiquitous on UNIA printed material like 
the Negro World.
31. Negro World, June 20, July 18, 1925, April 24, 1926.
32. Burkett, Black Redemption, 5–6, 9–10.
33. Burkett, Garveyism as a Religious Movement, 33–34. AME ministers Richard Allen 
and Absalom Jones made the earliest documented articulation of Psalms 68:31, which 
AME-affiliated Ethiopianist ministers found so powerful a century later. See Jones and 
Allen, “Narrative of the Proceedings of the Black People. ”
34. Negro World, February 19, 1921, 4. See also Burkett, Garveyism as a Religious Move-
ment, 25.
robert vinson
150


--- PAGE 170 ---
35. Negro World, December 1, 1923, June 20, 1925.
36. Negro World, September 12, 1925, April 30, 1927.
37. Vinson, “In the Time of the Americans,” 53; Black Man, November 1920; Hill, 
“Dread History”; Hill and Pirio, “‘ Africa for the Africans,’” 219.
38. SAGA, NTS, 1455 file 128/214, memorandum of A. W. Richards, Divisional In-
spector, Eastern Cape Division to District Commandants, South African Police, Eastern 
Cape Division, June 16, 1928; Superintendent, Native Locations, to the Chairman and 
Members, Locations Committee, October 3, 1925; Detective Constable J. D. Justus to 
Divisional Criminal Investigation Officer, Kimberley, May 14, 1928.
39. Negro World, April 18, 1925.
40. Negro World, September 13, 27, 1924, August 14, 1926.
41. Negro World, January 14, 1922.
42. Negro World, June 27, 1925, October 18, 1924, January 17, 1925.
43. The Afro-Athlican Constructive Gaathly Mamatic Church Hymn Book, published 
in 1926, listed “the House of Athlyi, World’s Headquarters” at 253 Nyembane St., Kim-
berley, South Africa. See Hill, “Dread History,” 34, 62 n. 18. For Masogha’s address, see 
SAGA, NTS, 1455 file 128/214, Joseph Masogha to the Secretary for Native Affairs, June 
30, 1925.
44. Rogers, Holy Piby, 10.
45. Ibid., 6.
46. Ibid., 54–55.
47. Ibid., 25 (emphasis added).
48. There is virtually no scholarship on Rogers, an undeservedly neglected figure in 
pan-Africanist historiography. The notable exception is Hill, “Dread History. ” The Holy 
Piby was published on January 15, 1924. It and the Reverend Fitz Ballentine Pettersburgh’s 
Royal Parchment Scroll of Black Supremacy were the foundational texts of the emergent 
Rastafarian religion in 1930s Jamaica. According to Hill, Leonard Howell’s more famous 
text, The Promised Key, plagiarized heavily from the Pettersburgh book, which was reput-
edly published in 1926. There are few, if any, original copies of this work, though the text 
can be found online at <http://www.sacred_texts.com/afr/rps> (accessed February 1, 
2008).
49. Rogers, Holy Piby, 9, 26–27, 30–31, 36–39, 42–46.
50. Ibid., 9–10, 14, 22.
51. Ibid., 45.
52. Ibid., 7–10, 19.
53. Ibid., 64.
54. SAGA, NTS, 1455 file 128/214, Application for Church Site, April 20, 1926.
55. Ibid., Masogha to Secretary for Native Affairs, June 30, 1925; undated letter of R. A. 
Rogers to Secretary for the Interior; Secretary for Native Affairs to Secretary for the 
Interior, May 26, 1926; Superintendent, Native Locations, to Joseph Masogha, October 
24, 1925; Superintendent, Native Locations, to Native Locations Department, May 20, 
1926.
56. Another document gives his birth as January 1, 1899. See SAGA, Department of 
Native Affairs, 7602 file 25/328, pt. 2, R. D. Lyle, Pietermaritzburg Magistrate, to Natal 
Chief Native Commissioner, January 30, 1928.
Garveyism in South Africa
151


--- PAGE 171 ---
57. Edgar, “ African Educational Protest,” 184–91 (esp. 184); SAGA, CA, 2/SPT 16 file 
NI/9/2, undated article by Rev. Allen Lea. In 1919, the Church of Sweden, which had 
baptized Wellington, excommunicated him for unexplained reasons. See SAGA, NTS, 
7603 file 25/328, statement by J. E. Hallendorff, Church of Sweden missionary.
58. Wellington cited religious reasons for the requested name change and did so as 
part of an unsuccessful attempt to study medicine at Oxford University. See SAGA, CA, 
2/SPT v. 16 file N1/9/3, P . Nkala, Secretary to B. H. Wellington, to the Secretary for Na-
tive Affairs, July 16, 1926.
59. SAGA, NTS, 7603 file 25/328, Matatiele Magistrate to Secretary for Native Affairs, 
August 14, 1928. The quote is reprinted from the Matatiele Mail, December 23, 1925.
60. Umteteli wa Bantu, January 15, 1927 in SAGA, CA, 1/TSO 5/1/19 file 3/16/6.
61. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, Rex vs. Albert Rulashe, Umtata, case no. 663/1928, 
June 11, 1928; Wilson, Reaction to Conquest, 371.
62. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, undated report of J. Z. Makongolo, court inter-
preter. The report details events that occurred on June 9, 1927.
63. Ibid., affidavit of Daniel Dabulamanzi Mbebe, May 16, 1926; pt. 2, affidavit of Edgar 
Lonsdale, T solo Magistrate, March 12, 1927.
64. Umteteli wa Bantu, October 8, 1927.
65. Umteteli wa Bantu, January 8, 1927; SAGA, CA, 1/NKE 58 file N1/9/3, undated 
correspondence from Enoch Mgushulu to one Mr. Nyembezi; NTS 7602 file 26/328, pts. 
2 and 3, R. Fyfe King, T abankulu Magistrate, to Chief Magistrate, September 13, 1927.
66. SAGA, CA, 1/ECO 6/1/99 file 2/16/12, Engcobo Magistrate W. J. Davidson to 
Chief Magistrate, December 31, 1927. See also NTS 7603 file 26/328, Mount Ayliff Mag-
istrate W. H. P . Freemantle to Chief Magistrate, September 19, 1927; pt. 4, F. N. Doran, 
Qumbu Magistrate to Chief Magistrate, September 26, 1927.
67. Bradford, T aste of Freedom, 225.
68. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, statement by Benson Gcina, Harding Natal, Janu-
ary 12, 1928; Natal Chief Inspector of Locations to Natal Chief Native Commissioner, 
January 23, 1928.
69. Personal communication with Jeff Peires, August 3, 2000. Wellington’s “ American 
Negro” prophecies tapped into similar “outside liberator” mythologies that had circu-
lated in central and southern Africa since the nineteenth century. See Ranger, “Myth of 
the Afro-American Liberator,” and Higginson, “Liberating the Captives. ”
70. SAGA, NTS, 7603 file 25/328, affidavit of Samuel Nkwali, January 5, 1927; James 
Coombs, Qumbu Sergeant, to SAP District Commandant, January 18, 1927; statement by 
Milton Majola, Matatiele CID Detective, December 12, 1928; Allen Lea, “Bantu Leader-
ship: The Escapade of Wellington,” East London Dispatch, November 29, 1927.
71. Wilson, Reaction to Conquest, 316–17.
72. Redding, “Government Witchcraft. ”
73. Wilson, Reaction to Conquest, 302.
74. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 25/328, James Coombs, Qumbu Sergeant, to District Com-
mandant, January 18, 1927; undated affidavit of Frank Nolan Doran; affidavit of Qumbu 
constable Robert John Waldeck, March 10, 1927; undated affidavit of Umtata CID Detec-
tive Joseph Mho; pt. 2, statement by Constable Obed Sigenu, August 8, 1928. Wellington 
robert vinson
152


--- PAGE 172 ---
later claimed to be “the doctor in Israel that will heal you of your leprosy” (statement by 
Eliezer Mguni, Umtata, January 31, 1929).
75. Ibid., pt. 4, Frank Brownlee, Butterworth Magistrate, to Chief Magistrate, Oc-
tober 14, 1927; D. W. Semple to Qumbu Magistrate, November 26, 1927; Ngqeleni Ser-
geant to SAP District Commandant, December 10, 1927; SAGA, CA, 1/NKE 58 N1/9/2, 
Nqamakwe Magistrate to Chief Magistrate, October 29, 1927. According to these docu-
ments, the actual day of apocalypse shifted from several dates in April and May to No-
vember 7, December 5, and the vague “before Christmas. ”
76. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 25/328, affidavit by Ncanywa Giyose, Nqamakwe, May 27, 
1927.
77. Ibid., pt. 4, undated affidavit of Joseph Mho, Umtatata CID Detective; F. N. Doran, 
Qumbu Magistrate, to Deputy Commissioner of Police, July 5, 1927. In two Qumbu loca-
tions known for their strong Wellington allegiance, only 142 of 1,600 Africans submitted 
to vaccination.
78. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, pts. 2 and 3, affidavit of Edgar Lonsdale, T solo 
Magistrate, March 12, 1927.
79. SAGA, CA, 1/TSO 5/1/19, file 3/16/6, statement by Edward Chalmers Bam, 
March 12, 1927. Bam was an interpreter in the T solo court and a perennial Wellington 
critic.
80. Edgar, “ African Educational Protest,” 187; SAGA, NTS, 7603 file 26/328, pt. 4, 
Nqamakwe Magistrate A. L. Barrett to Chief Magistrate, October 6, 1927; NTS, 7602 
file 26/328, pt. 4, undated report of N. A. Mazwai.
81. SAGA, CA, 1/MFE 8/1/14, file 2/12/4, SAP Sergeant to SAP District Comman-
dant, December 19, 1927. The sergeant concluded that “it is not the uncivilized native 
who is keen on joining the organization but the half educated dressed native. ” However, 
Wellington did attract some non-Christian, nonliterate Africans.
82. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328 (A), Umtata Police Report, July 6, 1932; Lady Grey 
constable to Aliwal North Commandant, January 29, 1929.
83. SAGA, CA, 2/SPT 16, CID Report, August 15, 1928.
84. Interview by Robert Vinson of Walter Sisulu, Cape T own, April 26, 1998; 47th 
Annual Report of the South African Missionary Society (1928), cited in Edgar, “ African 
Educational Protest,” 187.
85. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, Magisterial Court documents of Albert Rulashe, 
June 11, 1928.
86. SAGA, CA, 1/ECO 6/1/99 file 2/16/12, Engcobo district, was but one example of 
these multiple difficulties. See C. C. Harris to Engcobo Resident Magistrate, November 
10, 1927; Engcobo Magistrate to Chief Magistrate, March 27, 1928, and the affidavit of 
Chief Alex Mgudlwa, May 20, 1929.
87. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328, statement by Eliezer Mguni, January 31, 1929.
88. Negro World, July 30, 1927. The government, after considerable deliberation, 
decided not to publicize Garvey’s denunciation, not wishing to give free publicity to 
Garvey himself. See SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 25/328, pt. 4, undated correspondence of the 
Secretary for Native Affairs to the Chief Magistrate. However, rival organizations like 
the Cape African National Congress utilized Garvey’s denunciation in their efforts to 
Garveyism in South Africa
153


--- PAGE 173 ---
discredit Wellington. See the article by E. Mdolomba in Imvo Zabantsundu, February 14, 
1928, reprinted in SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 25/328, pt. 2, February 17, 1928.
89. SAGA, CA, 2/SPT 16 file N1/9/2, Native Constable Sigenu to Herschel Magistrate 
August 15, 1928; CA, 1/ELN box 86, South African Police Report, January 24, 1929.
90. SAGA, CA, 1/QBU 2/17, Frank Doran, Qumbu Resident Magistrate, to Robert 
Welsh, Mount Fletcher Resident Magistrate, February 15, 1927.
91. SAGA, CA, 2/SPT 16 file N1/9/2, statement of Samuel Michael Bennett Ncwana, 
August 23, 1928.
92. Ibid., T andinyanso, “Concerning Herschel,” Umteteli wa Bantu, April 21, 1928.
93. Ibid., Native Constable Sigenu to Herschel Magistrate, August 15, 1928.
94. SAGA, NTS, 7603 file 25/328 (A), CID reports of April 6, September 5, Decem-
ber 6, 1935.
95. Ibid., CID report, January 3, 1936.
96. SAGA, NTS, 7602 file 26/328 (A), Wellington to Minister of Native Affairs, No-
vember 4, 1936.
97. SAGA, NTS, 7603 file 25/328, pt. 4, Magistrate to the Secretary for Native Affairs, 
December 4, 1939; B. H. Wellington to Minister of Native Affairs June 23, 1944.
98. Ibid., Secretary for Native Affairs to B. H. H. Wellington, December 8, 1947. The 
interviewer was Lwandle Kunene, who visited his sister, a nun, in Swaziland during the 
1970s.
99. Beinart and Bundy, Hidden Struggles in Rural South Africa, 199; SAGA, NTS, 1681 
file 2/276, pt. 2, affidavit of Melvin Hlamvana, June 13, 1940. The African American lib-
eration myth also extended beyond Garvey. For example, in 1937 the T ranskeian Bunga 
reported that an unnamed ex-Wellingtonite now followed “the Negro Father Divine, an 
American about whom there was something in the papers yesterday. ” See NTS, 7602 file 
25/328, Minutes of the 1937 United T ranskeian General Council.
robert vinson
154


--- PAGE 174 ---
The Negro Question
The Communist International and Black Liberation 
in the Interwar Years
hakim adi
At its inception in 1919 the Third Communist International,1 to its great credit, 
proclaimed its commitment to the liberation of Africa and people of African 
descent worldwide. In so doing, it became, perhaps, the era’s sole international 
white-led movement to adopt an avowedly antiracist platform, and it was cer-
tainly the only one formally dedicated to a revolutionary transformation of the 
global political and racial order. The Third Communist International, popularly 
called the Comintern, presented the Russian Revolution as an epoch-making 
event, a harbinger to the emancipation of all peoples, including those of African 
descent. In the period between the two world wars, people of African descent 
globally found merit in this claim. They lauded the Soviet model of economic 
development and the Soviet Union’s approach to racism and national oppres-
sion within its borders and welcomed its opposition to colonialism and racism 
internationally. Many black activists became members of communist parties 
or became closely associated with the Comintern. Indeed, the Communist 
International would play a pivotal role in a number of key events affecting black 
people globally during the interwar years.
This essay examines the interaction between the Communist International 
and the black liberation struggle, particularly in the United States, South 
Africa, Britain, and Britain’s colonies in Africa and the Caribbean. It high-
lights the Comintern’s position on the “Negro Question,” as black-related is-
sues were then called, an approach that played a pivotal role in the evolution of 
pan-Africanism, or black internationalism, in the interwar years.2 Three broad 
conclusions emerge from the inquiry. First, black activists were crucial in the 
development of the Comintern’s pan-African approach to the Negro Question.


--- PAGE 175 ---
Second, the Communist International’s repeated expressions of support for 
black liberation empowered black communists on the ground, strengthening 
their position within various national communist parties. Third, the Com-
munist International, more than any other political movement in the interwar 
years, emphasized the capacity of black workers for self-organization and for 
leadership in the struggle for black liberation globally.
The Backdrop
The Comintern’s interest in the Negro Question was not entirely without 
precedent. The nineteenth-century founders of communism recognized the 
oppression and exploitation of Africa and people of African descent. Karl Marx 
noted that in addition to the exploitation of America and Asia, the “turning 
of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins signalized 
the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production. ” The “veiled slavery of the 
wage-workers in Europe,” he continued, “needed for its pedestal, slavery pure 
and simple in the new world. ”3 Friedrich Engels, Marx’s close collaborator, 
condemned the European colonization of Africa as an enterprise designed to 
benefit the stock exchange.4 Both Marx and Engels took a keen interest in the 
antislavery struggle in the United States.5 Their ideas were developed further 
by the Russian revolutionary leader V . I. Lenin, who was particularly attentive 
to the political problems of the imperialist era of the early twentieth century 
and to national and racial oppression and colonialism. However, a more sys-
tematic communist line on the Negro Question only came with the emergence 
and evolution of the Comintern.
The Comintern was created in the wake of the Russian Revolution in 
order to build an international communist movement and organize revolution 
worldwide. Lenin and the founders of the Comintern viewed the anticolonial 
movement as vital in this struggle against imperialism and therefore called 
for an alliance between the working-class movement in the advanced capital-
ist countries and the struggles of the oppressed peoples in the colonies. Ac-
cordingly, the Manifesto of the Communist International to the Proletariat of the 
Entire World, the Comintern’s foundational document of 1919, stressed global 
revolutionary solidarity. Asserting that the “emancipation of the colonies is 
possible only in conjunction with the emancipation of the metropolitan work-
ing class,” the manifesto called on the “Colonial Slaves of Africa and Asia” to 
rise up against their oppressors.6
hakim adi
156


--- PAGE 176 ---
The victorious Bolshevik Revolution and the Comintern’s call struck a 
chord throughout the black world. Wilfred Domingo, a U.S.-based radical of 
Caribbean origin, wrote in 1919,
The question naturally arises: Will Bolshevism accomplish the full free-
dom of Africa, colonies in which Negroes are the majority, and promote 
human tolerance and happiness in the United States by the eradication 
of the causes of such disgraceful occurrences as the Washington and 
Chicago race riots? The answer is deducible from the analogy of Soviet 
Russia, a country in which dozens of racial and lingual types have settled 
their many differences and found a common meeting ground, a country 
which no longer oppresses colonies, a country from which the lynch 
rope is banished and in which racial tolerance and peace now exist.7
Domingo was hardly alone in his enthusiasm for Bolshevism. Another Carib-
bean immigrant to the United States, the writer Claude McKay, called the 
Russian Revolution “the greatest event in the history of humanity,” and he, 
too, hoped the Communist International would make his adopted country 
“safe for the Negro. ”8 At the organizational level, the Comintern inspired the 
African Blood Brotherhood, founded in 1919 in New Y ork by Cyril Briggs, yet 
another Caribbean immigrant. Combining Marxism and Black Nationalism, 
and claiming a membership of several thousand in the United States and the 
Caribbean, the brotherhood aimed at the “immediate protection and ultimate 
liberation of Negroes everywhere. ”9 A number of African Blood Brotherhood 
members would go on to join the U.S. communist party and to play significant 
roles in the Communist International.10
The impact of the Bolshevik Revolution extended to the African conti-
nent, too, and it was especially significant among African soldiers who served 
in the British and French armies during the Great War.11 A military officer 
from Senegal reportedly lost his life leading a Red cavalry regiment against 
counterrevolutionary forces in Russia.12 The Comintern’s influence in Africa 
was most pronounced in South Africa, where the continent’s first communist 
party emerged in 1921. At its founding, the South African party was almost 
exclusively white, with just one black member, but it broke decisively with the 
racial divisions then existing and appealed to all workers “white and black” to 
join together to overthrow the capitalist system.13
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
157


--- PAGE 177 ---
The Comintern and the Negro Question
At its second congress in 1920, the Comintern restated its commitment to 
nonracial proletarian internationalism and adopted statutes that proclaimed, 
“In its ranks the white, the yellow and the black-skinned peoples/uRELfk.dthe work-
ing people of the world/uRELfk.dare fraternally united. ”14 The oppression faced by 
African Americans had already been discussed at the Comintern’s first congress 
in 1919. In 1920 Lenin himself asked for information on “Negroes in America” 
and specifically demanded “all Communist parties should render direct aid to 
the revolutionary movements among the dependent and under-privileged na-
tions (for example, Ireland, the American Negroes, etc.) and in the colonies. ”15
Although there was continuing debate as to whether African Americans con-
stituted a nation, the congress had made a decision that would have important 
implications for the nexus between the C omintern and black liberation: the 
African American struggle had been linked to the anticolonial struggles in 
Africa and elsewhere. The issue of black liberation came up again the following 
year, in 1921, at the Comintern’s third congress, where the gathering proposed 
a commission to study “the question about the blacks. ”16
From the standpoint of the Negro Question, however, the fourth congress 
of 1922 was the most important to date and was a key moment in the develop-
ment of the Comintern’s revolutionary black internationalism. The congress 
established a Negro Commission and advanced a “Thesis on the Negro Ques-
tion” that established Comintern policy in regard to Africa and the diaspora. 
Easily, the most colorful black personality at the fourth congress was Claude 
McKay, who had so effusively welcomed the Bolshevik Revolution. Although 
not formally a member of the U.S. communist party, McKay had a “dominant 
urge” to make the “magic pilgrimage” to the Soviet Union and was invited to 
Moscow by the white U.S. communist John Reed.17 At the congress, McKay 
criticized the U.S. communist party for ignoring African Americans, arguing 
that the Negro Question was the central factor in the class struggle in the 
United States. He urged the Comintern to organize a “Negro Congress,” claim-
ing it would be “amazed at the fine material for Communist work there is in 
the Negro Race. ”18
The other black person attending the fourth congress from the United States 
was Otto Huiswoud. Originally from the Caribbean, like McKay, Huiswoud 
was an official delegate to the congress, representing the U.S. communist party, 
which he was the first black person to join. Huiswoud was among the first in 
the Communist International to argue that African Americans could play a 
hakim adi
158


--- PAGE 178 ---
vanguard role in the liberation of black people globally and was subsequently 
made chairman of the Negro Commission created by the congress.19
The creation of the Negro Commission inaugurated a more active pan-
African policy on the part of the Communist International. The new approach 
was outlined in the “Thesis on the Negro Question,” approved by the fourth 
congress, which both Huiswoud and McKay played a key role in drafting. The 
resolution declared that the colonization of “regions inhabited by black races is 
becoming the last great problem on the solution of which the further develop-
ment of capitalism itself depends. ” The “Negro problem,” consequently, had 
“become a vital question of the world revolution. ” The Comintern recognized 
“the international struggle of the Negro Race is a struggle against capitalism 
and imperialism” and therefore called for “an international organization of the 
colored people. ”20 The Comintern’s concern with the Negro Question was also 
based on the fear that the colonial powers could use African troops to crush 
revolutionary attempts in Europe, or even to attack the Soviet Union. Several 
speakers at the fourth congress, including McKay and Soviet War Commissar 
Leon T rotsky, alluded to such a possibility.21
The emergence of the Comintern’s pan-African policy coincided with a 
new awakening among black people globally. The black political revival was 
epitomized by Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association 
(UNIA) and by the Pan-African Congresses, organized by W. E. B. Du Bois. The 
UNIA, with its Black Nationalist ideology and its mass base, made an especially 
strong impression on black communists in the United States, including the 
members of the African Blood Brotherhood, which by this time had become 
closely linked to the U.S. communist party. At the same time, Garvey, although 
ideologically opposed to Bolshevism, was not unaffected by the revolutionary 
events in Russia. He welcomed the emergence of Soviet Russia and mourned 
the death in 1924 of Lenin, calling him “probably the world’s greatest man” and 
sending a telegram to Moscow “expressing the sorrow and condolence of the 
400,000,000 Negroes of the world. ”22
The Communist International, for its part, implicitly recognized the im-
portance of Garveyism and attempted both to undermine it and to have some 
influence on its members. The fourth congress of 1922, therefore, pledged both 
to organize a “general Negro conference or Congress in Moscow” and to sup-
port “every form of Negro movement which tends to undermine or weaken 
capitalism or imperialism. ”23 The Comintern’s approach was fully consistent 
with that of the African Blood Brotherhood, which vied with the UNIA for 
leadership of the black masses in the United States and tried to organize among 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
159


--- PAGE 179 ---
UNIA members. It was also consistent with the approach of the U.S. com-
munist party, which produced its own pan-African-oriented literature. The 
brotherhood’s program also anticipated many of the points in the Communist 
International’s “Thesis on the Negro Question,” including an insistence on 
the vanguard role of African Americans in global black liberation, the view 
advanced at the fourth congress by Huiswoud, who was also a member of 
the brotherhood. From its inception, the brotherhood had announced that 
“Negroes in the United States/uRELfk.dboth native and foreign born/uRELfk.dare destined 
to play a vital part in a powerful world movement for Negro liberation. ”24
Not all communists, however, agreed that African Americans were best 
placed to lead the movement for black liberation internationally. David Ivon 
Jones, a white South African communist who had shown a strong interest in 
the Negro Question, insisted on the primacy of the African continent. “Negro 
emancipation,” he declared, “is not an American question; it is a question of 
Africa. ”25 But because at that time there were so few black communists in 
Africa, the Comintern accepted Huiswoud’s countervailing argument that “the 
history of the Negro in America fits him for an important role in the liberation 
struggle of the entire African race. ”26 Accordingly, African American members 
of the U.S. communist party were sent to the Moscow-based University of the 
T oilers of the East, an institution that trained revolutionaries from colonial 
countries and oppressed nations.27
As part of its pan-African policy, the Communist International pressed its 
affiliates in the imperialist countries to encourage the development of “rev-
olutionary movements” in the African colonies. Officially, both the British 
and French communist parties claimed to do just that. In the early 1920s, the 
French party became active in Africa, especially in North Africa, establishing 
branches in Algeria and Tunisia. The C omintern instructed other parties to 
follow the French example and especially to publish revolutionary literature in 
African languages, so as “to establish a closer contact with the oppressed colo-
nial masses. ”28 The British party, despite its pronouncements to the contrary, 
showed little real interest in organizing in Britain’s African colonies. The French 
party also was found wanting on the Negro Question. The neglect earned both 
parties rebukes at the fifth congress of the Communist International in 1924: 
the French for not doing enough to organize  Africans living in France, and 
the British for not openly demandin g independence for the colonies.29 The 
fifth congress, consequently, established a Negro Propaganda Commission 
and again discussed organizing a special Negro Congress.
hakim adi
160


--- PAGE 180 ---
Y et no such meeting ever took place. Partly this was because there were 
numerous logistical problems associated with bringing delegates from the 
colonies to Moscow, where, it had been envisaged, the congress would be 
held. The European communist parties also did little or nothing to mobilize 
black delegates. Then the task of organizing such a congress was given to the 
U.S. communist party, which largely failed to take up its responsibilities. It was 
hoped that the American Negro Labor Congress, which was organized by the 
U.S. communist party in Chicago in 1925, would lead the work to convene the 
World Negro Congress, but it, too, failed to make the necessary breakthrough. 
An international conference of “Negro workers” was eventually held under the 
auspices of the Comintern’s trade union center, the Red International of Labor 
Unions, or Profintern, in Hamburg, Germany, in 1930.
The World Anti-Colonial Conference and the 
League Against Imperialism
Meanwhile, in 1927, the Comintern sponsored an international conference 
that had important implications for the Negro Question. Held in Brussels, 
Belgium, the gathering was called the W orld Anti-Colonial Conference. Its 
most important outcome was the creation of the League Against Imperial-
ism and for National Independence, a broad-based anticolonial organization, 
often led by communists, but which worked with all those forces opposed to 
colonialism and imperialism. Nearly 200 delegates, representing all the world’s 
major colonial regions, attended the World Anti-Colonial Conference. Rep-
resentatives from the African world included Lamine Senghor, a member of 
both the French communist party and the Paris-based Comité de Défense 
de la Race Nègre; Isaac Wallace-Johnson, head of the Sierra Leone Railway 
Workers Union; Josiah Gumede and James La Guma of the African National 
Congress of South Africa; and Richard B. Moore, representing the American 
Negro Labor Congress and the Garvey movement.30
The Negro Question featured prominently at the World Anti-Colonial 
Conference. Moore played a particularly active role in the proceedings, pre-
senting the “Common Resolution on the Negro Question,” which demanded 
“complete freedom of the peoples of Africa and of African origin. ” T oward this 
end, the resolution called for “the organization of the economic and political 
power” of black people and for a global struggle against “imperialist ideol-
ogy. ”31 The conference was an important site for networking, allowing African 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
161


--- PAGE 181 ---
activists to consult with one another and to learn from the wider experience 
of the Communist International. La Guma and Gumede, the South African 
delegates, along with Sierra Leone’s Wallace-Johnson, subsequently visited the 
Soviet Union. On returning to South Africa, Gumede famously proclaimed, 
“I have seen the new world to come, where it has already begun. I have been 
to the new Jerusalem. ”32 More broadly, La Guma’s participation in the World 
Anti-Colonial Conference, and especially his visit to Moscow, would prove 
vital to the subsequent development of the South African communist party, 
in which he became a leading figure.33
The Sixth Congress of the Communist International
During the sixth congress of the Comintern, held in 1928, there were important 
developments in policy on the Negro Question in general and with regard to 
South Africa and the United States in particular.34 The sixth congress was held 
at a time when the Comintern was already in the process of adopting a new 
political line which emphasized that the world was entering a new period of 
economic and political crisis in which there would be an increasing likelihood 
of wars and an intensification of the revolutionary struggle both in the impe-
rialist countries and in the colonies. The Negro Question, affecting as it did 
large parts of Africa and the Caribbean, became even more important, while in 
those areas in which communist parties operated, such as the United States and 
South Africa, the need to “bolshevize” the parties and rid them of any manifes-
tations of “white chauvinism” became even more urgent. The policies adopted 
during this “Third Period” also called for a less conciliatory approach to rival 
political ideologies, leaders, and organizations that were often condemned 
as “reformist,” such as Garvey and the UNIA. In part however, the changes in 
policy that occurred during 1928 had been discussed for some years before and 
had often been urged by black communists themselves. One of these changes 
was a much greater emphasis on “Negro workers,” which consequently led to 
the Negro Question becoming a major concern for the Profintern.
The sixth congress adopted two resolutions, or “theses,” on black self-
determination in the United States and South Africa, respectively. The thesis 
on the “Black Belt” of the United States, that is, those southern states and 
parts thereof in which African Americans formed a majority of the population, 
argued that they constituted a nation, with the right to govern themselves and 
to demand independence from the rest of the United States if they so wished. 
The other thesis advocated what was termed a Native or Black Republic in 
hakim adi
162


--- PAGE 182 ---
South Africa, that is, South Africans should strive for what was later termed 
black majority rule.
That the Comintern played the decisive role in the adoption of the new 
line there may be little doubt. It was not, however, simply a matter of central-
ized imposition. Black delegates to the sixth congress actively participated in 
the debates on the Negro Question and played a leading role in drafting 
and  advocating the two theses, alongside delegates from the U.S., South 
African, and other communist partie s. The more voluble black participants 
included South Africa’s James La Guma35 and the African Americans James 
Ford, who later stood as a vice presidential candidate for the U.S. communist 
party, and Harry Haywood, then a student at the University of the T oilers of 
the East. Indeed, for some black communists, such as La Guma and Haywood, 
the theses on self-determination were an empowering tool, forcing as they 
did the Negro Question to the center of communist policy not just in the 
United States and South Africa but throughout the international communist 
movement.
In South Africa, black self-determination meant increased Africanization 
of the party, the membership as well as the leadership. The Native Republic 
thesis specifically instructed the South African party to “orientate itself chiefly 
upon the native toiling masses,” noting that “the Party leadership must be 
developed in the same sense. ”36 The Comintern created all the conditions for 
African ascendancy in the South Afr ican communist movement and for a 
policy that put Africans at the center of the struggle for liberation in that coun-
try. Ultimately, however, it was up to the South African communists to African-
ize the party.
The Native Republic thesis met considerable resistance from South African 
communists, showing that the notion of complete Comintern hegemony, or 
alleged domination by Moscow, is often at variance with the reality. In 1928 
many leaders of the South African party still regarded white workers as the 
major force for change in the society. Other South African communists, white 
as well as black, rejected the new policy as “Garveyism,” despite its critical 
stance toward that movement, and as endorsing the Garveyite slogan of “ Africa
for the Africans,” a notion they had long opposed. However, supporters of 
the Native Republic thesis, such as La Guma, enjoyed the strong support of 
the Communist International. In the deliberations before the sixth congress, 
Comintern president Nikolai Bukharin had declared that the Comintern “must 
say very clearly that in the struggle between the Negroes and the whites that it 
is on the side of the Negroes. ”37 Y et such unequivocal endorsement from the 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
163


--- PAGE 183 ---
top failed to quell the dissent within the South African party, which continued 
for several years.
The situation in the United States mirrored that in South Africa, with the 
Black Belt thesis causing as much contentiousness as did the Native Republic 
thesis. African Americans, the thesis a sserted, were not just a racial minority 
but also a “nation within a nation,” a people for whom racism was a “device 
of national oppression. ”38 Within the U.S. communist party, Harry Haywood 
became the most ardent champion of black self-determination, defending it 
against its many critics, white and black alike.
Haywood’s position had ample precedence in the African American experi-
ence. The notion that black people in the United States constituted a “nation 
within a nation” had been advanced since the nineteenth century by black 
writers, such as Martin Delany. Well before the Comintern did so, in 1917 Cyril 
Briggs, the founder of the African Blood Brotherhood, also had demanded 
self-determination and a “separate political existence” within the United States 
for African Americans.39
The Black Belt thesis, as Mark Solomon has noted, highlighted several key 
issues: the right of African Americans to decide their own future and the revo-
lutionary potential of the black struggle in the United States. At the same time, 
the Black Belt thesis provided a new basis for the struggle against racism and 
for encouraging a new approach and reevaluation of African American history 
and culture.40 The result, according to Robin Kelley, was a new chapter in the 
development of the U.S. communist party: for the first time, communist ideas 
began to circulate among African Americans in the southern states, precisely 
the area where the struggle for civil rights later emerged.41 Hosea Hudson, an 
African American communist in the South during the 1930s, remembered the 
discussions about the right to self-determination and how that concept might 
empower black people to demand “democratic rights” in the United States. “In 
the present set-up,” ran the black collective wisdom, as related by Hudson, 
“everybody supposed to have the same rights, but we didn’t have no rights. ”42
The Native Republic and Black Belt theses were therefore important devel-
opments in the Comintern’s pan-African program that continued to be based 
on the perceived “common tie of interest” that linked people of African descent 
throughout the world. After the sixth congress, the Negro Question became 
an even more central concern for the international communist movement, 
with greater concern being expressed regarding the Negro Question in Africa, 
South America, and Europe. Black communists were in a stronger position, 
hakim adi
164


--- PAGE 184 ---
too, and some, like Haywood and Ford, rose to influential positions within the 
Comintern.
The International Trade Union Committee of Negro Workers
Consistent with the resolutions of the sixth congress, in 1928 the Communist 
International also created a new body to organize black workers: the Inter-
national T rade Union Committee of Negro Workers (ITUCNW). This orga-
nization was formally part of the Profintern. Led initially by James Ford, the 
ITUCNW was assigned the “task of drawing Negro workers into the existing 
trade unions, of further creating new trade unions and of unifying the wide 
mass of Negro workers on the basis of the class struggle. ”43 T oward that end, 
the committee called a meeting in Hamburg, Germany, in 1930, the First In-
ternational Conference of Negro Workers. This conference was the closest 
the Comintern came to organizing a World Negro Congress, and it marked an 
important landmark in its approach to the Negro Question.
Although colonial governments barred a number of delegates from attend-
ing, the First International Conference of Negro Workers featured representa-
tives from the various parts of the black world, including Africa, the United 
States, and the Caribbean.44 The relatively large number of delegates from the 
African continent was especially noteworthy and reflected Comintern concern 
for a much greater focus on Africa. By contrast, the movements that competed 
with the Communist International for the allegiance of black people globally, 
Garveyism and the Du Boisian Pan-African Congresses, were both dominated 
by Africans of the diaspora. The participants in the First International Con-
ference of Negro Workers included several figures destined to rise to promi-
nence in pan-Africanism and in the anticolonial struggle in Africa, including 
Isaac Wallace-Johnson of Sierra Leone and Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya, and the 
conference was, in many ways, the model for the 1945 Pan-African Congress 
organized by George Padmore. The conference reaffirmed the Comintern’s 
position on the proletarian foundations of black liberation, and it elected a new 
executive committee “to give concrete aid and assistance to all Negro workers 
and to help them build up class unions in their countries. ”45
The First International Conference of Negro Workers was also a major 
event in the career of George Padmore, who afterward was for several years a 
top official in the Comintern’s black internationalist work. From 1930 to 1933, 
the T rinidadian-born Padmore edited the Negro Worker, the official organ 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
165


--- PAGE 185 ---
of the ITUCNW. Padmore personally wrote many of the articles in the Negro 
Worker, which was distributed globally, often by black seamen, and sometimes 
disguised as a religious tract.46 Sim ultaneously, he authored a number of re-
lated pamphlets, most famously The Life and Struggles of Negro T oilers.47
These and other publications of the ITUCNW chr onicled the struggles of 
black workers in Africa, the United States, the Caribbean, South America, and 
Europe. They consistently identified the main enemy of the “Negro toilers” as 
British, French, and U.S. imperialism, while presenting the Soviet Union as the 
“champion of the oppressed. ” In this era, the height of the Comintern’s Third 
Period, with its strong opposition to “reformism,” readers of the Negro Worker
also were warned against the dangers posed by a host of “misleaders,” among 
them the British Labour Party, the American Federation of Labor, the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the Indus-
trial and Commercial Workers Union of Africa, South Africa’s leading black 
labor group. Garveyism, however, was presented as the most dangerous form 
of “ideological deceit,” guilty of denying the class struggle and the “possibility 
of the revolutionary struggle of the Negro masses for self-determination. ”48
Perhaps most importantly, though, the Negro Worker offered practical advice 
to those directly involved in struggles, suggesting concrete demands around 
which to rally. In addition to disseminating communist ideology, then, the 
paper served as something of a collective organizer, helping to foster a sense of 
unity of struggle throughout Africa and the African Diaspora.49 It is a tribute 
to its effectiveness, or perceived effectiveness, that the authorities in various 
African and Caribbean colonies banned the Negro Worker.
The Caribbean
The ITUCNW, along with the Negro Worker, took an important interest in the 
Caribbean. Indeed, the committee’s founders included a Guadeloupean and 
a Cuban,50 and, partly through Padmore’s contacts, it maintained a strong in-
fluence in T rinidad.51 In the Caribbean, the ITUCNW organized among the 
workers in Jamaica, British Guiana, Grenada, Haiti, Guadeloupe, Puerto Rico, 
and the Dutch colonies.52 The Negro Worker, too, carried many articles on the 
region. It was especially attentive to the 1932 visit to Moscow of Vivian Henry 
and Hubert Critchlow, respectively the leading trade unionists in T rinidad and 
British Guiana (now Guyana).53
Even before the formation of the ITUCNW, the Communist International 
had paid attention to the Caribbean. In the late 1920s, the U.S. communist 
hakim adi
166


--- PAGE 186 ---
party, which had been given responsibility for the region by the Communist 
International, dispatched Otto Huiswoud and Cyril Briggs to the Caribbean.54
During the 1930s, the U.S. communist party was able to strengthen its links 
with workers in Jamaica, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico and with the 
communist party in Cuba.
The only communist party in the Caribbean was founded in Cuba in 1925 
and was initially dominated by European immigrants. Initially there was some 
reluctance to recruit large numbers of black members to the Cuban communist 
party, which had a low estimation of the revolutionary potential of immigrant 
workers from Haiti and Jamaica, who were described as having “a cultural 
level below that of Cuban workers and no tradition of struggle or organiza-
tion. ”55 However, after 1929 the Cuban communist party, partly under the in-
fluence of the Comintern and the U.S. communist party, began to pay much 
more attention to the recruitment of black members, especially among the 
sugar workers. By the time of the second congress of the party, in 1934, several 
black workers had risen to leadership positions. The congress discussed the 
necessity of winning over the “Negro toilers” to the revolution and attacked 
any manifestation of “discrimination against Negroes. ” The congress also dis-
cussed the need for “greater clarification of the Negro Question as a national 
rather than a ‘racial’ question typified in the slogan for self-determination of 
the Negroes in the Black Belt of Oriente Province. ”56 Although the Cuban 
communist party evidently had some weaknesses during its early years, even 
then its influence spread throughout the Caribbean. One of its members was 
a Jamaican, Cleveland Antonio King, who is reported to have introduced the 
communist ideology to Jamaica.57
Britain and the Negro Welfare Association
Much of the Comintern’s work on the Negro Question centered on the British 
Empire, since Britain was the world’s leading imperialist power, with colonies 
in Africa and the Caribbean, among other places. Y et the British communist 
party, to the consternation of the Communist International, consistently re-
sisted all entreaties to engage seriously in anticolonial agitation in Africa and 
the Caribbean or among black people in Britain.58 The void was filled, to some 
extent, by the Negro Welfare Association, which was founded in London in 
1931. The association was linked to the Communist International through 
a number of organizations, most importantly the ITUCNW and the League 
Against Imperialism. With a disinterested British communist party, the Negro 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
167


--- PAGE 187 ---
Welfare Association assumed the task of communist organizing among black 
people in Britain and in some of the British colonies. One of the association’s 
more important constituencies consisted of African and Caribbean seamen 
in the major British ports, such as London and Cardiff.59 Black communists, 
once again, were pivotal to this endeavor, which was spearheaded by indi-
viduals like the Barbadians Chris Jones, who led a committee of black seamen 
in London, and Arnold Ward, who became secretary of the Negro Welfare 
Association.60
Although charged with organizing blacks and effectively a branch of the 
ITUCNW, the Negro Welfare Association initially was led by white commu-
nists. Its goal was unmistakably pan-Africanist: “to work for the complete 
liberation and independence of all Negroes who are suffering from capital-
ist exploitation and imperialist domination . . . [and] to analyze, expose and 
combat capitalist exploitation and oppression in Africa, the West Indies, the 
other Negro colonies as well as in the USA. ”61 Certainly all the leading black 
communists in Britain were active in the Negro Welfare Association. So, too, 
were a number of other black activists who would later become key figures in 
the anticolonial struggle in Africa, such as Jomo Kenyatta and Isaac Wallace-
Johnson, both of whom we have already met in association with Communist 
International–related activities.
The Negro Welfare Association took up a variety of issues, among them rac-
ist legislation in South Africa, land alienation in Kenya, and self-determination 
in the Caribbean. Most significantly, however, the association, together with 
the League Against Imperialism, championed the anticolonial struggle in West 
Africa, a focus that was influenced by two of its most important interlocutors: 
the British-based West African Students’ Union and the Sierra Leonean Isaac 
Wallace-Johnson.62 The Negro Welfare Association’s anticolonial efforts had 
both a parliamentary and an extra-parliamentary focus. Its allies in Parliament 
were kept fully briefed on West African and other colonial issues, enabling 
them to question official policy. Outside Parliament, the association appealed 
directly to the British working class to support the anticolonial cause, orga-
nized among black people throughout Britain, and established important po-
litical links and networks among black people globally.
Scottsboro and Ethiopia
Two events were particularly significant to the development of the black in-
ternational in the 1930s, namely the Scottsboro case in the United States and 
hakim adi
168


--- PAGE 188 ---
the invasion of Ethiopia by fascist Italy. The Communist International was 
centrally involved in both.
In 1931, nine African American youths were arrested in Scottsboro, Ala-
bama, on bogus charges of raping two white women aboard a freight train. 
Predictably, the ensuing kangaroo trial resulted in the conviction of all nine de-
fendants, with all but one being immediately sentenced to death. The trial was 
followed by a bitter struggle over the appeals process. The NAACP, which pre-
ferred a fight confined to the U.S. judicial system and was initially reluctant to 
become involved, eventually lost control of the case to the communist-aligned 
International Labor Defense, with its call for a broad-based global campaign 
against the oppression of African Americans. The Communist International 
turned the case of the Scottsboro Boys, as the youths were dubbed, into a meta-
phor for racial injustice in the United States, and its campaign has been widely 
credited with saving the lives of the defendants. The campaign, from 1931 to 
1937, was a huge international event: “Workers and activists rallied in Latin 
America, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, across Europe and the United 
States, in parts of the British Empi re and its dominions, and in the farming 
collectives of Russia. ”63 Ada Wright, mother of two of the Scottsboro Boys, 
became a symbol of the campaign, both in the United States and in Europe, her 
speaking tours largely sponsored by the international communist movement.
The campaign on behalf of the Scotts boro Boys offered the Communist 
International an opportunity to raise other aspects of the global Negro Ques-
tion. Black communists and their allies, especially, were inclined to link the 
Scottsboro case to the anticolonial struggle in Africa.64 Indeed, the Scottsboro 
campaign helped the Communist International to expand its pan-African work 
in multiple ways. The International Labor Defense, in particular, benefited 
from the goodwill created by its defense of the condemned youths. By the time 
of its first congress in 1932, the Comintern’s legal arm had established branches 
in South Africa and Madagascar, while delegates from T rinidad, British Gui-
ana, South Africa, Nigeria, Kenya, and Liberia addressed the congress.65
In 1935, at a time when communists in the United States were finally uniting 
with the NAACP over the Scottsboro campaign, fascist Italy invaded Ethiopia, 
the only African country that had successfully defended its independence 
against European colonial invasion. The attack on a largely defenseless Ethio-
pia became an even bigger pan-African cause célèbre than the Scottsboro case. 
Ethiopia, long a symbol of hope for black people throughout the world, now 
faced national extinction. Black people globally rallied to its defense, a struggle 
in which communists played a key role.
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
169


--- PAGE 189 ---
The Communist International, and especially blacks in the Communist 
International, vigorously supported the Ethiopian cause. Appearing at the sev-
enth (and last) Comintern congress in 1935, just a couple of months before the 
invasion began, the African American James Ford strongly condemned Italy’s 
designs on Ethiopia. The clouds of war gathering over Ethiopia, Ford warned, 
signaled a wider fascist threat to world peace. Consequently, “the international 
proletariat must regard the struggle of Ethiopia as a just war, as a national 
defensive war, and support the Ethiopian people. ”66
As Ford spoke, the seventh congress was debating the need for the broadest 
unity against the growing danger of fascism and war. It approved a new policy 
advocating a broad alliance of all progressive and democratic forces against the 
growing threat of fascism, represented most dangerously by Germany, Italy, and 
Japan but also by elements within the ruling circles in many other countries. 
In particular the Comintern emphasized the need for the unity of the working 
class against fascism, and it even a ppealed to the social-democratic Second 
(Amsterdam) International, an organization it had previously denounced, to 
join it in opposing Italian aggression in Ethiopia.67
In the United States, African American communists played an active role 
in the various Ethiopian defense committees, just as they did in the Scottsboro 
campaign. The campaign in support of Ethiopia, in turn, helped to create the 
conditions for the emergence, in 1936, of the historic National Negro Congress. 
Formed on the initiative of the U.S. communist party, the National Negro 
Congress, which elected A. Philip Randolph as its president, was one of the 
broadest political bodies in African American history, with more than 500 
organizations represented, including the NAACP, the Urban League, and many 
churches and lodges.68
Everywhere in the black world, people rallied in defense of Ethiopia. In 
T rinidad, the Negro Welfare Cultural and Social Association spearheaded a 
“Hands off Abyssinia” campaign, just as it had previously organized support 
for the Scottsboro Boys and for Angelo Herndon, an African American com-
munist convicted of “insurrection” and sentenced to twenty years on a Georgia 
chain gang for leading a protest.69
On the African continent, at a meeting in Kenya organized in the Kikuyu 
Central Association, Kenyans vowed to “march to Ethiopia to defend their 
brothers. ”70 In West Africa, Wallace-Johnson, then based in the Gold Coast, 
took part in organizing an Ethiopian Defense Committee. Meanwhile in South 
Africa, the communist party organized “Hands off Ethiopia” demonstrations, 
hakim adi
170


--- PAGE 190 ---
even persuading dockworkers to refuse to load ships with supplies destined 
for the Italian military.71
In Britain, the Negro Welfare Association took up the Ethiopian cause. 
In a resolution proposed by Jomo Kenyatta, the association emphasized the 
symbolic importance of Ethiopia’s struggle against fascist aggression. “Millions 
of colonial and semi-colonial people in Africa and throughout the East,” the 
resolution asserted, “are gaining strength from the magnificent fight which is 
being put up by the Abyssinians to maintain their independence. ”72
Conclusion
Although often overlooked, the Communist International played an important 
role in the development of black internationalism during the critical interwar 
period, leaving a legacy for succeeding decades. One important aspect of this 
legacy, for example, was the influence of communism on major African Ameri-
can writers, such as Richard Wright, Langston Hughes, and Ralph Ellison.73
As the evidence demonstrates, the Comintern advanced the black struggle 
globally, both directly and indirectly. The Comintern established two organiza-
tions, the League Against Imperialism and for National Independence and the 
ITUCNW, along with its journal, the Negro Worker, that helped to advance the 
black liberation struggle. Consistently, the Comintern, in which black commu-
nists played a key role, took the lead on the Negro Question, variously cajoling 
and directing the national parties to put the issue of black liberation on their 
agendas and empowering black communists on the ground. The experience 
of Hosea Hudson in the U.S. South during the 1930s is instructive. The com-
munist press, he noted, “was always carrying something about the liberation of 
black people, something about Africa, something about the South, Scottsboro, 
etc. etc. We would read this paper and this would give us great courage. ”74 The 
post–World War II struggle for civil rights benefited from the fruit of such 
courage.
In other areas of the black world, the Comintern’s black internationalism 
provided similar inspiration. For example, despite a ban on its organ, the Negro 
Worker, the ITUCNW exercised con siderable influence on various Caribbean 
labor and mass movements. This was especially the case in the British colo-
nies, where large-scale strikes and anticolonial rebellions broke out in the late 
1930s. Labor leaders such as Vivian Henry in T rinidad and Hubert Critchlow 
in British Guiana were closely associated with the ITUCNW, w ith Critchlow 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
171


--- PAGE 191 ---
serving as a contributing editor to the Negro Worker. In T rinidad, the Negro 
Welfare and Cultural Association, which was closely linked to the ITUCNW,
played a leading role in the labor rebellions of 1937.75 The leaders of the associa-
tion included Jim Headley, formerly a member of the youth league of the U.S. 
communist party, and Rupert Gittens, who had been deported from France 
on account of his association with the French communist party.76
In the British West African colonies, the ITUCNW also influenced the bud-
ding labor movements, which would play key roles in the post–World War II 
political events. West African labor militants like Wallace-Johnson and the 
Gambian E. F. Small had close links with the Comintern, as did the Gold 
Coast’s Bankole Awoonor-Renner, who was one of the first continental Afri-
cans to attend the Communist International’s University of the T oilers of the 
East.
The impact of the Comintern can be seen, too, in various pan-African net-
works that emerged during the interwar years. Thus although George Padmore 
broke with the Communist International,77 he continued to use the contacts 
and connections he had forged while in the Comintern in his postcommunist, 
pan-Africanist career, including associations with Jomo Kenyatta and Wallace-
Johnson. The Comintern’s black internationalist perspective created the con-
ditions for the new Marxist-influenced pan-Africanism that emerged during 
the 1930s and reached its height with the convening of the 1945 Pan-African 
Congress by Padmore and others.
While largely unknown in Britain today, the Negro Welfare Association 
leader Arnold Ward was a significant figure in the network of black commu-
nists that stretched across Europe, the Americas, and Africa in the 1930s. It was 
Ward, apparently, who first interested Paul Robeson, one of the most famous 
African American communists of the 1930s and beyond, in the Soviet Union 
and communism.78
The networks established by black communists and the Comintern en-
dured for many years. In 1945, for example, a British-based communist, Des-
mond Buckle of the Gold Coast, drafted a pan-African document to present to 
the founding conference of the United Nations. The text, Manifesto on Africa in 
the Post-War World, was delivered by a group of British and U.S. pan-Africanists 
under Padmore’s leadership. In that same year, 1945, Buckle also represented 
the T ransvaal Council of Non-European T rade Unions, a major black South 
African labor group, at the inaugural meeting of the World Federation of T rade 
Unions.79
hakim adi
172


--- PAGE 192 ---
Most importantly, perhaps, the Communist International powerfully rein-
forced the internationalist and revolutionary perspectives in the black libera-
tion struggle/uRELfk.dperspectives that offered a vision of a world in which working 
and oppressed people would cast off the yoke of oppression and take control 
of their own destinies.
notes
1. The International Workingmen’s Association, or First International, in which Marx 
and Engels played an important role, was established in 1864 in London. The Second 
International was formed in Paris in 1889 but was split in two when most of its members 
refused to condemn the Great War.
2. Edwards, Practice of Diaspora.
3. Marx and Engels, On Colonialism, 258, 268.
4. Ibid., 273.
5. Marx and Engels, Civil War in the United States.
6. Daniels, Documentary History, 2:89.
7. Quoted in James, Holding aloft the Banner, 165.
8. Quoted in ibid., 166.
9. Summary of the Program and Aims of the African Blood Brotherhood. See also Hill, 
“Cyril Briggs. ”
10. On Briggs and the African Blood Brotherhood, see James, Holding aloft the Banner,
155–84.
11. Gromyko and Kosukhin, October Revolution and Africa.
12. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 95.
13. Johns, Raising the Red Flag, 111–27. See also Drew, Discordant Comrades, 46–57, and 
Johns, “Birth of the Communist Party. ”
14. Quoted in Bunting, introduction.
15. Lenin, Selected Works, 3:435.
16. Davidson, Filatova, Gorodnov, and Johns, South Africa and the Communist Inter-
national, 63.
17. McKay, Long Way, 153.
18. Solomon, Cry Was Unity, 41.
19. Ibid., 42.
20. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 130.
21. Ibid., 128–29.
22. Quoted in Haywood, Black Bolshevik, 105.
23. Kanet, “Comintern,” 90.
24. Summary of the Program and Aims of the African Blood Brotherhood.
25. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 131.
26. Ibid., 133.
27. Solomon, Cry Was Unity, 42–43. For more on black students at the University of 
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
173


--- PAGE 193 ---
the T oilers, see McClellan, “ Africans and Black Americans. ” For the experience of a black 
alumnus, see Haywood, Black Bolshevik, 148–76.
28. Quoted in Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 138.
29. Ibid., 140.
30. Geiss, Pan-African Movement, 326.
31. “Statement at the Congress of the League Against Imperialism and for National 
Independence,” in Turner, Turner, and Turner, Richard B. Moore, 143–46.
32. Quoted in Bunting, Moses Kotane, 36.
33. Simons and Simons, Class and Colour, 389–90.
34. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 160–75; Solomon, Cry Was Unity, 68–95; Kanet, 
“Comintern,” 102–11; Berland, “Emergence of the Communist Perspective”; Kelley, 
“Third International”; Haywood, Black Bolshevik, 218–81.
35. La Guma and Adhikari, Jimmy La Guma; Haywood, Black Bolshevik.
36. For the resolution on “The South African Question,” see South African Com-
munist Party, South African Communists Speak, 91–97.
37. Davidson, Filatova, Gorodnov, and Johns, South Africa and the Communist Inter-
national, 155.
38. Haywood, Black Bolshevik, 218.
39. Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, 323.
40. Solomon, Cry Was Unity, 86–87.
41. Kelley, Hammer and Hoe, 13.
42. Painter, Narrative of Hosea Hudson, 105.
43. International Conference of Negro Workers, Report of Proceedings and Decisions,9 .
44. International Conference of Negro Workers, Report of Proceedings and Decisions.
See also McClellan, “George Padmore and the Hamburg Conference. ”
45. International Conference of Negro Workers, Report of Proceedings and Decisions,
40.
46. On the Negro Worker’s disguises, see the introduction by Cohen in Nzula, 
Potekhin, and Zusmanovich, Forced Labour, 14.
47. Padmore, Life and Struggles.
48. “Special Resolution on Work among Negroes in the US and the Colonies: Adopted 
by the 5th Congress of the RILU,” International Negro Workers Review 1–2 (February 
1931): 19.
49. See, for example, Padmore, “The Fight for Bread,” Negro Worker 6–7 ( June–July 
1933): 2–4, and “T o Our Brothers in Kenya,” Negro Worker 8–9 (August–September 
1933): 19–25.
50. Sherwood, “Comintern and the Colonies,” 6.
51. Reddock, Women, Labour, and Politics, 108.
52. “Plan of Work of the Negro TU Committee for February–July 1932,” Library of 
Congress, Records of the CPUSA (hereafter LOC), 515/234/3038.
53. “Report of Negro Workers’ Leader on Soviet Russia,” Negro Worker 4–5 (April–
May 1933): 28–31.
54. “Meeting of Negro Department,” November 22, 1929, LOC, 515/130/1685.
55. Quoted in Carr, “Caribbean Backwater,” 238.
hakim adi
174


--- PAGE 194 ---
56. “Cuban Workers Strengthen their Organisations,” Negro Worker 4, no. 3 ( July 
1934), 30. See also Carr, “Caribbean Backwater. ”
57. Hart, Rise and Organise, 18.
58. Sherwood, “The Comintern. ”
59. Squires, “Communists and the Fight against Racism. ”
60. Sherwood, “Racism and Resistance. ” See also O’Connell to the Editor, Negro 
Worker 4–5 (April–May 1933): 24–25, and Report of the Annual Conference of the NWA,
October 25, 1935, LOC, 515/301/3943.
61. Report of the International Secretariat of LAI, League Against Imperialism, Lon-
don, 1935, Bridgeman Papers (DBN 25), University of Hull Archives, U.K.
62. On Wallace-Johnson, see Spitzer and Denzer, “I. T . A. Wallace-Johnson and the 
West African Y outh League,” pts. 1 and 2.
63. Miller, Pennybacker, and Rosenhaft, “Mother Ada Wright,” 388.
64. Squires, “Communists and the Fight against Racism,” 15–16.
65. Thomas Jackson, “The International Defence and Negro Peoples,” Negro Worker
2–3 (February–March 1933): 9.
66. Ford, “Defense of the Ethiopian People,” 159–60.
67. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 259.
68. Haywood, Black Bolshevik, 447–62.
69. Reddock, Women, Labour, and Politics, 108–10.
70. Report of Annual Conference of the NWA, October 20, 1935, LOC, 515/301/3943.
71. South African Communist Party, South African Communists Speak, 124–25.
72. Negro Worker 5, no. 2 (December 1935): 8.
73. Maxwell, New Negro, Old Left, 1–13.
74. Painter, Narrative of Hosea Hudson, 102.
75. Lewis, Labour in the West Indies, 31.
76. Reddock, Women, Labour, and Politics, 135–36.
77. Padmore left the Comintern in 1933. He was formally expelled the following year 
for “contacts with a provocateur, for contacts with bourgeois organisations on the ques-
tion of Liberia, for an incorrect attitude to the national question (instead of class unity 
striving towards race unity). ” See “Expulsion of George Padmore from the Revolutionary 
Movement,” Negro Worker 4, no. 2 ( June 1934): 14. See also “ A Betrayer of the Negro 
Struggle,” Negro Worker 4, no. 3 ( July 1934), and Helen Davis, “The Rise and Fall of 
George Padmore as a Revolutionary Fighter,” Negro Worker 4, no. 4 (August 1934): 15. 
Padmore published his own version of events in “ An Open Letter to Earl Browder,” 
The Crisis, October 1935, 302, 305. For Browder’s response, see “Earl Browder Replies,” 
The Crisis, December 1935, 372. It is interesting that for many years afterward Padmore 
continued to defend the Soviet Union’s approach to the “national question. ” See, for 
example, his How Russia Transformed Her Colonial Empire.
78. Duberman, Paul Robeson, 628 n. 59.
79. World News and Views 41 (1945): 324–25; Adi and Sherwood, 1945 Manchester 
Pan-African Congress, 29 n. 21.
The Communist International in the Interwar Years
175


--- PAGE 195 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 196 ---
Tupac Shakur (1971–1996). Tupac Amaru Shakur, born in prison to a 
Black Panther mother, became an icon of resistance to black youth 
worldwide. He is shown here as lived by a hip hop fan at a rapero
performance in Havana, Cuba, 2006. (Courtesy of Marc D. Perry)
part 3


--- PAGE 197 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 198 ---
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
Satyagraha and Black Internationalism
vijay prashad
Mohandas Gandhi, the Indian apostle of satyagraha, had the kind of serenity 
that disarmed even his fiercest opponents. Visitors came away overawed by his 
presence. His quiet demeanor yet sharp political analysis, while comforting 
to his allies, drove his enemies to distraction. Gandhi, in his lifetime, came to 
symbolize a new kind of politics, but his tactics had the weight of history be-
hind them. The elements that distinguished Gandhianism/uRELfk.dmarches and fasts, 
disobedience and strikes/uRELfk.dhad little novelty. What was decidedly new was that 
Gandhi spoke of peace and compromise even as his people fought an unarmed 
war, and that at a time when workers’ movements were gaining strength and 
demanding everything. T rade unionism and Bolshevism gained ground and 
terrified the owners of property and the managers of colonial states. Gandhi, 
by comparison, seemed serenely safe. In his first years in India, and especially 
during the Ahmedabad troubles of February–March 1918, he disavowed strikes 
and workers’ organizations, earning the trust of the owners of property and 
the distrust of the radicals. Workers’ groups, the district magistrate wrote, “as-
sailed [Gandhi] bitterly for being a friend of the mill owners, riding in their 
motorcars, and eating sumptuously with them, while the weavers were starv-
ing. ”1 Gandhi may not have been unacceptable to the captains of industry, but 
that does not detract from the sheer force of the movement he engendered, a 
movement that led him every bit as much as he led it.
In the 1920s and 1930s, as the Indian freedom struggle became synonymous 
with Gandhi, colonized and oppressed people in the darker nations took no-
tice. From Jamaica, African America, and southern Africa, among other places, 
came the query, Where is our Black Gandhi? Will our Black Gandhi come?2
Implicit in such queries was a demand for a replication, across the globe, of


--- PAGE 199 ---
the type of anti-imperialist mass movement that Gandhi is believed to have 
fashioned in India.
Y et Gandhi was no unalloyed radical. Given a choice, the powers would 
much rather have dealt with him than with Lenin. Both encouraged mass revolt 
against injustice, both rallied the people for a permanent revolution against 
imperialism, but something very important set them apart. While Lenin em-
bodied the socialist and communist specter, Marxism and all that it implied 
in the way of an assault on property, Gandhi symbolized the Orient. The way 
he dressed, the way he spoke, and the language he used to describe his tactics 
(some of them quite similar to those of the Bolsheviks) all afforded Gandhi and 
his movement some legitimacy in certain respectable circles. Instead of being a 
war on property, his struggle was seen as the spiritual work of an Eastern seer, 
one more interested in the purification of Indian society than in the radical 
transformation of the world. That Gandhi made the requisite noises against 
working-class-led strikes in Ahmedabad in 1918 offered further reassurance 
that this Oriental seer had more elevated goals than did the Bolsheviks.3
Gandhi thus provided many social movements the cover to do just what 
they might have done anyway, nicely shrouded in the cloak of Eastern pacifism. 
Nonviolent activism had a very long trajectory, from ancient times onward. 
However, while most political movements used nonviolent tactics, Gandhi 
raised nonviolence to a moral ethic, to a strategy with a vision for re-creating 
the world. Other political traditions shared the Gandhian adherence to strikes, 
fasts, and other nonviolent forms of pr otest, but without rejecting other tac-
tics, such as sabotage, destruction of pr operty, and militant confrontation 
with the police. Gandhianism alone affirmed that the end of peace could only 
be attained through the means of peace. No violent means, according to the 
Gandhians, could possibly create a nonviolent society. Violence, in this scheme 
of things, breeds violence.
The black international engaged aspects of Gandhianism that centered on 
whether it was possible to entirely eschew violence when confronted with an 
extremely violent colonial or racist regime, such as those in southern Africa and 
the southern United States. Could nonviolence, as a hard standard, succeed in 
bringing about popular mobilization when racist violence had shattered the 
confidence of a people? Would the oppressed not need a violent revolution to 
restore their sense of self? Despite occasional bouts of violence, the bulk of the 
population throughout most of the black world came to a simple conclusion: 
unless forced into guerrilla warfare by a ruthless adversary, it was far better to 
engage the last ounce of goodness in the enemy through moral nonviolent 
vijay prashad
180


--- PAGE 200 ---
confrontation. That is the genius of Gandhianism that appealed to many in 
the black international.
Gandhianism and African America: The Initial Phase
In March 1924, The Crisis, the official organ of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and a journal edited by W. E. B. 
Du Bois, published a short, characteristically pungent note from the African 
American sociologist E. Franklin Frazier. Titled “The Negro and Non-Resis-
tance,” Frazier’s piece deplored the tendency among “a growing number of 
colored people” to “repudiate the use of force on the part of their brethren in 
defending their firesides, on the grounds that it is contrary to the example of 
non-resistance set by Jesus. ” Drawing from the biblical injunction to “turn the 
other cheek” to violence, the Christian critics of violent and direct resistance 
enjoined the black masses that those who do injustice to them must be met 
with love. The lynchers, being human, might also grow to love black people. 
Frazier rejected this argument. “While [those who criticize violence] pretend 
to emulate the meekness of the Nazarene,” he countered, “they conveniently 
forget to follow his example of unrestrained denunciation of the injustice and 
hypocrisy of His day and His refusal to make any truce with wrong-doers. ” 
Jesus may not have fought oppression with guns, but he did give his life for 
justice and not for accommodation.4
Frazier had good reasons to be frustrated and despondent. Already in the 
late nineteenth century, lynching had become such a horrifying epidemic that 
journalist Ida B. Wells-Barnett turned her career over to exposing it.5 In 1919 the 
NAACP held a conference on lynching and later published a report document-
ing more than 3,000 cases of vigilante racist murders between 1889 and 1919.6
Previously, in 1918, Congressman Leonidas Dyer had introduced antilynching 
legislation into the House. Then, in 1922, Mary T albert, Mary Jackson, Helen 
Curtis, and other women in the NAACP formed the Anti-Lynching Crusaders, 
but their efforts came to naught in 1923, when the Dyer bill died by a filibus-
ter in the Senate. While the bill langui shed in Congress, another 200 African 
Americans fell victim to the lynch mob.7
It was in these circumstances that Frazier became disillusioned with non-
resistance. His idea of fighting fire also had foundation in African American 
reality. From the borderlands with Mexico to the Carolinas, African Americans 
with military experience turned against white supremacy and the lynching 
regime. During World War I, the government worried about African American, 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
181


--- PAGE 201 ---
Mexican, Japanese, and German plots to foment armed strife in the United 
States (the “Plan of San Diego” of 1916 being the most famous, and the Houston 
Mutiny of 1917 the most savage response).8 The authorities were seriously con-
cerned about the loyalty of their second-class citizens. That the disfranchised 
might take to the gun against white supremacy was not an academic question, 
especially in the wake of the panic caused by the 1911 Mexican Revolution.9
The loyalty of African Americans, even though well-demonstrated in the sav-
age campaigns against the Amerindians and in the wars of 1898, could not be 
vouchsafed in the minds of the elevated citizenry, who feared “Negroes with 
guns. ” Frazier’s rejection of nonresistance has to be read in this context.10
Frazier’s position shocked Ellen Winsor, a white Quaker ally of the NAACP
and veteran suffragette. She denied that nonviolent protest amounted to pas-
sivity and urged Frazier to study the ways of M. K. Gandhi, “who has not one 
drop of white blood in his veins. ” Perhaps with the harsh retribution visited 
upon any retaliation against the lynch mob in mind, Winsor asked, “Has not 
the Negro learnt to his sorrow that violent methods never win the desired 
goal?” She concluded, “Who knows but that a Gandhi will arise in this coun-
try to lead the people out of their misery and ignorance, not by the old way 
of brute force which breeds sorrow and wrong, but by the new methods of 
education based on economic justice leading straight to Freedom. ”11
Du Bois, in his capacity as editor of The Crisis, decided not to publish 
Winsor’s response. Instead, he sent her a kind personal note, albeit one with 
an edgy conclusion: “I am, I must say, compelled to smile at the unanimity with 
which the great leader, Mr. Gandhi, is received by those people and races who 
have spilled the most blood. ”12
Du Bois then showed Winsor’s letter to Frazier and published his reply in 
June 1924. The use of violence, Frazier reiterated, anticipating an argument that 
would be made more famously by Frantz Fanon decades later, was indispens-
able in self-defense against white supremacist aggression and would gain Af-
rican Americans self-respect. “ A Britisher remarked to me in England a couple 
of years ago,” Frazier continued, “that once in the Far East you could kick a 
Japanese with impunity, but since the Russo-Japanese war, the Japanese had 
become so arrogant that they would take you into court for such an offense. ” 
Struck by Winsor’s call for an American Gandhi, Frazier responded acerbically: 
“Suppose there should arise a Gandhi to lead Negroes without hate in their 
hearts to stop tilling the fields of the South under the peonage system; to cease 
paying taxes to States that keep their children in ignorance; and to ignore the 
iniquitous disenfranchisement and Jim Crow laws, I fear we would witness an 
vijay prashad
182


--- PAGE 202 ---
unprecedented massacre of defenseless black men and women in the name of 
Law and Order and there would scarce ly be enough Christian sentiment in 
America to stay the flood of blood. ”13
Whatever the merits of the debate, neither Frazier nor Winsor really under-
stood Gandhi and the Indian freedom struggle. For them, as for many in the 
United States, Gandhi had become a mythical figure for whom nonviolence 
had religious qualities and whose movement had been entirely motivated by 
an immense faith in him and in his ethical approach. Winsor wanted the black 
movement to adopt Gandhian pacifism as much as Frazier rejected the purity 
of that approach. Neither, however, showed an appreciation of the historical 
Gandhi.
Du Bois came closer to the mark. In July 1929, for the twentieth anniver-
sary issue of The Crisis, Du Bois invited Gandhi to submit a message. Gandhi 
did so, and in the margins Du Bois penned his own thoughts on Gandhian 
politics: “ Agitation, non-violence, refusal to cooperate with the oppressor, 
became Gandhi’s watchword and with it he is leading all India to freedom. 
Here and today he stretches out his hand in fellowship to his colored friends 
of the West. ”14 The techniques of direct action, the ethos of solidarity, and 
the refusal to bend to imperialism were far more important to Du Bois than 
Gandhi’s philosophy of ahimsa, life without violence. Individual heroism and 
self-abnegation meant little to those who suffered the long arm of white su-
premacy. Even in India Gandhianism was often understood by the masses as 
the license to rebel violently against authority (as in Chauri Chaura in 1922 
and during the mass “Quit India” uprising of 1942). Du Bois recognized the 
centrality of Gandhi to the rejuvenated mass movement of Indian nationalism, 
and while he saw Gandhi warts and all, he regarded him as one of the most 
important figures of his time.
Such a practical approach to Gandhi was rare in the United States, where 
Gandhi’s adherents were prone to depict him as a saint. A popular 1923 ac-
count by the University of Michigan’s Claude Van Tyne noted, “Millions of 
Indians believe Gandhi to be a reincarnation of Vishnu. ”15 That view irked 
Gandhi’s main Indian interpreter in the United States, Krishnalal Shridharani, 
who wrote, “Whatever religious and mystical elements there are in the Indian 
movement, and they are greatly exaggerated by the American journalists and 
scholars/uRELfk.dare there for propaganda and publicity reasons as well as for the 
personal satisfaction of deeply conscientious men like Gandhi and the mem-
bers of the Gandhi Seva Sangh. ” What drew the millions, Shridharani added, 
was the fact that “the movement has been a weapon to be wielded by masses 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
183


--- PAGE 203 ---
of men for earthly, tangible and collective aims and to be discarded if it does 
not work. ” Shridharani minimized the role of religion in the Indian movement 
precisely because it was exaggerated in the United States. In fact, religious 
iconography and ideas did play quite a significant role in Gandhi’s attempt 
to mobilize the population. Nevertheless, Shridharani was right to note that 
“ American pacifism is essentially religious and mystical. West can be more 
unworldly than East, and the history of the peace movement in the United 
States is a good illustration of that. ”16 In writing these lines, he could very well 
have had Ellen Winsor, not just her Quaker community, in mind.
The South African Sojourn: How Gandhi Became Mahatma
Gandhi’s adoption by American pacifism as an Oriental saint faced a significant 
contest not only from the diligent analysis by Du Bois but also from Gandhi’s 
own biographical details. Gandhi’s history has to be recovered from mythology 
or else it becomes impossible to understand what attracted him to anti-impe-
rialist movements across the darker nations. Gandhi was not always Gandhi, 
and the Gandhi that we know only emerged because of his experience in the 
struggles for justice in southern Africa.
Gandhi arrived in South Africa in 1893 at age twenty-four and left in 1914, 
aged forty-four. These were his formative years, when the naive man and me-
diocre lawyer became a major political and moral force in world affairs. How, 
exactly, did Gandhi become the Mahatma, the Great Soul?
In the 1860s the British imperial project drew people from India as inden-
tured laborers to work in the Natal province of South Africa. There, more than 
150,000 Indian laborers worked in a variety of occupations, notably in the coal 
mines and the sugarcane fields, as well as built railroads. They suffered from 
the callous indifference of the colonial state, which valued them for their labor 
power and cared little about their welfare. Women among the indentured lived 
the harshest lives: all that the colonial state disavowed in the way of social life 
had to be manufactured with scant material by women within the gendered 
division of labor.17
When their indenture contracts ran out, many “ex-indentured” sought to 
stay on the land that had become their home. This desire posed a challenge to 
the colonial state, as did the arrival of a merchant class of Indians who came to 
sell goods and services to the indentured. The Indian merchants were known 
to the state as “Passenger Indians” (because they paid their own passage from 
vijay prashad
184


--- PAGE 204 ---
India to South Africa) and to themselves as “ Arabs” (to differentiate themselves 
from the indentured laborers). A firm owned by one of these “ Arabs” or “Pas-
senger Indians” engaged Gandhi’s legal services to resolve one of its internecine 
disputes. Frustrated by the general lack of dignity accorded the merchants, 
Gandhi opposed laws that, to his mind, reduced the Indian merchant to a 
“kaffir” (the stereotypical word used by the white supremacist state to des-
ignate black Africans). In 1894 he helped found the Natal Indian Congress, 
whose goal was to repeal the discriminatory laws that fettered the lives of the 
Indian merchants. Thus far, actually until 1907, Gandhi had little to say about 
the oppression of black Africans and working-class Indians. His professional 
class, caste Hindu, and pro-imperial optic failed to detect them on the political 
horizon.18
From 1894 to 1906, Gandhi and the merchants eschewed mass struggles. 
According to historian Maureen Swan, the class divide “was a requirement of 
a colonial situation in which legal distinctions were increasingly being made 
on a racial basis, and in which the major threat to the merchants’ economic 
interests thus happened to be posed in terms of their being identified as part of 
a certain group which was placed low in the racial hierarchy. ”19 In other words, 
to preserve their own narrow class adv antages, the Indian merchants had to 
separate themselves from their indentured brethren (although it should also 
be said that this same class had little confraternity with oppressed castes and 
exploited classes within India). The Passenger Indians not only feared an alli-
ance or a mass uprising, but they also could not countenance fiscal losses and 
imprisonment.20 Even if Gandhi or the merchants had wanted to use the mass 
power of the indentured laborers, finding common causes on issues would have 
been difficult. In 1896, when the South African government and press attacked 
him for his caustic remarks about discrimination against Indians, Gandhi an-
nounced, “The lot of the indentured Indian cannot be very unhappy; and Natal 
is a very good place for such Indians to earn their livelihood. ”21 No wonder the 
Indian indentured did not flock to Gandhi in this period.
In 1906 the South African government introduced a bill to require the reg-
istration of all Indians and to control the entry of Indians into the country. 
The proposed law would have hampered freedom of commerce for the Indian 
merchants. Incensed, they tried every available tactic: resolutions, petitions to 
the Colonial Office, requests for meetings with senior officials, and letters and 
articles in the press. The government remained obdurate, and no compromise 
seemed possible (unlike in 1894, when 9,000 signatures forced the state to hold 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
185


--- PAGE 205 ---
back on its attempt to abolish Indian enfranchisement). It is in this context that 
the merchants acceded to Gandhi’s call for “passive resistance” in September 
1906.
Amid his call for passive resistance, Gandhi grappled with the failure of 
the Indian merchants’ polite strategy as well as the violent strategy of the 1905 
Russian Revolution. “Under British rule,” Gandhi wrote, “we draft petition, 
carry on a struggle through the Press, and seek justice from the King. All this 
is perfectly proper. It is necessary, and it also brings us some relief. But is there 
anything else that we should do? And, can we do it?”22 The “it” referred to the 
Russian people, notably those whom Gandhi called the anarchists (although 
they included communists and others), who “kill the officials openly as well 
as secretly. ”
Gandhi considered such armed action a mistake, because it kept both rul-
ers and ruled “in a state of constant tension. ” Nevertheless, the bravery and 
patriotism of the Russians appealed to him, for these men and women “serve 
their country selflessly. ” Indians in South Africa, by contrast, had not attained 
that level of patriotism. “We are children in political matters. We do not under-
stand the principle that the public good is also one’s own good. But the time 
has now come for us to outgrow this state of mind. We need not, however, 
resort to violence. Neither need we set out on adventures, risking our lives. We 
must, however, submit our bodies to pain. ”23 Gandhi struggled with the gap 
between the class interest of the Passenger Indians and the “public good” of the 
society. This is the first indication of his public disavowal of the narrow class 
strategy pursued by the Passenger Indians, and of his entry into the broader, 
messy world of populist, anticolonial nat ionalism. Indians, he wrote, hence-
forth should refuse to abase themselves to unjust laws and should, rather, suffer 
in jail. On September 11, 1906, before a room of merchants, Gandhi pledged 
to go to jail before submitting to the unjust laws. He asked those in the room 
to join him. “Imagine that all of us present here numbering 3000 at the most 
pledge ourselves. ” But even fewer would suffice: “I can boldly declare, and with 
certainty, that so long as there is even a handful of men true to their pledge, 
there can only be one end to the struggle, and that is victory. ”24
Two years later, Gandhi reflected on the 1906 struggle. He noted, “The en-
tire campaign was intended to preserve the status of the well-to-do Indians. . . .
It was chiefly a businessmen’s campaign. ”25 The businessmen, however, did not 
lead the campaign. It was left to the working class and the small merchants to 
assume that function. In 1910 Gandhi singled out the hawkers of T ransvaal 
for their important role: “Because of their courage, the campaign has created 
vijay prashad
186


--- PAGE 206 ---
so fine an impression. It is because hundreds of them went to gaol that it has 
come to be recognized as a great movement. ”26 The strong stand of the workers 
and small merchants surprised Gandhi, because “questions of self-respect or 
honour, it was thought so far, could have little meaning for hawkers. ” But things 
had changed: “Now, everyone admits that hawkers do care for self-respect and 
they have risen in the esteem of others. ”27
The masses came forward, mobilized either by class interest (the hawkers, 
the merchants) or by religious or ethnic fealty (through caste and creed as-
sociations, a central player being the Hamidia Islamic Society). Their arrival 
allowed Gandhi to lay out his theory and to develop his concepts: satyagraha 
(action on the basis of truth), ahimsa (action without violence), swaraj (self-
rule), and sarvodaya (welfare for all). Gandhianism began to be formulated 
in relationship to the mass upsurge. One crucial element of the revolt and of 
the theory is that it occurred in the context of widespread deprivation for the 
indentured and ex-indentured, but also unde r the heel of a state that, at this 
point, was more disposed to structural violence than to public and relentless 
physical violence. Despite the many protests engineered by the merchants 
and others, the state did not go after the Indian protesters with vehemence. Its 
rulers played politics with them, which they did not do with the Zulus, who in 
1906 rose up in rebellion against colonial rule. The hierarchy of racism and the 
mediation of an educated, “reasonable” class of adepts provided the Gandhian 
revolt with a far more genteel state than that experienced by the Zulus and 
others.
In 1913 the struggle picked up again, when Indians refused to concede to a 
poll tax and various other indignities. In 1908 Gandhi had signed an agreement 
with the South African government, but the authorities had only honored it 
in the breach.28 In order not to antagonize the merchants, the government 
deployed measures that disproportionately affected the working class. Gandhi 
wrote to one of his confidants, “I am resolving in my own mind the idea of 
doing something for the indentured man. ”29 It was in this spirit that Gandhi 
drafted a strong resolution against the poll tax, and although he called for 
resistance, he did not draft a program or a plan of action for the campaign. 
Gandhi wanted to help the indentured, but he made no attempt to organize 
them. “Gandhi hoped to avoid an attempt to mobilize the underclasses, with 
whom he had no direct contact,” writes historian Maureen Swan, “and he relied 
on an elite campaign, supported by the threat of mass mobilization which was 
implicit in the inclusion of the /uEEAW.o3 tax question, to put pressure on the govern-
ment. ”30 Gandhi’s various ashrams trained fewer than forty satyagrahis, whom 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
187


--- PAGE 207 ---
he hoped to unleash to conduct moral actions to challenge the government. 
He did tell the minister of the interior that he would urge a general strike of 
the indentured, although he had no expectation that this call would amount 
to much beyond its value as a threat to the government.
Looking back at this event on August 8, 1914, Gandhi marveled at the work-
ers who struck work and held fast. “There were 20,000 strikers who left their 
tools and work because there was something in the air. People said they did 
not know why they had struck. ”31 Actually, the record shows that the workers 
struck for a host of reasons: some had heard that a rajah would come from 
India to liberate them; others, that the rajah would come to decapitate them if 
they did not stop work; yet others acted against the atrocious conditions in the 
mines and fields; and some hoped to join a rumored column of Indian troops 
that would overthrow the government. For Gandhi, the strikers “went out on 
faith. ”32 But the Reverend A. A. Bailie perhaps put it best when he noted that 
the workers did not have a coherent reason to strike, not because they had no 
grievances, but because they had so many.33 The movement, Gandhi wrote, 
“spread beyond expectations”:
I never dreamt that 20,000 poor Indians would arise and make their 
own and their country’s name immortal. . . . South African Indians 
became the talk of the world. In India, rich and poor, young and old, 
men and women, kings and labourers, Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Chris-
tians, citizens of Bombay, Madras, Calcutta and Lahore/uRELfk.dall were 
roused, became familiar with our history and came to our assistance. 
The Government was taken aback. The Viceroy, gauging the mood of 
the people, took their side. All this is public knowledge. I am stating 
these facts here in order to show the importance of this struggle.34
From these working-class people Gandhi learned an enormous lesson: mass 
action can paralyze a state and force it, if the action is nonviolent, to its knees. 
The South African government tried to retaliate with viciousness, with police 
brutality and murder. But the strike held, and the government lost any moral 
legitimacy before the people.35
Gandhi returned to India in 1916 after being pushed to the fore by this mass 
movement. He did not start a new movement in India but once again got car-
ried by forces that had almost five decades of organization behind them. The 
modern Indian nationalist movement began with the resolute struggle of the 
Indian peasantry, who turned to the leadership of people like Gandhi for a host 
of reasons. Gandhi represented a class that could stand between the inchoate 
vijay prashad
188


--- PAGE 208 ---
utterance of mass rebellion and the bureaucratic speech of the state: he was 
part of the infrastructure of the emergent national bourgeoisie, frustrated into 
organization as the Indian National Congress (from 1885) but, until his arrival, 
fairly lackadaisical in its annual meetings. Gandhi adopted the style and idiom 
of the peasants in an attempt to earn their trust and loyalty.36 For the peasantry, 
as for many of the other social classes in British India, Gandhi’s power lay in 
the organization of the congress, the rebelliousness of the oppressed classes, 
the enthusiasm of the middle-class students, the ideology (nonviolence) that 
he forged out of his experiences, and the early tactical successes of the mass 
mobilizations he had provoked (the 1917–18 satyagrahas of Champaran, Kheda, 
and Ahmedabad).37
The Uncrowned King: African America and Gandhi Reprised
In the early 1940s, the pace of black struggles in the United States picked up. 
The wartime economy opened up some opportunities for blacks. Despite this, 
whites fiercely maintained their Jim Crow privileges. T ensions grew, particu-
larly in congested spaces where the white and black working class confronted 
each other; they had less opportunity to segregate themselves into protected 
spaces. Sociologists Charles Johnson and Howard Odum, among others, wrote 
at that time of the impending antagonism between whites and blacks, with 
Odum warning of black soldiers who were “organizing shock troop units all 
over the country” and putting weapons aside for the inevitable “race war. ”38
With the tempo of struggle being pushed from below, the veteran black 
activist A. Philip Randolph gave the government an ultimatum to end Jim 
Crow in wartime industries or else he would lead 10,000 people on a march 
on Washington on July 4, 1941. Freedom had to be fought for, Randolph wrote, 
“with our gloves off. ” Responding to the immense majority of blacks, Randolph 
readied himself for a stiff confrontation. The government quickly capitulated, 
and the president issued an executive order meeting Randolph’s demand.
Alongside Randolph was Bayard Rustin, who had just broken with the 
communists to become a leader in the pacifist Fellowship of Reconciliation 
(FOR). In FOR’s magazine, Rustin warned, “Many Negroes see mass violence 
coming. Having lived in a society in which church, school, and home problems 
have been handled in a violent way, the majority at this point are unable to con-
ceive of a solution by reconciliation and nonviolence. ”39 Bitterness, fear, and 
frustration governed the imagination of those who had begun to squirrel away 
arms or else hoped for a Japanese victory because, as one person told Rustin, 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
189


--- PAGE 209 ---
“it don’t matter who you’re a slave for. ”40 T o shift the tenor, Rustin argued that 
civil rights activists had to “identify” in an organic way with the black masses, 
by fighting daily for justice. “This demands being so integral a part of the Negro 
community in its day-to-day struggle, so close to it in similarity of work, so near 
its standard of living that when problems arise he who stands forth to judge, 
to plan, to suggest, or to lead is really at one with the Negro masses. ”41 But all 
this talk of nonviolence remained premature.
In 1943, when Randolph began to talk about the need for a nonviolent 
movement against racism, he faced a great deal of resistance.42 Du Bois wrote a 
searing attack on Randolph’s desire to adopt Gandhianism.43 Du Bois conceded 
that blacks had made some gains from their economic perseverance and from 
their legal struggles: “Our case in America is not happy, but it is far from des-
perate. ”44 The African American situation, however, was different from India’s. 
Gandhi’s struggle thrived in a context where a tiny minority oppressed the vast 
majority, whereas in the United States blacks comprised a small percentage of 
the population, and any call for nonviolent resistance “would be playing into 
the hands of our enemies. ” Du Bois’s major point was that Gandhian tactics 
were alien to the United States. Fasting, public prayer, and self-sacrifice had 
been “bred into the very bone of India for more than three thousand years. ” 
But African Americans would mock that approach, should the black leadership 
“blindly copy methods without thought and consideration. ”45
In fact, few Gandhians in the United States advocated or adopted fasting 
as a method. Shridharani wrote that Gandhianism “should merely point the 
way,” as fasting “may appear ridiculous in America,” where it lacked “the same 
social significance” it had in India.46 “Other countries,” Shridharani wrote in 
1939, “are likely to evolve different forms of self-purification, when and if they 
engage in a Satyagraha. ”47 Du Bois’s association of Gandhianism with fasting, 
without engaging the meaning of self-purification in nonviolent resistance, 
encouraged the view of Gandhi as mystical and Gandhianism as a specifically 
Indian political philosophy.
Two activists of FOR traveled to India, where they learned of Gandhianism 
first hand. In 1941 Ralph T emplin and Jay Holmes Smith returned to the United 
States, set up the Harlem ashram in New Y ork City, and translated Gandhian 
ideas into the theory of Kristagraha, or action on the basis of Christ, an amal-
gam of Christianity and satyagraha. One of the residents of the ashram was 
James Farmer, who joined in the creation of the Congress of Racial Equality 
(CORE) from this base camp.48 They began to experiment with their version of 
truth just as ordinary African Americans in southern cities had begun to test 
vijay prashad
190


--- PAGE 210 ---
the limits of Jim Crow. In Birmingham, Alabama, historian Robin Kelley notes, 
various organizations (the National Urban League, the Interracial Committee, 
and the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights) spent a decade, 
from the early 1940s to the early 1950s, trying to harness the everyday frustra-
tions of blacks: a lack of employment, a lack of decent housing, a lack of good 
schools, and a denial of dignity.49 Both the minimal demands (better housing, 
better schools) and the maximum demands (total social transformation) had 
become clear to the black masses and, to an extent, to the black leadership. 
What was also clear to the leadership, at the very least, was that the fight had 
to be nonviolent or else the retribution would be stronger than the people 
could bear. What had not emerged clearly as yet was the form of struggle, the 
instrument that would emerge from popular protests. The anarchy of protests, 
helped along by organized forces, would reveal the tactical form of struggle. 
The commune, the soviet, the workers’ council, and others emerged from the 
heart of the collision between spontaneous unrest and organization.
In 1955 Rosa Parks’s action set in motion a well-organized rebellion against 
Jim Crow. Thousands had been prepared for action by small forays into non-
violent resistance and by more militant confrontations with the police and 
white supremacists.50 Protesters took to the streets, withdrew from the buses, 
and inaugurated the mass struggle called the civil rights movement. The tac-
tical form was simple: the sit-down strike, the refusal to leave a place where 
the body was not wanted. Such actions uncovered the essence of Gandhian 
civil disobedience. For CORE’s James Farmer, “It was Martin Luther King, Jr., 
who established the shrine of Gandhian nonviolence in a southern city in the 
United States of America, drawing to him, as a magnet, pilgrims and press 
from all over the world. ”51 King’s use of Gandhian and Christian imagery, of 
love and suffering, drew from the decade-long Kristagraha tradition. But in 
truth, as historian T aylor Branch records, “nonviolence, like the boycott itself, 
had begun more or less by accident. ”52 It is by such accidents that history is 
propelled.
The civil rights movement, like the freedom movement in India, did not 
start with its leadership. It began in the acts of the southern black working 
class, whose refusal to quietly ride at the back of the bus or accept second-class 
employment in a racist job market was spurred by experience in the world 
wars and by the legacy of the Congress of Industrial Organization unions. If 
Gandhi learned his politics among the working class in South Africa and India, 
King, too, learned to bend to the will of the people while he picked tobacco 
in the outskirts of Hartford, Connecticut. Protected from the worst of white 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
191


--- PAGE 211 ---
supremacy by the elite black circles of Atlanta in which he grew up, King did 
not face the everyday racist trauma as the black working class faced it. With a 
few fellow Morehouse College students in the summer of 1944, King worked 
in the fields of Connecticut with black workers, many from the U.S. South and 
others from the Caribbean.
While toiling with the workers, King called his mother and told her that 
he wanted to be a minister; he had found his calling here, among the people 
who survived to struggle for a better day. King, like Gandhi, was led by the will 
of the masses, by such stalwarts as high school student Claudette Colvin and 
seamstress-activist Rosa Parks. The courage of ordinary people drew King into 
the struggle, and the Gandhian experiences of Farmer, Rustin, and eventually 
James Lawson served him well. King took the everyday commonsense non-
violence of the movement and raised it to philosophy, which, along with his 
immense charisma, was his contribution to freedom. In 1958 King wrote, “Non-
violent resistance had emerged as the technique of the movement, while love 
stood as the regulating ideal. In other words, Christ furnished the spirit and 
motivation, while Gandhi furnished the method. ”53 King could have added, 
“The Churches provided the institutional framework, the radicals provided 
the disciplined leg-work, and the people provided the energy and enthusiasm 
as well as the resilience. ” King was pushed by the socialism of his people out 
of his own narrow class confines into the solidarity of generations.
King’s views did not go unchallenged. In the late 1950s Robert Williams, 
head of the Monroe, North Carolina, branch of the NAACP, had espoused 
the view that there is no substitute for armed resistance against a recalcitrant 
and hostile Jim Crow establishment.54 As the NAACP expelled Williams, King 
addressed his case in Liberation. Williams, King argued, offered two paths of 
struggle, either “we must be cringing and submissive or take up arms. ” King 
disagreed, since the people of Monroe themselves had used “collective com-
munity action” to win “significant victory without use of arms or threats of 
violence. ” Then King offered his view on the power of nonviolence as he had 
learned it from Gandhi’s example:
There is more power in socially organized masses on the march than 
there is in guns in the hands of a few desperate men. Our enemies 
would prefer to deal with a small armed group rather than with a huge, 
unarmed but resolute mass of people. However it is necessary that the 
mass-action method be persistent and unyielding. Gandhi said that the 
Indian people must “never let them rest,” referring to the British. He 
vijay prashad
192


--- PAGE 212 ---
urged them to keep protesting daily and weekly, in a variety of ways. 
This method inspired and organized the Indian masses and disorganized 
and demobilized the British. It educates its myriad participants, socially 
and morally. All history teaches us that like a turbulent ocean beating 
great cliffs into fragments of rock, the determined movement of people 
incessantly demanding their rights always disintegrates the old order.55
While King knew that the black working class in the South had responded 
well to the call for nonviolent mass resistance, he also knew that class fissures 
in the “community” had already prevented the formation of the kind of total 
resistance he had envisioned. King had read E. Franklin Frazier’s Black Bour-
geoisie (1957), in which the sociologist cataloged the economic powerlessness 
of the African American middle class, who nonetheless wielded political power 
over segregated black neighborhoods.56 In 1958, in Stride toward Freedom, King 
cited Frazier’s book, noted that it was unlikely that the middle class would 
bear the “ordeals and sacrifices” of nonviolence, pointed out that the method 
“is not dependent on its unanimous accept ance,” and then hoped that a few 
dedicated resisters could “serve as the moral force to awaken the slumbering 
national conscience. ”57
The American engagement with Gandhi moved from mass protest to in-
dividual witness to a combination of the two. But for the struggle against Jim 
Crow, Gandhi was never a mystical, almost extraterrestrial, Vishnu-like figure, 
but a shrewd political tactician whose weapons of the weak could, with care, 
be adopted elsewhere. The Indian Shridharani, Gandhi’s chief interpreter in 
the United States, had called him an “unwilling avatar. ” Indeed he was. In black 
working-class and militant African American circles, the Mahatma was trans-
formed into a comrade in arms.
Gandhi and King learned their nonviolence from the masses, whose cour-
age and resilience surprised both of them. It was from these acts of resistance 
that they developed their theories. Gandhi’s Oriental and King’s Christian 
sheen allowed them space to maneuver. Their faith of nonviolence earned 
them the goodwill of the masses, who were ready to act, and it paralyzed the 
state, whose response could only turn the population against ruling classes 
who cannot act without the consent of large sections of the citizenry. Frazier’s 
frustrations with the nonviolent strategy reflected the impatience of those who 
wanted change to come fast but were not ready to find the organizational form 
to bring the masses into making that change happen. The real danger, not 
identified by Frazier, is that whereas Gandhi and King drew their lessons from 
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
193


--- PAGE 213 ---
the masses, and drew the masses into ever-powerful mobilizations, they could 
just as easily betray the needs and aspirations of those very people.
notes
The material for this essay began to accumulate as I researched Everybody Was Kung Fu 
Fighting. What I could not fit into that work I presented as a talk at the symposium in 
Madison, Wisconsin (2004), to honor the 100th anniversary of Du Bois’s Souls of Black 
Folk. Nellie McKay kindly invited me, Robert Warrior and I held it down for the Indians, 
and Maurice Wallace gave me very useful feedback. A raw version appeared in Little 
India, and for that I thank my editor Achal Mehra. I could not have written this essay 
without the pioneering work of Sudarshan Kapur’s Raising Up a Prophet and Richard 
Fox’s “Passage from India. ” Thanks to Michael West and Bill Martin for their patient 
encouragement.
1. Brown, Gandhi’s Rise, 118.
2. For example, in 1933 Leonard Howell, a founder of Rastafari, thought that he might 
become the Gandhi of Jamaica. See Lee, Le premier Rasta, 127.
3. General Jan Smuts had a more caustic view of Gandhi, whose departure in 1914 he 
welcomed in a letter to Sir Benjamin Robertson: “The saint has left our shores. I sincerely 
hope for ever” (Brown, Gandhi’s Rise, 3). Winston Churchill’s snide remarks (1931) speak 
to Gandhi’s mobilization of Oriental tropes: “It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr. 
Gandhi, a seditious Middle T emple lawyer, now posing as a fakir of a type well known in 
the East, striding half-naked up the steps of the viceregal palace, while he is still organis-
ing and conducting a defiant campaign of civil disobedience, to parlay on equal terms 
with the representative of the King-Emperor. ” See Churchill, Never Give In!, 97.
4. Frazier, “Negro and Non-Resistance” (March 1924), 213.
5. Wells-Barnett, On Lynching. For an excellent analysis of lynching and violence, see 
Feimester, “‘Ladies and Lynching. ’”
6. NAACP , Thirty Years of Lynching.
7. Zangrando, NAACP Crusade.
8. All of this is from Horne’s highly informed Black and Brown, 156–80.
9. Ibid., 92, 110–11.
10. There is always a temptation to read Frazier as impetuous and exaggerated, given 
the reaction to his Black Bourgeoisie.
11. Du Bois, Correspondence, 283–84.
12. Ibid., 284.
13. Frazier, “Negro and Non-Resistance” ( June 1924), 58–59.
14. Gandhi, “T o the American Negro,” 225.
15. Van Tyne, India, 110.
16. Shridharani, My India, 276.
17. Beall, “Women under Indentured Labor. ”
18. His concentration on Indians is not an indication of a lack of alliance or support, 
for he worked very closely with the T ransvaal Chinese Association and with the Natal 
Native Congress. On the Chinese, see Harris, “Gandhi, the Chinese, and Passive Resis-
vijay prashad
194


--- PAGE 214 ---
tance. ” On the Africans (and the Natal Native Congress), see Prashad, Everybody Was 
Kung Fu Fighting, 94–96.
19. Swan, Gandhi, 50.
20. I have relied on the outstanding, unpublished dissertation by the former speaker 
of the South African National Assembly, Frene Ginwala, “Class, Consciousness, and 
Control,” notably 147 onward for this section.
21. Swan, Gandhi, 64.
22. Gandhi, “Russia and India,” Indian Opinion, September 8, 1906, in Collected Works,
5:413.
23. Ibid.
24. Gandhi, Satyagraha in South Africa, in Collected Works, 5:421.
25. Gandhi, “ A Brief Explanation,” Indian Opinion, February 22, 1908, 99–101, in Col-
lected Works, 8:100.
26. Gandhi, “Duty of Hawkers,” Indian Opinion, January 8, 1910, in Collected Works,
10:123.
27. Ibid.
28. It was in the context of that agreement that Gandhi wrote, “ A satyagrahi bids 
goodbye to fear. He is therefore never afraid of trusting his opponent. Even if the oppo-
nent plays him false twenty times, the satyagrahi is ready to trust him for the twenty-first 
time, for an implicit trust in human nature is the very essence of his creed” (Satyagraha 
in South Africa, 159).
29. Swan, Gandhi, 242.
30. Ibid., 244.
31. Gandhi, “Speech at London Reception,” Indian Opinion, September 30, 1914, in 
Collected Works, 12:523–24 (quote on 524).
32. Ibid.
33. Swan, Gandhi, 252.
34. Gandhi, “The Last Satyagraha Campaign: My Experience,” Indian Opinion, De-
cember 1914, 508–19, in Collected Works, 12:509–10.
35. As Jan Smuts put it to Gandhi, “I often wish you took to violence like in English 
strikes, and then we would know at once how to dispose of you. But you will not injure 
even the enemy. Y ou desire victory by self-suffering alone and never transgress your 
self-imposed limits of courtesy and chivalry. And that is what reduces us to sheer help-
lessness” (Gandhi, Satyagraha in South Africa, 325–26).
36. Guha, “Discipline and Mobilise,” offers an insightful analysis of Gandhi’s relation-
ship to the mass movement that developed around his persona.
37. On Champaran, see Pouchepadass, Champaran and Gandhi; on Kheda, see Hardi-
man, Peasant Nationalists.
38. Singh, Black Is a Country, 105.
39. Rustin, “Negro and Nonviolence,” 8.
40. Ibid., 9.
41. Ibid., 10.
42. Pfeffer, A. Philip Randolph, 64.
43. Du Bois, “ As the Crow Flies. ”
44. Ibid., 110.
Waiting for the Black Gandhi
195


--- PAGE 215 ---
45. Ibid.
46. Shridharani, My India, 281.
47. Shridharani, War without Violence, 13.
48. A longer version of this essay will offer more details of the ashram.
49. Kelley, Race Rebels, 55–100, esp. 82–85.
50. Ibid.
51. Farmer, Lay Bare the Heart, 185.
52. Branch, Parting the Waters, 195.
53. King, “Experiment in Love,” 17.
54. Robert Williams would eventually put his case in his 1962 Negroes with Guns,
reprinted in 1998. For the context and Williams’s subsequent political career in Cuba 
and China, see Tyson, Radio Free Dixie.
55. King, “Social Organization of Nonviolence,” 33.
56. Frazier, Black Bourgeoisie.
57. King, Stride toward Freedom and T estament of Hope, 485–86.
vijay prashad
196


--- PAGE 216 ---
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
brian meeks
Whatever the objective forces propelling a people towards struggle, 
resistance and revolution, they would come to that struggle in 
their own cultural terms.—cedric robinson, Black Marxism
In 1968, Black Power swept across the Caribbean. The immediate trigger was 
a riot in Jamaica following the banning from the island of Black Power activ-
ist and scholar Walter Rodney. Then a lecturer at the Mona campus of the 
University of the West Indies, the Guyanese-born Rodney was attending a 
Black Power conference in Canada when the Jamaican government prohib-
ited him from returning to his job.1 Caribbean Black Power briefly rose to a 
crescendo in the “1970 Revolution” in T rinidad and T obago,2 when a mass 
movement climaxed in an aborted army mutiny against the government of 
Eric Williams, the famous historian and erstwhile anticolonial nationalist. The 
upsurge, however, was short lived: by the middle of the 1970s almost all the 
important radical Caribbean movements had switched to a Marxist-Leninist 
ideology,3 abandoning, at least overtly, the nationalist and populist insights of 
Caribbean Black Power.
What led to the eclipse of the Black Power movement? Was it the military 
success of Marxism-Leninism in the Third World? Was it the result of weak-
nesses and lacunae in the theory and praxis of the nascent Black Power move-
ment? This essay examines these questions as it traces the paths of Caribbean 
radicalism, paths that led, ultimately, to the ascendancy of the Marxist-Leninist 
notion of the vanguard party in the Grenadian Revolution and its tragic col-
lapse in 1983.


--- PAGE 217 ---
The Caribbean, 1968–1974: The Ascendancy of Black Power
The name Black Power came from the effervescent struggle for racial justice 
in the United States, but the Caribbean movement had multiple roots, deriv-
ing from a complex interplay of local and international histories. The primary 
tributary in the twentieth century was Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Im-
provement Association (UNIA), which was a significant social and political 
force in Jamaica, T rinidad, and other Caribbean territories in the 1920s and 
1930s.4 Another powerful local current emerged after the coronation of Haile 
Selassie as Ethiopian emperor in 1930. The Rastafarian movement, deriving its 
name from Selassie’s original title, Ras (Prince) T afari, combined millenarian-
ism with militant pan-Africanism and biblical prophecy. Rastafari, diverse and 
multipronged in its organizational form, gradually developed followers among 
the Jamaican poor and spread by the early 1960s to other parts of the Carib-
bean.5 There is little doubt, however, that the U.S. movement, which was fol-
lowed with immense interest in the Caribbean, particularly by young people, 
was the catalyst that brought these nasc ent trends together. When the civil 
rights movement made a leftward turn to Black Power in the mid-1960s, radical 
trends in the Caribbean found a ready-made slogan under which to organize 
their own deep dissatisfaction with their societies and governments.
Several striking features marked the Caribbean Black Power scene from 
roughly 1968 to 1973. In Jamaica, as the previous history might suggest, the 
movement was centrally influenced by powerful Rastafarian currents that 
stressed the importance of cultural determination in politics and asserted, 
against the official Jamaican ideology of peaceful multiracial coexistence, the 
saliency of race as a determining factor in people’s lives. By design, Black Power 
in Jamaica was decentralized, multipolar, and community based. Its ethos was 
captured in the pages of that essential, radical Caribbean newspaper Abeng,6
which served as a popular forum for expressing a range of conflicting views, 
rather than as an organ with a single party line.
The various currents of the movement were concentrated around the Uni-
versity of the West Indies at Mona, although they were not exclusively found 
there. The dominant trends advocated a grassroots/populist notion of the 
role of intellectuals in the popular movement. In 1967 Garth White expressed 
such a position at a meeting of the radical intellectual forum, the New World 
movement.7 White, then a leading radical student at the University of the West 
Indies at Mona, attacked the view of Lloyd Best, the noted T rinidadian econo-
mist and activist, that intellectuals should focus on research that would pro-
brian meeks
198


--- PAGE 218 ---
vide the movement with feasible options. Rather, White argued, intellectuals 
should become activists, merging their lives with those of the people: “What 
about New World? The days of sipping tea and airily contemplating ‘high is-
sues’ is past. . . . An opportunity for direct political action has been placed in 
the laps of those desirous to see social change. The possibility exists that ex-
isting structures may crumble. They certainly are crumbling. If they crumble 
the intellectuals will be in no position to move. . . . [We need to mobilize,] . . . 
actively becoming one of the people and not in any patronizing way. ”8
In T rinidad the 1970 Black Power revolution/uRELfk.dby any measure the high 
point of this period/uRELfk.dgave birth to a multiplicity of organizations with com-
peting ideological streams and multiple poles of authority. Black Power groups 
like the United Movement for the Reconstruction of Black Identity, based 
in southern T rinidad, competed with Young Power and the island’s version 
of the U.S. Black Panther Party. The trade unions brought to the movement 
their own spectrum of ideological perspectives, with Marxist trends having 
significant influence in organizations like Joe Y oung’s T ransport and Industrial 
Workers Union and George Weekes’s powerful Oilfield Workers T rade Union. 
The T apia House movement, despite being headed by Lloyd Best, one of the 
most capable Caribbean thinkers of his generation, stood aside from the mass 
movement and was subsequently marginalized.9
It was the National Joint Action Committee (NJAC), a student-led group,10
that would emerge as the leading force in the marching phase of the move-
ment when young, often unemployed people controlled the streets of Port 
of Spain and other T rinidadian urban centers. NJAC started from a radically 
anti-imperialist and Black Nationalist position, as elaborated in the pamphlet 
Conventional Politics or Revolution? “For the people of T obago, for instance, 
politics involves the recovery of their land from the white parasites who control 
the villages, an end to the assault on their dignity by white tourism. . . . For 
the suffering workers, politics involves freedom from the exploitation in the 
factories, on the estates, in the offices, on the building sites and the right of 
control. ”11
On a wider Caribbean level, the goals espoused by NJAC were more fa-
mously stated by Walter Rodney in his collected essays, The Groundings with 
My Brothers. Rodney defined Black Power as “(i) The break with imperialism 
which is historically white racist; (ii) the assumption of power by the black 
masses in the islands; and (iii) the cultural reconstruction of the society in the 
image of the blacks. ”12 Although radically anti-imperialist and African cen-
tered, Rodney’s views were far from exclusivist, as we shall see.
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
199


--- PAGE 219 ---
NJAC’s primary and ultimately fatal weakness was its acceptance and re-
production of T rinidad’s reigning political culture and leadership style. This 
syndrome, epitomized by Eric Williams, stressed reverence and obeisance to 
the jefe maximo. As Winston Suite, a contemporary activist not affiliated with 
it has suggested, NJAC, as a movement, took an exclusive and monopolistic ap-
proach to the struggle: “The leader of NJAC had a sense of messianic mission; 
he hears a voice from within; he identifies himself with everything as though 
revolution is not a drama. ...N J A C  b e h a v e d  a s  though the movement was its 
own. . . . They wanted you to do whatever they wanted to be done; they did 
not want you as an independent entity. ”13 NJAC’s failure to break with the past 
eventually resulted in the loss of its leading role in the popular movement. At 
the same time, the group’s adherence to the old political culture and leadership 
syndrome anticipated the centralist, vanguardist politics that would come to 
prominence with the ascendancy of Marxism-Leninism.
Similar if distinctive trends emerged on the other islands of the eastern 
Caribbean. Forum, a nascent Black Power discussion and action movement, 
emerged autonomously in a number of territories, including Antigua, St. 
Lucia, and Grenada. Forum’s Antigua branch eventually became the Antigua 
Caribbean Liberation Movement (ACLM), under the leadership of Tim Hec-
tor. Although notoriously unsuccessful in electoral politics, Hector’s ACLM
held together, and through the radical newspaper Outlet provided sustained 
resistance to corruption and venality in Antiguan politics for more than three 
decades.14
The greater focus inevitably has to be placed on Grenada, where the radi-
cal movement gained power through revolutionary insurrection. There, the 
Joint Endeavour for Welfare, Education and Liberation ( Jewel) emerged out 
of Forum and operated as a grassroots, Black Power organization with a broad 
anti-imperialist, “New Worldist”15 platform that emphasized direct political ac-
tion. The other notable Grenadian Black Power formation was the Movement 
for Assemblies of the People (MAP). As the name implied, MAP was heavily 
influenced by the notion of popular assemblies as alternative political struc-
tures to parliament/uRELfk.da notion associated with C. L. R. James, the celebrated 
Caribbean scholar and activist. Like Jewel, MAP supported spontaneous, direct 
action. The two movements eventually found common ground: in 1974 they 
came together to form the New Jewel Movement (NJM), united in their op-
position to the government of Eric Gairy, Grenada’s repressive and mercurial 
prime minister.16
From the very beginning, Black Power in the Caribbean connected with 
brian meeks
200


--- PAGE 220 ---
popular currents and garnered broad, mass support. In T rinidad, NJAC ini-
tially stood at the head of a broad and popular mass movement. The Jamaican 
movement, always more inchoate, nonetheless generated Abeng and acted as 
the stimulus for a process of popular education and mobilization, the effects of 
which were not completely felt until the mid- to late 1970s. The 1972 electoral 
victory of the People’s National Party (PNP), now headed by the charismatic 
Michael Manley, son of the late PNP founder and former prime minister Nor-
man Manley, heralded a peculiarly Jamaican radical movement, albeit one in 
which anti-imperialism operated within the constraints of the traditional po-
litical framework. In Grenada, the two groups that eventually merged to form 
the NJM were able to organize relatively massive crowds, ranging from the 1972 
La Sagesse protest against an English lord’s attempt to privatize beaches, to the 
campaign against Eric Gairy’s push for independence from Britain, which was 
seen as a diversion from the island’s social problems.
By the early 1970s, then, Black Power had become a powerful force in vari-
ous Caribbean societies. A burgeoning movement guided by notions of black 
nationalism and wedded to an anti-imperialist sense of autonomous Caribbean 
development, it was accompanied by populist and community-based notions 
of political participation17 and mobilization. More to the point, by the early 
1970s Caribbean Black Power actually had the ability to influence and mobilize 
large bodies of people.
1974–1983: The Eclipse of Black Power and 
Rise of Marxism-Leninism
By the late 1970s, however, the political landscape had changed and Black 
Power had been eclipsed. With the defeat in April 1970 of the mass move-
ment it had mobilized against the government of Eric Williams, T rinidad’s 
NJAC retreated from the center to the margins, having lost its status as the 
country’s primary revolutionary agency. This was due not only to its approach 
to leadership but also to a new, overwhelmingly “cultural” orientation, which 
served to reduce its influence in critical sectors, particularly among the union-
ized working class.
The T rinidadian movement, after a continued surge during which the radi-
cal guerrilla grouping NUFF18 emerged and militant action increased among 
students and workers, declined and then practically fell, as the twin-island na-
tion settled into the long quiescence of the oil boom of the mid- to late 1970s. 
In Jamaica, Black Power divided into two. One section was won to the tradi-
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
201


--- PAGE 221 ---
tional party system and became the radical cutting edge of Michael Manley’s 
resurgent PNP. The other section was won to Marxism-Leninism, eventually 
becoming, in 1978, the Workers Party of Jamaica (WPJ). In Grenada, the early 
NJM strategy of direct act ion and mass mobilization carried the movement 
forward to the 1973–74 islandwide general strike and a lockdown against the 
Gairy regime. Still, the NJM was unable to remove Gairy from power. When, 
in February 1974, the Grenadian prime minister proceeded to take the country 
into independence in the face of a strike, and against the wishes of the broad, 
popular opposition, it was evident that the movement and its chosen approach 
to politics had suffered a strategic defeat. This led to the important decision 
by the leadership of the NJM to aba ndon Black Power as an ideological and 
organizational strategy and to embrace a local version of Marxism-Leninism.
From 1974, then, with the emergence in Jamaica of the predecessor to the 
WPJ and the decision of the NJM to change course, we can observe the rise, 
growth, and partial consolidation of Marxist-Leninist organizations through-
out the Anglophone Caribbean. This transformation was accompanied by an 
adoption of the principles of democratic c entralism, hermetic-cell systems, 
and selective membership. If we take Garth White’s notion of the “merging of 
the intellectual with the people” as a central theme in Caribbean Black Power 
organizational ethos, then the Leninist philosophy that replaced it saw the 
party and its members as above the people, patronizingly leading and guiding 
them. Thus the pamphlet published with the 1978 launching of the WPJ pro-
claimed, “Whether it is England or America, Angola or Mozambique, capital-
ism and colonialism prevent the majority of working people from really know-
ing themselves. . . . The first principle of the real communist working class party 
therefore is that only the most serious and conscious workers can join. Then 
it is their job to teach, to guide, to lead, to draw up the rest/uRELfk.dnot because they 
have title or position but because the communist workers are the ones who 
put out more sacrifice, more work and more struggle against oppression than 
anyone else. ”19
Vanguard party principles did allow for a strong and focused organization. 
In Grenada, the one place where a classic revolutionary situation emerged, the 
prior, though very brief existence of a vanguard party laid the basis for an insur-
rectionary politics leading to the seizure of power in 1979. The WPJ, however, 
was never able to seriously break into the mainstream of Jamaican politics and 
never became a truly national force. It garnered only a limited popularity in 
specific communities where it gave assistance in areas such as security, health 
care, and legal aid, or in areas where its cadres were particularly well-placed, as 
brian meeks
202


--- PAGE 222 ---
in the media. Was this the result, as the party’s central committee regularly in-
timated, of the strength of anticommunism and the absence of a revolutionary 
situation? While these provide part of the explanation for the party’s weakness, 
it was the WPJ’s exclusivist organizational form and the limited appeal of its 
“proletarian” line that ultimately undermined its popularity.
The Power of an International Paradigm
The failure of T rinidadian Black Power to consolidate as a political movement 
as well as the inability of the early NJM to remove, or even thwart, Eric Gairy 
partly explains the waning influence of Black Power in the Caribbean by the 
mid-1970s. The critical factor in this process, however, was the rise of Marxism-
Leninism, which eclipsed Black Power as the dominant, radical paradigm.
Many factors account for the rise of Marxism-Leninism. The T et Offensive 
in 1968 seemed to indicate that the Vietnamese had not only survived the U.S. 
military onslaught but were capab le of going on the offensive; this signaled 
the beginning of a sea change in support for Leninism as a political strategy. 
That view was further enhanced in the mid-1970s when all the important and 
successful African liberation movements claimed Marxist-Leninist credentials. 
In the classic case of Angola in 1975, the non-Leninist movements/uRELfk.dHolden 
Roberto’s National Front for the Liberation of Angola and Jonas Savimbi’s 
National Union for the T otal Independence of Angola/uRELfk.dsuffered the oppro-
brium of being on the same side as the invading South Africans and the United 
States in opposing the legitimate (and Marxist) Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola government. In South Africa itself, the apartheid regime 
was opposed by the militant South African Communist Party (SACP) and the 
African National Congress, many of whose members either belonged to or 
were closely allied with the SACP.
In the Caribbean, the Cuban Revolution emerged as a more powerful ex-
ample than any of these other cases. In addition to Cuba’s struggle to survive in 
its early years (a period of high sugar prices and ample Soviet assistance), the 
nation’s progressive social programs at home and concrete military and civilian 
assistance abroad, particularly in Africa, served to consolidate the view that 
if you were radical and anti-imperialist, then it was difficult not to be Marxist 
and Leninist.
The Marxist-Leninist paradigm of success translated into a number of sub-
theses. The first centered on the taking of power. Here a hybrid approach based 
on Bolshevik and Cuban examples emerged. Leninist practices contributed the 
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
203


--- PAGE 223 ---
notion that a small, revolutionary, vanguard party could lead a mass revolution 
of working people, as so well exemplified in the Russian Revolution. From 
Third World armed revolts and especially Cuba came the notion of the guer-
rilla foco, as espoused by Regis Debray in his widely circulated book Revolution 
in the Revolution? In Debray’s conception the guerrilla foco, a small vanguard 
guerrilla group would provide the model for revolution in rural Third World 
countries (Debray himself would be captured in 1967 while accompanying 
Che Guevara’s failed guerrilla effort in Bolivia). This combination in essence 
asserted that it was necessary for a small, committed group of militants to pre-
pare the revolution, which would most likely take the form of an insurrection 
against the existing state. Allied to the vanguard and foco approach was the view 
that in order to be truly Leninist, one ha d to work first and foremost among 
the working classes, as opposed to the “transitional strata” of the unemployed 
and the petite bourgeoisie.20
Second, the political and economic strategy of the postrevolutionary re-
gime was dominated by the notion of a noncapitalist path or socialist orienta-
tion. This anchored the new state’s development to the false premise that the 
Soviet Union was willing to and capable of providing military and economic 
largesse to any successful, Third World, revolutionary government.
The third subthesis captured the ideology of the movement. Here the pri-
mary revolutionary literature consisted of the writings not just of Marx but also 
of Lenin and, occasionally, even Stalin. The works of these writers were easily 
available from the Soviet publishing house, Progress Publishers; by contrast, 
literature from other sources was much more difficult to obtain. Up to the 
early 1970s, the writings of those with the greatest influence on Caribbean 
Black Power/uRELfk.dC. L. R. James, Walter Rodney, Frantz Fanon, Eldridge Cleaver, 
Malcolm X, and Amilcar Cabral/uRELfk.dhad been in limited circulation. After 1975, 
such works became even scarcer, replaced by the Marxist classics and Soviet 
writers like Karen N. Brutents and Rostislav Ulyanovsky.21 The rich debates 
in British Marxism, Antonio Gramsci’s powerful work on hegemony, and the 
published debates surrounding prominent communist George Padmore’s and 
literary star Richard Wright’s prior ruptures with international communism 
were thus largely unknown to the radical movement that emerged after the 
collapse of Black Power.22
The outcome of this Marxist-Leninist turn in the Caribbean radical move-
ment is well known. In Grenada, the decision to adopt Leninist tactics pro-
vided the NJM with a tactical flexibility more in tune with the period of “calm” 
that followed the failed general strike. This approach facilitated the participa-
brian meeks
204


--- PAGE 224 ---
tion of the NJM in the People’s Alliance popular front against Gairy in the 1976 
elections. In what was generally considered a corrupt exercise, Gairy narrowly 
won. The NJM became a part of the parliamentary opposition, and as head of 
the party with the most seats in the alliance, the NJM’s Maurice Bishop be-
came Leader of the Opposition. This constitutional position served the party 
well. Unlike the earlier period when the NJM had no legitimate voice outside 
Grenada, Bishop now spoke in regional forums as the leader of Grenada’s 
“loyal opposition. ” Thus when the NJM overthrew the Gairy regime and seized 
power on March 13, 1979,23 it was not the work of unknown coup plotters but 
the action of the very familiar Bishop-led opposition that had been campaign-
ing against Gairy’s arbitrary actions for three years. The other critical dimen-
sion, of course, was the actual taking of power, which required many years of 
preparation. In any situation where secrecy is necessarily at a premium/uRELfk.dand 
this was especially the case in tiny Grenada/uRELfk.da clandestine army could only 
be organized and trained in the context of a political organization with a quasi-
military structure, strict compartmentalization, and top-down hierarchy. This 
was precisely what the vanguard party paradigm provided.
While the vanguard approach made the seizure of power possible, it 
also became a millstone around the NJM’s neck in its four and a half years in 
power.24 The party’s highly selective criteria for membership severely con-
stricted the number of people who could join it, especially at a moment when 
it was relatively popular and needed as many members as possible to run the 
state apparatus. The result was inordinate physical pressure on the few actual 
party members, which contributed immeasurably to a breakdown of the party 
in 1983. At the same time, the principle of selectivity served to alienate the NJM
from the people. When, for instance, party comrades in September 1983 tried to 
defend the Central Committee’s decision to detain Maurice Bishop, they were 
often met with the incredulous response, “What is the Central Committee?”
Most analysts argue that the 1983 crisis in the NJM, w hich led to the death 
of Bishop and a number of his closest associates, was the result of an ultraleft  
conspiracy led by Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard.25 My position has 
been that there is little evidence and even less motive for such a long-standing 
conspiracy. A more convincing explanation may be found in the vanguardist 
structures of the party, which led to its alienation from its popular base. As 
external pressure from the U.S. regime of Ronald Reagan intensified in early 
1983 amidst growing economic difficulties, support for the NJM began to ebb 
even further. The NJM, used to ope rating in a clandestine, hierarchical fash-
ion, sought in the middle of 1983 to deal with these tests not by bringing the 
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
205


--- PAGE 225 ---
people into the revolution in an unprecedented way but, rather, by juggling 
with the notion of leadership, as it had done in the past. A top-down solution 
was sought to a problem that required a massive popular intervention and 
the democratic reorganization of politics. The subsequent attempt to establish 
a joint leadership between Bishop and Coard was disastrous, leading to the 
detention of Bishop after he initially agreed to the measure and then reneged 
on his agreement. The flawed decision to solve the revolution’s political prob-
lems from the top was demonstrated in the sequence of events that followed: 
a popular and successful attempt to release Bishop, the takeover of the fort by 
Bishop’s forces, and then the murder of Bishop and the army’s retaking of the 
captured fort.
The unraveling of the Left in Jamaica followed a different course. After 
being officially launched as a communist party in 1978, the WPJ grew in a lim-
ited but steady fashion over the following two years. In a period when the 
PNP and its more leftist Y outh Organization dominated the anti-imperialist 
platform, there were clear strictures on the possibility of the growth of the 
WPJ, imposed first by the fact that in many respects the two parties were say-
ing similar things. There was also the overwhelming popularity of Michael 
Manley, whose early social programs and “democratic socialist” rhetoric had 
inspired the poor. Nonetheless, the WPJ was able to establish strongholds in a 
few areas in Kingston, where its cadres had helped to defend the community 
against invading gunmen and provided invaluable legal and medical services. 
The WPJ also had some strength in a number of rural areas where the agricul-
tural working class had long traditions of trade union struggle.26
Several events combined to undermine the WPJ. After the electoral defeat 
of the Manley government in the bloody 1980 elections,27 it became apparent 
how much the entire Left had depended on the relatively moderate, “demo-
cratic socialist” PNP for its survival. Whereas the PNP c ould, albeit with sig-
nificant difficulty, resume its role as a traditional electoral opposition party, the 
communist WPJ remained in a no-man’s-land, caught between a clandestine 
preparation for imminent insurrection and its attempt to establish itself as a 
“legitimate” opposition party.28 This latter objective was fatally undermined 
after the Grenada events of October 1983. The party, aided by statements from 
its leaders, was branded in the Jamaican and Caribbean press as part of the 
regional ultraleft conspiracy against Bishop. Indeed, in the wake of the PNP’s 
defeat, when anticommunist sympathies became widespread in Jamaica, the 
WPJ was portrayed as the very source of the anti-Bishop conspiracy.
The WPJ was certainly the party with the closest links to the Grenadian 
brian meeks
206


--- PAGE 226 ---
leadership. A number of WPJ cadres worked in various capacities in Grenada, 
and WPJ leader T revor Munroe consulted regularly with the NJM. It is hi ghly 
unlikely that the WPJ could have “instructed” the proud NJM leader ship to 
detain Maurice Bishop, but a concurrence with the decision would have 
been an important ideological green light. Whether this did occur is yet to be 
proven, but Munroe did not immediately condemn Bishop’s murder, leaving 
a strong impression that the WPJ was implicated in the decision to detain and 
execute the Grenadian leader. Whatever popularity the WPJ had gained up 
to this point29 was lost, never to be regained. The party’s failure to win even 
a single seat in the 1986 local government elections signaled its death knell. 
By the turn of the decade, the WPJ had dissolved itself, and a phase in radical 
Jamaican politics had come to an end. Michael Manley was reelected by a 
landslide in 1989, but with a policy that eschewed the radical nationalism of his 
earlier regime and accepted the basic tenets of the brave new neoliberal world. 
The PNP’s ability to accomplish this volte-face was no doubt facilitated by the 
self-dissolution of the WPJ, and thus the absence of a strong popular force 
demanding more consistent resistance to U.S. and International Monetary 
Fund demands for a retreat from radicalism. In sum, the program of vanguard 
elitism weakened, undermined, and in the case of Grenada, the only instance 
in which an unambiguously leftist movement came to power, destroyed the 
Caribbean radical movement of the 1970s.
The Matter of Ideology
The failure of elite vanguardism leaves open the question of ideology. Was 
the adoption of Marxism by Caribbean radical movements a historical error? 
Or was the error not so much Marxism as an ideology as Leninism, that is, 
vanguardism, as political tactics?
T o attempt to address these questions, I engage with an important inter-
vention by Alex Dupuy, who some years ago wrote an article titled “Race and 
Class in the Postcolonial Caribbean: The Views of Walter Rodney. ”30 Dupuy 
argues that Rodney went through a transition. In his early work, as captured 
in The Groundings with My Brothers, Rodney is a Black Power advocate. He 
later travels to Africa, where he writes his classic How Europe Underdeveloped 
Africa,31 and then returns to Guyana, where he engages in political activity and 
writes his posthumously published History of the Guyanese Working People.32
These two periods, Dupuy argues, represented an ideological movement, 
as Rodney makes the transition to a Marxian mode of analysis. Rodney’s Black 
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
207


--- PAGE 227 ---
Power, Dupuy asserts, is an essentialist discourse, a false consciousness that 
is exclusivist and therefore fundamentally antidemocratic: “(Groundings) . . . 
remained trapped in the essentialist and racialist categories and language cre-
ated by . . . imperialism. The ultimate consequence of this racialist discourse 
is that despite Rodney’s claim that the Black Power movement did not aim 
to create a racially intolerant society, it could not but recreate exclusivist and 
hence fundamentally antidemocratic practices. ”33
Dupuy develops his reasoning as follows: Rodney recognizes that in the 
Caribbean there are different racial groups, yet he reduces them to black and 
white. Such an approach, Dupuy argues, robs distinctive ethnic groups of their 
cultural and class differences. This ap plies to both the “black” and “white” 
groups. For Rodney, Dupuy asserts, class differences among black people are 
seen not as fundamental social attributes but as aberrant behavior, a distortion 
of the love that should exist among “black brothers. ” Black Power, Dupuy fur-
ther maintains, simultaneously deprives white persons of their social distinc-
tiveness and right to political choice. By fetishizing color, Dupuy argues, Black 
Power, as proposed by the early Rodney, made all whites exploiters of blacks 
and made all black exploiters dupes or traitors. Black Power further excluded 
revolutionary whites from participating in the struggle to overthrow capital.
Dupuy, however, misreads Rodney. While it is possible to find interpre-
tations of Black Power that are indeed racially exclusive and deny the pos-
sibility of persons defined as white playing a role in “liberation,” this is not 
Rodney’s approach in Groundings. In this text Rodney explains at length that 
Black Power is not concerned with an exclusivist or narrowly racialist agenda. 
Here he uses an example from the famous Black Panther Party leader and later 
pan-Africanist Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture):
Cuba is the only country in the West Indies and in this hemisphere 
that has broken with white power. That is why Stokely Carmichael can 
visit Cuba but he can’t visit T rinidad or Jamaica. That is why Stokely 
can call Fidel “one of the blackest men in the Americas” and that is 
why our leaders in contrast qualify as “white. ” . . . Here I’m not just 
playing with words/uRELfk.dI’m extending the definition of black power by 
indicating the nature of its opposite/uRELfk.dwhite power/uRELfk.dand I’m pro-
viding a practical illustration of what black power means in one par-
ticular West Indian community where it has already occurred. White 
power is the power of whites over blacks without any participation of 
the blacks. White power rules the imperialist world as a whole.34
brian meeks
208


--- PAGE 228 ---
Not only does Dupuy skew his presentation to miss this important emphasis, 
but he also misses the thrust of Rodney’s argument. Rodney is not substitut-
ing a racial construction of society as false consciousness in place of a true 
capitalist construction (requiring a true class consciousness to understand and 
overcome it); rather, he is arguing that capitalism is inevitably linked to racism. 
Thus understanding the nature of imperialism as white is not a distraction, 
but getting to the heart of imperialism and class domination. This is evident 
in Rodney’s definition, cited above, of the program of Black Power in the West 
Indies: imperialism is the main system of exploitation to be overcome, but in 
order to do so, it must be combated on the terms of its rule, which is through 
a racial and cultural system designed to keep black peoples in their place.
One cannot deny Dupuy’s assertion that Rodney developed his outlook 
throughout his long period of travel; it would be hard to imagine that he re-
mained static for a decade. Nor do I wish to suggest that there are not real theo-
retical problems with a perspective that conflates race as the sole determinant 
of social and political behavior. Y et Dupuy remains mistaken on the perception 
of a qualitative transformation in Rodney’s outlook. He misses the obvious 
point that Groundings is written in Jamaica with a population overwhelmingly 
of African decent, a context in which a call to reconstruct the society in the 
image of black people not only is democratic but also addresses the history of 
covert denial of an African heritage. A History of the Guyanese Working People,
by contrast, is written in Guyana, where two racial groups had been in sharp 
competition for social space and political power. In this context different tac-
tics are required to combat “historically white” imperialism. Rather than a 
sharp dichotomy between the (flawed) Black Power Rodney and the (cor-
rect) Marxist Rodney, what we have instead is a continuum, starting from 
an approach that is seeking, under quite distinct conditions, to place Marx’s 
insights into capitalist political economy at the service of oppressed Africans 
and Indians at home and abroad.
If Rodney is not perceived as moving from light to darkness, then perhaps 
we can see his analyses in Groundings and in History as part of a single project 
to grapple with a system of oppression that comes with a racial stamp deeply 
embedded within it, operating, as it were, as a central feature of its genetic 
code. Rodney seeks to apply this general insight with different approaches for 
the specific conditions of Jamaica and Guyana. The outlines of his approach 
are eloquently expressed in another document lost to the generation of the 
1970s: the celebrated poet and playwright Aimé Césaire’s famous resignation 
letter to the French Communist Party. As Césaire declared,
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
209


--- PAGE 229 ---
What I demand of Marxism and Communism is that they serve the 
black peoples, not that the black peoples serve Marxism and Com-
munism. Philosophies and movements must serve the people, not 
the people the doctrine and the movement. . . . A doctrine is of value 
only if it is conceived by us and for us, and revised through us. . . .
We consider it our duty to make common cause with all who cher-
ish truth and justice, in order to form organizations able to sup-
port effectively the black peoples in their present and future strug-
gle/uRELfk.dtheir struggle for justice, for culture, for dignity, for liberty. . . .
Because of this, please accept my resignation from the Party.35
Conclusions
The points arising from Dupuy’s article are critical for understanding the fate of 
the 1970s movements, when the adoption of Leninist tactics also brought with 
it the wholesale adoption of a certain approach to Marxism. This approach 
brought with it a “clear” class perspective, excluding a popular explanation of 
oppression as an interweaving of race and class. It certainly avoided grappling 
with Rodney’s exploration of the “cultural” dimension of exploitation that 
denigrated anything out of Africa. Caribbean Leninism in the 1970s suffered, 
therefore, from its inability to constr uct a “counter-symbolic order”36 that 
could address not only the reality of economic exploitation but also the more 
insidious reality of deeply embedded cultural and racial marginalization.
These considerations point to a further, perhaps overdrawn, conclusion, 
namely that a movement fully conscious of the political economy of imperi-
alism, but grasping its racialist nature, may have had, in the specific circum-
stances of this era, a greater potential for mobilizing the population and mov-
ing beyond the narrow confines of a partial class theory. This does not deny 
that Black Power was always flawed, both organizationally and theoretically. 
Indeed, there are very substantial reasons why the Black Power movement 
was so rapidly superseded by Marxism-Leninism in the fluid political condi-
tions of the mid-1970s. And yet, Black Power brought with it an openness and 
diversity of political forms and politics and, critically, an appreciation of the 
importance of countersymbolic and counterhegemonic popular forms. These 
features were lost in the transition to Marxism-Leninism. Popular movements 
of the future may wish to heed these lessons as they consider the construction 
of new organizational and theoretical approaches to resistance.
Assumptions by Caribbean radicals during the 1970s over the nature of 
brian meeks
210


--- PAGE 230 ---
state power and its acquisition have a further, final lesson. In this area both 
Black Power and Marxist movements called for mass uprisings to seize power 
from corrupt or compromised regimes. The inevitable conclusion was that 
the Caribbean could eventually be full of little Cubas, each proceeding, with 
cooperation, on its own path of development. This, as has been suggested, 
was predicated/uRELfk.dat least in its Marxist-Leninist form/uRELfk.don the false assump-
tion that the Soviet Union would provide such regimes with the economic 
and military aid necessary for surviving and developing on a “path of socialist 
orientation. ”
It is worthwhile, admittedly with the corrective lens of hindsight, to con-
sider whether there were alternative strategies. The taking of power meant 
immediate opposition from imperialism with all the well-known tactics of de-
stabilization, both overt and covert. The example of Nicaragua is only the most 
egregious illustration. There, the movement, despite adopting commendable 
democratic forms, including a popularly di scussed and ratified constitution, 
was violently undermined by the Contra war until, physically exhausted and 
economically prostrate, it was defeated in “free and fair” elections.37
Against these outcomes we might well ask, What if movements did not aim, 
in the short run, at taking power, but sought instead to build up effective com-
munities of resistance, based on self-help, regional and international networks 
of solidarity, internally generated educational programs, and the like? What 
would have been the outcome, in other words, if an encircling, counterhege-
monic, Gramscian strategy was adopted, as opposed to the tempting shortcut 
of overthrowing the state? T o be sure, this may be entirely wishful thinking. On 
the night of March 12, when the NJM leader ship got wind of Gairy’s plans to 
massacre them, perhaps there was no alternative but, as an act of self-defense, 
to take power. And state power, of course, may provide the best bulkhead of 
resources, protection, and legitimacy to enact a counterhegemonic strategy.
But consider for a moment the Rastafarian movement. In 1961 Ronald 
Henry, under the banner of Rastafari, sought to seize power in Jamaica and 
failed ignominiously.38 The Rastafarian movement, complex and quarrelsome 
in its diversity, nonetheless heeded the failure of this tactic and proceeded on 
a cultural, multicentered, community-based path. By the late 1970s, the entire 
Jamaican reggae industry was dominated by Rasta philosophy, and singers 
were singing, “Everyone join Rasta bandwagon. ” Then Bob Marley,39 Peter 
T osh, Dennis Brown, and a host of others brought Rastafarian philosophy with 
tremendous effect to a worldwide audience. And in the twenty-first century, 
under the banner of Bobo Shanti and other houses, Rastafari and its new chant-
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
211


--- PAGE 231 ---
ers like Sizzla, Anthony B, and Buju Banton are enjoying a qualitative revival. 
Meanwhile the once vibrant radical Left lies dormant, if not extinct. Perhaps 
there is, after all, virtue in a strategy of encirclement.
notes
1. For an assessment of the influence of Black Power on young people in Jamaica in 
the 1960s, see Lewis, Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political Thought, esp. 85–123.
2. Ryan and Stewart, Black Power Revolution; Meeks, “Development. ”
3. Lewis, “Learning to Blow”; Meeks, Radical Caribbean; Mars, Ideology and Change.
4. Lewis, Marcus Garvey and “Garvey’s Perspective. ”
5. See Campbell, Rasta and Resistance.
6. The radical Jamaican newspaper Abeng was one of the immediate by-products of 
the Rodney riots. It was published only from January to October 1969 but served a larger 
role, in that it brought together key individuals who would play a significant role in the 
politics of the 1970s. See Lewis, Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political Thought, 121 n. 
32.
7. The New World Quarterly was a journal published in the 1960s at the University 
of the West Indies, Mona, and also from Georgetown, Guyana. It was the organ of the 
New World movement, a group composed primarily of university-based intellectuals 
that elaborated an extensive Caribbean “dependentista” approach to development.
8. White, “New World,” 57, 60.
9. See Meeks, “Lloyd Best. ”
10. Geddes Granger (who later changed his name to Makandal Daaga), the charis-
matic leader of NJAC, had been a past president of the Guild of Undergraduates at the 
St. Augustine campus of the University of the West Indies.
11. National Joint Action Committee, Conventional Politics, 1.
12. Rodney, Groundings, 28.
13. Suite, “ Arrogance. ”
14. See Henry, “CLR James. ”
15. The New World movement never elaborated a single program, but there was a 
dominant approach that stressed the severing of exploitative metropolitan linkages and 
the fostering of a regional, “bottom-up” economy. For an interesting retrospective and 
critique, see Green, “Caribbean Dependency Theory. ”
16. For the early history of the NJM, see Jacobs and Jacobs, Grenada, and Meeks, 
“Social Formation. ”
17. Not surprisingly, the community-based appeal of Black Power was often seen by 
aspiring Leninists as an inferior approach to political organization. This view is captured 
in Rupert Lewis’s diary entry of January 24, 1971. Lewis, then an emerging Marxist-
Leninist, had just returned from the December meeting of radical Caribbean activists on 
Rat Island in St. Lucia and noted, in reference to the groups from the eastern Caribbean, 
“Hardly any of the groups showed any inclination for Leninist theory. . . . None had a 
clear stand on the working class but all showed a concern for community type groups. ” 
See Scott, “Dialectic,” 126 fn. 55.
brian meeks
212


--- PAGE 232 ---
18. Meeks, Narratives, esp. 48–74.
19. Munroe, Workers Party, 8. It is interesting to note that in Guyana the pattern was 
somewhat different. The radical trend that consolidated in the 1970s was Marxist, but not 
Leninist. There, President Forbes Burnham and his People’s National Congress (PNC) 
already occupied, though with a large measure of corruption and authoritarianism, the 
radical nationalist black platform. Cheddi Jagan’s People’s Progressive Party (PPP), with 
its long history of conventional political engagement, occupied the Marxist space. This 
forced the young, radical opposition in a novel direction, away from PNC’s black nation-
alism and PPP’s Marxism-Leninism. It is only here in Guyana, with the Working People’s 
Alliance (WPA) (and debatably, the ACLM in Antigua), that we see the possibility of 
an organization learning from both the positive and negative experiences of the Black 
Power movement. But its leader, Walter Rodney, was cut down before the WPA was able 
to sink deeper political roots. See Lewis, Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political Thought,
esp. 202–53, and Mars, Ideology and Change, esp. 105–28.
20. This often led to an ironic approach to mass work, with cadres standing, for in-
stance, outside the Kingston industrial estate, waiting for the few workers to emerge from 
the factories, while thousands of people in nearby communities were often ignored.
21. See, for instance, Brutents, National Liberation, and Ulyanovsky, Socialism.
22. Padmore, head of the Negro Bureau of the Communist T rade Union International, 
left the communist party in 1933 in opposition to its colonial policies; see his celebrated 
book Pan-Africanism or Communism? Richard Wright broke with the communist party 
in 1944 and published “I T ried to Be a Communist,” which was shortly and more widely 
distributed in Crossman, God That Failed.
23. Bishop and other leaders argued in the hours and days following the overthrow 
that Gairy had initiated a plan to arrest and even eliminate the NJM leadership. There 
was no alternative, they asserted, but to seize power.
24. Meeks, Caribbean Revolutions and Revolutionary Theory.
25. See, for instance, Lewis, Grenada.
26. A more fulsome history of the WPJ is yet to be written. For an early critique, see 
Campbell, “Progressive Politics. ” This reading is appropriately critical of its middle-class 
leadership but does not sufficiently capture the WPJ’s mass work and the basis for its 
undoubted rootedness in a number of urban and rural communities.
27. The generally used, though largely mythical, figure for the number of people killed 
in the months before the 1980 election is 800. No serious empirical work has been done 
to confirm it, though my suspicion is that when it is done, the figure will be significantly 
greater.
28. Lewis elaborates on this point effectively in Scott’s interview, “Dialectic,” 159.
29. At perhaps the peak of its popular support, in July 1981, when the PNP had yet 
to revive from the electoral debacle of 1980, the WPJ could only obtain 3.1 percent sup-
port in a national poll of “citizens with a clear party preference. ” See Stone, Political 
Opinions,1 4 .
30. Dupuy, “Race and Class. ”
31. Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.
32. Rodney, History.
33. Dupuy, “Race and Class,” 114.
The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power
213


--- PAGE 233 ---
34. Rodney, Groundings, 31.
35. Aimé Césaire, quoted in Robinson, Black Marxism, 260.
36. The term is taken from Sylvia Wynter. See “Politics of Black Culture,” in which she 
makes the case for the importance in Jamaica of the construction of a counter-symbolic 
order through Rastafari and other popular for ms as an alternative to a middle-class, 
bureaucratically led movement.
37. For an analysis of the overt and covert attempts to destabilize and overthrow the 
Sandinista state in Nicaragua, see Sklar, Washing ton’s War.
38. Meeks, “Obscure Revolt. ”
39. See, for example, Bogues, Black Heretics, esp. 187–205.
brian meeks
214


--- PAGE 234 ---
Merely One Link in the Worldwide Revolution
Internationalism, State Repression, and the Black Panther Party, 
1966–1972
robyn spencer
Recent scholarship has combined analytical frameworks from diplomatic and 
social history to explore the complex relationship between the black freedom 
struggle in the United States and such events as the Bandung Conference, Afri-
can decolonization, resurgent pan-Africanism, and guerrilla movements in the 
Third World.1 Most importantly, this new literature has revealed the impact on 
radical black protest of the Cold War, “one of the ‘hottest’ moments in world 
history,” in the words of Robin D. G. Kelley.2 On the eve of the Cold War, Af-
rican Americans all across the political spectrum looked abroad for ideological 
inspiration, cultural affirmation, and political allies.3 As the Cold War became 
ever hotter, the U.S. government also became alive to the international impli-
cations of the emerging civil rights movement. The U.S. Justice Department, 
in its supporting brief to the Supreme Court for the pivotal Brown v. Board of 
Education decision of 1954, declared that the “problem of racial discrimina-
tion” had to be viewed “in the context of the present world struggle between 
freedom and tyranny,” noting further that “racial discrimination furnishes grist 
for the Communist propaganda mills, and it raises doubt even among friendly 
nations as to the intensity of our devotion to the democratic faith. ”4
As it became more conscious of its image overseas, the U.S. government 
moved against citizens who raised doubts about its “devotion to the demo-
cratic faith,” especially if those doubts were shared with international audi-
ences. In this regard, no issue was pricklier than that of racial injustice. As part 
of its response to the Red threat, the U.S. government sought to rupture the 
internationalist thrust that had been forged by the black freedom struggle in 
the decades leading up to the Cold War, persecuting key African American


--- PAGE 235 ---
intellectuals and political leaders like  W. E. B. Du Bois and Paul Robeson. 
Flouting the official Cold War line, both Du Bois and Robeson, along with a 
number of other activists and organizations, continued to link the movement 
for racial justice in the United States with the worldwide struggle against co-
lonialism and oppression.5
The sidelining of Du Bois, Robeson, and others of their ilk did not, to be 
sure, completely smash the tradition of black internationalism in the United 
States. Others soon stepped into the gap. Even in the heyday of the Cold War, 
African American leaders like Robert Williams and Malcolm X and organiza-
tions like the Revolutionary Action Movement remained committed to global 
solidarity among oppressed peoples, and they “flatly rejected unconditional 
racial unity and developed a nationalism built on a broader concept of revolu-
tionary Third World solidarity. ”6 As the civil rights movement developed, even 
some of the mainstream black leaders who previously had tended to steer clear 
of internationalist entanglements, in accordance with the wishes of the U.S. 
government, began to change their tune. Thus in 1960 Fellowship of Recon-
ciliation activist James Lawson expressed the view that “all Africa will be free 
before the American Negro attains first class citizenship. ”7 Similarly Martin Lu-
ther King Jr., in his 1963 testament “Letter from a Birmingham Jail,” contrasted 
black Americans, who “creep at horse-and-buggy pace toward gaining a cup 
of coffee at a lunch counter,” with African and Asian nations, who move “with 
jetlike speed towards gaining political independence. ”8 At the 1963 March on 
Washington, perhaps the iconic event of the civil rights movement, Student 
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee leader John Lewis proclaimed, “‘One 
man, one vote’ is the African cry, it is ours too. ”9
Y et, although not totally obliterated, black internationalism in the United 
States suffered serious reversals during the heyday of the Cold War, in the 1950s 
and early 1960s. As a result, an “ant i-imperialist and anticapitalist critique of 
the global political economy” only returned to a central programmatic position 
in the African American struggle in the mid-1960s, when once again, activists 
began to conceptualize the black liberation movement in the United States 
as part of a worldwide struggle for human rights.10 A number of movements 
and individuals, including some of those mentioned above, contributed to 
this ideological renewal. More than any other group, however, it was the Black 
Panther Party that led the way back to internationalism as a sustained program-
matic expression of the black liberation struggle in the United States.11
The Black Panther Party, this essay argues, offers provocative new ways to 
conceptualize the relationships between social movements, international poli-
robyn spencer
216


--- PAGE 236 ---
tics, and state repression. The historiography of black internationalism during 
the Cold War centers largely on presidential politics, State Department poli-
cies, international diplomacy, and the activities of leading black intellectuals 
and middle-class civil rights organizations.  Few scholars have taken to heart 
Mary Dudziak’s observation that “an international frame need not eclipse a 
focus on the grassroots. ”12 Much of the existing literature, consequently, takes 
a top-down approach/uRELfk.drelegating to a postscript the Black Power movement’s 
vibrant engagement with international politics. In the latter connection, the 
Black Panther Party is central. The Panthers fused a radical internationalist 
posture/uRELfk.danticolonialism, Third World solidarity, and opposition to U.S. im-
perialism/uRELfk.dwith an equally radical critique of U.S. society, exposing urban 
poverty, housing shortages, unequal education, and police brutality.13
With more than 5,000 members at its height and one of the country’s most 
popular alternative newspapers, The Black Panther, the Panthers combined 
a mass base with a critique of U.S. foreign policy and a concomitant call for 
global justice. They argued that at a time when “the people of the world are 
making their final bid for full and complete freedom,” the “ American racial 
problem can no longer be spoken of or solved in isolation. ”14 The Panthers’ 
prominence in the effort to heal the breach created by the Cold War in Afri-
can American political culture was a central factor in the unprecedented state 
repression that would be unleashed on the m. Indeed, the campaign against 
the Panthers aptly bears out Penny Von Eschen’s assertion that “organized 
state repression” highlighted the enormous stakes involved in the struggle for 
a “global understanding of economic exploitation and the fight for human 
rights. ”15 At tremendous costs, collective and personal, the Panthers made 
significant contributions to the practice and theory of internationalizing the 
black freedom struggle in the United States.
Critiquing Uncle Sam
On a spring evening in 1966, Bobby Seale, who only months later would be-
come one of two cofounders of the Black Panther Party, held forth on a street 
corner in Berkeley, California. Seale, a resident of the nearby black commu-
nity of Oakland, was engaged in political theater. He recited a poem titled 
“Uncle Sammy Called Me Fulla Lucifer,”16 a witty, irreverent, profanity-laden 
dialogue between conscript Fearless Fosdick, a newspaper cartoon character, 
and Uncle Sam, the symbol of U.S. pride and military recruitment. The sheer 
spectacle of Seale’s impromptu performance, coupled with the poem’s echo 
The Black Panther Party
217


--- PAGE 237 ---
of growing anti–Vietnam War sentiment, attracted a crowd of young people, 
mostly students from the University of Ca lifornia at Berkeley. The poem re-
counted a political odyssey in which a naive Fosdick, “schooled . . . to sing red, 
white, and blue stars and stripes songs,” eventually rejected the racialized icon-
ography of the U.S. nation-state, embodied by the pale-skinned, white-haired, 
star-spangled Uncle Sam. By the end of the poem, Fosdick, having undergone 
an epiphany, refused “to pledge eternal allegiance to all things blue-true, blue-
eyes, blond-blond-haired, white-chalk, white skinned with USA tattooed all 
over. ” Newly liberated, Fosdick defiantly declared, “I will not serve!” The crowd 
roared. The police, however, were less amused. After a brief scuffle, Seale and 
his companion, Huey Newton, soon to become cofounder of the Black Panther 
Party, were arrested for blocking the sidewalk.17
This incident is emblematic of the sequence of events that led to the forma-
tion, in October 1966, of the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense. Seale, in his 
autobiography, framed the incident as evidence of early encounters with police 
authority and as confirmation that Berkeley, one of the epicenters of white 
student activism, was an important po litical crossroads for Oakland’s grass-
roots activists.18 Seale may have added that the poem’s satiric disavowal of 
blind patriotism and military service suggests that the Berkeley incident can 
also be read as an embryonic articulation of the future Panther policy of not just 
critiquing U.S. policies, foreign and domestic, but also directly linking them.
Even before founding the Black Panther Party, Newton and Seale had 
turned to Marxist theoreticians at home and abroad for an explanation of the 
socioeconomic contradictions they saw around them. In time, the pair made 
two key conclusions: that capitalism was the root cause of oppression world-
wide, and that the African American struggle was inextricably linked with the 
struggle for Third World liberation. In their studies, Newton and Seale were es-
pecially influenced by the ideas of guerrilla warfare and revolutionary violence 
found in the works of Mao Zedong, Fidel Castro, Frantz Fanon, Malcolm X, 
and Robert Williams. And although initially founded on a program of combat-
ing police brutality, racism, and economic inequality, the Black Panther Party 
soon evolved into an organizational vehicle for highlighting and critiquing the 
linkages between U.S. domestic and foreign policies.
The Panthers’ ten-point program, their statement of goals and principles, 
made a direct connection between police brutality in black and Chicano com-
munities, on one hand, and the misdeeds of U.S. troops in Vietnam, on the 
other.19 Accordingly, the sixth point demanded that black men be exempt from 
military service, so they “will not fight and kill other people of color in the 
robyn spencer
218


--- PAGE 238 ---
world who, like black people, are being victimized by the white racist govern-
ment of America. ”20 Such an analysis resonated in poor communities like Oak-
land, where African Americans organized more than twenty demonstrations 
against police violence in 1965 and 1966. The following year, 1967, almost 10,000 
antidraft activists protested and engaged in civil disobedience at the U.S. Army 
induction center in Oakland, as part of a weeklong, nationwide protest called 
Stop the Draft week.21 In these circumstances, the Panthers’ strong antiwar 
stance electrified many young people, individuals like Sherwin Forte. An early 
recruit, Forte mentioned the “riotous atmosphere, the killings, the National 
Guard, the helicopters, the protest in Berkeley, [and] the anti-draft movement” 
as events that led him to join the Black Panther Party. “The Vietnam war was 
happening,” he continued, “and I had a choice whether I would go and fight 
the country’s battles in Vietnam or whether I wanted to take my life and use 
it to redress some wrongs in this country. I didn’t see the Vietnamese as the 
enemy. I saw the enemy as racist America. ”22
The Panther critique, although far more ra dical than most, emerged at a 
time when antiwar sentiment was beginning to gain traction nationally. In early 
1966, even before the Panthers appeared, the Student Nonviolent Coordinat-
ing Committee had come out against the war. When the Johnson administra-
tion abolished automatic student deferments for the draft in 1966, thousands 
flooded into Students for a Democratic Society and other predominantly 
white, antiwar organizations. Cultural icon Muhammad Ali publicly refused 
the draft, while antiwar rallies in major cities began to attract thousands. The 
Fulbright hearings/uRELfk.dfive televised hearings in 1966 by the Senate Foreign Rela-
tions Committee, under its chairman, Senator J. William Fulbright/uRELfk.dsignaled 
the mainstreaming of dissent. Then, in ea rly 1967, after a massive buildup of 
U.S. forces in Vietnam, Martin Luther King condemned the war, a move that 
garnered international publicity. King did not act solely on moral grounds. The 
adventure in Vietnam, he objected, was “some demonic destructive suction 
tube,” leading the United States to abandon antipoverty efforts at home, even 
as the war took a disproportionate toll on the poor, many of whom were being 
asked to fight for freedom they did not enjoy.23 The TET offensive of January 
1968, complete with graphic news footage and a high casualty rate, increased 
antiwar sentiment across the land.
The Panthers, however, distinguished themselves from the mainstream 
antiwar movement. Whereas the latter restricted its demand to “peace” and a 
withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, the Panthers went further, calling for 
solidarity with the Vietnamese resistance and for the defeat of U.S. imperial-
The Black Panther Party
219


--- PAGE 239 ---
ism. In 1968, deepening their internationalist orientation, the Panthers created 
the position of international coordinator and appointed Connie Matthews to 
fill it. Matthews skillfully mobilized a far-flung network of international alli-
ances to provide support for incarcerated Panthers. She promoted the party in 
Europe, speaking at public events and rallies and making linkages with leftist 
organizations.24
In an interview with Angela Davi s, Matthews outlined the Panther inter-
nationalist agenda. The party, she declared, sought to educate black people 
“to the importance of internationalism. T o get them to understand that we 
are in the belly of the whale here and that imperialism, manifested in the U.S., 
is a monster with tentacles and the other oppressed peoples of the world are 
trying to cut off the tentacles but that we here have to get the monster from 
inside. ”25 In tandem with Matthews’s work, the Panthers reached out to U.S.-
based representatives of various liberation movements and sent a delegation 
to the United Nations to meet with emissaries of “revolutionary countries. ” 
The Panthers subsequently issued a press release warning of a civil war in the 
United States if Huey Newton, who had been jailed for allegedly killing a police 
officer, was not released. The press release called on “oppressed and colonized” 
people to demonstrate in front of U.S. embassies worldwide, demanding fur-
ther that the United Nations station “Observer T eams throughout the cities 
of America wherein black people are cooped up and concentrated in wretched 
ghettos. ”26
Solidifying an International Base
In 1968 Eldridge Cleaver, a top Panther leader facing an assault conviction, 
fled the United States. After some months in Cuba, he moved on to Algeria, 
which, like Cuba, had no diplomatic ties with the United States. Cleaver’s flight 
opened a new phase in the Panthers’ internationalism: he oversaw the creation 
of the international section of the Black Panther Party, based in Algeria.27 On 
a personal level, Cleaver also benefit ed from the Panthers’ global solidarity 
networks: after he went into exile, activists in four U.S. cities, joined by others 
in Paris, Rome, London, and Amsterdam, launched the International Commit-
tee to Defend Eldridge Cleaver.28 Shortly after Cleaver relocated to Algiers, a 
Panther delegation joined representatives from twenty-four countries and six 
liberation movements there, for the Pan African Cultural Festival. The Pan-
ther delegates to the festival included David Hilliard, chief of staff; Raymond 
“Masai” Hewitt, minister of information; and Emory Douglas, minister of cul-
robyn spencer
220


--- PAGE 240 ---
ture. Douglas’s bold political drawings had previously received much acclaim 
internationally, and the Panthers mounted an exhibit of his works at the festi-
val.29 In Algiers, the Panther leaders discussed areas of potential cooperation 
with revolutionaries from Angola, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, and Haiti, many 
of whom considered the Panthers the vanguard of the liberation movement in 
the United States.30 Chief of Staff Hilliard recalled that his group’s interlocutors 
in Algiers “were all aware of our problems before we got there. They knew that 
U.S. imperialism was their problem and that fascism was what Black people in 
America are faced with. ”31
The Algiers meetings produced a noted expression of moral support for 
the Panthers. After the festival, representatives of a number of liberation move-
ments sent a strongly worded message to the United Nations. The message 
read, in part,
African political organizations are shocked and saddened to learn of the 
arrests and repressive fascist type crimes perpetrated against the leaders 
and members of the Black Panther Party on their return to the United 
States from the First Pan African Cultural Festival by U.S. authorities in 
flagrant violation of the Universal Human Rights Declaration enshrined 
in the charter of the United Nations. . . . United Nations would be 
ignoring its duties should it stand by unconcerned while the principles 
inshrined [sic] in its Charter are being trampled on at its very doorstep.32
The Panthers also received some state support, including from Cuba and Al-
geria. Cleaver also established a close relationship with the North Korean em-
bassy in Algiers. In 1969 he traveled to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, 
to attend the International Conference on T asks of Journalists of the Whole 
World in their Fight Against U.S. Imperialist Aggression. In his speech at the 
conference, Cleaver applauded North Korea and its leader Kim Il Sung for 
embracing their own brand of Marxism-Leninism, attacked U.S. imperialism, 
and proclaimed the Panthers’ solidarity with the revolutionary peoples of the 
world.33
Deeply influenced by the trip, Cleaver began to promote the writings of 
Kim Il Sung in The Black Panther.34 In a related development, the newspaper 
created an international section with a masthead featuring pictures of Patrice 
Lumumba, Ho Chi Minh, and Che Guevara, along with a silhouette of a rifle. 
This section was filled with commentaries and news briefs on the political situ-
ation in Vietnam, Palestine, and South Africa, among other places, and with 
speeches by revolutionary thinkers like Amilcar Cabral, head of the armed 
The Black Panther Party
221


--- PAGE 241 ---
anticolonial movement in the Portuguese colonies of Guinea-Bissau and Cape 
Verde.35The Black Panther’s international section also chronicled the activities 
of Panther support committees overseas and carried statements of solidarity 
from various organizations, such as the Association of Democratic Jurists of 
Korea and the Committee for Afro-Asian Solidarity of Korea, both based in 
North Korea.36
As their international involvement deepened, the Panthers intensified their 
critique of the mainstream antiwar movement. In a typical broadside, Panther 
chief of staff David Hilliard, appearing at the San Francisco Moratorium Dem-
onstration, one of the largest such events of the 1960s, castigated the antiwar 
movement for focusing on aggression abroad to the exclusion of oppression 
at home. “We’re not going to let you talk about waging a struggle in support 
of people 10,000 miles from here, when you have problems right here in fascist 
America,” Hilliard lectured his predominantly white audience.37
Militant in their insistence on the connection between the domestic and 
the foreign, the Panthers offered a novel proposal. Incarcerated Panthers, 
they suggested, could be exchanged for U.S. prisoners of war in Vietnam. The 
Black Panther, accordingly, encouraged readers, “If you have sons, husbands, or 
friends who are prisoners of war in Vietnam, send us their name, rank and serial 
numbers. We will forward this information to Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of 
Information of the Black Panther Party; and attempt to exchange their freedom 
for the freedom of the Minister of Defense, Huey P . Newton and Chairman 
Bobby Seale who are political prisoners here in ‘fascist Babylon. ’”38 Panthers in 
Oakland held a rally to popularize the idea.39 The proposed exchange, needless 
to say, never materialized. It did, however, powerfully symbolize the Panthers’ 
claim that their incarcerated comrades were political prisoners who deserved 
the same status and recognition as U.S. prisoners of war in Vietnam.
Huey Newton and Intercommunalism
Huey Newton, the top Panther leader who had become an international cause 
célèbre during his imprisonment, presided over a deepening of the party’s 
international thrust on being released in August 1970. In an interview with 
Sechaba, the official organ of the African National Congress of South Africa, 
Newton noted the continuing influence of international revolutionaries on the 
Black Panther Party and asserted that the Panthers wanted to establish better 
communications with other liberation movements in order to coordinate their 
struggles.40 Having, evidently, sharpened his Marxism during his confinement, 
robyn spencer
222


--- PAGE 242 ---
Newton continued, “The bourgeoisie that is based here in America has an 
international character, because it exploits the world, it controls the wealth of 
the world; it has stolen, usurped the wealth of the people of the world. . . . We 
feel that the only way that we can combat an international enemy is through 
an international strategy, unity of all people who are exploited, who will over-
throw the international bourgeoisie, and replace it with a dictatorship by the 
proletariat, the workers of the world. ”41 Subsequently, Newton wrote an open 
letter offering troops to the Vietnamese National Liberation Front. The offer, 
he told the Vietnamese, was a “recognition of the fact that your struggle is also 
our struggle, for we recognize that our common enemy is the American impe-
rialist who is the leader of international bourgeois domination. . . . Therefore 
our problem is international, and we offer these troops in recognition of the 
necessity for international alliances to deal with this problem. ”42 Nguyen Thi Dinh, 
a high-ranking commander in the Vietnamese resistance, expressed his gratitude 
but declined the offer of military assistance. The Panthers’ own “persistent and 
ever-developing struggle [within the United States] is the most active support 
to our resistance against U.S. aggression for national salvation,” he declared.43
Some mainstream African American leaders took umbrage to Newton’s 
offer. The NAACP’s Roy Wilkins disparaged it, accusing the Panther leader of 
privileging the Viet Cong over “John Q. Black American. ” Newton’s response 
underlined what, by then, had become a cornerstone of his party’s program. 
The Panthers, he retorted, were “internationalists because we believe our 
struggle must proceed on many fronts. While we feed and clothe the poor at 
home we must meet and attack the oppressor wherever he may be found. ”44
Newton’s most significant contribution to Panther internationalism was 
the theory of revolutionary intercommunalism. U.S. capitalist imperialism, 
according to this theory, had transformed understandings of sovereignty and 
self-determination that underlay the concept of nationhood to the point where 
nations no longer existed, “because of the development of technology, be-
cause of the development of the mass media, because of the fire power of the 
imperialist, because of the fact that the United States is no longer a nation 
but an empire. ”45 Newton’s intercommunalism effectively repudiated the old 
internal colonialism thesis, the idea that African Americans constituted a “na-
tion within a nation” or an “internal colony” within the United States, which 
previously had been a mainstay of Panther ideology. The new reality, Newton 
now argued, was a world divided into oppressed and liberated communities, 
linked by common causes that united them across national boundaries against 
a common enemy: the U.S. empire.
The Black Panther Party
223


--- PAGE 243 ---
In this new world order, Newton suggested, race, and even ideology, had 
declined in importance. The indispensable basis of global solidarity, rather, 
was common experiences of oppression. He explained: “We see very little 
difference in what happens to a community here in North America and what 
happens to a community in Vietnam. We see very little difference in what 
happens, even culturally, to a Chines [ sic] community in San Francisco and 
a Chinese community in Hong Kong. We see very little difference in what 
happens to a black community in Ha rlem and a black community in South 
Africa, a black community in Angola and Mozambique. We see very little dif-
ference. ”46 Intercommunalism was a central topic in Newton’s college tour 
after he left prison, and he spoke at length on the same subject at the Panthers’ 
Revolutionary People’s Constitutional Convention of 1970. The Panthers, he 
warned, “cannot make our stand as na tionalists, we cannot even make our 
stand as internationalists, we must place our future hopes on the philosophy 
of intercommunalism, a philosophy which holds that the rise of imperialism 
in America transformed all the other nations into oppressed communities. ”47
He pointed to Algeria and North Korea as examples of liberated communities 
and argued for self-determination globa lly. “Whether on an intercommunal 
level, a regional level, or on a local level, we hold that all people have the right 
to proportional representation within the framework of revolutionary inter-
communalism and communism,” the Panther leader concluded.48
Not all Panthers appreciated Newton’s latest theoretical pronouncements. 
Some saw little difference between in tercommunalism and the party’s long-
standing commitment to internationalism. Still, under Newton’s prodding, 
the term was incorporated into the Panther organizational structure.49 The 
group’s news outlet, the Black Community News Service, was renamed the 
Intercommunal News Service, while the International chapter became the In-
tercommunal chapter. Solidarity committees in Sweden, Denmark, Germany, 
Holland, and England also fell in line, nomenclatorially speaking at least. “Our 
intercommunal solidarity,” they proclaimed in a joint communiqué, “is ex-
pressed in our political work to revolutionize our respective communities and 
to free the third world political prisoners within Germany, England, Holland, 
Denmark and Sweden. ”50
Political Repression
The Panthers’ efforts to build a mass constituency domestically, under a pro-
gram advocating international revolution, earned them the lasting enmity of 
robyn spencer
224


--- PAGE 244 ---
the U.S. state, which responded with a campaign of repression. In 1967 the FBI
launched COINTELPRO, a program to “ expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or 
otherwise neutralize the activities of black nationalist, hate-type organizations 
and groupings, their leadership, spokesmen, membership, and supporters and 
to counter their propensity for violence and civil disorder. ”51 The Black Pan-
ther Party, although not specifically mentioned in this initial memo, was the 
chief target of the coming onslaught. The FBI subsequently made that clear. 
Rectifying the previous omission, a later memo dubbed the Panthers “the most 
violence-prone organization of all the extremist groups operating in the United 
States. ”52 All but officially designated the principal internal enemy of the U.S. 
state, the Panthers would bear the brunt of COINTELPRO actions.
The subsequent massive police raids and mass arrests of Panthers went 
hand in hand with the promised campaign of disinformation to “expose, dis-
rupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize” the party. The repression 
had the desired effect, exacerbating existing tensions within the organization 
and pushing it, ideologically speaking, further to the left. State repression also 
created a wave of political refugees, as Panthers fled overseas to escape the 
ever-widening dragnet.53 The fleeing mi litants joined other party members 
who had preceded them into exile, most notably Eldridge Cleaver, in giving 
even greater publicity to the Panther cause on the international stage.
The resulting international networks would prove extremely helpful to 
the Panthers, offering them both moral and material support. As the raids 
and arrests began to decimate the organization, activists in Germany, France, 
Holland, Norway, Denmark, and Sweden, among other places, established 
solidarity committees, which organized demonstrations and held public hear-
ings to raise awareness of the Panthers’ plight.54 In one notable example of 
solidarity, the Black Panther Party Solidarity Committee in Sweden organized 
a march of 300 people to demand the release of Bobby Seale and other politi-
cal prisoners.55 After the arrest of twenty-one Panthers in New Y ork, Panther 
international coordinator Connie Matthews sprung into action, urging the 
Danish government to use its influence to “convince the American government 
of the unjustness of their course, and to persuade them to cease immediately 
the unwarranted harassment of the Black Panther Party and its members. ”56
Meanwhile the Danish Socialist Party and allied groups held a demonstration 
in the course of which speakers highlighted the connections between the Viet-
nam War, the exploitation of the Danish working class, and the persecution 
of the Black Panther Party. The event culminated in more than 600 protesters 
marching on the American embassy in Copenhagen.57
The Black Panther Party
225


--- PAGE 245 ---
The FBI did not fail to note the Panthers’ “connections with foreign revolu-
tionaries” and carefully monitored those connections.58 Chronicling Cleaver’s 
travels in 1970 to North Korea, China, and North Vietnam, the FBI observed 
that from his base in Algiers, Cleaver “maintains close contact with communist 
nations and Arab guerilla organization s. ” On the radio in Hanoi, Cleaver is 
reputed to have urged African American servicemen “to desert, commit sabo-
tage, and ‘rip off ’ (kill) the United States Commander in South Vietnam. ”59
Indeed, Attorney General John Mitchell justified warrantless electronic 
telephone surveillance of the Panther headquarters in Oakland by copying the 
Panthers: he invoked the links between the party’s domestic and international 
activities. Mitchell mentioned the Panthers’ strength, along with the threat he 
considered them to pose, notably, “(1) the large number of Black Panther Party 
branch organizations in this country; (2) the large number of Black Panther 
Party members; and (3) the fact that numerous threats of personal attack were 
being directed by the Black Panther Party against local law enforcement offi-
cers. ”60 The attorney general feared that the group’s allies abroad would finance 
revolution in the United States. The Panthers, he asserted, had “avenues for 
channeling foreign funds into this country for the purpose of supporting Black 
Panther Party revolutionary activities which included the advocacy of the vio-
lent overthrow of existing Federal and State government structures. ”61 Mitchell 
based the latter claims on three factors: “(1) the presence of Black Panther 
Party leader Eldridge Cleaver in Cuba, Algeria and North Korea; (2) contacts 
in Sweden of Panther members with representatives of the North Vietnamese 
government; and (3) contacts of Panthe r members with representatives of 
communist Cuba. ”62 These same foreign connections, the U.S. government 
maintained, were the source of Panther ideology. As the FBI saw it, the Black 
Panther Party “relies heavily on for eign Communist ideology to shape its 
goals,” the party’s “Marxist” orientation providing a “favorable environment 
for the support of the Panthers from other Communist countries. ”63
A major result of the crusade against the Black Panther Party was an exac-
erbation of the differences, ideological and personal, between Huey Newton, 
its U.S.-based top leader, and the Algerian-based Eldridge Cleaver, the chief 
Panther spokesman overseas. The FBI’s campaign to sow discord between the 
two men was international in scope, and it involved everything from phony 
letters to death threats. An FBI memo dated just eight days after Newton’s 
release from prison in 1970 suggested that counterintelligence efforts should 
aim to “drive a wedge” between Newton and Cleaver.64 Far from just an at-
tempt to ignite a feud between two leaders, the FBI’s maneuverings were an 
robyn spencer
226


--- PAGE 246 ---
attack on the very foundations of Panther ideology and strategy. In targeting 
Cleaver, the FBI hoped to undermine the Panthers’ international standing and 
disrupt their attempts to sustain and deepen alliances overseas. If Cleaver was 
a key element in the Panthers’ internationalist thrust, then Newton was their 
essential helmsman, presiding over the domestic base and standing at the core 
of the efforts to connect the national and global.
In the wake of the internecine conflict, the party began to decline. The FBI
gleefully took the credit, a 1971 report claiming that the “chaotic condition of 
BPP and the split between BPP leaders Huey P . Newton and Eldridge Cleaver 
is possibly a direct result of our inte nsive counterintelligence efforts aimed 
at causing dissension between Newton and Cleaver and within the Party. ”65
This was not the only factor; preexisting tensions within the party also played 
a major role in its decline. Still, the FBI’s crowing was not without merit: its 
campaign of repression and disinformation contributed mightily to the even-
tual collapse of the Black Panther Party.
From its foundation in 1966 to its downward spiral in 1972, the Black Pan-
ther Party was seen by the U.S. government as a threat to national security. The 
Panthers’ most enduring qualities/uRELfk.dtheir ability to be both crucible and con-
duit for black internationalist consciousness in the United States, to maneuver 
on the international stage, and to leverage a global New Left network/uRELfk.dmade 
them largely impervious to co -optation. The organized violence of the state, 
physical and psychological, would have to be brought to bear against them. And 
it was. As the “greatest threat to the internal security of the United States,”66
in the words of FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, the Panthers were “savaged by 
a campaign of political repression that in terms of its sheer viciousness has 
few parallels in American history. ”67 Political repression in the United States 
was hardly new; it certainly did not begin with the Panthers.68 However, the 
repressive apparatus of the U.S. state increased greatly during the Cold War, 
and the Black Panther Party felt its full sting in the 1960s and 1970s, the peak 
of the effort to root out subversives and control grassroots protesters at home 
and abroad.
Conclusion
Although the Panthers no longer maintained missions overseas after 1971, their 
program and ideology remained internationalist. In September 1971, Newton 
led a delegation of more than a dozen Panthers to the People’s Republic of 
China, where they met top officials and visited historical and cultural sites.69
The Black Panther Party
227


--- PAGE 247 ---
On returning to the United States, Newton issued a statement declaring that 
the Panthers had gone to China ahead of U.S. president Richard Nixon, whose 
subsequent visit to that country constituted a historic Cold War event, “so that 
we might ask the peace and freedom-loving Chairman Mao T se-tung to be 
the chief negotiator . . . for the peace and freedom of the oppressed peoples of 
the world. ”70 Other Panther officials also continued to travel overseas. In 1971 
Martin Kenner, a leading member of the Committee to Defend the Panthers, 
went to Europe to meet representatives of China, North Korea, Cuba, and the 
Vietnamese resistance. The Vietnamese, Kenner noted in reporting to Newton 
about the meetings, “were far and away the most outspoken in their desire for 
more help from us. They requested radio programs, leaflets, and drawings/uRELfk.din
short propaganda they can use in Nam/uRELfk.das well as Party propaganda here in 
the paper about US aggression in S.E. Asia. . . . All of the governments wanted 
to receive party paper. ”71
At the same time, the Panthers continued to provide material aid to African 
liberation support organizations, as well as to send medical supplies to libera-
tion movements in the Portuguese colonies of Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, 
and Angola.72 The Panthers also remained a source of inspiration for oppressed 
groups around the world. In 1972 Australian aborigines independently created 
a branch of the party and requested official recognition from the Panther head-
quarters in Oakland, California.73 Even in decline, then, the Panthers’ praxis 
remained consistent with their ideology. As late as 1972, they issued a revised 
ten-point platform that, among other things, attributed “the various conflicts 
which exist around the world” to the “aggressive desires of the U.S. ruling 
circle and government to force its domination upon the oppressed people of 
the world. ”74 In the throes of death, as in the prime of its life, the Black Panther 
Party remained committed to a vision of liberation in which the fate of African 
Americans was inseparable from that of other oppressed and colonized peoples 
globally.
Robin Kelley has argued that “too often our standards for evaluating social 
movements pivot around whether or not they ‘succeeded’ in realizing their vi-
sions rather than on the merits or power of the visions themselves. ”75 The story 
of the Black Panther Party, its successes and its failures, is a testament to the 
merits of this argument. The Panthers both confirmed and tapped into a deep 
anti-imperialist consciousness that existed at the grass roots of the black com-
munity/uRELfk.da consciousness that was separate and apart from African-centered 
cultural affirmations and engagements with the dominant, white-led antiwar 
movement. With few resources, the Panthers managed to produce an impres-
robyn spencer
228


--- PAGE 248 ---
sive body of political tracts, along with witty and sarcastic illustrations, car-
toons, and poems that connected them to the often-forgotten protest tradition 
of the African American Left, with its deep commitment to internationalism. 
As Hilliard affirmed in 1970, the Panthers saw themselves as “merely one link in 
the worldwide revolution. ”76 They boldly operated on the international stage, 
waging their own version of diplomacy and making linkages with groups rep-
resenting oppressed peoples in Africa, Asia, and Europe. The Panthers also 
made important theoretical contributions to the global struggle for freedom. 
Huey Newton’s concept of intercommunalism, although it was not systemati-
cally taught or popularized in his lifetime, anticipated much of the present-
day critique of globalization. The Panthers may not have achieved the global 
revolution they envisioned, but their “alternative visions and dreams . . . inspire 
new generations to continue to struggle for change. ”77
notes
1. Dudziak, Cold War; Horne, Black and Red; Layton, International Politics; Meri-
wether, Proudly We Can Be Africans; Plummer, Rising Wind; Von Eschen, Race against 
Empire.
2. Kelley, “Stormy Weather,” 69.
3. Dudziak, “Little Rock Crisis”; Fraser, “Crossing the Color Line”; Borstelmann, 
“‘Hedging Our Bets. ’”
4. Emerson and Kilson, “ American Dilemma,” 644.
5. See Horne, Black and Red, and Plummer, Rising Wind.
6. Kelley, “Stormy Weather,” 87.
7. Lawson, “We Are T rying,” 314.
8. King, Why We Can’t Wait, 81.
9. Carson, In Struggle, 94.
10. Von Eschen, Race against Empire, 187.
11. Kelley, “Stormy Weather,” 87.
12. Dudziak, Cold War, 253.
13. Cleaver, “Back to Africa”; Clemons and Jones, “Global Solidarity. ” For examples of 
this frame of analysis in the study of other black nationalist organizations, see Woodard, 
Nation within a Nation, and Kelley, “Stormy Weather. ”
14. “The Black Man’s Stake in Vietnam,” Black Panther, March 23, 1969, 16.
15. Von Eschen, Race against Empire, 187.
16. A poem that began with the line “Uncle Sammy called us full of Lucifer” ap-
peared in the Black Panther Party newspaper under the title “Bobby’s poem. ” The poem 
appeared in different versions, shaped to fit different critiques of Uncle Sam. See Black 
Panther, October 12, 1968, 9.
17. Seale, Lonely Rage, 145–51, and Seize the Time, 27–29.
18. Seale, Lonely Rage, 145–51.
The Black Panther Party
229


--- PAGE 249 ---
19. “Black Soldiers as Revolutionaries to Overthrow the Ruling Class,” folder: Protest 
Movements, Black Panther Party Publications, San Francisco African American Histori-
cal and Cultural Society Archives, San Francisco, California; Black Panther, September 
20, 1969, 2.
20. Seale, Seize the Time, 67.
21. “Police Brutality, Old Story,” Sun-Reporter, February 26, 1955, 8; “What’s Wrong 
with Our Police Department,” Sun-Reporter, June 7, 1958, 6; “New Police Brutality Cases 
Anger Parents: Ask Police Chief and Mayor ‘Stop Brutality,’” Sun-Reporter, November 
14, 1959, 1; “Victim of Police Brutality?,” Sun-Reporter, March 4, 1961, 1, 5. See also Lader, 
Power on the Left, 229.
22. Sherwin Forte, interview by author, October 9, 1997, tape recording, Oakland, 
California.
23. King, T estament of Hope, 233.
24. “Interview with Scandinavian Rep. of Black Panther Party: Connie Matthews,” 
Black Panther, October 18, 1969, 9.
25. “Interview with Angela Davis,” Black Panther, November 1, 1969.
26. “Panthers Move Internationally,” Black Panther, September 14, 1968, 3.
27. Cleaver, “Back to Africa,” 216–17.
28. “Project Resistance,” 11, box 80, Huey P . Newton Foundation Papers, Special 
Collections, Green Library, Stanford University, Stanford, California (hereafter HPN 
Papers). I accessed the HPN Papers at Stanford University in 1996 when the archival 
recording process was just beginning; box and folder titles, contents, etc., may subse-
quently have changed.
29. Ibid., 29–30.
30. “Black Panther Discussion with African and Haitian Liberation Fighters,” Black 
Panther, August 23, 1969, 16–17.
31. Ibid.
32. “ African Liberation Movement,” Black Panther, October 4, 1969, 11.
33. Eldridge Cleaver, “Solidarity of the People until Victory or Death!,” Black Panther,
October 25, 1969, 12–13.
34. Cleaver, “Back to Africa,” 226.
35. For example, see Black Panther, September 20, 1969, 16.
36. See various issues of Black Panther in October 1969.
37. “T ext of Speech of David Hilliard at San Francisco, November 15, 1969,” folder: 
“Hilliard, David. Expert Witness File,” box 27, HPN Papers.
38. Black Panther, November 21, December 9, 1969.
39. “ A Rally Announcing Action,” folder: “Oakland, Protests, Demonstrations etc, 
1920–1969,” Oakland History Room, Oakland Public Library, Oakland, California.
40. Newton, T o Die, 201–3.
41. Folder: “MSS People’s Revolutionary Intercommunalism,” 2, HPN Papers.
42. Newton, T o Die, 178.
43. Ibid., 184.
44. Ibid., 186, 190.
45. “Huey’s Message at Boston College, November 18, 1970,” 4, box 8, HPN Papers.
robyn spencer
230


--- PAGE 250 ---
46. Ibid., 5.
47. “Revolutionary Peoples Constitutional Convention: Resolutions and Declara-
tions, November 29, 1970, Washington, D.C.,” 2, folder: “Re: Revolutionary People’s 
Constitutional Convention,” box 15, HPN Papers.
48. Ibid., 4.
49. Newton spoke at New Haven College on February 5, 1971, on “BPP/uRELfk.dIdeology” 
and at Princeton University on February 9, 1971, on “Black Panther Party/uRELfk.dNew Ideol-
ogy”; see folder: “Signed Contracts/uRELfk.dexecuted,” box 8, HPN Papers.
50. “Joint Communique,” folder: “Communication Sheets,” box 2, HPN Papers.
51. “ August 15, 1967” memo, folder: “Counterintelligence Program Case Histories /uRELfk.d
FBI files,” box 68, HPN Papers.
52. Churchill and Vander Wall, COINTELPRO Papers, 124.
53. Cleaver, “Back to Africa,” 224.
54. Seale, Seize the Time, 34.
55. Black Panther, October 25, 1969, 21.
56. “Open Letter to the Danish Foreign Ministry,” Black Panther, May 11, 1969.
57. “Free Huey Demonstration in Scandinavia,” Black Panther, June 21, 1969, 18.
58. Churchill and Vander Wall, COINTELPRO Papers, 124.
59. “Racial Disorders and law enforcement,” folder: “Books to be Written,” box 18, 
HPN Papers.
60. “Sworn statement by John Mitchell dated April 15, 1976,” box 80, HPN Papers.
61. Ibid.
62. Ibid.
63. Donner, Age of Surveillance, 265.
64. “T o SAC SF from Director FBI, 9/9/70,” 3, box 80, HPN Papers.
65. Informative note dated 3/4/71, box 80, HPN Papers.
66. Churchill, “‘T o Disrupt, Discredit, and Destroy,’” 83.
67. Ibid., 78.
68. See Donner, Age of Surveillance ; Churchill and Vander Wall, COINTELPRO 
Papers; O’Reilly, Racial Matters; Schultz and Schultz, It Did Happen Here.
69. “Black Panther Party Delegation’s Book re: People’s Republic of China upon 
Return,” box 46, HPN Papers.
70. Folder: “The Servants Visit to the People’s Republic of China,” box 44, HPN 
Papers.
71. Folder: “Rev Rep. in U.S. and Canada, Western Europe, eg. China,” box 41, HPN 
Papers.
72. “Innerparty Memorandum /uEERW.o13,” October 25, 1972, 2, box 14, HPN Papers.
73. Folder: “Requests to Start Black Panther Party Centers,” box 14, HPN Papers.
74. “The Black Panther Party Program, March 29, 1972, platform,” 11, folder: “Misc. 
Articles,” box 41, HPN Papers.
75. Kelley, Freedom Dreams, ix.
76. Richard Harwood, “Black Panthers Striving Heartily for Revolution,” Sunday Star-
Bulletin & Advertiser (Honolulu), January 25, 1970, E4, HPN Papers.
77. Kelley, Freedom Dreams, ix.
The Black Panther Party
231


--- PAGE 251 ---
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
marc d. perry
The narrative of hip hop’s rise as a global cultural phenomenon has been a 
rather extraordinary one.1 I recall in the mid-1970s being dragged to local 
“street jams” among Manhattan’s Lower East Side public housing projects 
where neighborhood youth, almost exclusively African American and Puerto 
Rican, gathered summer afternoons to listen and dance to the music of local 
DJs and their makeshift audio equipment powered via illicit taps into city street 
lamps. I was clearly unaware at that age that what was going on around me, as 
was happening throughout New Y ork’s inner-city patchwork of public housing 
projects, would give birth to a cultural movement soon to be celebrated as hip 
hop. Indeed, I would come into budding self-awareness amidst that formative 
period of hip hop’s early ascendance in New Y ork City during the 1980s. It was 
during much later travels, however, that I became cognizant of how hip hop, 
once a collaborative expression of postindustrial cultural improvisation among 
African American, Puerto Rican, and West Indian inner-city youth, was now 
being refashioned by other marginalized youth globally to give critical voice 
to their own subjective experience a nd sense of selfhood. In the interim, of 
course, a onetime marginal youth culture encompassing expressive elements 
of music, verbal lyricism, dance, graffiti  art, and fashion had evolved into a 
multibillion-dollar global industry.
Although hip hop has undergone radical transformation during this move-
ment from street to international marketplace, it has at the same time retained 
a critical capacity to convey a signifying blackness of representational force and 
emotive meaning. T o underscore this is by no means to suggest that there is 
something “essentially” black per se about hip hop, but rather it is a recognition 
of the significant, albeit highly mediated ways hip hop continues to communi-
cate a “black,” largely masculine discourse of urban marginality. Hip hop today 
has emerged globally as the most visible and widely disseminated conduit of


--- PAGE 252 ---
U.S. black popular imagery/uRELfk.dcommercially mediated not only through music 
but increasingly through film, television, and corporate merchandising. While 
the majority of scholarship to date has focused on the cultural politics of hip 
hop’s domestic production and consumption within the United States, there 
have been more recent moves to examine the sociocultural dynamics involved 
in the trafficking and spread of rap music and hip hop culture globally.2
In this essay I address this second line of inquiry, mapping how the black 
racial significance of hip hop is received, interpreted, and redeployed trans-
nationally. Rather than a broad survey, this exploration centers on the poli-
tics and poetics of hip hop as they find particular expression within the black 
diasporic world. Beyond simply questions of cultural consumption and repro-
duction, I argue that hip hop’s expanding global reach has enabled the making 
of new black diasporic subjects in and of themselves. In ways evocative of 
Benedict Anderson’s insights into the role of print media in forging modern 
national identities,3 hip hop today has assumed an increasingly significant role 
in shaping contemporary forms of black diasporic consciousness and subjec-
tivity. Here, African-descendant youth in an array of locales are employing the 
performative space of hip hop to mobilize notions of black self in ways that 
simultaneously contest and transcend nationally bound racial framings. Within 
these contexts understandings of diaspor ic belonging are often paramount, 
if not vitally constitutive of such black self-fashioning. Thus, much like print 
media of a previous moment, hip hop has become a productive technology 
in the current global mapping and moving of black political subjects via the 
social workings of diaspora. In pursuing this argument, this essay examines hip 
hop movements in Brazil, Cuba, and South Africa comparatively as varying 
examples of how transnationally attuned identities of blackness are marshaled 
in the making of diasporic subjects through hip hop’s performative lens.
When considering the international proliferation of hip hop, one needs 
to be cognizant of the differing ways hip hop’s “black” cultural politics travel 
as they are engaged by communities beyond the United States. While such 
diffusion may move along similar global circuits as culturally and geographi-
cally divergent as Senegal and Japan, it is clear that hip hop’s reception and 
recontextualization in the formation of local followings can often involve very 
different kinds of social meaning-making. While hip hop may indeed provide 
cultural resources in the global shaping of local identities,4 one must always 
remain attentive to questions of power and relative positionality. The query, 
then, becomes one of who is consuming whom, and to what ends.
It is, however, undeniable that hip hop has assumed a wide and particularly 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
233


--- PAGE 253 ---
marked resonance among more socially marginal communities of youth. This 
is as much the case for working-class urban youth in Chile as it is for their 
ethnically marked Basque contemporaries in Spain. In both settings we find 
examples of how young people appropriate markers of blackness as a means of 
expressing their own subjective conditions of marginality. Chile’s Las Panteras 
Negras (The Black Panthers) coupled with the Basque nationalist group Negu 
Gorriak’s self-identification as “ Afro-Basque” are exemplary of such symbolic 
deployments.5 Palestinian hip hop poet Suheir Hammad’s evocations of Public 
Enemy, Amiri Baraka, and Malcolm X in her 1996 collection Born Palestinian, 
Born Black is further illustrative of blackness’s global resonance as a hip hop–
informed marker of social marginality.6 Y et while shared understandings of 
social marginalization may indeed be involved in these examples, such iden-
tifications do not in the end constitute these young people in any historical 
sense as “black” per se. Where lie, then, these practices of black self-making 
of which I speak?
Within the current literature on hip hop’s transnational dimensions there 
is little scholarship examining the politics of race and racial identification at 
play globally. In many treatments either African or African-descendant sites 
are absent from examination, or there is an analytical privileging of cultural 
or ethnic modes of differentiation vis-à-vis marginalized communities to the 
exclusion of the racialized processes that often shape the lived experience of 
these populations. While it is clear, as T ony Mitchell has suggested, that hip 
hop in a global sense “cannot be viewed  simply as an expression of African 
American culture; it has become a vehicle for global youth affiliations and a 
tool for reworking local identities all over the world,”7 this does not mean that 
race (or blackness) is necessarily erased from the equation.
When assessing hip hop’s transnational racial significance, one cannot deny 
the particular salience of the cultural form within the contemporary Afro-
Atlantic world. Whether Haitian immi grants in Montreal, Afro-Colombians
in Cali, Colombia, or Afro-Amerindian Garifuna in Honduras, African-
descendant youth globally are using the performative space of hip hop as a vital 
site of critical self-expression. Y et beyond a simple claiming of voice, to what 
extent might hip hop’s “black” cultural framings facilitate new, diasporically 
attuned identities of blackness themselves? Such a suggestion recalls those 
diasporic affinities that first gave rise to hip hop via the interchange of African 
American, Puerto Rican, and West Indian inner-city youth.8 Cultural agencies 
of the like found creative expression through the melding of overlapping his-
tories of black diasporic experience coupled with shared conditions of social 
marc d. perry
234


--- PAGE 254 ---
marginalization as youth of color in postindustrial urban America. Indeed, 
it has been argued that this early period of hip hop’s formation engendered 
new expressions of black urban subjectivity that found common groundings 
through a shared sense of Afrodiasporic belonging.9
At this moment, however, hip hop can be seen as an increasingly impor-
tant conduit for just those kinds of global black identifications and emergent 
subjectivities that have historically constituted the African Diaspora as a lived 
social formation. The notion of diaspora here is dynamic and ever changing, 
one forged through historical plays of power and agency in the continual re-
making of diaspora via transnational black identification and communicative 
interchange.10 Such an understanding foregrounds Brent Hayes Edwards’s no-
tion of a “mobilized diaspora” in distinguishing between a historically given ,
“involuntary” sense of diaspora versus a historically responsive recognition of 
the ways the African, or more appropriately, “black,” diaspora is actively em-
ployed in the making of globally conscious black subjects and social move-
ments.11 This framing not only underscores the salience of what Paul Gilroy 
has termed the contemporary “routes” of diasporic identification12 but ad-
ditionally opens up space for an appreciation of how transnational affinities 
of blackness can be fashioned among comm unities of African descent who 
may not necessarily share histories of displacement. Such expansiveness holds 
particular currency when considering the vibrant presence of hip hop in Africa 
itself, where young people across the continent can be seen asserting their 
claim to a globalized space of “mode rn,” postcolonial blackness through hip 
hop’s diasporic spectrum. Y et while the source of such black self-imaginings 
may be initially grounded in the historical specificity of the United States, 
subsequent black self-constitutions are neither beholden to nor necessarily 
disarticulated from U.S. racial histories. The question, rather, as we shall see, 
concerns the complex manner in which such blackness is rearticulated globally 
by varying communities of “black” youth.
Brazil
The rise of Brazilian hip hop offers a critically insightful illustration of how 
black diasporic identities are currently mobilized through the performative 
spectrum of hip hop culture. Articulations of this kind carry added poten-
tial given Brazil’s location as the most populous concentration of peoples of 
African descent outside the African continent/uRELfk.da historical legacy courtesy 
of the largest and most e nduring slave system in the Americas. While hip 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
235


--- PAGE 255 ---
hop’s foundations in Brazil were first laid in the 1980s through the circula-
tion of music and images emanating from the United States,13 Brazilian hip 
hop’s diasporic contours should be understood within a broader recent his-
tory of Afro-Brazilian engagement with U.S. black popular culture. Brazil’s 
Black Soul movement of the 1970s represents a particularly notable example 
of such diasporically informed engagement. Here by way of music, dance, and 
fashion, young Afro-Brazilians of Rio de Janeiro drew upon the black cultural 
aesthetics and embodied self-awareness of 1970s U.S. soul music in the voicing 
of new, transnationally inspired expressions of Afro-Brazilian blackness. Dur-
ing this period parties were organized where young Afro-clad youth donned 
bell-bottoms and dashikis and gathered to dance to the likes of James Brown 
and Marvin Gaye.
T ranscending questions of simple cultural importation, Michael Hanchard 
has argued that Black Soul represented an effort to construct alternative forms 
of self-affirming black identity as oppositional responses to Brazil’s historical 
privileging of whiteness and persistent forms of racial subjugation.14 Emerg-
ing during the repressive era of Brazil’s military dictatorship (1964–85), Black 
Soul events became important venues for the dissemination of information 
pertaining to the nascent Movimento Negro/uRELfk.da loosely coordinated affilia-
tion of Afro-Brazilian organizations mobilized strategically around black iden-
tity claims. Endeavors of this kind, Hanchard suggests, were formative in the 
early framing of a black identity politics that continue today as an instrumental 
facet of Afro-Brazilian sociopolitical organizing. Here, politicized assertions 
of blackness have been central in efforts to contest Brazil’s hegemonic claims 
as a “racial democracy,” where race and racism are alleged inconsequential, if 
not nonexistent, within an ostensibly racially amalgamated national populace 
with one of the highest levels of social inequality in the world.15
The emergence of Brazilian hip hop needs, therefore, to be viewed within 
this continuum of diasporically engaged Afro-Brazilian identity politics. Y oung, 
largely male Afro-Brazilian favelados/uRELfk.dresidents of Brazil’s urban shantytowns 
known as favelas/uRELfk.din and around São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro were the first 
to take up rap music in the voicing of their own racially informed experiences 
and concerns. The highly popular São Paulo–based Racionais MC’s (Rational 
MC’s) are a prime example of this early movement in Brazilian hip hop. Es-
tablishing their reputation in the late 1980s and early 1990s while performing 
primarily in favelas and the “darker” suburbs on the fringes of São Paulo, the 
group’s aggressive lyrics focused on social themes most pressing in these mar-
ginalized communities, such as racism, racially targeted police violence, drug 
marc d. perry
236


--- PAGE 256 ---
trafficking, and government corruption in the improvised perifierias (peripher-
ies). The opening salvo to “Capítulo 4 Versículo 3” from the platinum-selling 
1998 album Sobrevivendo No Inferno (Surviving in Hell) stands as a dramatic 
case in point:
60/uEER!.o dos jovens de periferia sem antecedentes criminais já sofreram 
violência policial;
A cada quatro pessoas mortas pela polícia, três são negras;
Nas universidades brasileiras, apenas 2/uEER!.o dos alunos são negros;
A cada quatro horas um jovem negro morre violentamente em São Paulo;
Aqui quem fala é Primo Preto, mais um sobrevivente16
[60/uEER!.o of youth in the periphery without criminal records have already 
suffered police violence
In every four people killed by the police, three are black
In Brazilian Universities, only 2/uEER!.o of students are black
Every four hours, a young black person dies violently in São Paulo
Speaking here is “Primo Preto” (“Black Cousin”), another survivor].17
As Primo Preto’s introduction testifies, blackness and marginality are im-
bricated realities in many of Brazil’s favelas and urban peripheral zones where 
systemic forms of racialized violence are quotidian. Indeed, Derek Pardue has 
suggested that São Paulo hip hop artists mediate marginality itself/uRELfk.din both 
social and geospatial terms/uRELfk.dthrough discourses and practices of negritude 
in ways that gesture toward diaspor ic belonging.18 His discussion of these 
diasporic dimensions and their articulation s vis-à-vis questions of identity, 
however, remain largely implicit rather than explicitly explored. Alternatively, 
Jennifer Roth Gordon contends that Brazilian MCs constitute, in effect, “an 
alternative black consciousness movement” largely through what she sees as 
their adoption of U.S. racial ideologies via hip hop’s transnational lens.19 My 
argument is that diasporic rather than U.S. understandings of blackness are in 
the end instrumental in fashioning critical expressions of black Brazilian self. 
The emphasis here is on dialogic engagements rather than reductive appropria-
tions of blackness.
Similar mobilizations of blackness can be seen in Rio de Janeiro, where 
immediately following the infamous Candelaria murders of 1993, in which off-
duty police systematically gunned down a group of black street children sleep-
ing aside a Rio Janeiro church, a protest rally was coordinated in the city by a 
coalition of organizations within the Movimento Negro. Among the speakers 
and performers condemning the murder s and the broader culture of racial 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
237


--- PAGE 257 ---
violence at the rally were the Rio-based rap duo Consciencia Urbana (Urban 
Consciousness). At the time of the event, member Big Richard described the 
political significance of his music this way:
In the U.S. blacks have a notion that racism exists. Not in Brazil. In 
Brazil racism is disguised. In Brazil we live in a racial democracy, 
believe it if you will. Here we have a small number of black youth 
who fight against racism, while the majority, even as they suffer rac-
ism every day like being harassed on the bus by the police, prefer 
to believe what is shown to them on television and in the media. 
So what happens is that we present the counterculture to this, and 
to fight as a counterculture is not easy, especially in Brazil.20
In addition to employing rap as a pedagogic device in an effort to inform 
Afro-Brazilian counterhegemonic sensibilities vis-à-vis dominant Brazilian 
constructions of racial exceptionalism, Consciencia Urbana’s songs evoke 
black diasporic imagery and identifications as a means of grounding the local 
within broader histories of black antiracist struggle. In referencing the signifi-
cance of Malcolm X, for example, Big Richard explains: “We decided to make 
a rap song about Malcolm X because he was not solely a black American. He 
lost his Americanness when he fought against racism, for any person who fights 
against racism anywhere in the world is fighting for blacks, for the survival of 
black people. ”21
Here the figure of Malcolm X is resignified beyond his U.S. historical speci-
ficity in an effort to accommodate a more expansive diasporic reading. Similar 
moves are echoed in a song by Racionais MC’s where baggy-jeaned, baseball-
cap-adorned member Mono Brown riffs, “We need a leader with popular 
credit like Malcolm X as in other times in America, who is black down to the 
bones/uRELfk.done of us/uRELfk.dand reconstructs our pride from ruins. ”22 These artists’ 
adoption and rearticulation of Malcolm X’s black nationalist imagery within 
the context of Afro-Brazilian struggle is a cogent example of the ways African-
descendant communities draw inspiration transnationally from experiences 
and cultures of black populations elsewhere. By mobilizing such diasporic re-
sources in this manner, to use Jacqueline Nassy Brown’s term, Afro-Brazilian 
rap artists not only tie their struggles historically to others in the diaspora but, 
in effect, actively constitute the black diaspora itself as a lived social reality.23 In 
the case of Malcolm X’s imagery, such cultural appropriations were no doubt 
informed at the time by the revitalization of Malcolm X in the United States by 
rap artists such as Public Enemy, who along with Spike Lee helped to feed the 
marc d. perry
238


--- PAGE 258 ---
“X” fashion trend of the early 1990s. Although these commodified representa-
tions of Malcolm’s complex legacy were not devoid of their commercially tied 
contradictions, they nonetheless retained a capacity to transnationally convey 
and generate meanings of a radical blackness for others.
Rather than simple appropriations, these examples illustrate how U.S. rap 
music and hip hop–attuned black popular c ulture serves as a lens through 
which diasporically informed ideas, messages, and identifications can and are 
actively fashioned. Such black diasporic pr ocesses and understandings are 
clearly articulated by Big Richard, who elaborates:
By principle, we think that rap is not a [North] American music. 
Rap is a music of black people, and black people originated in Af-
rica. In the case of those who are born outside of Africa, we are 
speaking of the Diaspora. Here in Brazil, it is a regional music, 
adapted to the Portuguese, to the Brazilian swing where we mix tim-
balala and samba-reggae with rap. We make a connection by join-
ing American music with Brazilian music in creating our own style, 
but without ever losing the music’s roots, because in fact these two 
roots are sisters/uRELfk.dthey originated in only one place, Africa.24
While emphasizing the African historical “roots” of rap music, Big Rich-
ard simultaneously evokes the contemporary routes of rap’s black diasporic 
significance in referencing its aesthetically conveyed blackness as the basis for 
constructing transnational black “connections” between Brazil and the United 
States. He suggests that such identifications are made most real not simply 
through the consumption of hip hop but, rather, through the ways hip hop is 
proactively transformed in the making of a new, culturally relevant, yet a signi-
fyingly “black” Brazilian music form. Big Richard’s reference to “creating our 
own style” through the fusion of Afro-Brazilian musical elements and the use of 
Portuguese to indigenize rap further underscores the important interrelation-
ality between style making and identity. On both aesthetic and linguistic levels, 
then, the creative reworking of hip hop’s conveyed blackness not only may give 
rise to a new Brazilian music genre but mi ght, in fact, serve as an alternative 
modality for articulating blackness in Brazil altogether. The suggestion here is 
that hip hop may facilitate black social imaginaries that transcend nationally 
prescriptive, historically circumscribed fields of Brazilian blackness.
Within the broader space of Brazilian hip hop, style is also key to the ways 
blackness is performatively marked and bodily exhibited through popular fash-
ion. Glossy hip hop magazines such as Rap Brasil, Hip Hop en Movimiento, and 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
239


--- PAGE 259 ---
Rap Rima that have emerged over the past decade are filled with images of 
young black and brown, primarily male, Brazilians dressed in U.S.-inspired hip 
hop attire. The enactive “rocking” of such hip hop fashion is often accompanied 
by overt body posturing stylistically evocative of that employed by young Afri-
can American men and male rap artists. Many of Brazil’s most established rap 
groups signify themselves in one form or another through such U.S.-inspired 
black urban style. As a mode of self-representational practice, style in this way 
must be understood as “performative” in its own right/uRELfk.dperformative in the 
productive sense in which Judith Butler speaks of how individual subjectivi-
ties and the social categories that define them are in the end constituted only 
insomuch as they are enacted or performed in everyday life.25 Indeed, if we 
consider Stuart Hall’s suggestion that “it is only through the ways in which we 
represent and imagine ourselves that we come to know how we are,”26 empha-
sizing the performative nature of black popular style in this way encourages 
considerations of the active self-representational force of style in its capacity 
to culturally articulate, more than simply reflect, identities of blackness and 
ways of being.27
Afro-Brazilian rap duo Afro-X and De xter further illustrate this perfor-
mative mending of black urban style and the aesthetic production of black 
selfhood. The duo recorded their first album in 2000 while imprisoned in the 
infamous São Paulo Carandiru prison complex that first gained international 
attention in 1992 when 111 inmates were systematically massacred by military 
police following a prison uprising. Referring to themselves as “509-E” after 
their prison cell number, Afro-X and Dext er’s music assails a corrupt justice 
system while testifying to the violent realities of being black, male, and poor 
in contemporary Brazil. In addition to limited performances in prison, the 
duo recorded a video for MTV Brazil in which they can be seen sporting gold 
chains and designer sneakers.28 Their state-regulation beige pants are worn 
baggy off the hip, stylistically evoking U.S. hip hop–associated fashion prac-
tices first coined by young African American males that, ironically, arose out 
of U.S. prison culture.
As these Brazilian examples suggest, rap music and associated hip hop cul-
ture can provide alternative cultural frameworks through which new meanings 
and identities of blackness can be strategically articulated and performatively 
mobilized. T o the extent that these identifications are forged through trans-
nationally projected black imagery, they are not predicated on linguistic in-
telligibility. Rather, hip hop’s black racial alterity is conveyed most tangibly 
through its marked blackness of style. Such blackness, in turn, is transformed 
marc d. perry
240


--- PAGE 260 ---
through both linguistic and stylistic innovations in the voicing and bodily per-
formance of new kinds of critical black subjectivity that are both products of 
and responsive to the particular sociocultural imperatives of contemporary 
Brazil. Writing on Afro-Brazilian youth culture in Bahia, Brazil, Livio Sansone 
observes that the fashioning of new black-signified youth styles as exempli-
fied in hip hop “offers black people new opportunities for redefining black 
difference in Western societies by aestheticizing blackness, in the first place, 
through highly visible styles and pop music. ”29 Indeed, the adoption of these 
transnationally informed youth practices provides young Afro-Brazilians with 
means of not only marking their blackness more visibly but actively linking 
their struggles to a broader black diasporic experience and transnational frame-
works of black antiracism.
Cuba
Much as in Brazil, race and blackness have long been at the center of Cuba’s 
historical narrative, dating back to the massive importation of enslaved Afri-
cans upon whose labor the island’s sugar-based plantation economy grew to 
the largest in the colonial world by the mid-nineteenth century. Cuba’s welding 
of race and nation was further deepen ed in the late nineteenth century dur-
ing the island’s anticolonial wars of independence in which recently liberated 
Afro-Cubans comprised the vast majority of the independence movement’s 
fighting force. Here the struggle to free the island from Spanish colonial control 
was inextricably tied to the struggle for black emancipation and correspond-
ing visions for a racially just and equitable Cuban nation.30 Such expectations 
remained largely elusive until after 1959, when the Cuban Revolution took up 
socialism and placed racial equality, at least initially, at the center of its declared 
program to build a socially egalitarian society. While the extent to which the 
Cuban Revolution was able to eliminate racism and hierarchical racial privilege 
remains debated,31 it is unquestionable that many black Cubans did, on the 
whole, benefit significantly from the social reforms and programs undertaken 
during the early revolutionary period. This did not mean that the deep, histori-
cally rooted ideological structures of racism in Cuban society ceased to operate 
and to reproduce themselves in everyday life. T o speak publicly of racism’s per-
sistence, however, became taboo under revolutionary socialism, which by the 
mid-1960s had declared racism and racial discrimination officially eradicated 
from the island. Assertions to the contrary were ultimately deemed divisive, 
counterrevolutionary if not counternational declarations.
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
241


--- PAGE 261 ---
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc ushered in yet an-
other critical phase of Cuba’s racial history. With the 1990 suspension of So-
viet subsidies upon which Cuba’s economy and the revolutionary project had 
been largely underwritten, the island fell into a severe economic crisis known 
as the “special period. ” In a strategic move to revive the economy, the Cuban 
state initiated a series of economic reforms in the early 1990s that, in effect, 
represented a cautious opening of the heretofore-closed Cuban economy to 
global capital. Possibly the most dramatic consequence of this neoliberal shift 
has been the dollarization of Cuba’s economy and its transformative impacts 
on everyday life in Cuba.32 In addition to engendering greater social stratifica-
tion predicated upon differing levels of access to circulating dollars and other 
foreign currencies, race (re)emerged as a critical factor affecting who and how 
one gets such access within Cuba’s new economy.33 Within these workings, 
new levels, if not racialized modes, of socioeconomic marginalization have 
surfaced in Cuba today. Under such conditions the ideological claims of a 
unified, “nonracial” Cuba under revolutionary socialism and the subsequent 
silencing of race were now laid bare by the everyday lived social consequences 
of racial difference in Cuba. The critical question to be asked, then, concerns 
how black and darker-skinned Cubans are currently responding to these new 
racialized realities and to what extent and in what ways might such efforts be 
contestatory.
It is no coincidence that the emergence of hip hop in Cuba over the last 
decade or so has occurred precisely during this current period of rapid social 
transformation.34 Though the early roots of rap music in Cuba can be traced 
back to the mid-1980s, it was not until the economic crisis of the 1990s that 
hip hop as a cultural movement in Cuba began to take shape. It is significant, 
moreover, that those who first and most ardently engaged in hip hop were 
overwhelmingly black and darker-skinned youth. It remained so as interest in 
rap music spread throughout the greater Havana area. A cultural space, almost 
exclusively black and young, began to evolve around the transnationally intro-
duced music form. Within a relatively short time, parties began springing up 
across Havana where young people gathered to listen, dance, and otherwise 
participate in the collective making of Cuba’s nascent hip hop movement.35
By the mid-1990s these new black spaces had a brief footing in a few state-run 
cultural centers before garnering the distrust of some Cuban officials who 
viewed such gatherings with suspicion, ostensibly associating them with capi-
talist culture and antisocial influences.
marc d. perry
242


--- PAGE 262 ---
Within today’s vibrant self-identified Cuban hip hop movement, black 
youth frequent dance clubs and additional venues throughout the island’s 
urban centers where the latest U.S. hip hop can be heard. Many of these youth, 
significantly, are drawn from poorer, more socially marginal neighborhoods. 
As scores of youth dance and sin g along with the music/uRELfk.dthough most do 
not actually speak English themselves/uRELfk.dthey don baggy pants, foreign-made 
athletic shoes, and U.S. baseball caps and team jerseys. These commodified 
expressions of U.S. black youth culture are tied to the recent opening of the 
island to transnational flows of people, capital, and cultural influences, as well 
as a growing culture of consumerism in a once defiantly anticonsumerist Cuba. 
Y et like their Brazilian peers, these youth mobilize black-signified style as self-
constituting practices.
Beyond questions of consumption, however, the cultural meaning-making 
within Cuban hip hop lies most significantly in the way young Afro-Cubans are 
critically refashioning rap music and hip hop’s black-signified aesthetics into 
their own idioms of self-expression. With an estimated 500 or more rap groups 
currently islandwide, there are sites throughout Cuba where local raperos, as 
Cuban MCs are termed, perform original material before packed audiences. 
While frequently using body posturing and gestures evocative of U.S. rap per-
formances, their lyrics are sung in a distinctly Cuban Spanish vernacular over 
rhythms often incorporating Afro-Cuban musical elements. At the center of 
the music, however, is a thematic emphasis on social critique in which many 
raperos evoke their identities as los negros (black people) as the basis from 
which their perspectives are critically voiced. It is important to note that a 
significant number of raperos and their followers who might not necessarily 
be categorized as “negro” (black) within Cuba’s phenotypically graduated sys-
tem of racial classification self-identify as such. In conversation with some of 
these individuals, many suggest that it was precisely through their involvement 
within the Cuban hip hop movement that they came to identify themselves 
as black. As Randy of the Havana-based duo Los Paisanos explained, “Me? 
I’m black. Well here in Cuba I’m jabao. This is what they tell me here in Cuba, 
jabao. This light brown hair and eyes more or less light, all the same color, and 
with light brown skin. ” When asked how long he identified as black ( negro),
Randy replied, “Not very long. It has been a short time, since I began to take 
seriously the hip hop movement. Hip hop is a thing that frees the mentality, 
it is freedom. Many people don’t understand but for us it is freedom. We have 
changed our way of thinking and we have completely opened our thinking. 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
243


--- PAGE 263 ---
I don’t know, it’s a powerful weapon. Hip hop is a force, it’s life, it’s a way of 
life. ”36 As Randy’s comments suggest, hip hop can indeed be instrumental in 
forging new understandings of black selfhood. Rather than simply a question 
of music, hip hop becomes for Randy a way of life, a transformative, liberating 
force associated with black self-actualization.
Y et such identities find their most active and politically demonstrative ex-
pression through their performance. In addition to everyday concerns, such as 
struggles for foreign currency and the social impacts of tourism and the related 
sex trade, raperos frequently address manifestations of and struggles against an-
tiblack racism both locally and internationally. In doing so, these youth actively 
position themselves and their politics within a broader Afrodiasporic context 
of present-day black struggle. U.S. black radical figures such as Malcolm X, the 
Black Panthers, and more recently, Mumia Abu-Jamal have become important 
verbal references among many Cuban MCs. The transnational sites of contact 
for such black radical iconography stem primarily from two related sources. 
The first is raperos’ long-standing engagement with critically oriented African 
American rap artists from the United States, and the second arises from the 
influence of African American political exiles, most notably Assata Shakur 
and Nehanda Abiodun. Abiodun has been particularly active in mentoring 
capacities within Havana’s hip hop community, conferring on her something 
of a la madrina, or godmother, status within the movement.
Another key facilitator of these black radical connections has been the New 
Y ork–based Black August Collective, which participated in a number of the 
early Cuban hip hop festivals held annually in Havana. Black August’s partici-
pation along these lines has been twofold: organizing festival performances 
of more politically identified African American artists such as Mos Def and 
T alib Kweli, Common, and Dead Prez, while strengthening bonds with Afri-
can American political exiles on the island. Largely as a result of these varying 
engagements, raperos’ transnationally envisioned notions of social justice are 
often advanced within overlapping discourses of “revolution”/uRELfk.done rooted 
in post-1959 Cuban revolutionary society and another informed by U.S. black 
radical/nationalist traditions and their contemporary struggles.
Y et on another level and resonant with similar examples in other Afro-
diasporic sites,37 such diasporically attuned, self-consciously “modern” expres-
sions of blackness overtly contest Cuba’s dominant historical configuration 
of blackness within the nationally bounded trope of “folklore. ” Framings of 
this kind have tended to relegate Afro-Cubans to an ahistorical, unchang-
ing “national” past, effectively freezing blacks within static representations 
marc d. perry
244


--- PAGE 264 ---
of the “traditional” rather than recognizing the dynamic and ever-changing 
nature of Afro-Cuban culture, identity, and social agency. The self-affirming, 
nationally expansive black modernity asserted by Afro-Cuban raperos clearly 
stands in stark juxtaposition to, if not in implicit critique of, such folklorized 
constraints.
Given the growing marginalization of darker-skinned Cubans from centers 
of economic activity in an increasingly socially stratified Cuba, raperos can 
be understood as employing the black-identified cultural space of hip hop to 
articulate and mobilize their racial difference in response to greater levels of 
racially lived social inequality. Hip hop’s black-signified framings offer these 
youth a racially empowering, yet alternative, nationally transcendent source of 
black identification. Such diasporically aware blackness, in turn, serves as the 
basis upon which to act and move politically. Here, raperos’ musical emphasis 
on social critique is often aimed at deconstructing the mounting contradic-
tions between the claims of a socially jus t, racially egalitarian society under 
revolutionary socialism and the growing realities of class and racial polariza-
tion within the island’s new neoliberally impacted economy.
Most raperos, however, are far from counterrevolutionaries, as some off the 
island might like to claim. Quite the contrary. The majority of Cuban MCs see 
their music as critically engaged in one form or another in advancing key prin-
ciples embodied in the ideals of the Cuban Revolution. As Kokino, a member 
of Havana’s Anónimo Consejo (Anonymous Advice), put it, “Our critique or 
our protest is constructive. The idea of Anónimo Consejo is not to throw the 
revolution to the floor. It is rather to make a revolution within the revolution. 
It is to criticize the things, or to protest the things that are not well within the 
Cuban revolution. But our objective is not to harass or be destructive, but it is 
to make a new Cuba for young people. ”38 Indeed, these youth represent a gen-
eration of socially engaged artists who remain shaped by the socialist-derived 
notions of egalitarianism embedded and still alive within Cuban society. Im-
plicit critiques of capitalism and its debilitating effects on Cuban society are 
recurring themes within much of Cuban hip hop. Moreover, vocal challenges 
to U.S. imperialism/uRELfk.dthose articulated with Cuban revolutionary discourse as 
well as more radical voices within U.S. hip hop/uRELfk.dhold significant sway among 
many Cuban MCs. All this said, raperos’ central object of critique remains 
Cuban society and its lived contradictions.
MCs Zoandris and Pelón, who comprise the Havana-based duo Hermanos 
de Causa (Brothers of Cause), are among the most respected and politically 
outspoken raperos on the island. One of their signature tracks from their 2003 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
245


--- PAGE 265 ---
album is “Lágrimas Negras” (“Black T ears”). T aking the song’s title from a 
classic Cuban bolero-son made famous in the 1930s by the celebrated Cuban 
composer Miguel Matamoros, Hermanos de Causa’s “Lágrimas Negras” pre-
sents a lamentable though unabashed denunciation of the prevalence of racism 
in today’s Cuba.
Y o de frente todo el tiempo realista
No digas que no hay racismo
donde hay un racista
siempre y cuando donde quiera 
que me encuentre el prejuicio 
de una forma o de otra
siempre esta presente
[. . .]
Siento odio profundo por tu 
racismo
Ya no me confundo con tu ironía
Ylloro sin que sepas que el llanto 
mío
Tiene lágrimas negras como mi 
vida
[. . .]
No me digas que no hay porque
yo sé, lo he visto
No me digas que no existe porque
lo he vivido
No me niegues que hay oculto
un prejuicio racial que nos 
condena y
nos valora a todos por igual
No te dejes engañar
los ojos de par en par
No te dejes engañar . . .
I in front, all the time a realist
Don’t say that there isn’t racism
where there is a racist
Always, when and where ever I 
find myself, prejudice in one 
form or another is always 
present
[. . .]
I feel profound hate for your 
racism
I am no longer confused by your 
irony
And I cry without you knowing 
that my cry has black tears like 
my life
[. . .]
Don’t tell me that there isn’t any 
because I know, I have seen it
Don’t tell me that it doesn’t exist 
because I have lived it
Don’t deny that there is a hidden
racial prejudice that condemns us 
and
values us all the same
Don’t be fooled
Eyes wide open
Don’t be deceived . . .
Hermanos de Causa in no uncertain terms seeks to expose the stark incon-
gruities between long-standing revolutionary discourses that deny the work-
ings of racism versus the lived realities and social consequences of racialized 
existence in Cuba today. Rather than a marker of romantic sorrow as conveyed 
marc d. perry
246


--- PAGE 266 ---
in the original rendition, in Hermanos de Causa’s version of “Lágrimas Negras,” 
the song’s title is resignified to foreground a racial positionality at the center of 
its testimonial critique/uRELfk.din short, a critical black subject, “no longer confused,” 
who refuses to remain silent.
A particularly significant marker of hip hop’s Cuban ascendance has been 
the Cuban state’s response to its racially signified cultural politics. In 1999 the 
Cuban minister of culture organized a meeting with representatives of Havana’s 
hip hop community where he expressed the government’s recognition of rap 
as a legitimate form of Cuban cultural expression. Prior to this moment, as 
suggested earlier, the Cuban state regarded rap music as an icon of U.S. capi-
talist culture with implied counterrevolutionary tendencies. Since this shift, 
however, the state became increasingly involved in the institutionalization of 
Cuban hip hop within the frame of revolutionary national culture.
The evolution of the annual Cuban Hip Hop Festival serves as a key indica-
tor of the Cuban state’s growing interest in, and attempted institutionalization 
of, the hip hop movement. Initiated in 1995, the festival was founded by a small 
group of black cultural activists interested in creating a space to showcase Ha-
vana’s emerging rap talent. With little support from the Cuban government, 
these individuals ran the festival unti l 2000, when the cultural branch of the 
Union of Y oung Communists stepped in as the event’s sole organizer. From 
this point on, state institutions have played an increasingly active role in mak-
ing resources and public venues available to rap artists. At the same time, the 
Cuban state has made consistent efforts to assume a position as a key arbiter 
and representational face of the movement. The establishment in 2002 of the 
state-run La Agencia de Rap, or Cuban Rap Agency, represented the most 
dramatic expression of such incorporative institutionalizing moves. Y et in all its 
institutional expressions, the Cuban state has conspicuously/uRELfk.dthough not sur-
prisingly/uRELfk.ddownplayed, if not completely ignored, the black racial significance 
of Cuban hip hop in its official dealings with the movement. T o acknowledge 
this racial significance would open the Pandora’s box of race and its contem-
porary dynamics, which the revolutionary leadership remains largely resistant 
to openly addressing.
Though initial reception on the part of many raperos to this new official 
attention was relatively positive, there was some ambivalence. On one level, 
the hip hop movement has long fought for recognition and the right to state 
resources within the context of a socialist society. Therefore, the recent access 
was much appreciated. Nonetheless, there remained at various levels caution, 
if not mistrust, on the part of many Cuban MCs regarding the extent to which 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
247


--- PAGE 267 ---
the state sought to hold the reins. While the Cuban state’s recognition of hip 
hop may have signaled a move toward authorizing it as a valid part of Cuban 
national culture and thus bestowing u pon it just resources, that recognition 
can also be read as an attempt to incorporate a previously marginalized youth 
culture/uRELfk.das well as its racial underpinnings/uRELfk.dwithin institutional structures, 
thereby mitigating its oppositional potential.
While this may certainly be the case, I suggest that such incorporation 
has simultaneously enabled the development of an alternative space of racial 
articulation within an otherwise tightly controlled Cuban public landscape. I 
contend that Cuban hip hop has come to occupy an important site of racially 
positioned social critique and antiracist advocacy within contemporary Cuba 
and, in doing so, helps push critical accounts of racial and class dynamics fur-
ther into realms of public discourse at this critical historical juncture. As such, 
hip hop can be understood as an increasingly important player in an evolving 
black public sphere predicated on the assertion of a contemporary black po-
litical difference within a previously configured, ostensibly “nonracial” Cuban 
national imaginary. Within this evolving black counterpublic,39 Afro-Cuban 
intellectuals and artists are increasingly engaging raperos whose work is seen 
in vanguardist terms vis-à-vis the island’s current spectrum of racial politics. 
Moreover, courses at the University of Havana are now accessing Cuban rap 
lyrics as important sources of contemporary social commentary on Cuban 
society.
The future of Cuban hip hop, as the future of Cuba as a whole at this trans-
formative moment, remains to be seen. Y et the efforts of Afro-Cuban raperos
illuminate the dialect interplay between shifting regimes of racialized power 
and emergent forms of race-based social praxis as they are increasingly forged 
at the intersection of the local and the global. Here, the transnational, black-
signified space of hip hop has been instrumental in enabling new forms of 
diasporically engaged strategies of self-making and self-action in the face of 
new globally inflected imperatives of race.
South Africa
While traditional scholarship of the African Diaspora has tended to concern 
itself with populations of African descent that share a common historical expe-
rience of dispersion/uRELfk.doften involuntary/uRELfk.dfrom an African “homeland,” thus 
privileging the Atlantic as the primary locale of diasporic experience, others 
have underscored the necessity of (re)centering Africa as a contemporary site 
marc d. perry
248


--- PAGE 268 ---
in the making and shaping of black diaspor ic identities and related political 
expression.40 When considering the transnational contours of hip hop as a 
modern-day route of black racial identification, Africa itself has to be reckoned 
with. The widespread proliferation of rap artists and hip hop culture through-
out Africa’s urban centers represents an important manifestation of hip hop’s 
global black reach. The rise of vibrant local hip hop movements in Senegal, 
Ghana, Benin, Kenya, and Cote d’Ivoire/uRELfk.dto name just a few/uRELfk.dsuggests that 
African youth today are increasingly engaging in the black-signified cultural 
space of hip hop as a medium of critical self-expression.41
The very real, structurally conditioned hardships that much of sub-Saharan 
Africa continues to live through have no doubt shaped the social commitments 
and political urgencies found in much of the hip hop produced on the conti-
nent. Before Kanye West’s anti-“bling” single “Diamonds from Sierra Leone” 
(2005) helped draw U.S. attention to the economies of violence tied to Africa’s 
diamond trade, Sierra Leonean youth in Freetown had long been active in 
using hip hop as a medium of social critique in the postwar nation.42 In East 
Africa, Swahili-language rap in cities like Dar es Salaam, T anzania, and Nairobi, 
Kenya, have similarly become an important vehicle among urban youth for giv-
ing critical voice to present-day social concerns such as AIDS, joblessness, and 
state corruption.43 For the purposes of this essay, however, the gaze is turned 
southward toward South Africa/uRELfk.done of the earliest sites of hip hop on the 
continent/uRELfk.das a poignant example of the ways critically positioned identities 
of blackness have been mobilized through the transnational lens of hip hop.
South African hip hop has undergone significant development since its 
emergence during the waning years of apartheid among Cape T own’s coloured, 
or “mixed-race,” youth in the late 1980s. T oday, Johannesburg has joined Cape 
T own as one of South Africa’s centers of locally produced hip hop, with each 
reflecting the particular cultural (and racial) dynamics of their regional set-
tings. For one, Johannesburg-based hip hop has had to compete with the rise 
of kwaito/uRELfk.da frenetic, widely popular dance music out of Johannesburg’s black 
townships that fuses older South African music genres, such as mbaqanga, with 
Western music styles, including hip hop. Heavily incorporative of the township 
vernacular isicamtho,44 kwaito artists have generally tended to gravitate toward 
festive rather than explicit sociopolitical themes in their lyrics. Some have 
suggested such orientations reflect a celebratory postapartheid move among 
many black South African youth away from the more overt political impera-
tives of the apartheid era.45 Given the widespread popularity of kwaito among 
Johannesburg’s black township youth/uRELfk.dthe same demographic fan base from 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
249


--- PAGE 269 ---
which the region’s hip hop traditionally draws/uRELfk.dit is not surprising that the 
music has had a significant impact on the local hip hop scene, leading in some 
cases to a potential blurring of genres. There are those within Johannesburg’s 
hip hop scene, however, who hold firm to what they see as a clear and necessary 
artistic distinction between the two genres.46
While South Africa’s top-selling, Soweto-born hip hop artist Pitch Black 
Afro may employ blackness satirically as a central performative trope (e.g., 
his ubiquitous oversized Afro wig), a differing and possibly more politically 
consequent mobilization of blackness can be found in the context of the genre’s 
birth in Cape T own. Hip hop emerged in South Africa in the late 1980s pri-
marily among coloured youth of Cape T own’s sprawling Cape Flats region.47
Coloureds, as peoples of “mixed race” were legally classified under apartheid’s 
racialized caste system, literally occupied the racial middle ground, historically 
positioned by the apartheid state as a buffer between the worlds of white and 
black South Africa. Residentially, educationally, and frequently professionally 
segregated from both black and white South Africans, coloured communi-
ties often developed their own cultural identity, drawing variously upon their 
African, Indo-Malaysian, and European cultural histories.48 And unlike black 
South Africans, coloureds generally spoke either Afrikaans or English as their 
primary, identifying language, rather than local African vernaculars. Moreover, 
in accordance with apartheid’s divide-and-rule logic, coloureds were allotted 
limited class privileges over black South Africans. Such efforts contributed to 
the historical formation of a racialized class of South Africans who generally 
aspired to and identified more with white South African status, to the detri-
ment of a nonwhite or “black” social identity/uRELfk.da development clearly attuned 
with the grand designs of apartheid.
As with the rest of South Africa, however, the 1980s were a highly charged 
time in the Cape T own region with the rise of mass antiapartheid political 
mobilization. During this period significant numbers of coloured youth were 
politicized through varying forms of activism. The critical turning point in the 
antiapartheid struggle culminated in 1990 with the release of Nelson Mandela 
and the unbanning of the African National Congress (ANC) and the South 
African Communist Party. It was within this politically charged moment of 
social transformation that South Africa’s self-defined Black Hip Hop Move-
ment first found its footing among Cape T own’s coloured youth. Though the 
movement’s followers eventually adopted “ African” in the place of “Black” as a 
self-identifying term, the initial choice was indicative of the movement’s early 
marc d. perry
250


--- PAGE 270 ---
deployment of blackness as an identity-based social marker.49 And while the 
later shift may have, in part, reflected the broader move in postapartheid South 
Africa toward nonracialism as a reconciliatory national project,50 the use of 
“ African” as a self-marker by historically configured coloured youth clearly 
carried with it additional political significance.
Probably the most influential hip hop group to emerge during this early 
period was the Cape Flats–based Prophets of Da City (POC), who are often 
celebrated as key pioneers of South African hip hop. Formed in 1990 during 
that critical year of political openings, POC was headed by members Ready D, 
Shaheen, and Ramone, who drew heavily upon Cape T own’s preexisting b-boy 
(break-dancing) culture in their performances. From its initiation, the group’s 
music embraced a strong sociopolitical focus often directed at addressing the 
everyday struggles of coloured township life, including those pertaining to 
poverty, unemployment, gang violence, and drug abuse.51 At the center of 
these concerns, however, were explicit critiques of apartheid and its various 
manifestations of racialized oppression.
Y et a key and defining component of POC’s early political voicings was 
their use of the term “black” as a self-referential marker. Through their music 
and other public engagements, POC’s members consistently positioned them-
selves as both black and African in oppositional stance to their historical clas-
sification as coloured under apartheid. This move was particularly significant 
when we consider that during this same period, the coloured population of 
the greater Cape T own region voted resoundingly for the white Afrikaner-led 
National Party/uRELfk.dthe very architects of apartheid/uRELfk.dover Nelson Mandela’s 
ANC in South Africa’s first multiracial elections in 1994. POC’s assertion of a 
black Africanness as coloured youth, in turn, signified a political affront to a 
divisive racial paradigm designed to hinder political alliance between people 
of “mixed race” and the larger “black” South African majority. Cognizant of 
the political stakes of such ideological trappings, POC’s track “Black Thing,” 
released one year after the national elections, riffs,
The term “coloured” is a desperate case
of how the devil’s divided us by calling us a separate race.
They call me “coloured” said my blood isn’t pure, but G,
I’m not jakking my insecurity.
So I respond to this and ventilate my mental state with Black 
Consciousness .... 5 2
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
251


--- PAGE 271 ---
Adam Haupt, who among others has chronicled the deployment of racial dis-
course within Cape T own’s hip hop scene of the 1990s, draws attention to 
POC’s allusion to South Africa’s Black Consciousness Movement of the 1960 
and 1970s as a “unifying narrative” that “provides an alternative to the divisive 
discourse of apartheid. ”53 Indeed, such appeals not only posit a broadened and 
racially inclusive notion of blackness but also seek to situate POC members 
within a historical continuum of black political struggle and consciousness 
in South Africa.
While hip hop proves a performative frame through which such counter-
hegemonic assertions of “black” subjectivity can be rooted nationally, it may 
also facilitate a forging of black self through transnationally expansive under-
standings of blackness. Black Noise, another key pioneering Cape T own–based 
hip hop crew comprised of historically situated coloured youth, illustrates this 
kind of strategic melding of national and transnational frames of blackness. As 
their name attests, Black Noise placed a se lf-signifying “black” African iden-
tity and social message at the very center of their music and public image. 
The group’s 1994 track “Who T aught Y ou to Hate Y ourself?” stands out as a 
particularly vivid expression of such black political fusions. The song’s title is 
drawn from an oft-cited quote of Malcolm X’s in which he rhetorically chides 
his African American audience about internalized black self-hatred. The track’s 
chorus builds around a sequence of audio samples in which we hear Malcolm 
X forcibly prompting, “Who taught you to hate yourself? This blue-eyed man,” 
followed by “Don’t let the white man speak for you / And don’t let the white 
man fight for you. ” Embedded within the sequence we hear a South African 
voice intoning in Afrikaans, “ Kaffirs bly maar kaffirs” (“Kaffirs (niggers) will 
remain kaffirs”)54/uRELfk.dor “Y ou remain where you are. ” Through this intertextual 
montage a transatlantic dialogue is for ged between South African and U.S. 
historical realities of race. I suggest that it is precisely through such dialogic 
references that these artists facilitate a nationally transcendent understanding 
of black political struggle and subjectivity. The outlines of such positioned 
identity are given active voice by member Emile Jansen, who follows in the 
track’s second verse:
That’s right the whites taught me to hate who I am
They labeled us as coloured
But now I know I’m a black man.
Apartheid’s divide and conquer, Made us believe we’re a separate race
marc d. perry
252


--- PAGE 272 ---
And who wants to be a creation, of the supremacist pale face,
And if you’re not a perpetrator, of white supremacy,
Then ask yourself
Why you’re now angry at me
The word coloured implies
That we’re genetically 50/50
But the black gene is dominant
And therefore I’m black see
Y ou’ll never say, Cause we know about our white past
Making coloureds understand they’re black, Is one hell of a task,
Educated with self hatred
Our black past was destroyed . . . .55
Such lyrics not only provide a poignant critique of the fragmentizing logics of 
apartheid’s system of racial classification but give narrative form to the politi-
cal agency of black self-constitution through the performative dimensions of 
hip hop.
The transnational routes of such black self-makings found further ground-
ings through Black Noise’s active participation in the local South African 
branch of Afrika Bambaataa’s Bronx-based Universal Zulu Nation.56 The 
extent of these commitments brought Emile Jansen to New Y ork in 1993 as 
South Africa’s representative to the Zulu Nation’s twentieth-anniversary cel-
ebration.57 Such affiliations, however, were not without their ambivalences. 
Jane Battersby has suggested that the African American–derived Afrocentric 
imagery upon which Bambaataa’s Zulu Nation drew was woefully incongruent 
with the political realities of South Africa’s ethno-racial landscape.58 The use of 
the expression “Zulu Nation” itself was particularly fraught because it evoked 
a complex set of politically charged meanings in South Africa, given Zulus’ 
pivotal role in the country’s recent history of ethnically manipulated political 
violence. While such cultural translations clearly had limitations, it would be 
wholly reductive to dismiss their social significance. The importance of such 
engagement lies, rather, in the transnational contours of Black Noise’s articula-
tions of, if not identifications with, the black-signified cultural symbolism of 
the Bronx-born Zulu Nation.
Political orientations of these kinds found active social expression through 
the numerous workshops and speaking engagements both POC and Black 
Noise have undertaken in South African schools, libraries, and prisons over 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
253


--- PAGE 273 ---
the years. Such efforts illustrate the creative fusion of the pedagogic tenden-
cies of rap music with social activism as these youth take their message and 
concerns to a generation of young people throughout the Cape T own region. 
One noteworthy example of such engagement was the headlining participation 
in 2000 of POC and Black Noise in a youth AIDS-awareness campaign directed 
at mobilizing hip hop as a means to promote HIV education among secondary 
school students.59 Black Noise member Emile Jansen has been particularly 
committed to community-based activism, embracing an acutely politicized 
position vis-à-vis questions of racial ident ity. Jansen initiated a series of local 
forums in the Cape Flats area dubbed the T .E.A.A.C.H. Project (The Educa-
tional Alternative Awakening Corrupted Heads), intended, as he explained, to 
“re-educate people to the proud past the black people have and to make them 
aware that respect for our people by themselves and others will only be attained 
if we know our past and supply our people with black role models that they can 
aspire to. ”60 Additionally, Jansen founded a school-based touring project titled 
“Heal the Hood,” directed toward promoting what he described as “respect for 
being African and using these talents responsibly for the benefit of Africa. ”61
As these examples demonstrate, the politics of identity/uRELfk.din particular 
those embracing a recuperative notion of a black Africanness/uRELfk.dstand central 
to the self-vision and social mission of groups like POC and Black Noise. From 
performative fashionings to political engagement, these South African youth 
can be understood not only as constituting new oppositionally positioned 
identities of blackness through the transnationally attuned space of hip hop, 
but as strategically deploying them in politically directed ways.
Concluding Thoughts
Reflecting on the political possibilities of global music circuits, George Lipsitz 
has suggested that transnational music flows can provide resources for “the 
recognition of new networks and affiliations [while] they become crucibles 
for complex identities in formation that respond to the imperatives of place at 
the same time they transcend them. ”62 When considering the Afrodiasporic 
dimensions of present-day hip hop, such multivalent identity formations are 
decidedly at play. Here my attention has turned to local hip hop followings 
in Brazil, Cuba, and South Africa as test aments to how African and African-
descendant youth employ the space of hip hop to fashion and marshal globally 
conscious notions of black selves toward liberatory ends. Identity-centered 
marc d. perry
254


--- PAGE 274 ---
mobilizations of these kinds recall what Leith Mullings has termed “racial-
izations from below” in describing the transnationally inflected ways racially 
marginalized communities use the language of race itself as the basis to chal-
lenge globalized workings of racial subjugation.63 Such maneuvers are forged 
through complex interplays of racializing forces, on one hand, and racially 
grounded social agencies, on the other.
As I have argued, it is precisely through the political framings of diaspora 
that such contestive self-racializations find their most poignant expression. 
Nationally transcendent modes of black diasporic identification prove stra-
tegic in challenging local conditions of racial oppression while remaining 
critically responsive to the ways global processes are increasingly reshaping 
such conditions. In the case of Brazil, hegemonic discourses tied to notions 
of “racial democracy” are increasingly unhinged as Afro-Brazilian youth utilize 
the diasporically configured black racial contours of hip hop to construct new 
identities to critically interrogate the racialized social realities of their every-
day lives. Along analogous lines in Cuba, raperos are using hip hop to contest 
long-standing ideologies of Cuban national racelessness, while providing acute 
public critiques of the racialized workings of neoliberal transformations in a 
rapidly shifting Cuban social landscape. In South Africa, a new generation 
of racialized coloured youth have attempted to position themselves amidst 
shifting racial paradigms of “old” and “new” where current claims to “nonra-
cialism” run counter to the continued lived consequences of hierarchical racial 
privilege.
Mapping such maneuvers elucidates the social significance of hip hop not 
simply in terms of its international circulation and consumption but, rather, 
through the ways it is actively lived and politically employed as a site of racial 
mobilization and self-formation. Among these black-identified youth, the 
space of diaspora/uRELfk.dthrough the performative lens of hip hop/uRELfk.doperates as a 
key paradigm of both identity and politics, and as such it has been instrumental 
in enabling transnationally engaged strategies of black self-fashioning and ac-
tion in response to new, globally conditioned modes of racialization. In doing 
so, these young people not only mobilize black selves but ultimately realize 
the black diaspora as a lived social formation itself. In this way, hip hop can be 
seen as an active site for the global (re)mapping of black political imaginaries 
via social dynamics of diaspora. Or, to return to the poetics of Los Paisanos’ “El 
Negro”: “¡Fundamentalmente hip hop quiere decir negro! Corto, pero penetrante”
(“Fundamentally hip hop means black! Concise, but penetrating”).
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
255


--- PAGE 275 ---
notes
1. In this essay I use the term “hip hop” to refer to the broad set of cultural practices, 
the stylized aesthetics, and the larger cultural industry associated with, and inclusive of, 
rap music.
2. See Mitchell, Global Noise; Condry, Hip-Hop Japan; and Osumare, Africanist Aes-
thetic in Global Hip-Hop.
3. Anderson, Imagined Communities.
4. See Appadurai, Modernity at Large.
5. Urla, “‘We Are All Malcolm X!’”
6. Hartman, “‘Debke Beat Funky as P .E. ’s Riff. ’”
7. Mitchell, Global Noise, 2.
8. Rose, Black Noise; Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop.
9. Rivera, New York Ricans from the Hip Hop Zone.
10. Gilroy, Black Atlantic; Gordon and Anderson, “ African Diaspora”; Patterson and 
Kelley, “Unfinished Migrations. ”
11. Edwards, “Use of Diaspora. ”
12. Gilroy, Black Atlantic.
13. Magaldi, “ Adopting Imports. ”
14. Hanchard, Orpheus and Power.
15. For critical discussions of Brazil’s “myth of racial democracy” and its impact on 
black political mobilization beyond Hanchard, see Winant, Racial Conditions, and Lilly 
Caldwell, Negras in Brazil.
16. Original Portuguese lyrics accessed September 18, 2007, from <http://www
.coquim.hpg.ig.com.br/l1.htm>.
17. T ranslation drawn from Roth Gordon, “Hip Hop Brasileiro. ”
18. Pardue, “Putting Mano to Music. ”
19. Roth Gordon, “Hip Hop Brasileiro. ”
20. Personal interview, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, July 27, 1993.
21. Ibid.
22. McDaniels, “Striking Cord with Y ouths,” 7.
23. Brown, “Black Liverpool. ”
24. Personal interview, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, July 27, 1993.
25. Butler, Gender Trouble.
26. Hall, What Is This Black?, 30.
27. Hebdige, Subculture.
28. Darlington, Brazilian Rappers.
29. Sansone, “New Blacks from Bahia,” 461.
30. Helg, Our Rightful Share.
31. For a discussion of varying scholarly readings of and the relative effectiveness of 
the Cuban Revolution’s approach to the problematics of race and racism, see Fernández, 
“Changing Discourse on Race in Contemporary Cuba,” and de la Fuente, Nation for 
All.
32. This scenario remained intact until November 2004, when the Cuban state, in an 
effort to reduce the island’s dependency on U.S. dollars, discouraged the flow of dollars 
marc d. perry
256


--- PAGE 276 ---
by way of exchange tariffs in favor of other forms of hard foreign currency. While such 
moves may have contributed to a de-dollarization of the Cuban economy, the funda-
mental mechanisms of foreign currency de pendency continued to function intact, as 
Cubans remain largely dependent on some form of foreign currency in order to survive 
in Cuba’s new economy.
33. Hammond, “High Cost of Dollars”; de la Fuente, Nation for All.
34. My analysis of the Cuban hip hop movement draws primarily from my two and 
a half years of ethnographic field research conducted in Havana.
35. Fernández, “¿Poesía urbana?”; Pac ini Hernández and Garofalo, “Hip Hop in 
Havana.”
36. Personal interview, Havana, Cuba, August 2, 2002.
37. See Thomas, Modern Blackness, and Godreau, “Folkloric ‘Others. ’”
38. Personal interview, Havana, Cuba, December 12, 2001.
39. Dawson, “Black Counterpublic?” Drawing on the work of Fraser, “Rethinking 
the Public Sphere,” Dawson distinguishes an alternative, subalternly positioned black 
“counterpublic” from that of Habermas’s bourgeois concept of the public sphere predi-
cated on formal institutional civic structures such as the media, the academy, and other 
dominant organizational forms.
40. Diawara, In Search of Africa; Echeruo, “ African Diaspora. ”
41. One only needs to glance at the website Africanhiphop.com to get a sense of the 
remarkable scope and depth to which hip hop has taken root in Africa. Africanhiphop.
com is but one of more than 200 websites dedicated to locally produced hip hop in Africa. 
Networks of these kinds, in turn, provide a once-inconceivable space for communicative 
interchange among African practitioners and followers of hip hop, while testifying to the 
technological savviness of those engaged in the production and promotion of hip hop in 
Africa despite the continent’s endemic levels of poverty and resource scarcity.
42. See, for instance, BBC Radio 1’s audio documentary The Beautiful Struggle (2005).
43. Perullo, “Hooligans and Heroes. ” Regarding Kenyan hip hop, see the documentary 
Hip Hop Colony: The African Hip Hop Explosion (2005), produced/directed by Michael 
Wanguhu.
44. Isicamtho is derived from a fusion of regional African languages such as Zulu, 
T swana, Sesotho, and Afrikaans. In the shifting parlance of the townships, the term has 
come to replace the expression tsotsitaal, or gagster-speak, previously used to refer to 
the ever-evolving township vernacular.
45. Stephens, “Kwaito”; Boloka, “Cultural Studies and the T ransformation of the 
Music Industry. ”
46. Interview with Johannesburg-based Skwatta Kamp, one of South Africa’s most com-
mercially successful hip hop crews, <http://www.musica.co.za/eMusica/news_article
.asp?segmentID=99&GenreID=99&ArticleID=1296> (accessed April 10, 2006).
47. A vast network of townships was erected in the 1960s along Cape T own’s sandy 
floodplains to accommodate large numbers of coloureds forcibly displaced by apartheid’s 
social geography.
48. Significant numbers of enslaved and indentured laborers from what are today 
Malaysia and Indonesia were brought to the Cape T own region in the late 1600s by 
Dutch traders. These “Malays” later intermixed with European settlers and indigenous 
Hip Hop’s Diasporic Landscapes of Blackness
257


--- PAGE 277 ---
Africans, resulting in the racial codification of “coloureds” as a population group under 
apartheid. Large segments of Cape T own’s coloured community still practice the Islam 
first introduced via Malay/Indonesian influences, and the religion continues to be an im-
portant component of a distinct cultural identity for many. Within the broader coloured 
population, both Afrikaans and English are spoken with a distinctive vernacular accent, 
cadence, and intonation.
49. This observation is drawn from my personal experience in Cape T own in 1991 
during the early formation of the region’s hip hop movement. At this juncture, youth 
participating in the scene, the vast majority of whom were coloured, titled themselves 
as the Black Hip Hop Movement.
50. See Frederikse, Unbreakable Thread.
51. Faber, “Cape T own’s Hip Hop Scene. ”
52. Cited in Haupt, “Hip-Hop in the Age of Empire. ”
53. Ibid., 217. See also Watkins, “‘Simunye, We Are Not One,’” and Battersby, “‘Some-
time It Feels Like I Am Not Black Enough. ’”
54. “Kaffir,” a word originally derived from Arabic and meaning unbeliever, was used 
in South Africa by whites to refer to blacks in ways historically resonant with the term 
“nigger” in the United States.
55. Cited from <http://africasgateway.com/sections-viewarticle-105.html> (accessed 
September 24, 2007).
56. The Zulu Nation was a social-cultural organization founded in the early 1970s in 
public housing projects of the South Bronx by Afrika Bambaataa and is credited as a key 
cradle of early hip hop culture in New Y ork City. The now “Universal” Zulu Nation has 
its own website (<www.zulunation.com>) containing information ranging from the his-
tory of hip hop, to Afrocentric teachings and readings of world events, to black-produced 
consumer products. The site even provides an online application service for member-
ship, enabling the expansion of what is now the organization’s global network of local 
branches.
57. See <http://www.zulunation.nl/pr ojects/southafrica/introducing_emile_yx
.php> (accessed April 12, 2006).
58. Battersby, “‘Sometime It Feels Like I Am Not Black Enough. ’”
59. See <http://www.africanhiphop.com/update/hivhop.htm>.
60. Mario Pissarra, Contemporary African Database, <http://people.africadatabase
.org/en/profile/11711.html> (accessed September 24, 2007).
61. Ibid.
62. Lipsitz, Dangerous Crossroads, 6.
63. Mullings, “Race and Globalization. ”
marc d. perry
258


--- PAGE 278 ---
bibliography
Abdul-Raheem, T ajudeen, ed. Pan-Africanism: Politics, Economy, and Social Change in 
the Twenty-First Century. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1996.
Abraham, Sara. “Exceptional Victories: Multiracialism in T rinidad and T obago and 
Guyana. ” Ethnopolitics 4, no. 4 (2005): 465–80.
Adeleke, Tunde. UnAfrican Americans: Nineteenth-Century Black Nationalists and the 
Civilizing Mission. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1998.
Adi, Hakim, and Marika Sherwood. The 1945 Manchester Pan-African Congress Revis-
ited. London: New Beacon Books, 1995.
African Studies Review 43, no. 1 (2000). Special issue on the African Diaspora.
Akyeampong, Emmanuel. “ Africans in the Diaspora: The Diaspora and Africa. ” African 
Affairs 99 (2000): 183–215.
Ali, Noble Drew. The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple of America. Chicago: 
Self-published, 1927.
Allen, Ernest, Jr. “Making the Strong Survive: The Contours and Contradictions 
of Message Rap. ” In Droppin’ Science: Critical Essays on Rap Music and Hip Hop 
Culture, edited by William Eric Perkins, 159–91. Philadelphia: T emple University 
Press, 1996.
Alpers, Edward A. “Recollecting Africa: Diasporic Memory in the Indian Ocean 
World. ” African Studies Review 43, no. 1 (2000): 83–99.
Alpers, Edward A., and Pierre-Michel Fontaine, eds. Walter Rodney, Revolutionary and 
Scholar: A Tribute. Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies and African 
Studies Center, University of California, 1982.
Alter, Peter. Nationalism. London: Edward Arnold, 1994.
American Social History Project. Who Built America? Working People and the Nation’s 
Economy, Politics, Culture, and Society. 2 vols. New Y ork: Worth, 2000.
Amrane, Minne, and Deniéle Djamila. Femmes en combat: La guerre d’ Algérie. Algiers: 
Éditions Rahma, 1993.
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of 
Nationalism. New Y ork: Verso, 1991.
Anderson, Carol. Eyes off the Prize: The United Nations and the African American Strug-
gle for Human Rights, 1944–1955. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Anderson, David. Histories of the Hanged: The Dirty War in Kenya and the End of Em-
pire. New Y ork: Norton, 2005.
Anthony, David Henry, III. Max Yergan: Race Man, Internationalist, Cold Warrior. New 
Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2006.
Appadurai, Arjun. “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy. ” 
Public Culture 2, no. 2 (1990): 1–24.


--- PAGE 279 ---
bibliography
260 ———.  Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1996.
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. In My Father’s House: Africa in the Philosophy of Culture.
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Aptheker, Herbert. American Negro Slave Revolts. New Y ork: Columbia University 
Press, 1944.
———.  A Documentary History of the Negro People in the United States. 3 vols. New 
Y ork: Citadel Press, 1962.
Asante, Molefi. The Afrocentric Idea. Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1987.
Asante, S. K. B. Pan-African Protest: West Africa and the Italo-Ethiopian Crisis, 1934–
1941. London: Longman Group, Ltd., 1977.
Atkins, Keletso. “The Black Atlantic Communication Network: African American 
Sailors and the Cape of Good Hope Connection. ” Issue: A Journal of Opinion 24, 
no. 2 (1996): 6–11.
Austin, David. “ All Roads Led to Montreal: Black Power, the Caribbean, and the Black 
Radical T radition in Canada. ” Journal of African American History 92, no. 4 (2007): 
516–39.
Austin, Dennis. Politics in Ghana, 1946–1960. London: Oxford University Press, 1970.
Baba Kake, Ibrahim. “L’influence des Afro-Américains sur des nationalistes noirs fran-
cophones d’ Afrique (1919–1945). ” Présence africaine 112 (1979): 48–65.
Baden-Powell, Sir Robert Stephenson. Scouting for Boys: A Handbook for Instruction in 
Good Citizenship. 4th ed. London: C. Arthur Pearson Ltd., 1911.
Bair, Barbara. “‘Ethiopia Shall Stretch Forth Her Hands Unto God’: Laura Kofey 
and the Gendered Vision of Redemption in the Garvey Movement. ” In A Mighty 
Baptism: Race, Gender, and the Creation of American Protestantism, edited by Susan 
Juster and Lisa MacFarlane, 38–61. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996.
Balibar, Etienne. “Is There a ‘Neo-Racism’?” In Race, Nation, and Class: Ambiguous Iden-
tities, by Etienne Balibar and Immannuel Wallerstein, 17–28. London: Verso, 1991.
Bankie, B. F., ed. Globalising Africans: Towards the 7th Pan-African Congress. Cape 
T own: Center for Advanced Studies of African Society, 2001.
Barbeau, Arthur E., and Florette Henri. The Unknown Soldiers: Black American Troops 
in World War I. Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1974.
Barrett, Leonard E. The Rastafarians: The Dreadlocks of Jamaica. Kingston: Sangsters 
Book Stores, 1977.
Bastfield, Darrin. Back in the Day: My Life and Times with Tupac Shakur. New Y ork: 
Da Capo Press, 2003.
Basu, Dipannita, and Sidney Lemelle, eds. The Vinyl Ain’t Final: Hip Hop and the Glo-
balization of Black Popular Culture. London: Pluto, 2006.
Battersby, Jane. “‘Sometime It Feels Like I Am Not Black Enough’: Recast(e)ing 
Coloured through South African Hip Hop as a Postcolonial T ext. ” In Shifting Selves: 
Post-Apartheid Essays on Mass Media, Culture, and Identity, edited by Hermans Was-
serman and Sean Jacobs, 109–29. Cape T own: Kwela, 2004.
Beall, Jo. “Women under Indentured Labor in Colonial Natal, 1860–1911. ” In Women 
and Gender in Southern Africa to 1945, edited by Cheryl Walker, 146–67. Cape 
T own: David Philip, 1990.


--- PAGE 280 ---
bibliography
261Bebbington, D. W. Evangelicalism in Modern Britain: A History from the 1730s to the 
1980s. London: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Beckles, Hilary. “Caribbean Anti-Slavery: The Self-Liberation Ethos of Enslaved 
Blacks. ” Journal of Caribbean History 22, no. 1–2 (1988): 1–19.
———.  A History of Barbados: From Amerindian Settlement to Nation-State. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Beinart, William, and Colin Bundy. Hidden Struggles in Rural South Africa: Politics and 
Popular Movements in the Transkei and Eastern Cape, 1890–1930. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1987.
Beinart, William, and Saul Dubow, eds. Segregation and Apartheid in Twentieth Century 
South Africa. London: Routledge, 1995.
Beito, David T . “T o Advance the ‘Practice of Thrift And Economy’: Fraternal Societies 
and Social Capital, 1890–1920. ” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 29, no. 4 (1999): 
585–612.
Bell, Madison Smartt. T oussaint Louverture: A Biography. New Y ork: Pantheon, 2007.
Benot, Yves. “La chaine des insurrections d’esclaves dans les Caraibes de 1789 a 1791. ” 
In Les abolitions de l’esclavage de L. F. Sonthonax a V . Schoelscher, 1793, 1794, 1848,
edited by Marcel Dorigny, 179–86. Saint-Denis, France: Presses universitaires de 
Vincennes, Paris: UNESCO, 1995.
———.  La révolution française et la fin des colonies: Essai. Paris: Éditions La Découverte, 
1988.
Berland, Oscar. “The Emergence of the Communist Perspective on the ‘Negro Ques-
tion’ in America: 1919–1931. ” Pt. 2. Science & Society 64, no. 2 (2000): 194–217.
Berlin, Ira. Generations of Captivity: A History of African-American Slaves. Cambridge, 
Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2003.
Bernal, Martin. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1987.
Biddiss, Michael D. Father of Racist Ideology: The Social and Political Thought of Count 
Gobineau. New Y ork: Weybright and T alley, 1970.
Biko, Steve. I Write What I Like. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986.
Birmingham, David, and T erence Ranger. “Settlers and Liberators in the South, 
1953–1980. ” In History of Central Africa, vol. 2, edited by David Birmingham and 
Phyllis M. Martin, 336–82. London: Longman, 1983.
Blackburn, Robin. The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery. London: Verso, 1989.
Black Eyed Peas. “Going Gone. ” Monkey Business CD. A&M. June 7, 2005.
Blyden, Edward W. Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race. 1887. Edinburgh: University 
Press, 1967. Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1994.
Bogues, Anthony. Black Heretics, Black Prophets: Radical Black Intellectuals. New Y ork: 
Routledge, 2003.
Bolland, O. Nigel. “Creolization and Creole Societies: A Cultural Nationalist View of 
Caribbean Social History. ” In Intellectuals in the Twentieth-Century Caribbean, vol. 1, 
Spectre of the New Class: The Commonwealth Caribbean, edited by Alistair Hen-
nessy, 50–79. London: Macmillan, 1992.
———.  On the March: Labour Rebellions in the British Caribbean, 1934–39. Kingston: 
Ian Randle, 1995.


--- PAGE 281 ---
bibliography
262 ———.  The Politics of Labour in the British Caribbean: The Social Origins of Authoritari-
anism and Democracy in the Labour Movement. Princeton, N.J.: Markus Wiener, 2001.
Boloka, Gibson. “Cultural Studies and the T ransformation of the Music Industry: 
Some Reflections on Kwaito. ” In Shifting Selves: Post-Apartheid Essays on Mass 
Media, Culture, and Identity, edited by Hermans Wasserman and Sean Jacobs, 
97–107. Cape T own: Kwela, 2004.
Bolster, W. Jeffrey. Black Jacks: African American Seamen in the Age of Sail. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997.
Borstelmann, Thomas. “‘Hedging Our Bets and Buying Time’: John Kennedy and Ra-
cial Revolutions in the American South and Southern Africa. ” Diplomatic History
24, no. 3 (2000): 435–63.
Boston Branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
Fighting a Vicious Film: Protest against “The Birth of a Nation.” Boston, 1915.
Bourgois, Philippe. “One Hundred Y ears of United Fruit Company Letters. ” In Banana 
Wars, edited by Steve Striffler and Mark Moberg, 103–44. Durham, N.C.: Duke 
University Press, 2003.
Bradford, Helen. A T aste of Freedom: The ICU in Rural South Africa, 1924–1930. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1987.
Branch, T aylor. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–63. New Y ork: 
T ouchstone, 1988.
Branson, Susan, and Leslie Patrick. “Étrangers dans un pays étrange: Saint-Domingan 
Refugees of Color in Philadelphia. ” In The Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the 
Atlantic World, edited by David P . Geggus, 193–208. Columbia: University of South 
Carolina Press, 2001.
Brinton, Crane. The Anatomy of Revolution. New Y ork: Vintage, 1958.
Brock, Lisa, ed. “ African [Diaspora] Studies. ” Special issue of Issue: A Journal of Opin-
ion 24, no. 2 (1996).
Brooks, Joanna. “The Early American Public Sphere and the Emergence of a Black 
Print Counterpublic. ” William and Mary Quarterly 62, no. 1 (2005): 67–92.
Brooks, Joanna, and John Saillant. Introduction to “Face Zion Forward”: First Writers 
of the Black Atlantic, 1785–1798, edited by Joanna Brooks and John Saillant, 3–33. 
Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2002.
———,  e d s .  “Face Zion Forward”: First Writers of the Black Atlantic, 1785–1798. Boston: 
Northeastern University Press, 2002.
Brown, Christopher Leslie. Moral Capital: Foundations of British Abolitionism. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Brown, Elaine. A T aste of Power: A Black Woman’s Story. New Y ork: Anchor Books, 
1994.
Brown, Jacqueline Nassy. “Black Liverpool, Black America, and the Gendering of 
Diasporic Space. ” Cultural Anthropology 13, no. 3 (1998): 291–325.
Brown, Judith. Gandhi’s Rise to Power: Indian Politics, 1915–1922. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1972.
Brown, Judith M., and Martin Prozesky, eds. Gandhi and South Africa: Principles and 
Politics. Scottsville, South Africa: University of Natal Press, 1999.


--- PAGE 282 ---
bibliography
263Brown, Scot. Fighting for US: Maulana Karenga, the US Organization, and Black Cul-
tural Nationalism. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2003.
Brutents, Karen N. National Liberation Revolutions Today (Some Questions of Theory).
Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1974.
Bryce-Laporte, Roy Simon. “Crisis, Contraculture, and Religion among West Indians 
in the Panama Canal Zone. ” In Blackness in Latin America and the Caribbean, vol. 1, 
edited by Norman E. Whitten Jr. and Arlene T orres, 100–118. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1998.
Buckley, Roger N. The British Army in the West Indies: Society and the Military in the 
Revolutionary Age. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1998.
———.  Slaves in Red Coats: The British West India Regiments, 1795–1815. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1979.
Bundy, Colin. “Continuing a Conversation: Prospects for African Studies in the 21st 
Century. ” African Affairs 101 (2002): 61–73.
Bunting, Brian. Introduction to S. P . Bunting: A Political Biography, by Edward Roux, 
3–34. Bellville, South Africa: Mayibuye Books, 1993.
———.  Moses Kotane: South African Revolutionary. Bellville, South Africa: Mayibuye 
Books, 1998.
Burkett, Randall K. Black Redemption: Churchmen Speak for the Garvey Movement.
Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1978.
———.  Garveyism as a Religious Movement: The Institutionalization of a Black Civil 
Religion. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1978.
Burton, Richard D. E. Afro-Creole: Power, Opposition, and Play in the Caribbean. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1997.
Bush, Rod. We Are Not What We Seem: Black Nationalism and Class Struggle in the 
American Century. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1999.
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New Y ork: 
Routledge, 1990.
Butler, Kim D. Freedoms Given, Freedoms Won: Afro-Brazilians in Post-Abolition in São 
Paulo and Salvador. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1998.
Byrd, Alexander X. Captives and Voyagers: Black Migrants across the Eighteenth-Century 
British Atlantic World. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2008.
———.  “ E b o e,  Co u n t r y,  Nation, and Gustavus Vassa’s Interesting Narrative. ” William 
and Mary Quarterly 63, no. 1 (2006): 122–47.
Cabral, Amilcar. Return to the Source. New Y ork: Monthly Review Press, 1974.
———.  Revolution in Guinea. New Y ork: Monthly Review Press, 1972.
Callahan, Allen Dwight. The T alking Book: African Americans and the Bible. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.
Campbell, Horace. “Progressive Politics and the Jamaican Society at Home and 
Abroad. ” Social and Economic Studies 43, no. 3 (September 1994): 191–205.
———.  Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney. T renton, N.J.: 
Africa World Press, 1987.
———.  Reclaiming Zimbabwe: The Exhaustion of the Patriarchal Model of Liberation.
T renton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 2003.


--- PAGE 283 ---
bibliography
264 Campbell, James T . Songs of Zion: The African Methodist Episcopal Church in the United 
States and South Africa. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Capelli, Luciano, dir. The Promised Ship. Rio Nevado Production, 2000.
Carmichael, Stokely, with Ekwueme Michael Thelwell. Ready for the Revolution: The 
Life and Struggles of Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. New Y ork: Scribner, 2003.
Carr, Barry. “From Caribbean Backwater to Revolutionary Opportunity: Cuba’s 
Evolving Relationship with the Comintern, 1925–34. ” In International Communism 
and the Communist International, 1919–43, edited by Tim Rees and Andrew Thorpe, 
234–53. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1998.
———.  “ Id e n t i t y,  C l a s s ,  a n d  Nat i o n :  B l a c k  Im m i g r a n t  Wo r k e r s ,  Cu ba n  Co m m u n i s m ,  
and the Sugar Insurgency, 1925–1934. ” Hispanic American Historical Review 78, no. 1
(1998): 83–116.
Carretta, Vincent. Equiano, the African: Biography of a Self-Made Man. Athens: Univer-
sity of Georgia Press, 2005.
———.  “O l au d a h  Eq u i a n o  o r  G u s t av u s  Va s s a ?  Ne w  L i g h t  o n  a n  E i g h te e n t h - Ce n t u r y  
Question of Identity. ” Slavery and Abolition 20 (1999): 96–105.
———,  e d .  Unchained Voices: An Anthology of Black Authors in the English-Speaking 
World of the Eighteenth Century. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1996.
Carson, Clayborne. In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Castells, Manuel. The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture. 3 vols. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1996, 1997, 1998.
Catlin-Jairazbhoy, Amy, and Edward A. Alpers, eds. Sidis and Scholars: Essays on Afri-
can Indians. T renton, N.J.: Red Sea Press, 2004.
A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 
1774–1875. Register of Debates, 19th Cong., 1st sess.
Césaire, Aimé. Notebook of a Return to My Native Land. Paris: Présence Africaine, 1971.
Cha-Jua, Sundiate Keita. “The Black Radical Congress and the Reconstruction of the 
Black Freedom Movement. ” Black Scholar 28, no. 3–4 (1999): 8–21.
Chang, Jeff. Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation. New Y ork: 
St. Martin’s Press, 2005.
Cheney, Charise L. Brothers Gonna Work It Out: Sexual Politics in the Golden Age of 
Rap Nationalism. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2005.
Chevannes, Barry. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 
1994.
Childs, Matt D. “‘ A Black French General Arrived to Conquer the Island’: Images of 
the Haitian Revolution in Cuba’s 1812 Aponte Rebellion. ” In The Impact of the Hai-
tian Revolution in the Atlantic World, edited by David P . Geggus, 135–56. Columbia: 
University of South Carolina Press, 2001.
Chomsky, Aviva. “‘Barbados or Canada?’ Race, Immigration, and Nation in Early-
Twentieth-Century Cuba. ” Hispanic American Historical Review 80, no. 3 (2000): 
415–62.
———.  West Indian Workers and the United Fruit Company in Costa Rica, 1870–1940.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1996.


--- PAGE 284 ---
bibliography
265———.  “ We s t  In d i a n  Wo r k e r s  i n  Co s t a  R i c a n  R a dical and Nationalist Ideology: 
1900–1950. ” The Americas 51, no. 1 (1994): 11–40.
Churchill, Ward. “‘T o Disrupt, Discredit and Destroy’: The FBI’s Secret War against 
the Black Panther Party. ” In Liberation, Imagination, and the Black Panther Party: A 
New Look at the Panthers and Their Legacy, edited by Kathleen Cleaver and George 
Katsiaficas, 78–117. New Y ork: Routledge, 2001.
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall. The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents from the 
FBI’s Secret Wars against Domestic Dissent. Boston: South End Press, 1990.
Churchill, Winston S., ed. Never Give In! The Best of Winston Churchill’s Speeches. New 
Y ork: Hyperion, 2004.
Clavin, Matthew J. “ American T oussaints: Symbol, Subversion, and the Black Atlantic 
T radition in the American Civil War. ” Slavery and Abolition 28, no. 1 (2007): 87–113.
Cleaver, Eldridge. “Solidarity of the People until Victory or Death!” The Black Panther,
October 25, 1969, 12–13.
Cleaver, Kathleen Neal. “Back to Africa: The Evolution of the International Section of 
the Black Panther Party (1969–1972). ” In The Black Panther Party [Reconsidered],
edited by Charles E. Jones, 211–54. Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1998.
———.  “ Wo m e n ,  Pow e r,  a n d  R e v o l u t i o n .”  In  Liberation, Imagination, and the Black 
Panther Party: A New Look at the Panthers and Their Legacy, edited by Kathleen 
Cleaver and George Katsiaficas, 123–27. New Y ork: Routledge, 2001.
Clegg, Claude Andrew, III. An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Muhammad.
New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
Clemons, Michael L., and Charles E. Jones. “Global Solidarity: The Black Panther 
Party in the International Arena. ” In Liberation, Imagination, and the Black Panther 
Party: A New Look at the Panthers and Their Legacy, edited by Kathleen Cleaver and 
George Katsiaficas, 20–39. New Y ork: Routledge, 2001.
Cobb, William Jelani. T o the Break of Dawn: A Freestyle on the Hip-Hop Aesthetic. New 
Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2007.
Cobley, Alan Gregor. “Far from Home: The Origins and Significance of the Afro-
Caribbean Community in South Africa to 1930. ” Journal of South African Studies 18, 
no. 2 (1992): 349–70.
Collier-Thomas, Bettye, and V . P . Franklin, eds. Sisters in the Struggle: African American 
Women in the Civil Rights–Black Power Movement. New Y ork: New Y ork University 
Press, 2001.
Condry, Ian. Hip-Hop Japan: Rap and the Paths of Cultural Globalization. Durham, 
N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006.
Conniff, Michael. Black Labor on a White Canal: Panama, 1904–1981. Pittsburgh: Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh Press, 1985.
Cornish, Dudley T aylor. The Sable Arm: Negro Troops in the Union Army, 1861–1865.
New Y ork: Longmans, Green, 1956.
Coupland, Reginald. The British Anti-Slavery Movement. 2nd ed. London: F. Cass, 
1964.
Craton, Michael. T esting the Chains: Resistance to Slavery in the British West Indies.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1982.


--- PAGE 285 ---
bibliography
266 Craton, Michael, and D. Gail Saunders. Islanders in the Stream: A History of the 
Bahamian People. 2 vols. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1992.
———.  “S e e k i n g  a  L i f e  o f  Their Own: Aspects of Slave Resistance in the Bahamas. ” 
Journal of Caribbean History 24 (1990): 1–27.
Cronon, Edmund David. Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal 
Negro Improvement Association. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1955.
Crossman, Richard, ed. The God That Failed. New Y ork: Harper & Brothers, 1949.
Crummell, Alexander. The Future of Africa. 1862. Detroit: Negro History Press, 1960.
Cruse, Harold. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New Y ork: Morrow, 1967.
Cuba. Dirección General del Censo. Informe general del censo de 1943. Havana: P . 
Fernandéz, 1945.
Cugoano, Quobna Ottobah. “Thoughts and Sentiments on the Evil and Wicked T raf-
fic of the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, Humbly Submitted to 
the Inhabitants of Great Britain, 1787. ” In Unchained Voices: An Anthology of Black 
Authors in the English-Speaking World of the Eighteenth Century, edited by Vincent 
Carretta, 154–58. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1996.
———.  “ Th o u g h t s  a n d  S e n t i m e n t s  o n  the Evil of Slavery. ” In Black Atlantic Writers of 
the Eighteenth Century: Living the New Exodus in England and the Americas, edited 
by Adam Potkay and Sandra Burr, 129–56. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Curtis, Edward E., IV . Black Muslim Religion in the Nation of Islam, 1960–1975. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Daniels, Robert V ., ed. A Documentary History of Communism. Vol. 2. New Y ork: 
Vintage, 1960.
Darlington, Shasta. “Brazilian Rappers Speak to the Poor: Popular Duo Launch Re-
cording Career from Notorious San Paulo Prison. ” The Globe and Mail (T oronto), 
September 5, 2000, A10.
Davidson, Apollon, Irina Filatova, Valentin Gorodnov, and Sheridan Johns, eds. South 
Africa and the Communist International: A Documentary History. 2 vols. London: 
Frank Cass, 2003.
Davidson, Basil. The People’s Cause: A History of Guerrillas in Africa. London: Long-
man, 1981.
Davies, Carole Boyce. Left of Karl Marx: The Political Life of Black Communist Claudia 
Jones. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2007.
Davis, David Brion. Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World.
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2006.
———.  The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770–1823. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1966, 1975.
———.  The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1966.
———.  Slavery and Human Progress. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Davis, Harry E., ed. “Documents Relating to Negro Masonry in America. ” Journal of 
Negro History 21, no. 4 (1936): 411–32.
Davis, Raymond Allan. “West Indian Workers on the Panama Canal: A Split Labor 
Market Interpretation. ” Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 1981.
Dawson, Michael C. “ A Black Counterpublic? Economic Earthquakes, Racial 
Agenda(s), and Black Politics. ” In The Black Public Sphere, edited by Houston


--- PAGE 286 ---
bibliography
267Baker Jr. and Michael C. Dawson, 199–227. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1995.
Debray, Regis. Revolution in the Revolution? New Y ork: Monthly Review Press, 1967.
Defronzo, James. Revolutions and Revolutionary Movements. Boulder: Westview Press, 
1991.
Degras, Jane, ed. The Communist International, 1919–1943. 3 vols. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1956–65.
de la Fuente, Alejandro. A Nation for All: Race, Inequality, and Politics in Twentieth-
Century Cuba. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
del Castillo, José. “La inmigración de braceros azucareros en la República Domini-
cana, 1900-1930. ” Cuadernos del CENDIA (Santo Domingo, Universidad Autónoma 
de Santo Domingo) 262, no. 7 (1978): 49–54.
Depelchin, Jacques. Silences in African History: Between the Syndromes of Discovery and 
Abolition. Dar es Salaam: Mkuki na Nyota Publishers, 2005.
Dessens, Nathalie. From Saint-Domingue to New Orleans: Migration and Influences.
Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2007.
de Witte, Ludo. The Assassination of Lumumba. London: Verso, 2001.
Diawara, Manthia. In Search of Africa. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1998.
Dirlik, Arif. “The Third World in 1968. ” In 1968: The World Transformed, edited by 
Carole Fink, Philipp Gassert, and Detlef Junker, 295–317. New Y ork: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998.
Ditchfield, G. M. The Evangelical Revival. London: UCL Press, 1998.
Donner, Frank J. Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America’s Political Intel-
ligence System. New Y ork: Vintage, 1981.
Downes, Aviston D. “Freemasonry in Barbados before 1914: The Limits of Brother-
hood. ” Journal of Caribbean History 36, no. 2 (2002): 285–309.
———.  “Sa i l i n g  f ro m  Colonial into National Waters: A History of the Barbados Land-
ship. ” Journal of the Barbados Museum and Historical Society 46 (2000): 93–112.
Doyle, William. The French Revolution: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2001.
Drake, St. Clair. Black Folk Here and There: An Essay in History and Anthropology.
2 vols. Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, University of California, 
1987–90.
Draper, Theodore. American Communism and Soviet Russia: The Formative Period.
New Y ork: Viking, 1960.
Drescher, Seymour. “The Ending of the Slave T rade and the Evolution of European 
Scientific Racism. ” In The Atlantic Slave Trade: Effects on Economies, Societies, and 
Peoples in Africa, the Americas, and Europe, edited by Joseph Inikori and Stanley 
Engerman, 361–96. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1992.
———.  “ Th e  Limits of Example. ” In The Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the Atlantic 
World, edited by David P . Geggus, 10–14. Columbia: University of South Carolina 
Press, 2001.
Drew, Allison. Discordant Comrades: Identities and Loyalties on the South African Left.
Pretoria: University of South Africa Press, 2002.


--- PAGE 287 ---
bibliography
268 ———,  e d .  South Africa’s Radical Tradition: A Documentary History. 2 vols. Cape 
T own: Buchu Books, 1996–97.
Duberman, Martin Bauml. Paul Robeson. New Y ork: Knopf, 1988. London: Pan Books, 
1991.
Dubois, Laurent. Avengers of the New World: The Story of the Haitian Revolution. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2004.
———.  Les esclaves de la Republique: L’histoire oubliee de la premiere emancipation, 
1789–1794. Paris: Calmann-Levy, 1998.
Du Bois, W. E. B. “ As the Crow Flies. ” New York Amsterdam News, March 13, 1943, as 
cited in Sudarshan Kapur, Raising Up a Prophet: The African-American Encounter 
with Gandhi (Boston: Beacon Press, 1992), 109–11.
———.  “ B a c k  to  A f r i c a .”  In  Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa, edited by John 
Henrik Clarke, 105–19. New Y ork: Vintage, 1974.
———.  Black Folk, Then and Now: An Essay in the History and Sociology of the Negro 
Race. New Y ork: H. Holt and Company, 1939.
———.  Black Reconstruction, 1860–1880. New Y ork: Harcourt, Brace, 1935.
———.  The Correspondence of W . E. B. Du Bois. Vol. 1, Selections, 1877–1934. Edited by 
Herbert Aptheker. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1973.
———.  The Negro. New Y ork: H. Holt, 1915.
Dudziak, Mary L. Cold War, Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2000.
———.  “ Th e  Little Rock Crisis and Foreign Affairs: Race, Resistance, and the 
Image of American Democracy. ” Southern California Law Review 70, no. 6 (1997): 
1641–1716.
Duncan, Quince. “El negro antillano. ” In El negro en Costa Rica, 8th ed., edited by 
Carlos Meléndez Chaverri and Quince Duncan, 120–26. San José: Editorial Costa 
Rica, 1981.
———.  “ Th e  Po c o m i a  R e b e l l i o n .”  In  The Best Short Stories of Quince Duncan/Las me-
jores historias de Quince Duncan, comp. Dellita Martin-Ogunsola, 123–34. San José: 
Editorial Costa Rica, 1995.
Dupuy, Alex. Haití in the World Economy: Class, Race, and Underdevelopment since 1700.
Boulder: Westview Press, 1989.
———.  “ R a c e  a n d  C l a s s  i n  the Postcolonial Caribbean: The Views of Walter Rodney. ” 
Latin American Perspectives 23, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 107–29.
Durand, Alain-Phillipe, ed. Black, Blanc, Beur: Rap Music and Hip-Hop Culture in the 
Francophone World. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2002.
Dyson, Michael Eric. Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur. New Y ork: 
Civitas Books, 2001.
Echenberg, Myron. Colonial Conscripts: The Tirailleurs Sénégalias in French West Africa, 
1857–1960. Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1991.
Echeruo, Michael. “ An African Diaspora: The Ontological Project. ” In The African 
Diaspora: African Origins and New World Identities, edited by Isidore Okpewho, 
Carole Boyce Davies, and Ali A. Mazrui, 3–18. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1999.
Edgar, Robert R. “ African Educational Protest in South Africa: The American School


--- PAGE 288 ---
bibliography
269Movement in the T ranskei in the 1920s. ” In Apartheid and Education: The Education 
of Black South Africans, edited by Peter Kallaway, 184–91. Johannesburg: Ravan 
Press, 1984.
———.  “Ga r v e y i s m  i n  A f rica: Dr. Wellington and the American Movement in the 
T ranskei. ” Ufahamu 6 (1976): 31–57.
Edmondson, Locksley. “Black America as a Mobilizing Diaspora: Some International 
Implications. ” In Modern Diasporas in International Politics, edited by Gabriel Shef-
fer, 333–49. London: Croom Helm, 1986.
———.  “ Th e  In te r n at i o n a l i z ation of Black Power: Historical and Contemporary 
Perspectives. ” Mawazo 4, no. 1 (1968): 16–30.
Edwards, Brent Hayes. The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise of 
Black Internationalism. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003.
———.  “ Th e  Us e  o f  D iaspora. ” Social T ext 19, no. 1 (2001): 45–73.
Egbuna, Obi. Destroy This T emple: The Voice of Black Power in Britain. London: Mac-
Gibbon & Kee, 1971.
Egerton, Douglas R. Death or Liberty: African Americans and Revolutionary America.
New Y ork: Oxford University Pres, 2009.
———.  Gabriel’s Rebellion: The Virginia Slave Conspiracies of 1800 and 1802. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1993.
———.  He Shall Go Out Free: The Lives of Denmark Vesey. Madison, Wisc.: Madison 
House, 1999.
Elkins, Caroline. Imperial Reckoning: The Untold Story of Britain’s Gulag in Kenya. New 
Y ork: Henry Holt, 2005.
Elkins, W. F. Black Power in the Caribbean: The Beginnings of the Modern National Move-
ment. New Y ork: Revisionist Press, 1977.
Ellis, Keith. “Nicolas Guillen and Langston Hughes: Convergences and Divergences. ” 
In Between Race and Empire: African-Americans and Cubans before the Cuban Revo-
lution, edited by Lisa Brock and Digna Castaneda Fuertes, 129–67. Philadelphia: 
T emple University Press, 1998.
Ellis, Stephen, and T sepo Sechaba. Comrades against Apartheid: The ANC and the 
South African Communist Party in Exile. London: James Currey, 1992.
Emerson, Rupert, and Martin Kilson. “The American Dilemma in a Changing World: 
The Rise of Africa and the Negro American. ” In The Negro American, edited by 
T alcott Parsons and Kenneth B. Clark, 626–55. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Equiano, Olaudah. “The Interesting Narrative. ” In Black Atlantic Writers of the Eigh-
teenth Century: Living the New Exodus in England and the Americas, edited by Adam 
Potkay and Sandra Burr, 166–268. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
———.  The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, The 
African, Written by Himself. Edited by Werner Sollors. New Y ork: Norton, 2001.
Erlmann, Veit. African Stars: Studies in Black South African Performance. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Esedebe, P . Olisanwuche. Pan-Africanism: The Idea and the Movement, 1776–1963.
Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1982.
Essien-Udom, E. U. Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1962.


--- PAGE 289 ---
bibliography
270 Euraque, Darío. “The Banana Enclave, Nationalism, and Mestizaje in Honduras, 
1910s–1930s. ” In Identity and Struggle at the Margins of the Nation-State: The Labor-
ing Peoples of Central America and the Hispanic Caribbean, edited by Aviva Chom-
sky and Aldo Lauria-Santiago, 151–68. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1998.
Faber, Jörg. “Cape T own’s Hip Hop Scene. ” Ntama: Journal of African Music and Popu-
lar Culture, Mainz University, Friday, January 23, 2004, <http://ntama.uni-mainz.
de/hiphop/faber/>. Accessed September 24, 2007.
Fabre, Michel. From Harlem to Paris: Black American Writers in France, 1840–1980.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991.
Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth. New Y ork: Grove, 1968.
Farmer, James. Lay Bare the Heart: An Autobiography of the Civil Rights Movement.
New Y ork: Arbor House, 1985.
Farwell, Byron. The Great War in Africa, 1914–1918. New Y ork: Norton, 1986.
Feimester, Crystal. “‘Ladies and Lynching’: The Gendered Discourse of Mob Violence 
in the New South, 1880–1930. ” Ph.D. diss., Princeton University, 2000.
Fernández, Ariel. “¿Poesía urbana o la Nueva T rova de los noventa?” La jiribilla, 2001, 
<http://www.lajiribilla.cu/2001/n15_agosto/414_15.html>. Accessed May 4, 2002.
Fernández, Nadine. “The Changing Discourse on Race in Contemporary Cuba. ” 
Qualitative Studies In Education 14, no. 2 (2001): 117–32.
Ferrell, Robert H. Woodrow Wilson and World War I, 1917–1921. New Y ork: Harper & 
Row, 1985.
Fick, Carolyn E. “The French Revolution in Saint Domingue: A T riumph or a Fail-
ure?” In A Turbulent Time: The French Revolution and the Greater Caribbean, edited 
by David Barry Gaspar and David Patrick Geggus, 51–75. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1997.
———.  The Making of Haiti: The Saint Domingue Revolution from Below. Knoxville: 
University of T ennessee Press, 1990.
Fields, Barbara J. “Slavery, Race, and Ideology in the United States of America. ” New 
Left Review 181 (1990): 95–118.
Fischer, Sibylle. Modernity Disavowed: Haiti and the Cultures of Slavery in the Age of 
Revolution. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2004.
Fletcher, Leonard P . “The Friendly Societies in St. Lucia and St. Vincent. ” Caribbean 
Studies (Puerto Rico) 18, no. 3–4 (1978–79): 89–114.
Foner, Nancy. “Introduction: West Indian Migration to New Y ork. An Overview. ” In 
Islands in the City: West Indian Migration to New York, edited by Nancy Foner, 1–23. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.
Fontaine, Pierre-Michel. “T ransnational Relations and Racial Mobilization: Emerging 
Black Movements in Brazil. ” In Ethnic Mobilization in a Transnational World, edited 
by John F. Stack, 141–62. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.
Foran, John, ed. The Future of Revolutions: Rethinking Radical Change in the Age of 
Globalization. New Y ork: Zed Press, 2003.
Ford, James. “Defense of the Ethiopian People. ” In The Negro and the Democratic Front,
by James Ford, 159–60. New Y ork: International Publishers, 1938.
Ford-Smith, Honor. “Women and the Garvey Movement in Jamaica. ” In Garvey: His 
Work and Impact, edited by Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan, 73–83. T renton, N.J.: 
Africa World Press, 1991.


--- PAGE 290 ---
bibliography
271Forsythe, Dennis, ed. Let the Niggers Burn! The Sir George Williams University Affair 
and Its Caribbean Aftermath. Montreal: Black Rose Book/uRELfk.dOur Generation Press, 
1971.
Fox, Richard. “Passage from India. ” In Between Resistance and Revolution: Cultural Poli-
tics and Social Protest, edited by Richard Fox and Orin Starn, 65–82. New Bruns-
wick: Rutgers University Press, 1997.
Fraser, Cary. “Crossing the Color Line in Little Rock: The Eisenhower Administra-
tion and the Dilemma of Race for U.S. Foreign Policy. ” Diplomatic History 24, no. 2
(2000): 233–64.
Fraser, Nancy. “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of 
Actually Existing Democracy. ” In Habermas and the Public Sphere, edited by Craig 
Calhoun, 109–42. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991.
Frazier, E. Franklin. Black Bourgeoisie. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1957.
———.  “ Th e  Ne g ro  a n d  No n -R e s i s t a n c e.”  The Crisis 27, no. 5 (March 1924): 213–14.
———.  “ Th e  Ne g ro  a n d  No n -R e s i s t a n c e.”  The Crisis 28, no. 2 ( June 1924): 58–59.
Frederikse, Julie. The Unbreakable Thread: Non-Racialism in South Africa. Johannes-
burg: Ravan Press, 1990.
French, Scot. The Rebellious Slave: Nat Turner in American Memory. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 2004.
Frey, Sylvia. “Cultural Migrations: A Time-&-Space Outline of Black Atlantic Evan-
gelical Protestantism. ” In African Diasporas in the New and Old Worlds: Conscious-
ness and Imagination, edited by Geneviève Fabre and Klaus Benesch, 91–98. New 
Y ork: Rodopi, 2006.
———.  Water from the Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolutionary Age. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1991.
Frey, Sylvia R., and Betty Wood. Come Shouting to Zion: African American Protestant-
ism in the American South and British Caribbean to 1830. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1998.
Fuller, Hoyt W. “Notes From a Sixth Pan-African Journal. ” Black World, October 1974, 
70–81.
Fyfe, Christopher. “The Emergence and Evolution of African Studies in the United 
Kingdom. ” In Out of One, Many Africas: Reconstructing the Study and Meaning of 
Africa, edited by William G. Martin and Michael O. West, 54–61. Champaign: 
University of Illinois Press, 1999.
———.  A History of Sierra Leone. London: Oxford University Press, 1962.
Gaines, Kevin K. American Africans in Ghana: Black Expatriates and the Civil Rights 
Era. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Gallicchio, Marc. The African American Encounter with Japan and China: Black Interna-
tionalism in Asia, 1895–1945. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000.
Gamm, Gerald, and Robert D. Putnam. “The Growth of Voluntary Associations in 
America, 1840–1940. ” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 29, no. 4 (1999): 511–57.
Gandhi, M. K. Collected Works. Vols. 5, 8, 10, 12. New Delhi: Government of India, 1961, 
1962, 1963, 1964.
———.  Satyagraha in South Africa. Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1950.
———.  “ To  the American Negro: A Message from Mahatma Gandhi. ” The Crisis, July 
1929, 225.


--- PAGE 291 ---
bibliography
272 Garcia Dominguez, Bernardo. “Garvey and Cuba. ” In Garvey: His Work and Impact,
edited by Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan, 299–305. T renton, N.J.: Africa World 
Press, 1991.
Garland, David. The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order in Contemporary Soci-
ety. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Garrigus, John D. “Catalyst or Catastrophe? Saint-Domingue’s Free Men of Color 
and the Battle of Savannah, 1779–1782. ” Revista/Review Interamericana 22 (Spring/
Summer 1992): 109–25.
Garvey, Amy Jacques, ed. The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey. 2 vols. New 
Y ork: Atheneum, 1969.
Garvey, Marcus. “ An Exposé of the Caste System among Negroes. ” In Philosophy and 
Opinions of Marcus Garvey, vol. 2, edited by Amy Jacques Garvey, 55–61. New Y ork: 
Atheneum, 1992.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., and William L. Andrews, eds. Pioneers of the Black Atlantic: 
Five Slave Narratives from the Enlightenment, 1772–1815. Washington, D.C.: Civitas 
Counterpoint, 1998.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., and Nellie Y. McKay, eds. The Norton Anthology of African 
American Literature. New Y ork: Norton, 1996.
Geggus, David. “The Haitian Revolution. ” In Caribbean Slave Society and Economy, ed-
ited by Hilary Beckles and Verene Shepherd, 402–20. New Y ork: New Press, 1991.
———.  “ Th e  Ha i t i a n  R e v o l u t i o n .”  In  The Modern Caribbean, edited by Franklin W. 
Knight and Colin A. Palmer, 21–50. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1989.
———.  Haitian Revolutionary Studies. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2002.
———.  “ Th e  Influence of the Haitian Revolution in Latin America and the Carib-
bean. ” In Blacks, Coloureds, and National Identity in Nineteenth-Century Latin 
America, edited by Nancy Priscilla Naro, 38–59. London: Institute of Latin Ameri-
can Studies, 2003.
———.  Slavery, War, and Revolution: The British Occupation of Saint Domingue, 
1793–1798. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1982.
———.  “ Th e  S l av e s  a n d  Fre e  Co l o re d s  o f  Ma r tinique during the Age of the French 
and Haitian Revolutions. ” In The Lesser Antilles in the Age of European Expansion,
edited by Robert L. Pacquette and Stanley L. Engerman, 286–88. Gainesville: 
University Press of Florida, 1996.
———,  e d .  The Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the Atlantic World. Columbia: Uni-
versity of South Carolina Press, 2001.
Geiss, Imanuel. The Pan-African Movement: A History of Pan-Africanism in America, 
Europe, and Africa. T ranslated by Ann Keep. New Y ork: Africana Publishing, 1974.
Genovese, Eugene. From Rebellion to Revolution: Afro-American Slave Revolts in the 
Making of the Modern World. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1979.
Georgakas, Dan, and Marvin Surkin. Detroit, I Do Mind Dying: A Study in Urban Revo-
lution. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1975.
Gerhart, Gail. Black Power in South Africa: The Evolution of an Ideology. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1973, 1978.
Geschwender, James A. “Marxist-Leninist Organization: Prognosis among Black 
Workers. ” Journal of Black Studies 8, no. 3 (1978): 279–98.


--- PAGE 292 ---
bibliography
273Gilroy, Paul. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Gilyard, Keith. “The Bible and African American Poetry. ” In African Americans and the 
Bible: Sacred T exts and Social T extures, edited by Vincent L. Wimbush, 205–20. New 
Y ork: Continuum, 2000.
Ginwala, Frene. “Class, Consciousness, and Control/uRELfk.dIndian South Africans, 
1860–1946. ” Ph.D. diss., Oxford University, 1974.
Godreau, Isar. “Folkloric ‘Others’: Blanqueamiento and the Celebration of Blackness 
as an Exception in Puerto Rico. ” In Globalization and Race: Transformations in the 
Cultural Production of Blackness, edited by Kamari Maxine Clarke and Deborah A. 
Thomas, 171–87. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006.
Goldstone, Jack. Revolutions: Theoretical, Comparative, and Historical Studies. Belmont, 
Calif.: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, 2003.
Gomez, Michael A. Black Crescent: The Experience and Legacy of African Muslims in the 
Americas. New Y ork: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Gonzalez, Lélia. “The Unified Black Movement: A New Stage in Black Political Mo-
bilization. ” In Race, Class, and Power in Brazil, edited by Pierre-Michel Fontaine, 
120–34. Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, University of California, 
1985.
Gordon, Edmund T ., and Mark Anderson. “The African Diaspora: T owards an 
Ethnography of Diasporic Identification. ” Journal of American Folklore 112, no. 445 
(1999): 282–96.
Grady-Willis, Winston. “The Black Panther Party: State Repression and Political 
Prisoners. ” In The Black Panther Party [Reconsidered], edited by Charles E. Jones, 
363–89. Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1998.
———.  Challenging US Apartheid: Atlanta and Black Struggles for Human Rights, 
1960–1977. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006.
Graham, Richard, ed. The Idea of Race in Latin America, 1870–1940. Austin: University 
of T exas Press, 1990.
Grant, Colin. Negro with a Hat: The Rise and Fall of Marcus Garvey. New Y ork: Oxford 
University Press, 2008.
Green, Cecilia. “Caribbean Dependency Theory of the 1970s: A Historical-Materialist-
Feminist Revision. ” In New Caribbean Thought: A Reader, edited by Brian Meeks 
and Folke Lindahl, 40–72. Mona, Jamaica: University of the West Indies Press, 
2001.
Greenberg, Kenneth S., ed. Nat Turner: A Slave Rebellion in History and Memory. New 
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Griffith, Cyril. The African Dream: Martin R. Delany and the Emergence of Pan-African-
ist Thought. University Park: Penn State University Press, 1975.
Grimstead, David. “ Anglo-American Racism and Phillis Wheatley’s ‘Sable Veil,’ 
‘Length’ned Chain,’ and ‘Knitted Heart. ’” In Women in the Age of the American Revo-
lution, edited by Ronald Hoffman and Peter J. Albert, 338–444. Charlottesville: 
Published for the United States Capitol Historical Society by the University Press 
of Virginia, 1989.
Gromyko, Anatolii A., and Nikolai D. Kosukhin. The October Revolution and Africa.
Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1983.


--- PAGE 293 ---
bibliography
274 Guha, Ranajit. “Discipline and Mobilise. ” In Subaltern Studies No. 7, edited by Partha 
Chatterjee and Gyan Pandey, 64–120. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Guyer, Jane. African Studies in the United States: A Perspective. Atlanta: African Studies 
Association, 1996.
Hall, Gwendolyn Midlo. Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The Development of Afro-Creole 
Culture in the Eighteenth Century. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 
1992.
Hall, Perry A. In the Vineyard: Working in African American Studies. Knoxville: Univer-
sity of T ennessee Press, 1999.
Hall, Prince. “ A Charge. Delivered to the African Lodge, June 24, 1797, at Menotomy. 
By the Right Worshipful Prince Hall (1797). ” In “Face Zion Forward”: First Writers 
of the Black Atlantic, 1785–1798, edited by Joanna Brooks and John Saillant, 191–208. 
Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2002.
Hall, Stuart. “What Is This Black in Black Popular Culture?” In Black Popular Culture,
edited by Gina Dent, 21–33. Seattle: Bay Press, 1992.
Hammond, Jack. “The High Cost of Dollars. ” NACLA Report on the Americas 32, no. 5
(1999): 24–25.
Hanchard, Michael George. Orpheus and Power: The Movimento Negro of Rio de Janeiro 
and São Paulo, Brazil, 1945–1988. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994.
Hanna, William John. “Student Protest in Independent Black Africa. ” Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science 395, no. 1 (May 1971): 171–83.
Hanna, William John, and Judith Lynne Hanna. “The Cynical Nationalists. ” In Univer-
sity Students and African Politics, edited by William John Hanna, 49–70. New Y ork: 
Africana Publishing, 1975.
Hanna, William John, Judith Lynne Hanna, and Vivian Zeitz Sauer. “The Active Mi-
nority. ” In University Students and African Politics, edited by William John Hanna, 
71–102. New Y ork: Africana Publishing, 1975.
Hardiman, David. Peasant Nationalists of Gujarat: Kheda District, 1917–1934. New 
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1981.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. Empire. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 2000.
Harold, Claudrena N. The Rise and Fall of the Garvey Movement in the Urban South, 
1918–1942. New Y ork: Routledge, 2007.
Harpelle, Ronald. “Ethnicity, Religion, and Repression: The Denial of African Heri-
tage in Costa Rica. ” Canadian Journal of History 29 (1994): 95–112.
———.  “ R a c i s m  a n d  Nat i o n a l i s m  i n  the Creation of Costa Rica’s Pacific Coast Banana 
Enclave. ” The Americas 56, no. 3 (2000): 29–51.
———.  The West Indians of Costa Rica: Race, Class, and the Integration of an Ethnic 
Minority. Montréal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2001.
Harris, Joseph E. African-American Reactions to War in Ethiopia, 1936–1941. Baton 
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1994.
———.  The African Presence in Asia: Consequences of the East African Slave Trade.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1971.
———.  “ E x pa n d i n g  the Scope of African Diaspora Studies: The Middle East and 
India, a Research Agenda. ” Radical History Review 87 (2003): 157–68.


--- PAGE 294 ---
bibliography
275———,  e d .  Global Dimensions of the African Diaspora. Washington, D.C.: Howard 
University Press, 1982.
Harris, Karen L. “Gandhi, the Chinese, and Passive Resistance. ” In Gandhi and South 
Africa: Principles and Politics, edited by Judith M. Brown and Martin Prozesky, 
69–89. Scottsville, South Africa: University of Natal Press, 1999.
Harrison, Alferdteen, ed. Black Exodus: The Great Migration from the American South.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1991.
Hart, Richard. Rise and Organise: The Birth of the Workers and National Movements in 
Jamaica, 1936–1939. London: Karia Press, 1989.
Hartman, Michelle. “‘ A Debke Beat Funky as P .E. ’s Riff ’: Hip Hop Poetry and Politics 
in Suheir Hammad’s Born Palestinian, Born Black.”  Black Arts Quarterly 7, no. 1
(2002): 6–8.
Hartmann, Douglas. Race, Culture, and the Revolt of the Black Athlete: The 1968 Olympic 
Protests and Their Aftermath. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Harvey, David. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 
2005.
Haupt, Adam. “Hip-Hop in the Age of Empire: Cape Flats Style. ” In Voices of Transi-
tion: The Politics, Poetics, and Practices of Social Change in South Africa, edited by 
Edgar Pieterse and Frank Meintjies, 215–25. Johannesburg: Heinemann, 2003.
Haywood, Harry. Black Bolshevik: Autobiography of an Afro-American Communist.
Chicago: Liberator Press, 1978.
———.  Negro Liberation. New Y ork: International Publishers, 1948.
Hebdige, Dick. Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London: Routledge, 1981.
Helg, Aline. Our Rightful Share: The Afro-Cuban Struggle for Equality, 1886–1912. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995.
Hempton, David. Methodism: Empire of the Spirit. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2005.
Henry, Paget. “CLR James and the Antiguan Left. ” In C. L. R James’s Caribbean, edited 
by Paget Henry and Paul Buhle, 225–61. London: Macmillan, 1992.
Higginson, John. “Liberating the Captives: Independent Watchtower as an Avatar of 
Colonial Revolt in Southern Africa and Katanga, 1908–1941. ” Journal of Social His-
tory 26, no. 1 (1992): 55–80.
Hill, Robert A. “Cyril Briggs. ” In The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement 
Association Papers, vol. 1, edited by Robert A. Hill, 521–27 (appendix 1). Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983.
———.  “ D rea d  Hi s to r y :  L e o n a rd  P.  How e l l  a n d  Mi l l e n a r i a n  Visions in Early Rastafari 
Religion in Jamaica. ” Epoche: Journal of the History of Religions at UCLA 9 (1981): 
30–71.
———.  “ In t roduction: Garvey’s Gospel, Garvey’s Game. ” In Philosophy and Opinions 
of Marcus Garvey, 2 vols. (in 1), edited by Amy Jacques Garvey, v–lxxix. New Y ork: 
Atheneum, 1992.
———,  e d .  The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Pa-
pers. 10 vols. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983–2006. Vols. 11 and 12 
forthcoming.
Hill, Robert A., and Gregory A. Pirio. “‘ Africa for the Africans’: The Garvey Move-


--- PAGE 295 ---
bibliography
276 ment in South Africa, 1920–1940. ” In The Politics of Race, Class, and Nationalism 
in Twentieth-Century South Africa, edited by Shula Marks and Stanley T rapido, 
209–53. London: Longman, 1987.
Hiro, Dilip. Black British, White British: A History of Race Relations in Britain. London: 
Grafton Books, 1991.
Hobsbawm, Eric. The Age of Revolution, 1789–1848. New Y ork: New American Library, 
1962.
———.  Nations and Nationalism since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality. 2nd ed. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Hodder-Williams, Richard. “ African Studies: Back to the Future. ” African Affairs 85 
(1986): 593–604.
Hodges, Graham Russell. Root and Branch: African Americans in New York and East 
Jersey, 1613–1863. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999.
———,  e d .  Black Itinerants of the Gospel: The Narratives of John Jea and George White.
Madison, Wisc.: Madison House, 1993.
Hofmeyr, Jan. South Africa. 2nd ed. New Y ork: McGraw Hill, 1952.
Holly, James Theodore. A Vindication of the Capacity of the Negro Race for Self-Gov-
ernment and Civilized Progress, as Demonstrated by Historical Events of the Haytian 
Revolution; and the Subsequent Acts of that People since their National Independence.
New Haven: W. H. Stanley, 1857.
Holton, Woody. Forced Founders: Indians, Debtors, Slaves, and the Making of the Ameri-
can Revolution in Virginia. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press for the 
Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture, 1999.
Hooker, James R. Black Revolutionary: George Padmore’s Path from Communism to Pan-
Africanism. New Y ork: Praeger, 1967.
Horne, Alistair. A Savage War of Peace: Algeria, 1954–1962. London: Macmillan, 1977.
Horne, Gerald. Black and Brown: African Americans and the Mexican Revolution, 
1910–1920. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2005.
———.  Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the Cold 
War, 1944–1963. New Y ork: State University of New Y ork Press, 1986.
———.  Red Seas: Ferdinand Smith and Radical Black Sailors in the United States and 
Jamaica. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2005.
Howard-Pitney, David. The Afro-American Jeremiad: Appeals for Justice in America.
Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1990.
Howe, Glenford D. Race, War, and Nationalism: A Social History of West Indians in the 
First World War. Kingston: Ian Randle, 2002.
Howe, Stephen. Afrocentrism: Mythical Pasts and Imagined Homes. London: Verso, 
1998.
Huggins, Nathan I. Afro-American Studies: A Report to the Ford Foundation. New Y ork: 
Ford Foundation, 1985.
Hunt, Alfred N. Haiti’s Influence on Antebellum America: Slumbering Volcano in the 
Caribbean. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1998.
Hunwick, John, and Eva T routt Powell. The African Diaspora in the Mediterranean 
Lands of Islam. Princeton, N.J.: Markus Wiener, 2002.
Hutton, Clinton. “The Cuban Influence on Popular Jamaican Music. ” In Intra-


--- PAGE 296 ---
bibliography
277Caribbean Migration: The Cuban Connection (1898-Present), 117–32. Proceedings of 
seminar held at the University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica, June 14–16, 2001.
International Conference of Negro Workers. A Report of Proceedings and Decisions of 
the First International Conference of Negro Workers. Hamburg: International T rade 
Union, Committee of Negro Workers, 1930.
Irele, Abiola. The African Experience in Literature and Ideology. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1990.
Jacobs, Richard, and Ian Jacobs, eds. Grenada: The Route to Revolution. Havana: Casa 
de las Americas, 1980.
Jacobs, Sylvia M., ed. Black Americans and the Missionary Movement in Africa. West-
port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1982.
Jacobson, Matthew Frye. Whiteness of a Different Color: European Immigrants and the 
Alchemy of Race. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Jamaica. Blue Book for the Island of Jamaica: 1913–1914. Kingston: Government Printing 
Office, 1914.
James, C. L. R. The Black Jacobins: T oussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolu-
tion. New Y ork: Dial Press, 1938; rev. ed., 1963.
———.  A History of Negro Revolt. London: Fact Ltd., 1938.
———.  “ Wa l te r  Rodney and the Question of Power. ” In Walter Rodney, Revolutionary 
and Scholar: A Tribute, edited by Edward A. Alpers and Pierre-Michel Fontaine, 
133–46. Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies and African Studies Cen-
ter, University of California, 1982.
James, Winston. “Explaining Afro-Caribbean Social Mobility in the United States: 
Beyond the Sowell Thesis. ” Comparative Studies in Society and History 44, no. 2
(2002): 218–62.
———.  Holding aloft the Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in Early Twentieth-
Century America. London: Verso, 1998.
James, Winston, and Clive Harris, eds. Inside Babylon: The Caribbean Diaspora in 
Britain. New Y ork: Verso, 1993.
Jenkinson, Jacqueline. “The Glasgow Race Disturbances of 1919. ” Immigrants and 
Minorities 4, no. 2 (1985): 43–67.
Johns, Sheridan. “The Birth of the Communist Party of South Africa. ” International 
Journal of African Historical Studies 9, no. 3 (1976): 371–400.
———.  Raising the Red Flag: The International Socialist League and the Communist 
Party of South Africa, 1914–1932. Bellville, South Africa: Mayibuye Books, 1995.
Johnson, Cedric. Revolutionaries to Race Leaders: Black Power and the Making of African 
American Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
Johnson, Morris R. Archbishop Daniel William Alexander and the African Orthodox 
Church. Lanham, Md.: International Scholars Publishers, 1999.
Jones, Absalom, and Richard Allen. “ A Narrative of the Proceedings of the Black 
People, During the Late Awful Calamity in Philadelphia, in the Y ear, 1793. ” In Negro 
Protest Pamphlets, edited by Dorothy Parker, 1–24. New Y ork: Arno Press, 1969.
Joseph, Peniel E. “Black Studies, Student Activism, and the Black Power Movement. ” 
In The Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights–Black Power Era, edited 
by Peniel E. Joseph, 251–77. New Y ork: Routledge, 2006.


--- PAGE 297 ---
bibliography
278 ———.  “ In t roduction: T oward a Historiography of the Black Power Movement. ” In 
The Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights–Black Power Era, edited by 
Peniel E. Joseph, 1–25. New Y ork: Routledge, 2006.
Journal of African History 19, no. 1 (1978). Special issue on World War I and Africa.
Jung, Moon-Ho. Coolies and Cane: Race, Labor, and Sugar in the Age of Emancipation.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
Kadalie, Clements. My Life and the I.C.U. London: Cass, 1970.
Kanet, Roger. “The Comintern and the ‘Negro Question’: Communist Policy in the 
United States and Africa, 1921–41. ” Survey 19, no. 4 (Autumn 1973): 86–122.
Kapur, Sudarshan. Raising Up a Prophet: The African-American Encounter with Gandhi.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1992.
Keeling, Kara. “‘ A Homegrown Revolutionary’? Tupac Shakur and the Legacy of the 
Black Panther Party. ” Black Scholar 29, no. 2–3 (1999): 59–63.
Kelley, Robin D. G. Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination. Boston: Beacon 
Press, 2002.
———.  Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
———.  “Kickin’ Reality, Kickin’ Ballistics: ‘Gangsta Rap’ and Postindustrial Los An-
geles. ” In Droppin’ Science: Critical Essays on Rap Music and Hip Hop Culture, edited 
by William Eric Perkins, 117–58. Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1996.
———.  Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class. New Y ork: Free 
Press, 1994.
———.  “Sto r my  Weat h e r :  R e c o n s t r u c t i n g  B l a c k  (In te r) Nat i o n a l i s m  i n  the Cold War 
Era. ” In Is It Nation Time? Contemporary Essays on Black Power and Black National-
ism, edited by Eddie S. Glaude Jr., 67–90. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2002.
———.  “ Th e  Th i rd  In te r n at i o n a l  a n d  the Struggle for National Liberation in South 
Africa. ” Ufahamu 15, no. 1–2 (1986): 99–120.
Kerr-Ritchie, J. R. Rites of August First: Emancipation Day in the Black Atlantic World.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2007.
Keyes, Cheryl. “ At the Crossroads: Rap Music and Its African Nexus. ” Ethnomusicology
40 (1996): 223–48.
Kidd, Colin. The Forging of Races: Race and Scripture in the Protestant Atlantic World, 
1600–2000. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Kidd, Thomas S. The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial 
America. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.
King, Desmond. Making Americans: Immigration, Race, and the Origins of the Diverse 
Democracy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. “ An Experiment in Love. ” In A T estament of Hope: The Essential 
Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr., edited by James Washington, 16–20. 
San Francisco: Harper, 1986.
———.  “ Th e  S o c i a l  O r ga n i z ation of Nonviolence. ” In A T estament of Hope: The Es-
sential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr., edited by James Washington, 
31–35. San Francisco: Harper, 1986.
———.  Stride toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story. New Y ork: Harper, 1958.


--- PAGE 298 ---
bibliography
279———.  A T estament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, 
Jr. Edited by James Washington. San Francisco: Harper, 1986.
———.  Why We Can’t Wait. New Y ork: Penguin Books, 1964.
Kirk, Joyce. Making a Voice: African Resistance to Segregation in South Africa. Boulder: 
Westview Press, 1998.
Klehr, Harvey, John Earl Haynes, and Kryill M. Anderson. The Soviet World of Ameri-
can Communism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.
Klein, Herbert S. African Slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean. New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press, 1986.
Knight, Franklin W. Slave Society in Cuba during the Nineteenth Century. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1970.
Kornweibel, Theodore, Jr. “Seeing Red”: Federal Campaigns against Black Militancy, 
1919–1925. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998.
LaChance, Paul. “Repercussions of the Haitian Revolution in Louisiana. ” In The 
Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the Atlantic World, edited by David P . Geggus, 
209–30. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2001.
Lader, Lawrence. Power on the Left: American Radical Movements since 1946. New Y ork: 
Norton, 1979.
La Guma, Alex, and Mohamed Adhikari, eds. Jimmy La Guma/u2014.dA Biography. Cape 
T own: Friends of the South African Library, 1997.
Langley, Ayodele. Pan-Africanism and Nationalism in West Africa, 1900–1945. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1973.
Langley, Lester D. The Americas in the Age of Revolution, 1750–1850. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1996.
Laurent, Gerard M. Haiti et l’independance americaine. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de 
Seminaire Adventiste, 1976.
Lawson, James M., Jr. “We Are T rying to Raise the Moral Issue. ” In Black Protest 
Thought in the Twentieth Century, edited by August Meier, Elliott Rudwick, and 
Francis L. Broderick, 308–15. New Y ork: Bobbs-Merrill, 1971.
Layton, Azza Salama. International Politics and Civil Rights Policies in the United States, 
1941–1960. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Leal, Gilberto R. N. “Fárígá/Ifaradá: Black Resistance and Achievement in Brazil. ” In 
African Roots/American Cultures: Africa in the Creation of the Americas, edited by 
Sheila S. Walker, 291–300. New Y ork: Rowman & Littlefield, 2001.
Lee, Hélène. Le premier Rasta. Paris: Flammarion, 1999.
Lefkowitz, Mary R., and Guy MacLean Rogers, eds. Black Athena Revisited. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Legum, Colin. “The Y ear of the Students: A Survey of the African University Scene. ” 
In African Contemporary Record, A3–A30. London: Africana Publishing, 1972.
Lemelle, Sidney, and Robin D. G. Kelley, eds. Imagining Home: Class, Culture, and 
Nationalism in the African Diaspora. London: Verso, 1994.
Lenin, Vladimir Il’ich. Lenin on the National and Colonial Questions. Peking: Foreign 
Languages Press, 1967.
———.  Selected Works. Vol. 3. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1971.
Lewis, Arthur. Growth and Fluctuations, 1870–1913. Boston: G. Allen & Unwin, 1978.


--- PAGE 299 ---
bibliography
280 Lewis, David Levering. W . E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Cen-
tury, 1919–1963. New Y ork: Henry Holt and Company, 2000.
Lewis, Gordon. Grenada: The Jewel Despoiled. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1987.
Lewis, Rupert. “Garvey’s Perspective on Jamaica. ” In Garvey: His Work and Impact,
edited by Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan, 229–42. T renton, N.J.: Africa World 
Press, 1994.
———.  “ L ea r n i n g  to  B l ow  the Abeng: A Critical Look at Anti-Establishment Move-
ments of the 1960s and 1970s. ” Small Axe 1 (March 1997): 5–17.
———.  Marcus Garvey, Anti-Colonial Champion. T renton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 
1988.
———.  Walter Rodney’s Intellectual and Political Thought. Detroit: Wayne State Univer-
sity Press, 1998; Barbados: The Press, University of the West Indies, 1998.
Lewis, Rupert, and Patrick Bryan, eds. Garvey: His Work and Impact. T renton, N.J.: 
Africa World Press, 1991.
Lewis, W. Arthur. Labour in the West Indies. London: New Beacon Books, 1977.
“Life in Jamaica in the Early Twentieth Century: A Presentation of Ninety Oral 
Accounts. ” Unpublished transcripts housed at Institute of Social and Economic 
Research, University of the West Indies, Mona, Kingston, Jamaica.
Lilly Caldwell, Kia. Negras in Brazil: Re-envisioning Black Women, Subjectivity, and 
Citizenship. Piscataway, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2006.
Lincoln, C. Eric. The Black Muslims in America. 3rd ed. T renton, N.J.: Africa World 
Press, 1994.
Linebaugh, Peter, and Marcus Rediker. The Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Com-
moners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic. Boston: Beacon Press, 
2000.
Lipsitz, George. Dangerous Crossroads: Popular Music, Postmodernism, and the Politics 
of Space. London: Verso, 1994.
Lodge, T om. Black Politics in South Africa since 1945. London: Longman, 1983.
Logan, Rayford Whittingham. The Diplomatic Relations of the United States with Haiti, 
1776–1891. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1941.
Lumumba, Patrice. “Independence Day Speech. ” June 30, 1960. <http://www.africawithin
.com/lumumba/independence_speech.htm>. Accessed February 10, 2007.
Lynch, Hollis R. Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832–1912. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1967.
Madhubuti, Haki R., and Maulana Karenga, eds. Million Man March/Day of Absence: 
A Commemorative Anthology. Chicago: Third World Press, 1996.
Magaldi, Cristina. “ Adopting Imports: New Images and Alliances in Brazilian Popular 
Music of the 1990s. ” Popular Music 18, no. 3 (1999): 309–29.
Makalani, Minkah. “For the Liberation of Black People Everywhere: The African 
Blood Brotherhood, Black Radicalism, and Pan-African Liberation in the New 
Negro Movement. ” Ph.D. diss., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2004.
Makonnen, Ras. Pan-Africanism from Within. As recorded and edited by Kenneth 
King. Nairobi: Oxford University Press, 1973.


--- PAGE 300 ---
bibliography
281Malcolm X. Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements. New Y ork: Grove/
Atlantic, 1990.
Malcolm X et al. “Program of the Organization of Afro-American Unity. ” 
<http://www.themalcolmxmuseum.org/collections/phpweblog/stories.
php?story=01/10/13/0732492>. Accessed June 3, 2005.
Manning, Patrick. “ Africa and the African Diaspora: New Directions of Study. ” Journal 
of African History 44 (2003): 487–506.
Marquese, Mike. Redemption Song: Muhammad Ali and the Spirit of the Sixties. Lon-
don: Verso, 1999.
Marrant, John. “ A Journal of the Reverend John Marrant, from August the 18th, 1785, 
to the 16th of March, 1790, [1790]. ” In “Face Zion Forward”: First Writers of the Black 
Atlantic, 1785–1798, edited by Joanna Brooks and John Saillant, 93–160. Boston: 
Northeastern University Press, 2002.
———.  “A  S e rmon Preached on the 24th Day of June 1789. ” In “Face Zion Forward”: 
First Writers of the Black Atlantic, 1785–1798, edited by Joanna Brooks and John Sail-
lant, 77–92. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2002.
Mars, Perry. Ideology and Change: The Transformation of the Caribbean Left. Barbados: 
The Press, University of the West Indies, 1998.
Marshall, Dawn. “ A History of West Indian Migrations: Overseas Opportunities and 
‘Safety-Valve’ Policies. ” In The Caribbean Exodus, edited by Barry B. Levine, 15–31. 
New Y ork: Praeger, 1987.
Marshall, Sharon. “Nothing in My Hands: Some Personal Accounts of Migration 
from Barbados to Cuba. ” In Intra-Caribbean Migration: The Cuban Connection 
(1898–Present), 19–28. Proceedings of seminar held at the University of the West 
Indies, Mona, Jamaica, June 14–16, 2001.
Martin, T ony. Amy Ashwood Garvey: Pan-Africanist, Feminist, and Mrs. Garvey No. 1, or 
a T ale of Two Amies. Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 2007.
———.  The Pan-African Connection: From Slavery to Garvey and Beyond. Dover, Mass.: 
Majority Press, 1983.
———.  Race First: The Organizational and Ideological Struggles of Marcus Garvey and 
the Universal Negro Improvement Association. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 
1976.
———.  “ Wo m e n  i n  the Garvey Movement. ” In Garvey: His Work and Impact, edited 
by Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan, 67–72. T renton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1991.
———,  e d .  The Poetical Works of Marcus Garvey. Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 1983.
Martin, William G., and Michael O. West. “The Ascent, T riumph, and Disintegration 
of the Africanist Enterprise, USA. ” In Out of One, Many Africas: Reconstructing the 
Study and Meaning of Africa, edited by William G. Martin and Michael O. West, 
85–122. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
Marx, Anthony. Lessons of Struggle: South African Internal Opposition, 1960–1990. New 
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. The Civil War in the United States. New Y ork: Inter-
national Publishers, 1969.
———.  On Colonialism. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1960.


--- PAGE 301 ---
bibliography
282 Mathurin, Owen Charles. Henry Sylvester Williams and the Origins of the Pan-African 
Movement, 1869–1911. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1976.
Matthews, T racye. “‘No One Ever Asks, What a Man’s Place in the Revolution Is’: 
Gender and the Politics of the Black Panther Party, 1966–1971. ” In The Black Panther 
Party [Reconsidered], edited by Charles E. Jones, 267–304. Baltimore: Black Classic 
Press, 1998.
Maxwell, William J. New Negro, Old Left: African-American Writing and Communism 
between the Wars. New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1999.
May, Roy, and Robin Cohen. “The Interaction between Race and Colonialism: A Case 
Study of the Liverpool Race Riots of 1919. ” Race & Class 16, no. 2 (1974): 111–26.
McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald, eds. Comparative Perspectives 
on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural 
Framings. New Y ork: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
McClellan, Woodford. “ Africans and Black Americans in the Comintern Schools, 
1925–34. ” International Journal of African Historical Studies 36, no. 2 (May 1993): 
371–90.
———.  “G e o r ge  Padmore and the Hamburg Conference: Some Background. ” Paper 
presented at the international seminar “The Life and Times of George Padmore,” 
University of the West Indies, T rinidad, October 2003.
McCracken, John. “ African History in British Universities: Past, Present, and Future. ” 
African Affairs 92 (1993): 239–353.
McDaniels, Andrea. “Striking Cord with Y ouths, Brazil Rappers Nudge Reform. ” 
Christian Science Monitor, January 11, 1999, 7.
McDuffie, Erik S. “Black Women Radicals in the Garvey Movement and in the Left 
during the 1920s. ” In Diasporic Africa: A Reader, edited by Michael A. Gomez, 
219–50. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2006.
———.  “ L o n g  Jo u rneys: Four Black Women and the Communist Party, USA, 
1930–1956. ” Ph.D. diss., New Y ork University, 2003.
McKay, Claude. A Long Way from Home. London: Pluto, 1985.
McLeod, Marc. “Undesirable Aliens: Haitian and British West Indian Immigrant 
Workers in Cuba, 1898–1940. ” Ph.D. diss., University of T exas at Austin, 2000.
———.  “ Un d e s i r a b l e  A l i e n s :  R a c e,  Ethnicity, and Nationalism in the Comparison of 
Haitian and British West Indian Immigrant Workers in Cuba, 1912–1939. ” Journal of 
Social History 31, no. 3 (1998): 599–623.
McMichael, Philip. Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective. Thousand 
Oaks, Calif.: Pine Forge Press, 2004.
Meeks, Brian. “The 1970 Revolution: Chronology and Documentation. ” In The Black 
Power Revolution of 1970: A Retrospective, edited by Selwyn Ryan and T aimoon 
Stewart, 135–77. St. Augustine, T rinidad: I.S.E.R., University of the West Indies, 
1995.
———.  Caribbean Revolutions and Revolutionary Theory: An Assessment of Cuba, Nica-
ragua, and Grenada. London: Macmillan Caribbean, 1993.
———.  “ Th e  D e v elopment of the 1970 Revolution in T rinidad and T obago. ” M.S. 
thesis, Mona, Jamaica, University of the West Indies, 1976.
———.  “ L l o y d  B e s t ,  the People and the Road Not T aken in 1970. ” In Independent


--- PAGE 302 ---
bibliography
283Thought and Caribbean Freedom: Essays in Honour of Lloyd Best, edited by Selwyn 
Ryan, 71–88. St. Augustine, T rinidad and T obago: Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of 
Social and Economic Studies, T rinidad, 2003.
———.  Narratives of Resistance: Jamaica, Trinidad, the Caribbean. Mona: University of 
the West Indies Press, 2000.
———.  “O b s c u re  R e v o l t ,  Profound Effects: The Henry Rebellion, Counter-Hege-
mony, and Jamaican Society. ” Small Axe 2 (September 1977): 39–62.
———.  Radical Caribbean: From Black Power to Abu Bakr. Kingston: The Press, Uni-
versity of the West Indies, 1996.
———.  “S o c i a l  Fo r m ation and People’s Revolution: A Grenadian Study. ” Ph.D. diss., 
University of the West Indies, 1988.
Melish, Joanne Pope. Disowning Slavery: Gradual Emancipation and “Race” in New 
England, 1780–1860. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1998.
Meriwether, James H. Proudly We Can Be Africans: Black Americans and Africa, 
1935–1961. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Miller, Floyd J. The Search for a Black Nationality: Black Emigration and Colonization.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1975.
Miller, James A., Susan D. Pennybacker, and Eve Rosenhaft. “Mother Ada Wright 
and the International Campaign to Free the Scottsboro Boys, 1931–34. ” American 
Historical Review 106, no. 2 (April 2001): 387–430.
Millette, David. “Guerrilla War in T rinidad: 1970–1974. ” In The Black Power Revolution 
of 1970: A Retrospective, edited by Selwyn Ryan and T aimoon Stewart, 625–54. St. 
Augustine, T rinidad: I.S.E.R., University of the West Indies, 1995.
Mitchell, Henry H. Black Church Beginnings: The Long-Hidden Realities of the First 
Years. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 2004.
Mitchell, Michael. “Blacks and the Abertura Democrática. ” In Race, Class, and Power 
in Brazil, edited by Pierre-Michel Fontaine, 95–119. Los Angeles: Center for Afro-
American Studies, University of California, 1985.
Mitchell, T ony, ed. Global Noise: Rap and Hip Hop outside the USA. Middletown: 
Wesleyan University Press, 2001.
Moeti, Moitsadi Thoane. “Ethiopianism: Separatist Roots of African Nationalism in 
South Africa. ” Ph.D. diss., Syracuse University, 1981.
Monestel, Manuel. “El calypso en Costa Rica. ” M.A. thesis, Universidad de Costa 
Rica, Maestría en Artes, 2003.
Moore, Barrington, Jr. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant 
in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Moore, David Chioni, ed. Black Athena Writes Back: Martin Bernal Responds to His 
Critics. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2001.
Morgenthau, Ruth Schachter. Political Parties in French-Speaking West Africa. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1964.
Moses, Wilson Jeremiah. Alexander Crummell: A Study of Civilization and Discontent.
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1989.
———,  e d .  Classical Black Nationalism: From the American Revolution to Marcus 
Garvey. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1996.
Mullen, Bill V ., and James Smethurst, eds. Left of the Color Line: Race, Radicalism, and


--- PAGE 303 ---
bibliography
284 Twentieth-Century Literature of the United States. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 2003.
Mullings, Leith. “Race and Globalization: Racialization from Below. ” Souls 6, no. 5
(2004): 1–9.
Munroe, T revor. The Workers Party: What It Is. Why It Is Necessary. Kingston: Workers 
Liberation League, 1978.
Murphy, Martin F. Dominican Sugar Plantations: Production and Foreign Labor Integra-
tion. New Y ork: Praeger, 1991.
Murrell, Nathaniel Samuel, William David Spencer, and Adrian Anthony McFarlane, 
eds. Chanting Down Babylon: The Rastafari Reader. Philadelphia: T emple Univer-
sity Press, 1998.
Musson, Doreen. Johnny Gomas, Voice of the Working Class: A Political Biography. Cape 
T own: Buchu Books, 1989.
NAACP . Thirty Years of Lynching in the United States, 1889–1918. 1919. New Y ork: Arno 
Press, 1969.
Naison, Mark. Communists in Harlem during the Depression. New Y ork: Grove, 1984.
Nascimento, Elisa Larkin. Pan-Africanism and South America: Emergence of a Black 
Rebellion. Buffalo: Afrodiaspora, 1980.
Nash, Gary B. The Forgotten Fifth: African Americans in the Age of Revolution. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006.
———.  “ Th o m a s  Pe te r s :  Mi l l w r i g h t  a n d  D e l i v e re r.”  In  Struggle and Survival in Colonial 
America, edited by Gary B. Nash and David G. Sweet, 69–85. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1981.
National Joint Action Committee. Conventional Politics or Revolution? Belmont, T rini-
dad and T obago: The Vanguard, 1971.
Natsoulas, Theodore. “Patriarch McGuire and the Spread of the African Orthodox 
Church to Africa. ” Journal of Religion in Africa 12, no. 2 (1981): 81–104.
Neal, Mark Anthony. What the Music Said: Black Popular Music and Black Public Cul-
ture. New Y ork: Routledge, 1999.
Nelson, William E., Jr. Black Atlantic Politics: Dilemmas of Political Empowerment in 
Boston and Liverpool. Albany: State University Press, 2000.
Nettleford, Rex M. Identity, Race, and Protest in Jamaica. New Y ork: William Morrow, 
1972.
Newman, Richard. “ Archbishop Daniel William Alexander and the African Orthodox 
Church. ” International Journal of African Historical Studies 16, no. 4 (1983): 615–30.
———.  “ Th e  O r i g i n s  o f  the African Orthodox Church. ” In The Negro Churchman: The 
Official Organ of the African Orthodox Church, 1921–1931, 2 vols., edited by Richard 
Newman, iii–xxii. Millwood, N.Y.: Kraus Reprint Co., 1977.
Newman, Simon P . “ American Political Culture and the French and Haitian Revolu-
tions: Nathaniel Cutting and the Jeffersonian Republicans. ” In The Impact of the 
Haitian Revolution in the Atlantic World, edited by David P . Geggus, 72–89. Colum-
bia: University of South Carolina Press, 2001.
Newton, Huey P . “Message to the Vietnamese. ” In The Coming of the New International,
edited by John Gerassi, 539–95. New Y ork: World Publishing Group, 1971.


--- PAGE 304 ---
bibliography
285———.  T o Die for the People: The Writings of Huey P . Newton. New Y ork: Random 
House, 1972.
———.  “ Th e  Wo m e n’s  L i b e r ation and Gay Liberation Movements: August 15, 1970. ” 
In T o Die for the People: The Writings of Huey P . Newton, 152–55. New Y ork: Random 
House, 1972.
Newton, Velma. The Silver Men: West Indian Labour Migration to Panama, 1850–1914.
Kingston: Ian Randle, 2004.
Nkrumah, Kwame. Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah. New Y ork: Nelson, 
1957.
Northrup, David. Indentured Labor in the Age of Imperialism, 1834–1922. New Y ork: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Nzula, A. T ., I. Potekhin, and A. Zusmanovich. Forced Labour in Colonial Africa.
London: Zed Press, 1979.
Odendaal, Andre. Black Protest Politics in South Africa to 1912. T otowa, N.J.: Barnes 
and Noble, 1984.
Okonkwo, R. L. “The Garvey Movement in British West Africa. ” Journal of African 
History 21, no. 1 (1980): 105–17.
Okpewho, Isidore, Carole Boyce Davies, and Ali A. Mazrui, eds. The African Diaspora: 
African Origins and New World Identities. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1999.
O’Neale, Sondra A. Jupiter Hammon and the Biblical Beginnings of African-American 
Literature. Metuchen, N.J.: American Theological Library Association and the 
Scarecrow Press, 1993.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. Racial Matters: The FBI’s Secret File on Black America, 1960–1972.
New Y ork: Free Press. 1991.
Osumare, Halifu. The Africanist Aesthetic in Global Hip-Hop: Power Moves. New Y ork: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Oxaal, Ivar. Black Intellectuals and the Dilemmas of Race and Class in Trinidad. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Schenkman, 1982.
Ozouf, Mona. Festivals and the French Revolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1988.
Pacini Hernández, Deborah, and Reebee Garofalo. “Hip Hop in Havana: Rap, Race, 
and National Identity in Contemporary Cuba. ” Journal of Popular Music Studies
11/12 (2000): 18–47.
Padmore, George. How Russia Transformed Her Colonial Empire. London: Dennis 
Dobson, 1946.
———.  The Life and Struggles of Negro T oilers. London: R. I. L. U. Magazine for the 
International T rade Union Committee of Negro Workers, 1931; reprint, Holly-
wood, Calif.: Sun Dance Press, 1971.
———.  Pan-Africanism or Communism? The Coming Struggle for Africa. London: 
Dennis Dobson, 1956.
Page, Carol. “Black America in White South Africa: Church and State Reaction to the 
A.M.E. Church in Cape Colony and T ransvaal, 1896–1910. ” Ph.D. diss., University 
of Edinburgh, 1978.


--- PAGE 305 ---
bibliography
286 Page, Melvin E. The Chiwaya War: Malawians and the First World War. Boulder: West-
view Press, 2000.
Painter, Nell Irvin. The Narrative of Hosea Hudson: The Life and Times of a Black Radi-
cal. New Y ork: Norton, 1994.
Palmer, Colin. “Defining and Studying the Modern African Diaspora. ” Perspectives: 
American Historical Association Newsletter 36, no. 6 (1998): 22–25.
———.  Slaves of the White God: Blacks in Mexico, 1570–1650. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1976.
Palmié, Stephan. Wizards and Scientists: Explorations in Afro-Cuban Modernity and 
Tradition. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2002.
Pamphile, Leon D. “The NAACP and the American Occupation of Haiti. ” Phylon 67, 
no. 1 (1986): 91–100.
Paquette, Robert L. “Revolutionary Saint Domingue in the Making of T erritorial 
Louisiana. ” In A Turbulent Time: The French Revolution and the Greater Caribbean,
edited by David Barry Gaspar and David Patrick Geggus, 204–25. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1997.
Pardue, Derek. “Putting Mano to Music: The Mediation of Race in Brazilian Rap. ” 
Ethnomusicology Forum 13, no. 2 (2004): 253–86.
Patterson, Tiffany Ruby, and Robin D. G. Kelley. “Unfinished Migrations: Reflections 
on the African Diaspora and the Making of the Modern World. ” African Studies 
Review 43, no. 1 (2000): 11–45.
Payne, Charles M. I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the Mis-
sissippi Freedom Struggle. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Peabody, Sue. “There Are No Slaves in France”: The Political Culture of Race and Slavery 
in the Ancien Regime. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Perotin-Dumon, Anne. “The Emergence of Politics among Free-Coloureds and Slaves 
in Revolutionary Guadaloupe. ” Journal of Caribbean History 25, no. 1–2 (1991): 
100–135.
———.  Etre patriote sous les tropiques la Guadaloupe, la colonisation et la revolution 
1789–1794. Basse-T erre: Societe d’Histoire de la Gaudaloupe, 1985.
Perry, Jeffrey B. Hubert Harrison: The Voice of Harlem Radicalism, 1883–1918. New Y ork: 
Columbia University Press, 2009.
———,  e d .  A Hubert Harrison Reader. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University 
Press, 2001.
Perullo, Alex. “Hooligans and Heroes: Youth Identity and Hip-Hop in Dar es Salaam, 
T anzania. ” Africa T oday 51, no. 4 (2005): 75–101.
Pfeffer, Paula F.A. Philip Randolph: Pioneer of the Civil Rights Movement. Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State University Press, 1990.
Phillips, Anthony De V . “‘Go Ahead, England; Barbados Is Behind Y ou’: Barbadian 
Responses to the Outbreak of the Great War in 1914. ” In Before and After 1865: 
Education, Politics, and Regionalism in the Caribbean, edited by Brian Moore and 
Swithin Wilmot, 343–50. Kingston: Ian Randle, 1998.
Plummer, Brenda Gayle. “The Afro-American Response to the Occupation of Haiti, 
1915–1934. ” Phylon 43, no. 2 (1982): 125–43.


--- PAGE 306 ---
bibliography
287———.  Haiti and the Great Powers, 1902–1915. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University 
Press, 1988.
———.  Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Affairs, 1935–1960. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Popkin, Jeremy D. Facing Racial Revolution: Eyewitness Accounts of the Haitian Insurrec-
tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Post, K. W. J. Arise Ye Starvelings: The Jamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its After-
math. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1978.
Post, Ken. “The Bible as Ideology: Ethiopianism in Jamaica, 1930–1938. ” In African Per-
spectives: Papers in the History, Politics, and Economics of Africa Presented to Thomas 
Hodgkin, edited by Christopher Allen and R. W. Johnson, 185–207. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1970.
Potkay, Adam, and Sandra Burr, eds. Black Atlantic Writers of the Eighteenth Century: 
Living the New Exodus in England and the Americas. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 
1995.
Pouchepadass, Jacques. Champaran and Gandhi: Planters, Peasants, and Gandhian 
Politics. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Prashad, Vijay. Everybody Was Kung Fu Fighting: Afro-Asian Connections and the Myth 
of Cultural Purity. Boston: Beacon Press, 2001.
Presley, Cora Ann. Kikuyu Women, the Mau Mau Rebellion, and Social Change in Kenya.
Boulder: Westview Press, 1992.
Price, Richard. Maroon Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas. Garden City, 
N.Y.: Anchor Press, 1973.
Proudfoot, Malcolm Jarvis. Population Movements in the Caribbean. New Y ork: Negro 
Universities Press, 1970.
Pryke, Sam. “The Popularity of Nationalism in the Early British Boy Scout Move-
ment. ” Social History (Great Britain) 23, no. 3 (1998): 309–24.
Pulis, John W. “Bridging T roubled Waters: Moses Baker, George Liele, and the African 
American Diaspora in Jamaica. ” In Moving On: Black Loyalists in the Afro-Atlantic 
World, edited by John W. Pulis, 183–221. New Y ork: Garland, 1999.
———,  e d .  Moving On: Black Loyalists in the Afro-Atlantic World. New Y ork: Garland, 
1999.
Putnam, Lara. The Company They Kept: Migrants and the Politics of Gender in Caribbean 
Costa Rica, 1870–1960. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Pybus, Cassandra. Epic Journeys of Freedom: Runaway Slaves of the American Revolution 
and their Global Quest for Liberty. Boston: Beacon Press, 2006.
Quandt, William B. Revolution and Political Leadership: Algeria, 1954–1968. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1969.
Quarles, Benjamin. The Negro in the American Revolution. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1961.
Queely, Andrea. “Hip Hop and the Aesthetics of Criminalization. ” Souls 5, no. 1
(2003): 1–15.
Quirós, Ronald Soto. “Inmigración e identidad nacional: Los ‘otros’ reafirman el ‘nos-
otros. ’”Licenciatura thesis, Escuela de Historia, Universidad de Costa Rica, 1998.


--- PAGE 307 ---
bibliography
288 Rabe, Stephen G.U.S. Intervention in British Guiana: A Cold War Story. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina, 2005.
Raboteau, Albert J. Slave Religion: The “Invisible Institution” in the Antebellum South.
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Radical History Review 87 (2003). Special issue on T ransnational Black Studies.
Radical History Review 92 (2005). Special issue on the First Universal Races Congress 
of 1911.
Rael, Patrick. Black Identity and Black Protest in the Antebellum North. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Ranger, T erence. “The Myth of the Afro-American Liberator. ” Seminar Paper, UCLA, 
1971.
Redding, Sean. “Government Witchcraft: T axation, the Supernatural, and the Mpondo 
Revolt in the T ranskei, South Africa, 1955–1963. ” African Affairs 95 (1996): 555–79.
Reddock, Rhoda. Women, Labour, and Politics in Trinidad and Tobago/u2014.dA History.
London: Zed Books, 1994.
Rediker, Marcus. The Slave Ship: A Human History. New Y ork: Viking, 2007.
Redkey, Edwin. Respect Black: The Writings and Speeches of Henry McNeal Turner. New 
Y ork: Arno Press, 1971.
Reinhardt, Catherine. “French Caribbean Slaves Forge Their Own Ideal of Liberty in 
1789.” In Slavery in the Caribbean: Francophone World: Distant Voices, Forgotten Acts, 
Forged Identities, edited by Doris Y. Kadish, 19–38. Athens: University of Georgia 
Press, 2000.
Rhodes, Leara. “Haitian Contributions to American History: A Journalistic Record. ” 
In Slavery in the Caribbean Francophone World: Distant Voices, Forgotten Acts, Forged 
Identities, edited by Doris Y. Kadish, 75–90. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 
2000.
Rich, Paul. State Power and Black Politics in South Africa, 1912–1951. New Y ork: St. 
Martin’s Press, 1996.
Richards, Glen. “Friendly Societies and Labour Organisation in the Leeward Islands, 
1912–19. ” In Before and After 1865: Education, Politics, and Regionalism in the Carib-
bean, edited by Brian Moore and Swithin Wilmot, 136–49. Kingston: Ian Randle, 
1998.
———.  “ R a c e,  C l a s s ,  a n d  L abour Politics in Colonial Jamaica, 1900–1934. ” In Jamaica 
in Slavery and Freedom: History, Heritage, and Culture, edited by Kathleen E. A. 
Monteith and Glen Richards, 340–62. Mona: University of the West Indies Press, 
2002.
Richardson, Bonham C. “Caribbean Migrations, 1838–1985. ” In The Modern Caribbean,
edited by Franklin W. Knight and Colin A. Palmer, 203–28. Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press, 1989.
———.  Panama Money in Barbados, 1900–1920. Knoxville: University of T ennessee 
Press, 1985.
Rivera, Raquel. New York Ricans from the Hip Hop Zone. New Y ork: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2003.
Robaina, T omas Fernandez. “Marcus Garvey in Cuba: Urrutia, Cubans, and Black 
Nationalism. ” In Between Race and Empire: African-Americans and Cubans before


--- PAGE 308 ---
bibliography
289the Cuban Revolution, edited by Lisa Brock and Digna Castaneda Fuertes, 12–128. 
Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1998.
Roberts, Rita. “Patriotism and Political Criticism: The Evolution of Political Con-
sciousness in the Mind of a Black Revolutionary Soldier. ” Eighteenth-Century Stud-
ies 27 (1994): 569–88.
Robertson, David. Denmark Vesey. New Y ork: Knopf, 1999.
Robinson, Cedric J. Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition. Lon-
don: Zed Books, 1983.
Rock, Pete, with Black Ice. “T ruth Is. ” Soul Survivor II CD. BBE Records/Rapster. 
May 11, 2004.
Rodney, Walter. The Groundings with My Brothers. London: Bogle L’Ouverture Publi-
cations, 1969.
———.  A History of the Guyanese Working People: 1881–1905. Kingston: Heinemann 
Educational Books, 1981.
———.  How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. London: Bogle-L’Ouverture Publications, 
1969, 1973.
———.  “ Tow a rd s  the Sixth Pan-African Congress: Aspects of the International Class 
Struggle in Africa, the Caribbean, and America. ” In Pan-Africanism: The Struggle 
against Neo-Colonialism and Imperialism, edited by Horace Campbell, 18–41. 
T oronto: Afro-Carib Publications, 1975.
Rogers, Shepherd Richard Athlyi. Holy Piby: The Black Man’s Bible. Kingston: Re-
search Associates School Times Publications, 2000.
Rohlehr, Gordon. Transgression, Transition, Transformation: Essays in Caribbean Cul-
ture. San Juan, T rinidad: Lexicon T rinidad Ltd., 2007.
Rojas, Fabio. From Black Power to Black Studies: How a Radical Social Movement Be-
came an Academic Discipline. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007.
Rolinson, Mary G. Grassroots Garveyism: The Universal Negro Improvement Associa-
tion in the Rural South, 1920–1927. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
2007.
Rose, T ricia. Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America.
Hanover: Wesleyan University Press, 1994.
Rosenthal, Michael. The Character Factory: Baden-Powell and the Origins of the Boy 
Scout Movement. New Y ork: Pantheon, 1986.
Roth, Benita. Separate Roads to Feminism: Black, Chicana, and White Feminist Move-
ments in America’s Second Wave. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Roth Gordon, Jennifer. “Hip Hop Brasileiro: Brazilian Y outh and Alternative Black 
Consciousness Movements. ” Black Arts Quarterly 7, no. 1 (2002): 9–10.
Rothman, Adam. Slave Country: American Expansion and the Origins of the Deep South.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Rout, Leslie B., Jr. The African Experience in Spanish America, 1502 to the Present Day.
New Y ork: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Roux, Edward. S. P . Bunting: A Political Biography. Edited by Brian Bunting. Bellville, 
South Africa: Mayibuye Books, 1993.
Rugemer, Edward Bartlett. The Problem of Emancipation: The Caribbean Roots of the 
American Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2008.


--- PAGE 309 ---
bibliography
290 Rustin, Bayard. “The Negro and Nonviolence. ” In Time on Two Crosses: The Collected 
Writings of Bayard Rustin, edited by Devon Carbado and Donald Weise, 6–10. San 
Francisco: Cleis, 2003.
Ryan, Selwyn, and T aimoon Stewart, eds. The Black Power Revolution 1970: A Retro-
spective. St. Augustine, T rinidad: I.S.E.R., University of the West Indies, 1995.
Saillant, John. “Origins of African American Biblical Hermeneutics in Eighteenth-
Century Black Opposition to the Slave T rade and Slavery. ” In African Americans 
and the Bible: Sacred T exts and Social T extures, edited by Vincent L. Wimbush, 
245–48. New Y ork: Continuum, 2000.
Sanderson, Stephen K. Revolutions: A Worldwide Introduction to Political and Social 
Change. Boulder: Paradigm, 2005.
Sanneh, Lamin. Abolitionists Abroad: American Blacks and the Making of Modern West 
Africa. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Sansone, Livio. “New Blacks from Bahia: Local and Global Afro-Bahia. ” Identities 3, 
no. 4 (1997): 457–94.
Santiago-Valles, Kelvin. “World-Historical Ties among ‘Spontaneous’ Slave Rebellions 
in the Atlantic. ” Review 28, no. 1 (2005): 51–83.
Satter, Beryl. “Marcus Garvey, Father Divine, and the Gender Politics of Race Differ-
ence and Race Neutrality. ” American Quarterly 48, no. 1 (1996): 43–76.
Schama, Simon. Rough Crossings: Britain, the Slaves, and the American Revolution. New 
Y ork: Ecco, 2006.
Schmeisser, Iris. “‘Ethiopia Shall Soon Stretch Forth Her Hands’: Ethiopianism, 
Egyptomania, and the Arts of the Harlem Renaissance. ” In African Diasporas in the 
New and Old Worlds: Consciousness and Imagination, edited by Geneviève Fabre 
and Klaus Benesch, 263–86. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2004.
Schmidt, Hans. The United States Occupation of Haiti, 1915–1934. New Brunswick: 
Rutgers University Press, 1971.
Schneider, Mark Robert. We Return Fighting: The Civil Rights Movement in the Jazz 
Age. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2002.
Schultz, Bud, and Ruth Schultz, eds. It Did Happen Here: Recollections of Political 
Repression in America. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.
Scott, David. Conscripts of Modernity: The Tragedy of Colonial Enlightenment. Durham, 
N.C.: Duke University Press, 2004.
———.  “ Th e  D i a l e c t i c  o f  D e f eat :  A n  In te r v i e w  with Rupert Lewis. ” Small Axe 10 
(September 2001): 85–117.
Scott, Julius S. “The Common Wind: Currents of Afro-American Communication in 
the Era of the Haitian Revolution. ” Ph.D. diss., Duke University, 1986.
Scott, William R. The Sons of Sheba’s Race: African-Americans and the Italo-Ethiopian 
War, 1935–1941. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993.
Seale, Bobby. A Lonely Rage: The Autobiography of Bobby Seale. New Y ork: Times 
Book, 1978.
———.  Seize the Time: The Story of the Black Panther Party and Huey P . Newton. Balti-
more: Black Classic Press, 1991.
Self, Robert O. “The Black Panther Party and the Long Civil Rights Era. ” In In Search 
of the Black Panther Party: New Perspectives on a Revolutionary Movement, edited by


--- PAGE 310 ---
bibliography
291Jama Lazerow and Y ohuru Williams, 16–55. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 
2006.
Senior, Olive. “The Colón People. ” Jamaica Journal 11, no. 3 (1978): 62–71.
Sensbach, Jon F. Rebecca’s Revival: Creating Black Christianity in the Atlantic World.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Shannon, Magdaline W. Jean Price-Mars, the Haitian Elite, and the American Occupa-
tion, 1915–1935. New Y ork: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Shepperson, George. “Pan-Africanism and ‘Pan-Africanism’: Some Historical Notes. ” 
Phylon 23, no. 4 (1962): 326–58.
Shepperson, George, and Thomas Price. Independent African: John Chilembwe and the 
Origins, Setting, and Significance of the Nyasaland Native Rising of 1915. Edinburgh: 
University Press, 1958.
Sherwood, Marika. Claudia Jones: A Life in Exile. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 
1999.
———.  “ Th e  Comintern and the Colonies till c.1934. ” Paper presented to the African-
History Seminar, School of African Studies, London University, December 1993.
———.  “ Th e  Comintern, the CPGB, Colonies and Black Britons, 1920–1938. ” Science 
& Society 60, no. 2 (1996): 137–63.
———.  “ R a c i s m  a n d  R e s i s t a n c e :  Ca rd i ff  i n  the 1930s and 1940s. ” Llafur 4/5 (1991): 
51–70.
Shick, T om W. Behold the Promised Land: A History of Afro-American Settler Society 
in Nineteenth-Century Liberia. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980.
Shridharani, Krishnalal. My India, My America. Garden City, N.Y.: Halcyon House, 
1941.
———.  War without Violence: A Study of Gandhi’s Method and Its Accomplishments.
New Y ork: Harcourt, Brace, 1939.
Shukra, Kalbir. The Changing Pattern of Black Politics in Britain. London: Pluto, 1998.
Sidbury, James. Ploughshares into Swords: Race, Rebellion, and Identity in Gabriel’s Vir-
ginia, 1730–1810. New Y ork: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Simons, Jack, and Ray Simons. Class and Colour in South Africa, 1850–1950. London: 
International Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa, 1983.
Singh, Nikhil. Black Is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for Democracy. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004.
———.  “ Th e  B l a c k  Pa n t h e r s  a n d  the ‘Undeveloped Country’ of the Left. ” In The Black 
Panther Party [Reconsidered], edited by Charles E. Jones, 57–105. Baltimore: Black 
Classic Press, 1998.
Sivanandan, Ambalaver. Communities of Resistance: Writings on Black Struggles for 
Socialism. London: Verso, 1990.
Sklar, Holly. Washington’s War on Nicaragua. Boston: South End Press, 1988.
Skocpol, Theda. States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia, 
and China. New Y ork: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Smith, C. Calvin. “John E. Bush: The Politician and the Man, 1880–1916. ” Arkansas 
Historical Quarterly 54, no. 2 (1995): 115–33.
Smith, Mona Z. Becoming Something: The Story of Canada Lee. New Y ork: Faber and 
Faber, 2004.


--- PAGE 311 ---
bibliography
292 Sobel, Mechal. Trabelin’ On: The Slave Journey to an Afro-Baptist Faith. Westport, 
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1979.
Social Research 56, no. 1 (1989). Special issue on bicentennial of the French Revolution.
Solomon, Mark. The Cry Was Unity: Communists and African Americans, 1917–1936.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1998.
South African Communist Party. South African Communists Speak: Documents from 
the History of the South African Communist Party, 1915–1980. London: Inkululeko 
Publications, 1981.
South African Students’ Organization. “South African Students’ Organization 
Amended Constitution, Adopted by General Students’ Council, 4–10 July 1971. ” 
In Africa Contemporary Record, edited by Colin Legum, C210–C212. London: Rex 
Collings, 1972.
Spitzer, Leo, and LaRay Denzer. “I. T . A. Wallace-Johnson and the West African Y outh 
League. ” International Journal of African Historical Studies 6, no. 3 (1973): 413–52.
———.  “ I . T. A .  Wa l l a c e - Jo h n s o n  a n d  the West African Y outh League. ” Pt. 2, “The 
Sierra Leone Period, 1938–1945. ” International Journal of African Historical Studies 6, 
no. 4 (1973): 565–601.
Springer, Kimberly. Living for the Revolution: Black Feminist Organizations, 1968–1980.
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2005.
Squires, Mike. “Communists and the Fight against Racism during the Class against 
Class Period, 1928–33. ” Communist Review, Summer 2000, 12–19.
Starobin, Robert S., ed. Denmark Vesey: The Slave Conspiracy of 1822. Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Stein, Judith. The World of Marcus Garvey: Race and Class in Modern Society. Baton 
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986.
Stein, Stanley J. Vassouras: A Brazilian Coffee County, 1850–1900. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1957.
Stepan, Nancy Leys. The Hour of Eugenics: Race, Gender, and Nation in Latin America.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1991.
Stephens, Simon. “Kwaito. ” In Senses of Culture, edited by Sarah Nuttall and Cheryl-
Ann Michael, 256–77. Cape T own: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Steward, T . G. “How the Black St. Domingue Legion Saved the Patriot Army in the 
Siege of Savannah, 1779. ” Occasional Paper No. 5. Washington, D.C.: American 
Negro Academy, 1899.
Stoddard, T . Lothrop. The French Revolution in San Domingo. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1914.
Stone, Carl. The Political Opinions of the Jamaican People, 1976–1981. Kingston: Blackett 
Publishers, 1982.
Stovall, Tyler. “Colour Blind France? Colonial Workers during the First World War. ” 
Race & Class 35 (1993): 35–55.
Strachan, Hew. The First World War in Africa. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 
2004.
Stuckey, Sterling. The Ideological Origins of Black Nationalism. Boston: Beacon Press, 1972.
———.  Slave Culture: Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America. New 
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1987.


--- PAGE 312 ---
bibliography
293Sudbury, Julia. Global Lockdown: Race, Gender, and the Prison-Industrial Complex. New 
Y ork: Routledge, 2005.
Suggs, Henry Lewis. “The Response of the African American Press to the United States 
Occupation of Haiti, 1915–1934. ” Journal of Negro History 73, no. 1–4 (1988): 33–45.
Suite, Winston. “The Arrogance of NJAC. ” In The Black Power Revolution 1970: A 
Retrospective, edited by Selwyn Ryan and T aimoon Stewart, 355–62. St. Augustine, 
T rinidad: I.S.E.R., University of the West Indies, 1995.
Summary of the Program and Aims of the African Blood Brotherhood. New Y ork, 1920. 
Records of the CPUSA, Library of Congress, fond 515, reel 2, delo 37.
Sutherland, Bill. “Bill Sutherland: T anzania. ” In The Black Expatriates: A Study of Amer-
ican Negroes in Exile, edited by Ernest Dunbar, 88–109. New Y ork: Dutton, 1968.
Sutherland, Bill, and Matt Meyer. Guns and Gandhi in Africa: Pan-African Insights on 
Nonviolence, Armed Struggle, and Liberation in Africa. T renton, N.J.: Africa World 
Press, 2000.
Swan, Maureen. Gandhi: The South African Experience. Johannesburg: Ravan Press, 
1985.
Sweeney, Allison W. History of the American Negro in the Great World War. 1919. New 
Y ork: Negro Universities Press, 1969.
Sweet, James H. Recreating Africa: Culture, Kinship, and Religion in the African-Portu-
guese World, 1441–1770. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
Sweet, James I. “The Fourth of July and Black Americans in the Nineteenth Century: 
Northern Leadership Opinion within the Context of the Black Experience. ” Jour-
nal of Negro History 61, no. 3 (1976): 256–75.
Sykes, Bobbi. “Opening Statement. ” In On Trial: Black Power in Australia, edited by 
Ann Turner, 7–30. South Yarra: Heinemann Educational Australia, 1975.
Szok, Peter. La última gaviota: Liberalism and Nostalgia in Early Twentieth-Century 
Panamá. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2001.
T aylor, Ula Yvette. The Veiled Garvey: The Life and Times of Amy Jacques Garvey.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
T erry-Thompson, A. C. The History of the African Orthodox Church. New Y ork: Self-
published, 1956.
Thomas, Deborah A. Modern Blackness: Nationalism, Globalization, and the Politics of 
Culture in Jamaica. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2004.
Thomas-Hope, Elizabeth M. “The Establishment of a Migration T radition: British 
West Indian Movements to the Hispanic Caribbean in the Century after Emanci-
pation. ” International Migration 24 (1986): 66–81.
Thornton, John. Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1680.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
———.  “A f r i c a n  S o l d i e r s  i n  the Haitian Revolution. ” Journal of Caribbean History 25, 
no. 1–2 (1991): 58–80.
Tilly, Charles. Social Movements, 1768–2004. Boulder: Paradigm, 2004.
Tinker Salas, Miguel. “Relaciones de poder y raza en los campos petroleros venezola-
nos, 1920–1940. ” Asuntos (Caracas, CIED) 5, no. 10 (2001): 94–95.
T olbert, Emory. The UNIA and Black Los Angeles: Ideology and Community in the 
American Garvey Movement. Los Angeles: Sage, 1980.


--- PAGE 313 ---
bibliography
294 T rotter, Joe William, Jr., ed. The Great Migration in Historical Perspective: New Dimen-
sions of Race, Class, and Gender. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
T rouillot, Michel-Rolph. “From Planters’ Journals to Academia: The Haitian Revolu-
tion as Unthinkable History. ” Journal of Caribbean History 25, no. 1–2 (1991): 81–99.
———.  Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History. Boston: Beacon Press, 
1999.
Turits, Richard Lee. “ A World Destroyed, a Nation Imposed: The 1937 Haitian Mas-
sacre in the Dominican Republic. ” Hispanic American Historical Review 82, no. 3
(2002): 589–635.
Turner, Joyce Moore. Caribbean Crusaders and the Harlem Renaissance. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 2005.
Turner, Mary. Slaves and Missionaries: The Disintegration of Jamaican Slave Society, 
1787–1834. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982.
Turner, Richard Brent. Islam in the African American Experience. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1997.
Turner, Richard B., W. Burghardt Turner, and Joyce M. Turner, eds. Richard B. Moore, 
Caribbean Militant in Harlem: Collected Writings, 1920–1972. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1992.
Tyson, Timothy B. Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams and the Roots of Black Power.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999, 2001.
Ullman, Victor. Martin L. Delany: The Beginnings of Black Nationalism. Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1971.
Ulyanovsky, Rostislav. Socialism and the Newly Independent Nations. Moscow: Progress 
Publishers, 1974.
Urla, Jaqueline. “‘We Are All Malcolm X!’ Negu Gorriak, Hip-Hop, and the Basque 
Political Imaginary. ” In Global Noise: Rap and Hip Hop outside the USA, edited by 
T ony Mitchell, 171–93. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2001.
Valentine, C. “Two Religions in Practice. ” Crusader, August 1921, 5–6.
Van Deburg, William L. New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American 
Culture, 1965–1975. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Van Tyne, Claude. India in Ferment. New Y ork: Appleton, 1923.
Vincent, Theodore. Black Power and the Garvey Movement. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1972.
Vinson, Robert T rent. “‘The Americans Are Coming’: African Americans, Black West 
Indians, and T ransnational Politics in Early 20th Century South Africa. ” Book 
manuscript, forthcoming.
———.  “Ci t i z e nship over Race? African Americans in American–South African Di-
plomacy, 1890–1925,” World History Connected, November 2004, <http://worldhis-
toryconnected.press.uiuc.edu/2.1/vinson.html>. Accessed February 1, 2008.
———.  “ In  the Time of the Americans: Garveyism in Segregationist South Africa, 
1920–1940. ” Ph.D. diss., Howard University, 2001.
Von Eschen, Penny M. Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 
1937–1957. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997.
Wacquant, Loïc. Deadly Symbiosis: Race and the Rise of Neoliberal Penality. Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 2005.


--- PAGE 314 ---
bibliography
295Walker, David. David Walker’s Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World. 1829. Uni-
versity Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2000.
Walker, James W. St. G. The Black Loyalists: The Search for a Promised Land in Nova 
Scotia and Sierra Leone, 1783–1870. New Y ork: Africana Publishing, 1976.
Wallace, Michelle. Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman. New Y ork: Dial 
Press, 1978.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. The Modern World-System III: The Second Era of Great Expan-
sion of the Capitalist World-Economy, 1730–1840s. New Y ork: Academic, 1988.
Walshe, Peter. The Rise of African Nationalism in South Africa: The African National 
Congress, 1912–1952. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971.
Walters, Ronald W. Pan Africanism and the African Diaspora: An Analysis of Modern 
Afrocentric Political Movements. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1993.
Ward, Stephen. “The Third World Women’s Alliance: Black Feminist Radicalism and 
Black Power Politics. ” In The Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights–
Black Power Era, edited by Peniel E. Joseph, 119–44. New Y ork: Routledge, 2006.
Watkins, Lee. “‘Simunye, We Are Not One’: Ethnicity, Difference, and the Hip-
Hoppers of Cape T own. ” Race & Class 43, no. 1 (2001): 29–44.
Watkins-Owens, Irma. Blood Relations: Caribbean Immigrants and the Harlem Com-
munity, 1900–1930. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996.
Weinberg, Arthur, ed. Attorney for the Damned. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1989.
Wells-Barnett, Ida B. On Lynching. Amherst: Humanity Books, 2002.
Wendt, Simon. “Protection or Path toward Revolution?” Souls 9, no. 4 (2007): 320–32.
Wentink, D. E. “The Orthodox Church in East Africa. ” Ecumenical Review 20, no. 1
(1968): 33–43.
West, Michael O. “Ethiopianism and Colonialism: The African Orthodox Church in 
Zimbabwe, 1928–1934. ” In Christian Missionaries and the State in the Third World,
edited by Holger Bernt Hansen and Michael Twaddle, 237–54. Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 2002.
———.  “ L i k e  a  R i v e r :  Th e  Mi l lion Man March and the Black Nationalist T radition in 
the United States. ” Journal of Historical Sociology 12, no. 1 (1999): 81–100.
———.  “S e e d s  A re  S ow n :  Th e  Ga r v e y  Mo v e m e n t  i n  Z i m ba bw e  i n  the Interwar Y ears. ” 
International Journal of African Historical Studies 35, no. 2–3 (2003): 335–62.
———.  “ Wa l te r  Rodney and Black Power: Jamaican Intelligence and US Diplomacy. ” 
African Journal of Criminology and Justice Studies 1, no. 2 (2006): 1–50. Online 
journal.
West, Michael O., and William G. Martin. “Introduction: The Rival Africas and 
Paradigms of Africanists and Africans at Home and Abroad. ” In Out of One, Many 
Africas: Reconstructing the Study and Meaning of Africa, edited by William G. Martin 
and Michael O. West, 1–36. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
West-Durán, Alan. “Rap’s Diasporic Dialogues: Cuba’s Redefinition of Blackness. ” 
Journal of Popular Music Studies 16, no. 1 (April 2004): 4–39.
Westerman, George W. Los inmigrantes antillanos en Panamá. Panama: n.p., 1980.
Westmaas, Nigel. “Resisting Orthodoxy: Notes on the Origins and Ideology of the 
Working People’s Alliance. ” Small Axe 14 (2004): 63–81.


--- PAGE 315 ---
bibliography
296 White, Garth. “New World: Two Views. ” New World Quarterly 3, no. 4 (1967): 57–60.
White, Shane. “‘It Was a Proud Day’: African Americans, Festivals, and Parades in the 
North, 1741–1834. ’”Journal of American History 81, no. 1 (1994): 13–50.
Whitfield, Harvey Amani. Blacks on the Border: The Black Refugees in British North 
America, 1815–1860. Burlington: University of Vermont Press, 2006.
Wickins, P . L. The Industrial and Commercial Workers’ Union of Africa. Cape T own: 
Oxford University Press, 1978.
Wilder, Craig Steven. In the Company of Black Men: The African Influence on African 
American Culture in New York City. New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2001.
Wilkins, Fanon Che. “‘In the Belly of the Beast’: Black Power, Anti-Imperialism, and 
the African Liberation Solidarity Movement, 1968–74. ” Ph.D. diss., New Y ork 
University, 2001.
———.  “ Th e  Ma k i n g  o f  B l a c k  In te r n at i o n a l i sts: SNCC and Africa before the Launch-
ing of Black Power, 1960–65. ” Journal of African American History 92, no. 4 (2007): 
468–90.
Willan, Brian. Sol Platjee: South African Nationalist, 1876–1932. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1984.
Williams, Eric. Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1944.
Williams, Gavin. “Garveyism, Akinpelu Obisesan, and His Contemporaries: Ibadan, 
1920–22. ” In Legitimacy and the State in Twentieth-Century Africa: Essays in Honour 
of A. H. M. Kirk-Greene, edited by T erence Ranger and Olufemi Vaughn, 112–32. 
London: Macmillan, 1993.
Williams, Robert. Negroes with Guns. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1998.
Wilson, Carlton. “Britain’s Red Summer: The 1919 Race Riots in Liverpool. ” South 
Asia Bulletin: Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 15, no. 2
(1995): 25–35.
Wilson, Edward Thomas. Russia and Black Africa before World War II. New Y ork: 
Holmes and Meier, 1974.
Wilson, Monica. Reaction to Conquest: Effects of Contact with Europeans on the Pondo of 
South Africa. London: Oxford University Press, 1961.
Wimbush, Vincent L., ed. African Americans and the Bible: Sacred T exts and Social 
Te x t ure s. New Y ork: Continuum, 2000.
Winant, Howard. Racial Conditions. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994.
Wolf, Eric. Europe and the People without History. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1982.
Woodard, Komozi. “ Amiri Baraka, the Congress of African People, and Black Power 
Politics from the 1961 United Nations Protest to the Gary Convention. ” In The 
Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights–Black Power Era, edited by Pen-
iel E. Joseph, 55–77. New Y ork: Routledge, 2006.
———.  A Nation within a Nation: Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones) and Black Power Politics.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999.
Wright, Richard. “I T ried to Be a Communist. ” Atlantic Monthly 174 (August 1944): 
61–70; 175 (September 1944): 48–56.


--- PAGE 316 ---
bibliography
297Wynter, Sylvia. “The Politics of Black Culture: From Myal to Marley. ” Mimeo, 1977.
Y elvington, Kevin. “The War in Ethiopia and T rinidad, 1935–1936. ” In The Colonial 
Caribbean in Transition: Essays on Postemancipation Social and Cultural History,
edited by Bridget Brereton and Kevin A. Y elvington, 189–225. Mona: The Press, 
University of the West Indies, 1999.
Yun, Lisa. The Coolie Speaks: Chinese Indentured Laborers and African Slaves in Cuba.
Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 2008.
Zachernuk, Philip S. Colonial Subjects: An African Intelligentsia and Atlantic Ideas.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2000.
Zangrando, Robert. The NAACP Crusade against Lynching, 1909–1950. Philadelphia: 
T emple University Press, 1980.
Zeleza, Paul Tiyambe. Manufacturing African Studies and Crises. Dakar: CODESRIA, 
1997.
———.  “ R e w r i t i n g  the African Diaspora: Beyond the Black Atlantic. ” African Affairs
104, no. 414 (2005): 35–68.
Zerai, Assata, and Horace Campbell. “The Black Radical Congress and Black Feminist 
Organizing. ” Socialism and Democracy 19, no. 2 (2005): 147–56.
Zips, Werner, ed. Rastafari: A Universal Philosophy in the Third Millennium. Kingston: 
Ian Randle, 2006.


--- PAGE 317 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 318 ---
about the authors
hakim adi is Reader in the History of Africa and the African Diaspora at Mid-
dlesex University, London. He is a founding member and chair of the Black 
and Asian Studies Association and a member of the Mayor of London’s Com-
mission on African and Asian Heritage. He is the author of West Africans in 
Britain, 1900–1960: Nationalism, Pan-Africanism, and Communism and coauthor 
of The 1945 Manchester Pan-African Congress Revisited and Pan-African History: 
Political Figures from Africa and the Diaspora since 1787. He has also written three 
history books for children.
sylvia frey is Emeritus Professor of History at Tulane University, New Or-
leans. She is the author of Water from the Rock: Black Resistance in a Revolution-
ary Age and The British Soldier in America: A Social History of Military Life in the 
Revolutionary Period and coauthor of Come Shouting to Zion: African American 
Protestantism in the American South and British Caribbean to 1830.
william g. martin is Professor of Sociology at Binghamton University in 
Binghamton, New Y ork. He is coauthor of Making Waves: Worldwide Social 
Movements, 1750–2005 and How Fast the Wind: Southern Africa and the World-
Economy, 1975–2000, editor of Semiperipheral States and the World-Economy,
and coeditor of Out of One, Many Africas: Reconstructing the Study and Meaning 
of Africa.
brian meeks is Professor of Social and Political Change in the Department 
of Government at the University of the West Indies, Mona, in Jamaica. He 
is chairman of the Michael Manley Foundation and director of the Centre 
for Caribbean Thought at the University of the West Indies, Mona. He is the 
author of Caribbean Revolutions and Revolutionary Theory: An Assessment of 
Cuba, Nicaragua, and Grenada and Radical Caribbean: From Black Power to 
Abu Bakr, coeditor of New Caribbean Thought: A Reader, and author of the 
novel Paint the T own Red.
marc d. perry is Assistant Professor in the Af ro-American Studies and Re-
search Program and the Department of Anthropology at the University of


--- PAGE 319 ---
about the authors
300 Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. His current book project explores Cuba’s emer-
gent hip hop movement as it expresses the global dynamics of race and social 
transformation in the post-Soviet era.
lara putnam is Associate Professor of History at the University of Pittsburgh 
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. She is the author of The Company They Kept: 
Migrants and the Politics of Gender in Caribbean Costa Rica, 1870–1960 and co-
editor of Honor, Status, and Law in Modern Latin America. Her current research 
focuses on state racism, civil society, and policies toward British Caribbean 
youth at home and abroad from 1900 to 1970.
vijay prashad is Professor and Director of International Studies at T rinity 
College, Hartford, Connecticut. His books include The Darker Nations: A 
People’s History of the Third World, Karma of Brown Folk, and Everybody Was 
Kung Fu Fighting: Afro-Asian Connections and the Myth of Cultural Purity ; he 
is coauthor of Dispatches from Latin America: Experiments against Neoliberal-
ism. He is on the board of the Center for Third World Organizing (<www.
ctwo.org>), United For a Fair Economy (<www.faireconomy.org>), and the 
National Priorities Project (<www.nationalpriorities.org>).
robyn spencer is Assistant Professor of History at Lehman College, City 
University of New Y ork, in New Y ork City. Her current book project is titled 
“Repression Breeds Resistance: The Rise and Fall of the Black Panther Party 
in Oakland, California. ”
robert vinson is Assistant Professor of History at the College of William and 
Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, where his teaching and research are focused 
on the African Diaspora, South African history, and African American history. 
He is currently working on two monographs: The Americans Are Coming! The 
Dream of “ American Negro” Liberation in Segregationist South Africa and the 
coauthored Crossing the Water: African Americans and South Africa, 1890–1965. 
A Documentary History.
michael o. west is Professor of Sociology and Africana Studies at Bingham-
ton University in Binghamton, New Y ork. His publications include The Rise of 
an African Middle Class: Colonial Zimbabwe, 1898–1965 and the coedited Out of 
One, Many Africas: Reconstructing the Study and Meaning of Africa. His current 
research centers on the interconnections between black struggles in various 
parts of the world.


--- PAGE 320 ---
about the authors
301fanon che wilkins is Associate Professor in the Graduate School of Ameri-
can Studies, Doshisha University, Kyoto, Japan, and was an active organizer of 
the Seventh Pan-African Congress in Kampala, Uganda, in 1994. His research 
is concerned with the transnational and transcontinental dimensions of black 
radicalism during the long 1960s. He is currently preparing for publication a 
manuscript titled “Freedom Was in the Air: Black Radicalism, Africa, and the 
Global Search for Black Power, 1957–1976. ”


--- PAGE 321 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 322 ---
index
ABB. See African Blood Brotherhood
Abeng (newspaper), 198, 201, 212 (n. 6)
Abiodun, Nehanda, 244
Abolitionism: black writers on, 93–94; 
politics and religion joined in, 59–60; 
slave petitions and, 51–52. See also Slavery 
and slave trade; Slaves
Abolition of Slavery Act (Britain, 1833), 96, 
103 (n. 87)
Abu-Jamal, Mumia, 244
ACLM. See Antigua Caribbean Liberation 
Movement
Adams, John Quincy, 86
Adeleke, Tunde, 39 (n. 44)
Africa: academic studies of, 2–4; Cold 
War–era accomplishments of, 22; hip 
hop in, 248–49, 257 (n. 41); neglected in 
diaspora studies, 131, 149 (n. 3); “outside 
liberator” mythologies in, 152 (n. 69); 
response to Bolshevism in, 157; as symbol, 
48; vernaculars of, 249–50, 257 (n. 44)
African Americans: Africans’ progress 
compared with, 216; as agents of 
modernism, 11; daily frustrations of, 
191–92; and engagement with South 
Africa, 132–34, 149 (n. 8); as free black 
community, 5–6, 92–93, 95; Gandhianism 
and, 181–84, 189–94; identification as, 
56; migration of, 9; and protest of draft, 
218–19; Providential Design and, 39 
(n. 44); response of to U.S. invasion of 
Haiti, 98–100; use of term, 130. See also
American Negroes; Black Power; Civil 
rights movement
African Blood Brotherhood (ABB): and 
break with UNIA, 21; communist links 
of, 159; description of, 13–14; goal of, 157, 
159–60; women in, 20
African Churchman (periodical), 12
African Diaspora: academic studies of, 90, 
131, 149 (n. 3); concept of, 48; evidenced 
in British West Indian newspapers, 
121–22; first resettlement community of, 
54; homeland memories in, 48; Islamic 
influences in, 13–14.
African Methodist Episcopal Church, 54, 
133–34
African National Congress (ANC): 
antisegregation activities of, 138; 
banned in South Africa, 24; communist 
members of, 203; electoral defeat of, 
251; participants at meetings of, 134–35; 
resurgence of, 32; SASO’s difference from, 
28; unbanning of, 250; Y outh League of, 
148
African Opinion (magazine), 125 (n. 14)
African Orthodox Church, 12, 13
African Studies Review (journal), 149 (n. 3)
African Universal Church and Commercial 
League, 12–13
African World (newspaper), 138
Age of Revolution. See Revolutionary era
Algeria: Cleaver in, 220–21; as model, 224; 
revolution in, 23, 24
Ali, Muhammad, 26, 219
Ali, Noble Drew, 14
Allen, Richard, 54, 55, 57, 69 (n. 13), 150 
(n. 33)
American Federation of Labor, 166
American Negroes: Garveyism spread 
by, 134–38; as models for black South 
Africans, 148–49; South African 
community of, 135–36, 150 (n. 20); South 
African government’s suspicions of, 149 
(n. 8); use of term, 11, 130; Wellington 
as, 141–42, 143–44, 146. See also African 
Americans
American Negro Labor Congress (1925), 161


--- PAGE 323 ---
index
304 Amis des Noirs, 63, 64
ANC. See African National Congress
Ancient Order of Foresters (AOF), 112, 125 
(n. 24)
Ancient Shepherds, Loyal Order of, 111, 112
Anderson, Benedict, 233
Angola: Black Panther support for, 228; 
Marxism-Leninism in, 203; resistance 
suppressed in, 24
Anónimo Consejo (Anonymous Advice), 
245
Anthony B (Keith Blair), 212
Anti-Cussing Club for Boys, 111
Antigua: Black Power movement of, 200
Antigua Caribbean Liberation Movement 
(ACLM), 200, 213 (n. 19)
AOF. See Ancient Order of Foresters
Apartheid: hip hop and, 249–52; 
organizations opposed to, 148, 203. See 
also South Africa
Aponte, José Antonio, 84
Asante, Molefi, 36 (n. 10)
Ashe, Arthur, 149 (n. 8)
Association of Democratic Jurists of Korea, 
222
Atlantic Voice (periodical), 107–8
Australia: Black Panther support for 
aborigines of, 228; Black Power 
movement in, 27
Awoonor-Renner, Bankole, 172
Baden-Powell, Robert, 113–14, 121, 128 
(n. 76)
Bahamas: rebellion in (1787), 61
Bailie, A. A., 188
Bambaataa, Afrika, 253, 258 (n. 56)
Banton, Buju, 212
Baptist churches, 54, 58, 96
Baraka, Amiri (Le Roi Jones), 234
Barbados: Christian mission in, 113; planter 
hegemony critiqued in, 117; riots in (1937), 
127 (n. 61)
Barbados Herald (newspaper), 117
Barnett, L. E., 117–18
Basutoland. See Lesotho
Battersby, Jane, 253
Beal, Frances, 25
Beauvais, Louis-Jacques, 63
Belgium: civilizing mission of, 23. See also
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Benin, hip hop in, 249
Benton, Thomas Hart, 86
Bernal, Martin, 36 (n. 10)
Besse, Christophe, 63
Besse, Martial, 63
Best, Lloyd, 198–99
Bestes, Peter, 52
Bible: in Garveyite meetings, 12–13, 137–38, 
150 (n. 33); militant self-liberation based 
in, 53, 56–57, 60, 96–97; Rogers’s version 
of, 140; as tool of oppression, 56
Big Richard (Afro-Brazilian rapper), 238–39
Biko, Steve, 28, 32
Birth of a Nation (film), 98
Bishop, Maurice, 205–6, 207
Black Atlantic: concept of, 48; currents of 
resistance in, 82–85; evangelical network 
across, 56–60; Haitian Revolution’s 
implications for, 72–73; hip hop’s 
significance in, 234–35; seafaring tradition 
in, 49–51; use of term, 90
Black August Collective, 244
Black Belt thesis, 162–63
Black Bolshevism: Comintern leadership 
and, 17–18; emergence of, 15–16; rise of 
fascism and, 19–20; women in, 20–21
Black Carolina Corps, 61–62
Black Consciousness Movement, 28, 30–31, 
148, 252
Black Cross and Navigation Company, 140
Black Cross Nurses, 12, 111
Black Guides and Pioneers, 54
Black Ice, 43–44 (n. 141)
Black internationalism: Cold War–era 
setbacks to, 215–17; Comintern’s 
commitment to, 155–56, 158–61; common 
language of, 25–28; cultural nationalists 
and, 33–34; divisions in, 14–16, 43 (n. 125); 
foundational core of, 5–6, 36 (n. 2), 84–85, 
97; Gandhianism and, 21–22, 40 (n. 72), 
180–81; historiographical lacunae in, 
1–2, 7, 36 (n. 3); reclaiming narrative of, 
1–4; renewed mobilization of, 8, 33–35; 
revolutionary and revivalist traditions 
of, 73, 91–97; rise of fascism and, 19–20; 
waves of, 22–23; West Indian–centered,


--- PAGE 324 ---
index
305109–10. See also Hip hop culture; Interwar 
period; Pan-Africanism; Revolutionary 
era; Sixties era; World War I
Black Man (newspaper), 136
Black Noise (hip hop crew), 252–54
Black Panther, The (newspaper), 217, 221–22, 
229 (n. 16)
Black Panther Party for Self-Defense: black 
internationalism renewed in, 216–17; 
context of, 215–16; creation of, 25, 218; 
intercommunalism theory and, 26, 
222–24, 229; international connections 
of, 25–26, 220–22, 224, 225, 227–28; legacy 
of, 228–29; misogyny and patriarchy 
of, 25; political repression of, 29, 
224–27; program of, 217, 218–20; rappers’ 
referencing of, 244
Black Power: definitions of, 25, 199, 208–9; 
demise of, 30–32; emergence of, 25; 
internationalization of, 26–30; repression 
of, 32–33. See also Caribbean Black Power
Black Radical Congress (BRC), 34
Black Soul movement, 236
Black Star Line (steamship corporation), 
134–35, 137, 140, 143
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 11
Bois Caiman ceremony, 91, 97, 102 (n. 67)
Bolivar, Simon, 80
Bolshevism. See Communism; Marxism-
Leninism
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 76, 78, 80
Booth, Catherine, 113
Booth, William, 113
Boys’ Brigades, 111, 114–15
Boy Scouts, 109. See also Scouting movement
Branch, T aylor, 191
Brazil: Black Power movement in, 27–28; 
Candelaria murders in, 237–38; hip hop 
in, 35, 235–41, 255; prison uprising in, 240
BRC. See Black Radical Congress
Briggs, Cyril V ., 108, 157, 164, 167
Brinton, Crane, 79
British Communist Party, 160–61, 166, 
167–68
British Guiana. See Guyana
British Honduras. See Honduras
British Labour Party, 166
British West Indian migrants: approach 
to, 109–10; on Chinese migrants, 128 
(n. 78); civic activism of, 110–15, 123; racial 
uplift ideas of, 118–22; racial vocabulary 
of, 122–24; in South Africa, 135–37, 
150 (n. 20); transnational connections 
among, 107–9, 118, 135–38; xenophobia 
and legislation against, 115–19, 123. See also
American Negroes
British West Indian sailors, 109, 135–38
British West Indies Regiment (BWIR), 109, 
114–15
Brooks, Tillie M., 112
Browder, Earl, 175 (n. 77)
Brown, Dennis, 211
Brown, Elaine, 25
Brown, Jacqueline Nassy, 238
Brown, James, 236
Brown, Mono, 238
Brown v. Board of Education (1954), 215
Brutents, Karen N., 204
Buchana, Hugh, 117–18
Buckle, Desmond, 172
Bukharin, Nikolai, 163
Burkina Faso (earlier, Upper Volta), Black 
Power movement in, 29
Burnham, Forbes, 213 (n. 19)
Burrell, Ben, 99
Bustamante, Alexander, 117
Butelezi, Wellington. See Wellington, Butler 
Hansford
Butler, Judith, 240
BWIR. See British West Indies Regiment
Byrd, Alexander X., 69 (n. 10)
Cabral, Amilcar: Black Panthers influenced 
by, 221–22; declining influence of, 204; 
international connections of, 26; on 
postcolonial state, 24, 31; state repression 
of, 32
Campbell, Grace, 20–21
Canada: black nationalist groups in, 30; as 
refuge, 103 (n. 87)
Cape Argus (newspaper), 150 (n. 20)
Cape Indian Council, 138
“Capítulo 4 Versículo 3” (hip hop song), 237
Carey, Lott, 54
Caribbean Black Power: approach to, 
197; ascendancy of, 29–30, 198–201;


--- PAGE 325 ---
index
306 community-based appeal of, 212 (n. 17); 
decline of, 201–3; eclipsed by Marxism-
Leninism, 203–7; ideological questions 
about, 207–10; implications of, 210–12. See 
also Black Power
Carlos, John, 29
Carmichael, Stokely (Kwame Ture), 25, 26, 
27, 208
Carretta, Vincent, 69 (n. 10)
Castro, Fidel, 208, 218
Catholicism, 95
Central American Express (periodical), 
107–8, 114
Césaire, Aimé, 99, 209–10
Chicago Defender (newspaper), 122
Chile: hip hop in, 234
China, People’s Republic of: Black Panther 
delegation to, 227–28
Chorillo Dominoe T eam, 111
Christianity: African religious syncreticism 
with, 92–93; civilizing mission of, 11; 
critique of, 91–92; in Haiti, 95; Islam 
compared with, 14; Kristagraha theory 
and, 190–91; missions of, 107, 133–34; 
nonviolence based in, 181. See also Bible; 
Evangelical Protestantism; Salvation 
Army
Christophe, Henri, 63, 83–84
Churchill, Winston, 194 (n. 3)
Civil rights movement: Caribbean Black 
Power’s origins in, 198; Cold War context 
of, 215–16; Gandhianism and, 181–84, 189–
94; global context of, 21–22; integrationist 
vs. nationalist tradition in, 43 (n. 125); 
nonviolence in, 24–25
Clavin, Matthew, 97
Cleaver, Eldridge: declining influence 
of, 204; flight from U.S., 220, 225; 
international connections of, 26, 221–22, 
226; Newton’s differences with, 226–27
Cleaver, Kathleen, 25, 26
Coard, Bernard, 205–6
Cohen, Victor, 125 (n. 14)
COINTELPRO, 32, 225–27
Coker, Daniel, 54
Cold War: area studies and 
compartmentalization in, 2–3; black 
international setbacks in, 215–17; black 
liberation challenges in, 22; narratives 
influenced by, 88–89; political repression 
in, 40 (n. 74), 225–27. See also Communist 
International
Colón Boys’ Institute, 114–15
Colonialism: broad-based league against, 
161–62; “civilized” attributes defined in, 
132–34; communist view of, 16, 19, 156; 
crisis in Caribbean, 75; demise of, 79–81; 
denunciation of, 6, 23; Gandhi on, 186; 
post–World War I expansion of, 8; race 
relations traced to, 26; termination of, 7, 
22; transformation of vs. accommodation 
to, 15
Colvin, Claudette, 192
Committee for Afro-Asian Solidarity of 
Korea, 222
Committee of Negro Workers. See Inter-
national T rade Union Committee of 
Negro Workers
Common (musician), 244
Commonwealth Immigrants Bill (Britain, 
1962), 26
Communism: as antiracist in interwar 
period, 127 (n. 62); Gandhianism 
juxtaposed to, 179–80; Pan-African 
narrative cleansed of, 88–89. See also
Marxism-Leninism
Communist International (Comintern): 
anticolonial, antiracist agenda of, 16–19, 
161–62; approach to, 155–56; Caribbean 
interests of, 166–67, 171–72; development 
of, 156–57; divisions in, 17, 20; history of, 
173 (n. 1); invasion of Ethiopia and, 168, 
169–71; Native Republic and Black Belt 
theses of, 162–65; Negro commissions 
of, 18, 159; Negro Welfare Association 
linked to, 167–68; pan-African policy of, 
155, 158–61, 164–65, 172; proletarian 
revolution ideals of, 19–20; Scottsboro 
case and, 168–69, 170; summary of, 171–73. 
See also Black Bolshevism; International 
T rade Union Committee of Negro 
Workers
Congo, Democratic Republic of (earlier, 
Belgian Congo): Black Power movement 
in, 29; independence and confrontation 
in, 23


--- PAGE 326 ---
index
307Congressional Black Caucus, 148
Congress of Industrial Organizations, 191
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), 190
Consciencia Urbana (Urban 
Consciousness), 238
Cooper, Esther, 21
CORE. See Congress of Racial Equality
Costa Rica: antiblack legislation of, 116; 
British West Indian immigrants in, 107–8, 
111–12; Christian mission in, 113; racial 
uplift ideals in, 119; UNIA chapters in, 110, 
124–25 (n. 13)
Cote d’Ivoire: hip hop in, 249
Council on African Affairs, 148
Crisis, The (journal), 181–83
Critchlow, Hubert, 166, 171
Crummell, Alexander, 11
Cruse, Harold, 43 (n. 125)
Cuba: Black Panther delegation to, 228; 
Black Panther support from, 221, 226; 
British West Indian immigrants in, 108; 
economic difficulties of, 242, 256–57 
(n. 32); folkloric past of, 244–45; Haitians 
deported by, 117; hip hop in, 35, 241–48, 
255; Marxism-Leninism in, 167, 203–4; 
Negro Question in, 167; praise for, 31; 
revolution in, 203, 211, 241, 245; state 
recognition of rap in, 247–48; UNIA 
chapters in, 110; xenophobia in, 115–16
Cuffe, Paul, 50, 52, 54
Cugoano, Quobna Ottobah, 50, 51, 57, 59–60, 
102–3 (n. 73)
Cullen, Countee, 99
Curtis, Helen, 181
Daaga, Makandal (Geddes Granger), 212 
(n. 10)
Daily Gleaner (newspaper), 107–8
Danish Socialist Party, 225
Darrow, Clarence, 122
Davis, Angela, 25, 220
Davis, Henrietta Vinton, 12
Dawson, Michael C., 257 (n. 39)
Dead Prez (musician), 244
De Beers Consolidated Mines, 139
Debray, Regis, 204
Declaration of Independence (U.S.), 6, 17, 
37 (n. 26)
Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peoples 
of the World (UNIA), 137, 138
Declaration of the Rights of Man and 
Citizen (France), 17, 65, 74
Delany, Marcus, 164
Demane, Harry, 59
Depeche Africaine, La (newspaper), 122
Dessalines, Jean-Jacques, 77–78, 81, 84
“Diamonds from Sierra Leone” (hip hop 
song), 249
Diraath, James Charles, 139
Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement, 29
Domingo, Wilfred, 157
Dominican Republic (Santo Domingo): 
antiblack legislation of, 116–17; British 
West Indian immigrants in, 108; Haitian 
slave revolt supported by, 74–75
Douglas, Emory, 220–21
Drake, St. Clair, 37 (n. 12)
Dresher, Seymour, 81
Dubois, Laurent, 65
Du Bois, W. E. B.: on black folk, 37 (n. 12); 
editorship of, 181; on Gandhi, 182, 183, 
184, 190; Padmore on, 89; praise for, 
47–48, 90; providential and modernist 
ideals of, 134; UNIA opposed by, 15; U.S. 
persecution of, 216. See also Pan-African 
Congresses (1919–45)
Dudziak, Mary, 217
Dugommier, Jacques Coquille, 65–66
Dunmore, Lord ( John Murray), 52–54, 61, 
64, 67, 68
Dupuy, Alex, 207–9, 210
Durant, Richard, 62
Dutty, Boukman, 91–92
Dyer, Leonidas, 181
Edwards, Brent Hayes, 235
Egbuna, Obi, 27
Elks, Independent Benevolent Order of, 
109, 111
Ellison, Ralph, 171
Emancipation Proclamation (U.S., 1863), 97
Engels, Friedrich, 156
Enlightenment, 82, 92
Equiano, Olaudah: identity of, 50–51, 56; 
precursor to, 49; writings of, 57, 59–60, 
102–3 (n. 73)


--- PAGE 327 ---
index
308 Ethiopia: Black Power movement in, 29; 
Italian invasion of, 14, 20, 39–40 (n. 57), 
146–47, 168, 169–71; Ras Makonnen and, 
31, 42–43 (n. 121); worldwide support for, 
170–71. See also Selassie, Haile
Ethiopian Defense Committee, 170
Ethiopianism: African unity based in, 56; 
Haiti and, 67, 94; House of Athlyi version 
of, 139–41; as militant self-liberation 
theology, 53, 60; Providential Design 
linked to, 137
Ethiopian Regiment (Virginia), 52–53, 61, 
64, 67, 68
Evangelical Protestantism: African network 
in, 56–60; black Freemasonry linked 
to, 55; in black international revivalist 
tradition, 91–97; black sailors and, 49–51; 
British West Indian connections of, 109; 
emancipatory language of, 5–6, 7; militant 
self-liberation theology in, 53, 56–57, 60, 
96–97; pan-Africanism traced to, 48–52, 
93; Rebecca’s revival in context of, 37 
(n. 21), 49
Fanon, Frantz, 24, 28, 182, 204, 218
Farmer, James, 190, 191, 192
Farrakhan, Louis, 33
Fascism, 19–20, 170
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 29, 
32, 225–27
Fellowship of Reconciliation (FOR), 189–91, 
216
Fields, Barbara J., 122
First International Conference of Negro 
Workers (1930), 165–66
FOR. See Fellowship of Reconciliation
Ford, James, 163, 165, 170
Forte, Sherwin, 219
Forum movement, 200
France: Algerian revolt against, 23, 24; black 
veterans in, 63–64; colonialism of, 17, 
19–20, 75, 76–77; colonial losses of, 80; 
Communist Party in, 20, 160–61, 209–10; 
genocidal solution of, 77; hip hop in, 35; 
hostility of toward Haitian Revolution, 
82; national interests of, 74; U.S. alliance 
of, 63. See also French Revolution
Fraser, Nancy, 257 (n. 39)
Frazier, E. Franklin, 181–83, 193
Frederick Douglass (ship), 134–35
Free African Society (Philadelphia), 69 
(n. 13)
Freeman, Sambo, 52
Freemasonry, 54–55
Frelinghuysen, Theodous, 58
French Communist Party, 20, 160–61, 209–10
French Revolution: Caribbean influenced 
by, 62–67, 73–74, 85; end of, 76; equality 
for free people of color in, 17; veterans of, 
61–62; world-historical impact of, 79
Fugitive Slave Act (U.S., 1850), 103 (n. 87)
Fulbright, J. William, 219
Gairy, Eric, 200–203, 205, 211
Gandhi, Mohandas: British West Indians’ 
interest in, 121; hostility toward, 194 (n. 3);
King compared with, 191–94; mythology 
of, 182, 183; passive resistance philosophy 
of, 179–80, 186; return of to India, 188–89; 
South African sojourn of, 184–88
Garvey, Amy Ashwood, 12
Garvey, Amy Jacques, 12, 108
Garvey, Marcus: background of, 10, 108; on 
Bolshevism, 159; on female ideal, 12; as 
hero and chief apostle, 14, 122, 135, 136, 137, 
139–40, 148; ideological forebears of, 52; 
imprisonment of, 138; on Kofey, 13; labor 
organizing of, 117; pan-Africanism of, 47, 
51; providential and modernist ideals of, 
134; rightward shift of, 15; slogan of, 10–11; 
on steamship line, 134; on Wellington, 146. 
See also Garveyism; Garveyism in South 
Africa; Universal Negro Improvement 
Association and African Communities 
League
Garveyism: ideological opposition to, 14–15; 
mass constituency of, 11–12; religious 
component of, 12–13, 137–38; scholarship 
on, 38 (n. 41); syncretic spiritualism 
inspired by, 13–14; transnational connec-
tions of, 130–38; use of term, 130; white 
hostility to, 10–11; women’s role in, 11–12. 
See also Garvey, Marcus; Negro World;
Universal Negro Improvement Associa-
tion and African Communities League
Gary Convention (1972), 34


--- PAGE 328 ---
index
309Gaye, Marvin, 236
Geggus, David, 64–65, 71 (n. 55), 81
Geiss, Imanuel, 89–90
George, David, 49, 57, 58
Germany: fascism in, 19–20
Ghana: hip hop in, 249; independence of, 
22; transition in, 23
Ghazu, James, 150 (n. 22)
Gifford, Andrew, 58
Gilroy, Paul, 50, 90, 235
Ginwala, Frene, 195 (n. 20)
Gittens, Rupert, 172
Gobineau, Joseph Arthur Comte de, 85
Gold Coast: Ethiopian support from, 170
Goodridge, Joseph, 110
Good Samaritans (group), 111
Gordon, Jennifer Roth, 237
Gramsci, Antonio, 204, 211
Grand United Order of Odd Fellows 
(GUOOF), 109, 111, 112
Granger, Geddes (Makandal Daaga), 212 
(n. 10)
Grant, Colin, 38 (n. 41)
Great Awakening. See Evangelical 
Protestantism
Great Britain: antislavery movement in, 
58–59; black loyalist regiments of, 52–54, 
61, 64; Black Power movement in, 26–27; 
Christianization of slaves and, 5–6; 
colonialism of, 17, 19–20, 75, 121; colonial 
losses of, 80; Communist Party in, 160–61, 
166, 167–68; Ethiopian support from, 171; 
hostility of toward Haitian Revolution, 
82; identification as Afro-Britons in, 56; 
industrial revolution of, 79; in Kenya, 
23–24; Marxism-Leninism in, 204; Negro 
Welfare Association in, 167–68; role of in 
South Africa, 131; Salvation Army in, 109, 
113; scouting movement in, 113–14; slavery 
abolished by, 96, 103 (n. 87)
Great Migration: use of term, 9. See 
also Universal Negro Improvement 
Association and African Communities 
League; World War I
Greaves, Earl, 110
Grenada: Black Power movement of, 
200, 201, 202; black veterans in, 62, 63; 
Marxism-Leninism in, 204–7; revolution 
in (1979–83), 31, 197, 205–6; uprising in 
(1795–96), 82
Griffith, George (Ras Makonnen), 31, 42–43 
(n. 121)
Gronniosaw, James Albert Ukawsaw, 50, 
56–59, 102–3 (n. 73)
Gruel, Gabriel, 65
Guadeloupe: rebellion in (1793), 65–66; 
uprising in (1802), 82
Guatemala: British West Indian immigrants 
in, 108
Guerrilla foco: ideological questions and, 
207–10; implementation of, 204–7
Guevara, Che, 204, 221
Guinea-Bissau: Black Panther support for 
liberation in, 228; Black Power movement 
in, 29; resistance suppressed in, 24
Gulwa, Paul, 147
Gumbs, James, 136
Gumede, Josiah, 161, 162
GUOOF. See Grand United Order of Odd 
Fellows
Guyana (earlier, British Guiana): Black 
Power movement in, 30, 31; Christian 
mission in, 113; Comintern’s interest 
in, 166, 171–72; Marxism in, 213 (n. 19); 
population of, 209; self-rule terminated 
in, 40 (n. 74)
Habermas, Jürgen, 257 (n. 39)
Haiti: celebration of, 95–96; stakeholders in, 
78–79; U.S. invasion and occupation of, 
73, 88, 98–100, 122
Haitian Revolution (1791): abolitionists 
on, 94; antiracist agenda of, 16–17; black 
international narrative and, 87–90; 
black self-emancipation in, 7; currents 
of black resistance linked to, 82–85; as 
emblem of revolutionary tradition, 91, 
94, 96; French influence on, 73–74, 85; 
Garveyism compared with, 10; genocidal 
solution to, 77; hostility toward, 81–82; 
as iconic event, 66–67, 72–73; legacy of, 
97–100; number killed in, 81; origins of, 
68; outline of, 73–79; white negation of, 
85–87; world-historical impact of, 79–81. 
See also Saint Domingue; T oussaint 
Louverture


--- PAGE 329 ---
index
310 Haitians: massacred, 117
Hall, Prince, 52, 54–55, 57, 60, 94
Hall, Stuart, 240
Hamidia Islamic Society, 187
Hamilton, Charles V ., 26
Hamitic Hypothesis, 140
Hammad, Suheir, 234
Hammon, Briton, 50
Hammon, Jupiter, 56–57
Hampton, Fred, 32
Hanchard, Michael, 236
Harlem (New Y ork): ashram in, 190–91; 
British West Indian immigrants in, 108
Haupt, Adam, 252
Haynes, Lemuel, 70 (n. 42)
Haywood, Harry, 163, 164–65
Headley, Jim, 172
Heal the Hood project, 254
Hector, Tim, 200
Henry, Patrick, 67
Henry, Ronald, 211
Henry, Vivian, 166, 171
Hermanos de Causa (Brothers of Cause), 
245–47
Herndon, Angelo, 170
Hewitt, Raymond “Masai,” 220–21
Hill, Robert A., 151 (n. 48)
Hilliard, David, 220–21, 222, 229
Hip hop culture: African networks of, 257 
(n. 41); approach to, 233–35; in Brazil, 
35, 235–41, 255; in Cuba, 35, 241–48, 255; 
international black consciousness in, 
34–35, 233, 237–40; reflections on, 254–55; 
rise and transformation of, 232–33; in 
South Africa, 248–54, 255
Hip Hop en Movimiento (magazine), 239–40
Hobsbawm, Eric, 79
Ho Chi Minh, 221
Hofmeyr, Jan, 131
Holbrook, Felix, 52
Holly, James Theodore, 95
Holstein, Casper, 39 (n. 48)
Holy Piby (Rogers), 140
Honduras (earlier, British Honduras): 
antiblack legislation of, 116; British West 
Indian immigrants in, 108; Christian 
mission in, 113; uprisings in, 83, 114
Hoover, J. Edgar, 29, 227
House of Athlyi (Kimberley, South Africa), 
138–41
Houston Mutiny (1917), 182
Howell, Leonard, 151 (n. 48)
Hudson, Hosea, 164, 171
Hughes, Langston, 171
Huiswoud, Hermina, 21
Huiswoud, Otto, 158–59, 160, 167
ICU. See Industrial and Commercial 
Workers Union of Africa
Independent Benevolent Order of Elks, 109, 
111
Independent United Order of Mechanics, 
111, 112
India: African America compared with, 
190–91; freedom struggles in, 179–80; 
Gandhianism as understood in, 183–84; 
migrant laborers of, in Natal, South 
Africa, 184–86; nationalist movement of, 
188–89
Indian National Congress, 189
Industrial and Commercial Workers Union 
of Africa (ICU), 136, 138, 150 (n. 23), 166
Intercommunal News Service, 224
International Committee to Defend Eldridge 
Cleaver, 220
International Conference on T asks of 
Journalists of the Whole World in their 
Fight Against U.S. Imperialist Aggression, 
221
International Labor Defense, 169
International Monetary Fund, 207
International T rade Union Committee of 
Negro Workers (ITUCNW): Caribbean 
interests of, 166–67, 171–72; description 
of, 165–66; establishment of, 18, 171; Negro 
Welfare Association linked to, 167–68; rise 
of fascism and, 19–20
Interracial Committee, 191
Isicamtho (vernacular), 249–50, 257 (n. 44)
Islam: black nationalist type of, 13–14; 
Hamidia Society and, 187; in South Africa, 
257–58 (n. 48). See also Nation of Islam
Italy: Ethiopia invaded by, 14, 20, 39–40 
(n. 57), 146–47, 168, 169–71
ITUCNW. See International T rade Union 
Committee of Negro Workers


--- PAGE 330 ---
index
311Jackson, George, 32
Jackson, Mary, 181
Jackson, William, 137
Jagan, Cheddi, 213 (n. 19)
Jamaica: Black Power movement in, 29–30, 
197, 198, 200, 201–2; bloody 1980 election 
in, 206, 213 (n. 27); British West Indian–
owned newspaper in, 107; Christian 
mission in, 113; Christmas Rising/Baptist 
War in (1831), 96; counter-symbolic order 
in, 214 (n. 36); labor organizing in, 117–18; 
Marxism-Leninism in, 202–3, 206–7; 
Native Baptist movement in, 58; peaceful 
multiracial coexistence ideology of, 198; 
population of, 209; Rastafari’s appeal in, 
14, 211–12; T acky’s Revolt in, 82, 83; UNIA 
chapters in, 110; war against maroons 
in (1795–96), 82. See also Rastafarian 
movement
Jamaica Workers and T radesmen Union, 
117–18
James, C. L. R.: background of, 108; 
declining influence of, 204; on Haitian 
Revolution, 81, 87, 88, 90; on political 
assemblies, 200; on Rodney, 31
James, Winston, 108
Jansen, Emile, 252–53, 254
Japan: hip hop in, 233
Jea, John, 49, 50, 58, 102–3 (n. 73)
Jefferson, Thomas, 84, 86, 98
Jewel. See Joint Endeavour for Welfare, 
Education and Liberation
Johnson, Charles, 189
Johnson, Emmanuel, 136
Johnson, Lyndon B., 219
Joie, Chester, 52
Joint Endeavour for Welfare, Education and 
Liberation ( Jewel), 200–201
Jones, Absalom, 55, 57, 69 (n. 13), 150 (n. 33)
Jones, Chris, 168
Jones, Claudia, 21
Jones, David Ivon, 160
Jones, Le Roi (Amiri Baraka), 234
Kadalie, Clements, 136
Kaffir: use of term, 185, 252, 258 (n. 54)
Karenga, Maulana, 25, 33
Kelley, Robin D. G., 164, 191, 215, 228
Kenner, Martin, 228
Kenya: armed resistance suppressed in, 
23–24; Black Power movement in, 29; 
Ethiopian support from, 170; hip hop in, 
249
Kenyatta, Jomo, 165, 168, 171, 172
Kerr-Ritchie, J. R., 103 (n. 87)
Kikuyu Central Association, 170
Kim Il Sung, 221
King, A. James, 136
King, Boston, 57
King, Cleveland Antonio, 167
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 28, 191–92, 216, 219
Kitt, Eartha, 149 (n. 8)
Kofey, Laura, 12–13
Kouyaté, Tiemoko, 20
Kristagraha theory, 190–91
KRS-One (group), 33
Kunene, Lwandle, 154 (n. 98)
Kwaito artists, 249–50
Kweli, T alib, 244
“Lágrimas Negras” (hip hop song), 246–47
La Guma, James, 161, 162, 163
Land and Freedom Army (Mau Mau), 23–24
Lawrence, Jacob, 45
Lawson, James, 192, 216
League Against Imperialism and for National 
Independence, 161–62, 167–68, 171
Lebanon Foresters, 111, 112
Lee, Spike, 238–39
Lefela, Josiel, 135
Lenin, Vladimir I., 18, 156, 158, 159, 180, 204. 
See also Marxism-Leninism
Lesotho (earlier, Basutoland): Garveyism in, 
139; hopes in, 135
Lewis, John, 216
Lewis, Rupert, 212 (n. 17)
Liele, George, 49, 57, 58
Lincoln, Abraham, 97
Linebaugh, Peter, 83, 85
Lipsitz, George, 254
Louisiana: Pointe Coupee Conspiracy in, 67; 
Saint Domingue slaves in, 84
Louisiana Purchase (1803), 80, 86
Loyal Order of Ancient Shepherds, 111, 112
Lumumba, Patrice, 23, 221
Lynchings, 181


--- PAGE 331 ---
index
312 Machel, Samora, 32
Makandal poison conspiracy (1757), 82
Makonnen, Ras (George Griffith), 31, 42–43 
(n. 121)
Mandela, Nelson, 145, 150 (n. 23), 250. 
See also African National Congress
Manifesto of the Communist International 
to the Proletariat of the Entire World
(Comintern), 156
Manifesto on Africa in the Post-War World
(1945), 172
Manley, Michael, 201, 202, 206, 207
Manley, Norman, 201
Manning, Patrick, 149 (n. 3)
Mao Zedong, 218, 227–28
MAP . See Movement for Assemblies of the 
People
March on Washington (1963), 216
Margate, David, 49, 58
Marley, Bob, 211
Marrant, John: biblical ideas of, 54, 55; circle 
of, 58–59; precursor to, 49; writings of, 50, 
57, 102–3 (n. 73)
Marryshow, T . A., 126 (n. 34)
Martinique: slave rebellion in (1789), 64–65
Marx, Karl, 156
Marxism-Leninism: Black Panthers’ 
embrace of, 221–22, 226; Black Power 
eclipsed by, 31, 200, 201–3; Gandhianism 
juxtaposed to, 179–80; hopes in, 157; 
ideological questions about, 207–10; 
implications of, 210–12; political structure 
and tactics of, 203–7, 212 (n. 17)
Masogha, Joseph, 138–39, 141
Matamoros, Miguel, 246
Matshoba, Gilbert, 135
Matthews, Connie, 220, 225
Mau Mau (Land and Freedom Army), 23–24
Mbeki, Thabo, 148
McAdoo, Orpheus, 132
McGuire, George Alexander, 12
McKay, Claude, 108, 157, 158, 159
McKinley, Arthur, 138
Mechanics, Independent United Order of, 
111, 112
Melish, Joanne Pope, 69 (n. 13)
Mestizaje (racial and cultural mixing), 115, 
121
Methodist churches: British West Indian 
connections of, 107; founding of West 
African, 54; South African mission of, 
133–34; youth activities linked to, 109, 
114–15
Mexico: Black Power movement in, 
28–29; revolution in (1911), 182; Spanish 
overthrown in, 80
Mgijima, Enoch, 135
Million Man and Woman marches, 33–34
Mitchell, John, 226
Mitchell, T ony, 234
Mondlane, Eduardo, 26, 32
Montalvo, Eligio Sardiñas “Kid Chocolate,” 
122
Moore, Audley “Queen Mother,” xviii (ill.), 
21, 31, 33–34
Moore, Barrington, 79
Moore, Rhoda A., 112
Moore, Richard B., 108, 161
Moorish Science T emple of America, 
13, 14
Moravians, 49
Mosaic T emplars of America, 111
Mos Def (musician), 244
Motor Corp, 12
Movement for Assemblies of the People 
(MAP), 200–201
Movimento Negro Unificado (Unified Black 
Movement), 27–28, 236, 237–38
Mozambique: Black Panther support for 
liberation in, 228; resistance suppressed 
in, 24
Mullings, Leith, 255
Munroe, T revor, 207
NAACP . See National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People
Naidoo, Sarojina, 138
Natal Indian Congress, 185
Natal Native Congress, 194–95 (n. 18)
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People (NAACP), 166, 169, 
170, 181, 192, 223. See also Crisis, The
National Black Consciousness Day (Brazil), 
28
National Committee against Racial 
Discrimination, 26


--- PAGE 332 ---
index
313National Front for the Liberation of Angola, 
203
National Joint Action Committee (NJAC), 
199–201, 212 (n. 10)
National Negro Congress (1930), 170
National Union for the T otal Independence 
of Angola, 203
National Urban League, 170, 191
Nation of Islam, 13, 14, 25
Native Americans, 6, 37 (n. 26), 81
Native Baptist movement, 58
Natives Land Act (South Africa, 1913), 131
Natives (Urban Areas) Act (South Africa, 
1923), 131–32
Ncwana, Samuel Bennett, 136, 146
Negritude, 99
Negro Factories Corporation, 140
Negro Welfare Association, 167–68, 171, 172
Negro Welfare Cultural and Social 
Association, 170, 172
Negro Worker (periodical): black liberation 
focus in, 166, 171; Caribbean articles in, 
166–67, 172; editorship of, 19, 165–66; rise 
of fascism and, 20
Negro World (periodical): antiracism and 
anti-imperialism of, 122; British West 
Indian connections of, 107–8; circulation 
of, 10, 109, 139; contributors to, 39 
(n. 48); demise of, 19; perspectives in, 12; 
promotion of, 137, 139; translations of, 138; 
on Wellington, 146
Negu Gorriak (rock group), 234
New Jewel Movement (NJM): failures of, 
202, 203, 205–6, 211; Leninist tactics of, 
204–5, 207; rise of, 200–201
Newton, Huey P .: arrest, trial, and 
imprisonment of, 29, 218, 220, 222; China 
visit of, 227–28; Cleaver’s differences with, 
226–27; intercommunalism theory of, 26, 
222–24, 229; on nationalism, 25–26
New World movement, 198–99, 212 (n. 15)
New World Quarterly (journal), 212 (n. 7)
New Y ork: Caribbean organizations in, 112; 
hip hop in, 232, 253, 258 (n. 56). See also
Harlem
Nguyen Thi Dinh, 223
Nicaragua: British West Indian immigrants 
in, 108; liberation movement in, 211
Nixon, Richard, 228
NJAC. See National Joint Action Committee
NJM. See New Jewel Movement
“Nkosi’ Sikeleli Afrika” (song), 144
Nkrumah, Kwame, 22, 23, 89
North Korea: Black Panther delegation to, 
228; Black Panther support from, 221, 222, 
226; as model, 224
NUFF (guerrilla group), 201
NWA (group), 33
Odd Fellows, 109, 111, 112
Odum, Howard, 189
Oilfield Workers T rade Union, 199
Organization of African Unity, 31
Organization of Afro-American Unity, 24
Outlet (newspaper), 200
Padmore, George: background of, 108; 
break with Comintern, 20, 175 (n. 77), 
213 (n. 22); Comintern connections 
of, 172; declining influence of, 204; on 
Garveyism, 19; on Haitian Revolution, 
87–90; at International Conference of 
Negro Workers, 165–66
Paisanos, Los (rap duo), 243–44, 255
Palestine: hip hop in, 234
Palmares, Republic of: creation of, 28
Pan-African Conference (1900), 37 (n. 13)
Pan-African Congresses (1919–45): 
Comintern compared with, 159, 165; 
communist attendees of, 15–16; ideals of, 
47–48; new international order evidenced 
in, 22; organizers of, 89; UNIA opposed 
by, 14–15
Pan-African Congress (1974), 31
Pan-African Congress (1994), 34
Pan African Cultural Festival, 220–21
Pan-Africanism: black literary tradition as 
source of, 48, 55–60; Cold War–narrative 
on, 88–89; Comintern’s engagement with, 
155, 158–61, 164–65, 172; as communal 
defense, 120–21; definitions of, 47–48; 
evangelical Protestantism as source of, 
48–52, 93; Haitian Revolution ignored 
in, 89–90; ideological foundations of, 
48, 67–68; internationalization of, 16–17, 
26–28; Italian invasion of Ethiopia and,


--- PAGE 333 ---
index
314 169–71; of Negro Welfare Association, 
168; revolutionary type of, 93; as state 
affair, 31; U.S. Revolution as source of, 
47–48, 52–56, 60–62; women linked by, 25
Pan-Africanist Congress, 24
Panama and Panama Canal Zone: antiblack 
legislation of, 116; British West Indian 
immigrants in, 107–8, 111; Christian 
mission in, 113; racial uplift ideals in, 
118–19; UNIA chapters in, 110, 124–25 
(n. 13); youth activities in, 109, 114–15
Panama Star and Herald (periodical), 107–8, 
114–15
Panama Tribune (newspaper): British West 
Indian connections of, 107–8; racial uplift 
ideals of, 118–19, 120–21; racism critiqued 
in, 122
Pan-American Conference (1826), 86
Panteras Negras, Las (The Black Panthers) 
(musical group), 234
Pardue, Derek, 237
Parks, Rosa, 191, 192
Payne, Charles, 127 (n. 61)
People’s National Congress (PNC), 213 
(n. 19)
People’s National Party (PNP), 201, 202, 
206–7, 213 (n. 29)
People’s Progressive Party (PPP), 213 (n. 19)
Perotin-Dumon, Anne, 65
Perry, Marc D., 35
Peste, Disiz le, 35
Peters, Thomas, 53–54
Petit Impartial, Le (newspaper), 122
Pettersburgh, Fitz Ballentine, 151 (n. 48)
Pitch Black Afro (musician), 250
Pittsburgh Courier (newspaper), 122
Plan of San Diego (1916), 182
PNC. See People’s National Congress
PNP . See People’s National Party
POC. See Prophets of Da City
Pointe Coupee Conspiracy (1795), 67
Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola, 203
Portugal: Black Power movement in, 27
PPP . See People’s Progressive Party
Price-Mars, Jean, 99
Profintern. See Red International of Labor 
Unions
Progress Publishers, 204
Prophets of Da City (POC), 251–52, 253–54
Prosser, Gabriel, 67, 68, 86
Protten, Rebecca, 37 (n. 21), 49
Public Enemy (group), 33, 234, 238–39
Putnam, Lara, 9–10
Racionais MC’s (Rational MC’s), 236–37, 
238
Radical History Review (journal), 149 (n. 3)
Randolph, A. Philip, 170, 189, 190
Rap. See Hip hop culture
Rap Brasil (magazine), 239–40
Rap Rima (magazine), 240
Rastafarian movement: Caribbean Black 
Power’s origins in, 198; as counter-
symbolic order, 214 (n. 36); founding 
texts of, 140, 151 (n. 48); messiah of, 14; 
revisioning of, 211–12; in South Africa, 
148; spread of, 109. See also Selassie, Haile
Reagan, Ronald, 205–6
Rediker, Marcus, 83, 85, 102–3 (n. 73)
Red International of Labor Unions 
(Profintern), 161, 162, 165
Reed, John, 158
Revolutionary Action Movement, 216
Revolutionary People’s Constitutional 
Convention (1970), 224
Rigaud, André, 63, 83
Roberto, Holden, 203
Roberts, Rita, 70 (n. 42)
Robeson, Paul, 172, 216
Robinson, Cedric, 197
Rock, Pete, 43–44 (n. 141)
Rodney, Walter: assassination of, 30, 32, 213 
(n. 19); banned from Jamaica, 29–30, 197; 
on Black Power, 199; declining influence 
of, 204; Dupuy’s evaluation of, 207–9; 
ideals of, 31, 208–9, 210
Rogers, Richard Athlyi, 139–41, 151 (n. 48)
Rudder, David, 72, 100
Russian Revolutions (1905 and 1917), 155, 
156–57, 186, 204. See also Soviet Union
Rustin, Bayard, 189–90, 192
Saint Domingue: black veterans in, 61, 63, 
71 (n. 51); economic role of, 80; liberty 
tree symbol in, 66; mulattos of, 73–75;


--- PAGE 334 ---
index
315refugees from, 67. See also Haiti; Haitian 
Revolution
Saint Lucia: Black Power movement of, 200; 
uprising in (1795–97), 82
Saint Vincent: uprising in (1795–96), 82
Salvation Army, 107, 109, 112–13
San Francisco Moratorium Demonstration, 
222
Sansone, Livio, 241
Santo Domingo. See Dominican Republic
SASO. See South African Students’ 
Organisation
Satyagrahis, 187–88, 190, 195 (n. 28)
Savimbi, Jonas, 203
SCAP . See South African Communist Party
Scott, Julius, 83, 84, 87, 90
Scottsboro case, 168–69, 170
Scouting movement, 109, 113–14, 115
Seale, Bobby, 217–18, 222, 225
Searchlight (periodical), 107–8, 119–20, 128 
(n. 78)
Sechaba (periodical), 222
Second (Amsterdam) International, 170
Seko, Mobutu Sese, 31
Selassie, Haile (earlier, Ras T afari), 14, 109, 
118, 122, 198
Semouse, Josiah, 132
Senegal: Black Power movement in, 29; hip 
hop in, 233, 249
Senghor, Lamine, 161
Shakur, Afeni, 33
Shakur, Assata, 244
Shakur, Tupac Amaru, 1, 33, 177 (ill.)
Sharp, Granville, 54, 59
Sharpeville Massacre (1960), 24
Shepperson, George, 47–48
Shridharani, Krishnalal, 183–84, 190, 193
Sierra Leone: black military veterans in, 62; 
founding of, 54; hip hop in, 249
Sisulu, Walter, 145
Sivanandan, Ambalaver, 27
Sizzla (Miguel Orlando Collins), 212
Skocpol, Theda, 79
Slavery and slave trade: British abolition of, 
96, 103 (n. 87); communist view of, 156; 
demise of legitimacy of, 80–81; end of, 
63–67, 93–94; Evangelical Revival and, 
5–6, 48–49; expansion of, 79, 86; French 
abolition of, 17, 62, 75; globalized struggle 
against, 59–60; Haitian demolishment of, 
7; in Providential Design, 134, 137; U.S. 
abolition of, 63, 97; U.S. patriots’ support 
for, 6
Small, E. F., 172
Smith, Jay Holmes, 190–91
Smith, T ommie, 29
Smuts, Jan, 194 (n. 3), 195 (n. 35)
SNCC. See Student Non-Violent 
Coordinating Committee
Sobel, Mechal, 69 (n. 13)
Solaar, MC (Claude M’Barali), 35
Solomon, Mark, 164
Sons of Africa, 59
South Africa: African Americans banned 
from, 149 (n. 8); African American 
visitors to, 132–34; American Negro 
(West Indian) community in, 135–37, 
150 (n. 20); ANC resurgence in, 32; 
Black Consciousness movement in, 
28, 30–31, 148, 252; Bolshevism in, 157; 
Comintern’s Native Republic thesis 
on, 162–65; Ethiopian support from, 
170–71; Gandhianism’s emergence in, 
187–88; Garveyism’s legacy for, 148–49; 
hip hop in, 35, 248–54, 255; House of 
Athlyi religious organization in, 138–41; 
Marxism-Leninism in, 203; political 
culture of, 17, 130–31; racial codification of 
“coloureds” in, 257–58 (n. 48); segregation 
and oppression in, 24, 131–32, 139, 184–88; 
taxation in, 144; voting in, 136, 251
South African Communist Party (SCAP), 
157, 163, 203, 250
South African Students’ Organisation 
(SASO), 28
Soviet Union: centralization of power in, 
18–19; collapse of, 242; formation of, 
155; Garvey on, 159; racial policy of, 15; 
revolutions fostered by, 204, 211; threats 
redefined by, 19–20. See also Communist 
International; Marxism-Leninism
Soweto rebellion (1976), 30–31, 32
Spain: colonial losses of, 80; hip hop in, 234; 
hostility of toward Haitian Revolution, 
82; national interests of, 74–75
Spooner, Kenneth, 135


--- PAGE 335 ---
index
316 Stalin, Joseph, 16, 18–19, 204
Star of Bethlehem Lodge, 111–12
Stewart, James, 133
Stoddard, Lothrop, 102 (n. 51)
Stop the Draft week, 219
Stuckey, Sterling, 69 (n. 13)
Student Non-Violent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC), 25, 28, 219
Students for a Democratic Society, 219
Suite, Winston, 200
Surinam: war against maroons in (1789–93), 
82
Sutherland, Bill, 40 (n. 72)
Swan, Maureen, 185, 187
Sweden: Black Panther Party in, 225, 226
Sweet, Ossian, 122
Sykes, Bobbi, 27
T acky’s Revolt (1760), 82, 83
T afari, Ras (Haile Selassie), 14, 109, 118, 122, 
198
T albert, Mary, 181
T anzania: Black Power movement in, 29; hip 
hop in, 249
T apia House movement, 199
T .E.A.A.C.H. Project (The Educational 
Alternative Awakening Corrupted 
Heads), 254
T emplin, Ralph, 190–91
Thaele, James, 138
Third World Women’s Alliance, 25
Thompson, Louise, 21
Thornton, John, 66
T obago: black military veterans in, 62; Black 
Power movement in, 197, 199, 201
T osh, Peter, 211
“T o T oussaint Louverture” (Wordsworth), 
7, 38 (n. 31)
T oussaint Louverture, 45 (ill.); alliances 
of, 75; on Dessalines, 78; double 
consciousness of, 90; as inspiration and 
model, 84, 97, 99; opposition to, 76–77; 
sonnet for, 38 (n. 31); vision of, 1
T ransAfrica (group), 148
T ranskei: hopes in, 135; official Garveyism 
in, 147–48; oppression in, 141–42, 144; 
Wellington’s influence in, 142–47
T ransport and Industrial Workers Union, 199
T ransvaal Chinese Association, 194–95  
(n. 18)
T ransvaal Council of Non-European T rade 
Unions, 172
T reaty of Versailles (1919), 9, 15
T rinidad: black military veterans in, 62, 114; 
Black Power movement in, 30, 31, 197, 
199–201; British West Indian–owned 
newspaper in, 107; Christian mission 
in, 113; Comintern’s interest in, 166, 172; 
Ethiopian support from, 170
T rois Riviere rebellion (1793), 65–66
T rotsky, Leon, 159
T rouillot, Michel-Rolph, 7, 66, 86–87, 102 
(n. 51)
“T ruth Is” (song), 43–44 (n. 141)
Ture, Kwame (Stokely Carmichael), 25, 26, 
27, 208
Turner, Henry McNeal, 133–34
Turner, Nat, 96–97
Tye, Colonel, 53
Ubuntu, 33
UCPA. See Universal Coloured People’s 
Association
Ulyanovsky, Rostislav, 204
Umteteli wa Bantu (newspaper), 150 (n. 19)
UNIA. See Universal Negro Improvement 
Association and African Communities 
League
Unified Black Movement (Movimento 
Negro Unificado), 27–28, 236, 237–38
Union of South Africa. See South Africa
Union of Y oung Communists (Cuba), 247
United Fruit Company, 115, 116, 126 (n. 35)
United Movement for the Reconstruction of 
Black Identity, 199
United Nations, 172, 221
United States: Black Power movement in, 
28–29; camp meetings in, 92; Comintern’s 
Black Belt thesis on, 162, 164–65; Haitian 
refugees in, 67; Haiti invaded and 
occupied by, 73, 88, 98–100; hip hop in, 
232, 236, 239–40, 243, 244; imperialism of, 
122, 219–24; independence celebrations 
of, 95; Million Woman March critique 
of, 34; political power of, 17; political 
repression in, 29, 32, 116, 205–6, 207, 211,


--- PAGE 336 ---
index
317215–16, 225–27; Prosser’s Revolt in, 67; 
racial violence fears in, 181–82; response 
to Bolshevism in, 157; response to Haitian 
Revolution in, 86–87; Scottsboro case in, 
168–69, 170; South Africa compared with, 
132; symbols of, 66, 143, 144; Turner’s 
revolt in, 96–97; Vesey’s revolt in, 67, 68, 
84
U.S. Civil War, 97
U.S. Communist Party: ABB linked to, 
20–21; black self-determination idea 
in, 164; Caribbean interests of, 166–67; 
delegates of, 15, 158–59; Ethiopian support 
from, 170; labor congress organized by, 
161; pan-Africanist literature of, 160; youth 
league of, 172
U.S. Congress: antiapartheid efforts in, 148; 
antilynching legislation in, 181; Fulbright 
hearings in, 219
U.S. Constitution (1787), 17
U.S. Peace Corps, 29
U.S. Revolution: black continental 
veterans of, 70 (n. 42); black loyalist 
regiments in, 52–54, 60–62; black 
self-emancipation in, 5, 6–7; Caribbean 
influenced by, 62–67; French forces in, 
63–64; pan-Africanism traced to, 47–48, 
52–56, 60–62; slave petitions in, 51–52; 
spread of evangelicalism after, 92–93; 
world-historical impact of, 79. See also
Declaration of Independence; U.S. 
Constitution
Universal Coloured People’s Association 
(UCPA), 27
Universal Negro Improvement Association 
and African Communities League 
(UNIA): ABB’s break with, 21; British 
West Indian connections of, 107, 110–11; 
Caribbean Black Power’s origins in, 
198; Caribbean chapters of, 110–11, 113, 
124–25 (n. 13); collapse of, 19; Comintern 
compared with, 159–60, 165; Comintern’s 
opposition to, 19, 162, 166; convention 
of, 150 (n. 19); post–World War I 
reconstitution of, 10; religious character 
of, 12–13, 137–38; School of African 
Philosophy of, 147; scout troop linked 
to, 115; slogan of, 137, 150 (n. 30); South 
African leadership and branches of, 136–
38, 142, 147–48, 150 (nn. 22, 28); steamship 
line of, 134–35, 137, 140, 143; transnational 
character of, 130–38; Wellington’s story 
about, 142–43. See also Garvey, Marcus; 
Garveyism; Negro World
Universal Races Congress (1911), 37 (n. 13)
Universal Zulu Nation, 253, 258 (n. 56)
University of California at Berkeley, 217–18
University of Havana, 248
University of the T oilers of the East, 160, 
163, 172
University of the West Indies, 198–99
Urban League, 170, 191
Van Tyne, Claude, 183
Venezuela: antiblack legislation of, 116; 
British West Indian immigrants in, 108; 
Saint Domingue slaves in, 84; Spanish 
overthrown in, 80
Vesey, Denmark, 67, 68, 84
Vietnamese National Liberation Front, 223
Vietnam War: Black Panthers on, 222, 226, 
228; T et Offensive in, 203, 219. See also
Antiwar movement
Villatte, Jean Baptiste, 63
Virginia Jubilee Singers, 132, 133, 148
Vodun (slave religion), 91, 95
Von Eschen, Penny M., 217
Walker, David, 95–96
Wallace, Ernest, 142
Wallace-Johnson, Isaac Theophilus Akunna, 
105 (ill.); Comintern connections of, 
172; Ethiopian support from, 170; at 
International Conference of Negro 
Workers, 165; in Negro Welfare 
Association, 168; at World Anti-Colonial 
Conference, 161, 162
Ward, Arnold, 168, 172
Washington, Booker T ., 132, 134
Watson, David, 114–15
Weekes, George, 199
Wellington, Butler Hansford (Wellington 
Elias Butelezi): as American Negro, 
141–42, 143–44; decline and fall of, 
146–48, 153–54 (n. 88); excommunication 
of, 152 (n. 57); name change of, 142, 152


--- PAGE 337 ---
index
318 (n. 58); prophecies and institutions of, 
142–46, 153 (n. 75)
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 181
Wesley, John, 49, 50, 59
West, Kanye, 249
West African Methodist Church, 54
West African Students’ Union, 168
Westerman, George, 119
West Indian Democratic Club, 111
West Indian (newspaper), 126 (n. 34)
West Indies War Cry (newspaper), 113
Wheatley, Phillis, 56–57, 102–3 (n. 73)
White, Garth, 198–99, 202
White, Maude, 21
Whitefield, George, 50, 58
Wickham, Clennell, 117
Wilberforce, William, 59
Wilkins, Roy, 149 (n. 8), 223
Williams, Eric, 30, 108, 197, 200, 201
Williams, Robert, 26, 192, 216, 218
Wilson, Woodrow, 9
Winsor, Ellen, 182, 183, 184
Women: as Black Bolsheviks, 20–21; as Black 
Panthers, 25; ideal type of, 12, 21; racial 
uplift and, 119–21; in UNIA, 11–12
Wordsworth, William, 7, 38 (n. 31)
Workers Party of Jamaica (WPJ), 202–3, 
206–7, 213 (n. 29)
Working People’s Alliance (WPA), 30, 213 
(n. 19)
World Anti-Colonial Conference (1927), 
161–62
World Federation of T rade Unions, 172
World War I: British West Indies Regiment 
in, 114–15; overview of, 8–9; treaty to end, 
9, 15; Wellington’s story about, 142. See 
also Communist International
World War II: alliances reevaluated in, 
19–20; beginning of, 39–40 (n. 57); black 
and white antagonisms in, 189; new 
international order after, 22; rumors in, 
147–48
WPA. See Working People’s Alliance
WPJ. See Workers Party of Jamaica
Wright, Ada, 169
Wright, Richard, 90, 171, 204, 213 (n. 22)
Wynter, Sylvia, 214 (n. 36)
X, Malcolm: African visits of, 24; 
assassination of, 25; Black Panthers 
influenced by, 218; declining influence 
of, 204; Garveyism as influence on, 
14; hip hop and, 234, 238–39, 244, 
252; international connections of, 26; 
persistence of, 216; state repression of, 32
Yarmouth (ship), 134
Y ergan, Max, 149 (n. 8)
Y oung, Joe, 199
Y oung, Sidney, 118–19, 124
Y oung Power, 199
Y outh League (ANC), 148
Zimbabwe (earlier, Rhodesia): Black Power 
movement in, 29
Zong case, 59
Zulu Nation, 253, 258 (n. 56)
Zumbi (black leader), 28

