=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm - Black National-Separatists - Shawna Maglangbayan.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 59
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:24:58.347567
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
GARVEY,
LUMUMBA
AND MALCOLM : BLACK
NATIONAL-SEPARATISTS
by
Shawna Maglangbayan
wTP
THIRD WORLD PRESS, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS


--- PAGE 2 ---
5
First Edition
Second Printing, August 1973
Third Printing, April 1976
Fourth Printing, March 1979
CONTENTS
Copyright © 1972 by Shawna Maglangbayan
All Rights Reserved
INTRODUCTION
Part One
MARCUS GARVEY
7
No material in this book can be copied, reproduced, or used
in any way without written permission from
1. Garvey and the UNIA.
	
.
2. Myths and Fallacies
19
Third World Press 7524 S. Cottage Grove, Chicago, Illinois 60619 about Garvey 32
3. The Meaning of Garveyism
Part Two
PATRICE LUMUMBA
1. Lumumba and the
36
"Independence" of the Congo
	
.
2. The Aryan Offensive
43
Against Lumumba 48
3. The Essence of Lumumbism.
Part Three
MALCOLM X
65
1. Malcolm X and Islam.
	
. 69


--- PAGE 3 ---
7
INTRODUCTION
AS SURELY AS MARCUS GARVEY, PATRICE
Lumumba and Malcolm X were lynched yesterday, they are
being lynched today for a second time.
Yesterday the white man destroyed Garvey, Lumumba
and Malcolm bodily. Today he is trying to destroy them
ideologically by deforming and commercializing their polit-
ical thought. While alive, any and all means were used to
slander their names, hinder their movements, isolate them
from their people, sabotage their work, ridicule their ac-
complishments and ultimately execute them. Once dead,
they are delivered into the hands of a second lynching party:
the adroit, cunning, Aryan' supremacist gang which poses as
the "best friend" of Black mankind.
The most prominent members of the lynching mob who
have set upon Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm are cloaked
in the sheets of marxism. Advancing upon our heroes with
cries of "International Fraternity!" soon none but their voice
is heard. And when we ask: "What didour heroes say?,"
we are told that they said, "Long Live International Fratern-
1. ARYAN:Throughout this essay, the termAryanshall be used
interchangeably withwhiteto designate all members of this race.
We shall depart from the usual usage of the term "Caucasian"-
a highly incorrect and unscientific term-in designating members
of the Aryan (or white) race. As far as we are concerned, an
Aryan is eithera Semite (Jew or Arab),a Latin(from Europe
or South America),a Nordic(from Germany or theU.S.A.),or
a Slav(whether in Russia or in Canada).
6 Contents
2. Malcolm X and Africa. 77
3. Malcolm X and "Third-Worldism". 83
4. Malcolm X and the
Black American Struggle 93
5. Malcolm X in Perspective 104
CONCLUSION . 109


--- PAGE 4 ---
8
	
National-Separatists
ity!" From then on, it is no longer the voice of Garvey, Lu-
mumba and Malcolm which falls on our ears, but that of the
marxist rabble whose company these three men are said to
have joined or to have "considered" joining.
The facts speak for themselves. There is hardly a single
book written about Patrice Lumumba that isn't the work of
one or another Aryan of the "friendly" type. His speeches
have been compiled as well-with inevitable "explanatory"
prefaces-by "friendly" Aryans. His only book,Congo My
Country,written in 1956 during the earlier period of his
political development, and which appeared only after his
death, was prefaced by another "friendly" Aryan.
The greater part of what has been written about Mal-
colm X has come from the enemy's pen. The works of Mal-
colm have been literally taken over by the "friendly" Aryan
group. It is they who compile his speeches, splice his words,
"correct" his thinking and put it out on the market preceded
by lengthy "explanatory" prefaces and introductions. One
American Trotskyist has been so busy "explaining," "cor-
recting" and prefacing Malcolm X's political thinking, that
he is currently referred to as the "expert" on the matter.
Another Trotskyist "expert" on Malcolm X, who has crop-
ped up in Europe, poisoned the French edition ofThe Auto-
biography of Malcolm Xwith his "explanatory" preface.
Concerning Garvey, it wasn't until recently (1967) that
hisPhilosophy and Opinionsbecame available again after
being consigned to oblivion for almost forty years. With the
exception ofGarvey and Garveyism,written and published
by his widow, Amy Jacques Garvey-and practically impos-
sible to find anywhere-Blacks have had to rely on the de-
formed account provided by another "friendly" Aryan in a
Introduction
	
9
book entitledBlack Moses.Everything has been done to keep
the real Garvey out of the reach of his people.'
Whether they go under the pseudonyms of trotskyism,
castroism or marxism-leninism, marxists have consistently
sought to sap the life-blood from Black political thinking
and sidetrack the struggle of Black mankind by undermining
and sabotaging every Black national-separatist effort. How
do they go about this? Simply by posing as revolutionaries
who are equipped with the one and only philosophy that
can "save" Black mankind. He who doesn't adhere to this
philosophy isn't revolutionary, but "counter-revolutionary."
That's the type of whitemail that the marxists put down;
that's their chief form of ideological terrorism against those
who refuse to fall into their bankrupt ranks.3
2. A great deal of c_ edit must be given to the widow of Marcus
Garvey, Amy Jacques Garvey. It is she who is responsible for the
compiling ofPhilosophy and Opinionsand for its subsequent
publication. In her own book,Garvey and Garveyism,she re-
counts how Aryan publishers had flatlyrefusedto publish the two
volumes ofThe Philosophy and Opinions of Marcas Garvey.It
was with tremendous difficulty that she finally managed to get the
first edition ofPhilosophy and Opinionspublished in 1927. As
she further details, its circulation was mainly dependent on a
word-of-mouth and hand-to-hand diffusion. If it hadn't been for
her constant efforts to keep the real Marcus Garvey alive and his
printed word intact, there is no telling what would have become
of Garvey's political thought.
3. The Black American scholar, Harold Cruse, has produced
what is, to date, the most thorough and lucid analysis of the ne-
farious role of left-wing trends vis-a-vis the struggle of Blacks
in the United States (and by extension, everywhere else). His,
The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual(William Morrow & Co.,
New York, 1967), a real masterpiece of independent Black
scholarship, is an indispensable work in the study of the crip-
pling influence that the marxist dogma has exercised over Blacks
in general. On the other hand, it is an important key to the un-
derstanding of the development (or lack of it) of political


--- PAGE 5 ---
10
	
National-Separatists
By attempting to appropriate the legacy of Garvey, Lu-
mumba and Malcolm, and by deforming their thinking so
that it appears to be pro-marxist, if not actually marxist,
Aryan Leftists are showing how white supremacist they are.
What they're actually saying is that a Black man couldn't
stand up for the freedom and independence of his Black
brethrenunlesshe is marxist-inclined.
When left-wing white supremacy proclaims that Garvey,
Malcolm X, or Lumumba were, at one point or another,
"turning" to marxism, what they're actually telling us is
that the political relevancy of these Black men can only be
attributed to their being "under the influence" of one or an-
ether Aryan dogma.
The chief and only aim of this brief analysis of the
political significance of the three single Black men whose
actions have decidedly marked the universal history of Black
men and women in the 20th century-Marcus Garvey, Pa-
trice Lumumba and Malcolm X-is that of presenting them
in the only light which seems to us to be the correct one.
Our goal is that Black men and women the world over
may have a better grasp of what these men stood for, why
they did what they did and in which direction they were
headed. To understand these issues, we feel, will better en-
able each one of us to assume our historical responsibilities
and instill us with that sense of mission which animated
these three Black men.
thought among Blacks in the United States. Manyofthe conclu-
sions expressed in this essay bear the direct influenceofthis im-
potant contributionofHarold Cruse.
Introduction
II
When we consider that at present the Black race sur-
passes one billion in number and is spread out from one end
of the globe to the other, then, we can begin to understand
something about the greatness of Marcus Garvey, Patrice
Lumumba and Malcolm X. No three men have spanned as
many oceans and continents, cut across as many frontiers,
defied as many differences of language and culture, and
evoked such a unanimous response from Black mankind, as
they. What is it in their names which have won the sympathy
of Black men and women the world over? What is it about
their lives which generated a force that knew no boundary
in the Black world? Who were these men who made such
an impact on Black humanity?
Each of these three men originated in different regions
of the Black world: Garvey in the Caribbean, Lumumba in
Africa, and Malcolm X in North America. Yet what they
taught was not limited to any one specific area of the Black
universe. When they spoke, it was in the name of Blacks
everywhere, whether in Brazil, India, Venezuela, Ceylon or
Melanesia; whether in Australia, Canada, New Guinea or
Malaysia. Their message was as relevant to Blacks in the
Caribbean, Central and South America, as it was to those in
Europe; as meaningful to Blacks in North America as it was
to those in Africa, Asia and Oceania. They voiced the revin-
dications, not of a geographical region, but of an oppressed
and exploitedrace!
Marcus Garvey bridled two centuries, living from 1887
until 1940. Both Patrice Lumumba and Malcolm X were
born in 1925. Both were assassinated in the 60's (Lumum-
ba in 1961, Malcolm X in 1965). Each began his active
11


--- PAGE 6 ---
12
	
National-Separatists
political life in his twenties. Garvey's political life-span lasted
for thirty years; for Malcolm X it was slightly more than ten
years, and for Lumumba it was less than ten years. But this
in itself tells us very little about who these men were or what
they stood for. To understand who Garvey, Lumumba and
Malcolm X were, we must first establish the general histor-
ico-political context into which these three men evolved.
Ever since aggressive Aryan intrusions destroyed the
last vestige of independent Black nationhood and put a
check on theautonomouspolitical and socio-economic evolu-
tion of the Black world, there have been only two lines of
thought and action conditioning the political, economic and
cultural movement of Black societies. The one line is deter-
mined by a movement towardsfusionwith the dominant
Aryan framework through "cooperation," "alliance," "part-
nership," etc. The other line is determined by a movement
in theoppositedirection. The first we term theintegration-
istline. To the second line we have given the name,nation-
al-separatist.
The roots of Black national-separatism itself go back
many centuries. Its seeds were sown in those first national
wars of resistence against Aryan expansionism and aggres-
sion, when Blacks fought, struggled, bled and died in de-
fense of Black lands and Black lives. Unlike the embryonic
integrationist who, for a heap of worthless trinkets and cloth,
aided and abetted white penetration into the Black world,
national-separatists took up arms and resisted the white on-
slaught. They rejected the treatises and pacts of "association"
and "alliance" set before them by the Aryan aggressors.
Following in the footsteps of their national-separatist
predecessors, came other generations of equally determined
Black men and women who, with or without arms, fought
to break the shackles of colonial and chattel enslavement,
Introduction
	
13
forced labor, colonial subjugation and exploitation. They
didn't seek the favors of the slave master and colonial over-
seer as did the integrationist collaborators. They sought
ways and means to destroy the system of Black bondage. It
was national-separatists, Black men and women imbued with
a racial and national consciousness, who led those fierce anti-
colonial and anti-slavery insurrections that raged through-
out the whole of the Americas, Africa and Black-inhabited
Asia and Oceania. The only lineage in the Black world that
can claim a centuries-long past of struggleagainstthe
stranglehold of Aryan subjugation and exploitation is the
national-separatist line.
This is the general historico-political background into
which Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm X evolved. That
same lineage which gave us Dessalines (Haiti) and N'Zin-
ga (Angola), gave us Marcus Garvey in 1887 on the island
of Jamaica. That same lineage which gave rise to Dingane
(South Africa) and Ganga Zumba (Brazil), equally gave
rise to Patrice Lumumba in 1925 in the Congo. That same
lineage which gave us Nat Turner(U.S.A.),Jose Aponte
(Cuba) and Dedan Kimathi (Kenya), likewise gave us
Malcolm X in 1925 in the United States of America.
III
It would not only be a dangerous oversimplification
but, in fact, an error to state that either Lumumba, Malcolm
or Garvey were "born" national-separatists. Their upbringing
was predominately integrationist just as ours is. No Black
person today is exempt from one form or another of inte-
grationism. We are all tainted in varying degrees with the


--- PAGE 7 ---
1:i
	
National-Separatists
integrationist, assimilationist outlook. The day is yet to come
when an entire generation of Blacks will be armed from the
cradle, both psychologically, spiritually and otherwise, with
a national-separatist outlook on life. Neither Garvey, Lu-
mumba nor Malcolm were part of that still-to-emerge gener-
ation.
The upbringing of these three Black men was, there-
fore, not much different from that of the rest of us. What
needs to be underlined is that once Garvey, Lumumba and
Malcolm X were awakened to a Black racial consciousness,
they never let up in their struggle to weed out their integra-
tionist roots. These were men who did everything in their
power to effect the necessary transformations that would
make them dignified, proud Black men, not carbon copies of
the Aryan. Nothing ever deterred them from pursuing this
objective. From the moment they were stirred to racial
awareness to the time they died, they were living examples
of the type of determination, will, and force of character it
takes to be a national-separatist.
These three Black men were figures of an international
scope, on a world, scene dominated and controlled by white
supremacists. We have a tendency to forget the sort of in-
trigues and plots, the treacherous and constant harassment
faced by these men, twenty-four hours a day, every day. What
didn't the Aryan do to try and subvert them and buy them
off in one way or another? No temptation of any kind was
strong enough to overthrow these three Black men. Their
lives testify to this.
In spite of the overwhelming obstacles put in their way
day in and day out, Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm X re-
mained faithful to their mission. Like their national-separa-
tist predecessors, they came to see the salvation of the Black
race as dependent upon theindependentassertion of Black
Introduction
	
15
humanity along its own economic, political, cultural, mili-
tary and ideological lines of development.
Marcus Garvey, Patrice Lumumba and Malcolm X are
the three most outstanding exponents of national-separatism
in the twentieth century.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Part One
MARCUS GARVEY


--- PAGE 9 ---
I
I
CHAPTER 1
GARVEY AND THE UNIA
TODAY BLACK PEOPLE ARE BECOMING IN-
creasingly aware of Marcus Garvey, although it is not certain
that this awareness embraces the totality or even the most
relevant aspects of Garvey's imprint upon the Black world.
Who was Garvey? The picture that immediately comes into
most minds can be resumed in a single phrase: "Back-to-
Africa." This already shows to what extent we have become
victims of the crude, simplistic propaganda under which the
true image of Garvey is buried. To assume that the political
thinking of Marcus Garvey, his aim in life, and the reasons
for his organizing the most powerful contemporary political
movement in the Black world, can be reduced to the "ob-
jective" of shipping more than a hundred million Blacks to
Africa, is the greatest insult we could render to a Black man
of Garvey's political stature.
It is currently said that Garvey aimed at "transplanting"
the Blacks of the Americas to the African continent. It is
also suggested that it was to this end that he attempted to
procure land in Liberia and established two steamship tines
(i.e.,The Black Star LineandThe Black Cross Navigation
and Trading Company).Recently, one. Aryan scholar, true
to his kind, has even insidiously suggested that Garvey's aim
19


--- PAGE 10 ---
20
	
National-Separatists
might have been the "colonization" of the Blacks of Africa
by the Blacks of the Americas.
The place that Garvey assigned to Africa in his program
and the role he assigned to the Blacks of the Americas can
best be gotten from his own words: "We are not preaching
any doctrines to ask all the Negroes... to leave for Africa.
The majority of us may remain here, butwe must send our
scientists, our mechanics, and our artizans, and let them
build railroads, let them build the great educational and
other institutions necessary...." Concerning the shipping
vessels, Garvey added: "Africa must be linked to the United
States, to South and Central America, to the West Indies by
vesselswhich will unite in fraternal tiesthe ebony-hued
sons of Ethiopia in the Western Hemisphere with their
brothers across the sea."2
Not once did Garvey urge or envision the migration of
all the Blacks in the Western Hemisphere to Africa. There
was no "Back-to-Africa" mystique about Garvey's program.
Garvey dealt with realities. He wanted the white manout
of Africa. He wanted a free, independent, United Africa
that would become thebastionof the Black world. He want-
ed the entire African continent to be under the rightful con-
trol and power of its own people. He desired its riches, its
wealth and resources to exclusively benefit the whole of
Black mankind, beginning with Blacks on the African soil.
When Garvey called upon Black technicians, Black
scientists, Black educators and other Black expertsto pool
their knowledge and efforts in the direction of African
emancipation, it was because he envisioned Africa as a
1. Marcus Garvey, as quoted by E. U. Essien-Udom,Black
Nationalism,Laurel Edition, Dell Publishing Co., New York,
1964, p. 385. (Our italics.)
2. Ibid. (Our italics.)
Marcus Garvey
	
21
future center of industrial, technological and scientific de-
velopment in the Black world, a bastion of economic, mili-
tary, political, social and cultural power for the Black race.
When Garvey went about organizing the U.N.I.A. (Univer-'
sal Negro Improvement Association) -the only popular,
universal, Black national-separatist movement organized to
date in the history of the Black race-it was with this ob-
jective in mind. All of this was summed up in his slogan:
"Africa for the Africans, those at home and those abroad."
And it is not by accident that Malcolm X and Lumumba,
too, would later envision things in this light.
The establishment of the U.N.I.A. was to itself one of
the greatest single accomplishments of Marcus Garvey. Even
today, few of us think of organizing a movement outside of
our own districts, tribes, provinces or states. Some of us can't
even conceive of organization beyond our own neighbor-
hood. The establishment of theU.N.I.A.,during a period
when radios were still in their infancy, when television and
jet planes were unheard of, and when transatlantic communi-
cations were reduced to long sea voyages, is an indication of
what a Black man and woman can do when determined to
place their lives at the service of their suffering race.
Garvey was a man of action. No sooner had he seen the
need for a powerful, independent political movement that
would group Blacks from all corners of the globe into a
single body, than he set out to build it. In 1914, theU.N.I.-
A. was born. It was a Black national-separatist movement of
an international character. At the height of its activity, its
membership numberedinthe millions. Garvey travelled
(many timeson foot!)through parts of Central and South
America, the Caribbean and throughout the United States,
organizing chapters of theU.N.I.A.,instilling confidence in
the downtrodden Black masses of those areas. Wherever he


--- PAGE 11 ---
22
	
National-Separatists
went he summoned the Blacks to their feet, to the accomp-
lishment of a high mission-the redemption of their race.
Had Garvey been able to go on to India, Africa and Oceania,
he would have gone there as well with the same message to
the Black men and women of those areas. Both froma
cultural and from a geographical standpoint, Garvey's think-
ing defied all frontiers.
Seeing as well the need for an independent medium of
expression for national-separatist ideas, Garvey foundedin
1919, the weekly English-language newspaper,The Negro
World,which at its zenith contained articles in both Spanish
and French. He later launched in 1922 a daily newspaper,
The Negro Times,and in 1933 he published a monthly
magazine entitled,Black Man.He was also to establish the
first independent Black publishing company, theUniversal
Publishing House.
To finance his movement and publication, Garvey did
not depend on "friendly" whites but on the independent
means of Black people. Consequently, he launched various
business enterprises and small-scale industries(such as the
Negro Factories Corporation).Out of the combined profits
of these different enterprises and the payment of member-
ship dues which flowed into the U.N.I.A. treasury, Garvey
embarked on a still larger commercial scheme: the purchase
of several maritime vessels which he rechristened after prom-
inent Black figures of the past(i.e.,S.S.Frederick Douglass,
S. S. Booker T. Washington, S.S. Antonio Maceo, The Phyl-
lis Wheatley,etc.).
Calling upon all Black men and women who had mili-
tary. technical and medical skills, Garvey setout on the
second leg of his program: the establishment of a Black
national-separatist armed force. By mid-1920,theAfrican
Legion,theAfrican Motor Corps,theBlack Flying Eagles
Marcus Garvey
	
23
and theJuvenile Corpswere formed, along with theUni-
versal Black Cross Nurses.
In August of 1920, with delegates from various parts
cf the Black world assisting, the firstInternational Conven-
tion of the Negro Peoples of the Worldwas convened in
New York. After thirty days of full deliberations,the con-
vention issued a "Declaration of Rights of the Negro Peo-
ples of the World," condemning the enslavement and coloni-
zation of the Black world-particularlyAfrica-by the
Aryan powers. When the U.N.I.A. band struckthe last
chords of the new anthem, "Ethiopia, Thou Land of Our
Fathers," and as thousands of Black men and women in tears
sang its chorus, the Provisional Government of the African
Republic was proclaimed. Garvey was unanimously chosen
as the Provisional President. The aim of the U.N.I.A. was
now crystal clear.
In face of the new threat which had appeared quite un-
suspectedly, the Aryan powers wasted no time. One by one,
the U.N.I.A. ships (which by then had been making regular
trips to the Caribbean and Central America and back to the
United States)were sabotaged. Thousandsof U.N.I.A.
members were harassed. and arrested in variouscountries
under the most varied charges. The American State Depart-
ment declared that Garvey was "an undesirable and indeed
a very dangerous alien," whose aim was to pit "all of the
Negroes in the world against the white people."3
Rumors of a Provisional African Government in exile
had already gone as far as South Africa. The governments
of England, Italy, Belgium and France communicated to the
3.R.W.F.,Office of the Solicitor, Memo to Doughton, June 21,
1921, State Department Files, 811.108G 191/31,National Ar-
chives (In: Edmund Cronon,Black Moses,University of Wiscon-
sin Press, Wisconsin, 1964 reprinting, p. 89.)


--- PAGE 12 ---
24
	
National-Separatists
United States government their deep concern over the activi-
ties of the U.N.I.A. and its founder. Blaise Diagne, a Sene-
galese member of the French Chamber of Deputies, a
staunchly pro-colonialist buffoon, was prompted by the
French government to reject, "in the name of Africans," the
Provisional African Government in exile. Diagne issued the
following bootlicking "warning" to Garvey: "We French
natives wish to remain French, since France has given us
every liberty and since she has unreservedly accepted us up-
on the same basis as her own European children. None of us
aspires to see French Africa delivered exclusively to the
Africans as is demanded, though without any authority, by
the American Negroes at the head of whom you have placed
yourself."'
A group of bootlicking Blacks, calling itself the "Com-
mittee of Eight" (among whom were prominent members
of the U .S. Communist Party), petitioned the American
government to arrest Garvey and disband his "dangerous"
organization. Their slogan was: "Garvey Must Go!"
A few passages from the letter this "Committee of Eight"
sent on January 15, 1923 to the U .S. Attorney-General,
Harry M . Daugherty, will reveal the treacherous nature of
those lackeys (i.e.,Chandler Owen, George W . Harris,
Robert W . Bagnall, William Pickens, Julia P. Coleman,
John E. Nail, Robert S. Abbott, Harry H. Pace):
"Dear Sir:
As the chief law enforcement officer of the nation,
we wish to call your attention to a heretofore unconsider-
4. Blaise Diagne to Marcus Garvey, July 3, 1922, quoted in
Henri Charpin, "La Question. Noire,"Revue Indigene, XVII, No-
vember-December 1922, p. 281 (In: E. Cronon,Black Moses, op.
cit.., pp. 127-128, our italics.)
Marcus Garvey
	
25
ed menace to harmonious race relationships. There are in
our midst certain Negro criminals and potential murder-
ers, both foreign and American born, who are moved
and actuated by intense hatred against the white race.
These undesirables continually proclaim that all white
people are enemies to the Negro.
...Its present and moving spirit is one Marcus Gar-
vey, an unscrupulous demagogue, who has ceaselessly
and assiduously sought to spread among Negroes dis-
trust and hatred of all white people.
The official organ of the U .N.I.A., The Negro
World . .. . sedulously and continually seeks to arouse
ill-feeling between the races....
The U .N.I.A. is composed chiefly of the most primi-
tive and ignorant element of West Indian and American
Negroes.... In short, this organization is composed in
the main of Negro sharks and ignorant Negro fanat-
ics....
For the above reasons we advocate that the Attorney-
General use his full influence completely to disband and
extirpate this vicious movement, and that he vigorously
and speedily push the government's case against Marcus
Garvey. . ..
We desire the Department of justice to understand
that those who draft this document...sound this tocsin
only because they foresee the gathering storm of race
prejudice and sense the imminent menace of this insidi-
ous movement, which cancerlike, is gnawing at the very
vitals of peace and safety-of civic harmony and inter-
racial concord."5
In June 1923, Marcus Garvey was sentenced to a five-
year imprisonment term and locked up in the Tombs Prison
of New York City. His followers, making every possible sac-


--- PAGE 13 ---
26
	
National-Separatists
rifice, managed to raise the $25,000 demanded for his bail.
Garvey was released from prison in September 1923, deter-
mined more than ever before to realize the emancipation of
the Black race.
U.N.I.A. delegations had already gone to Liberia for land
and settlement negotiations. In December 1923, Garvey
was informed that the Liberian government had agreed to
provide the U.N.I.A. with a landing base in Africa. How-
ever, in face of the threat of invasion waved by Englanci,
France, Italy, Belgium and the United States, the treacherous
Liberian "leaders" quickly capitulated. The first party of
U .N.LA technical experts which arrived in Liberia in the
latter part of 1924, with thousands of dollars worth of
material, were promptly arrested and deported. The supplies
and machinery were confiscated and eventually sold by Li-
berian President King. The Liberian government announced
that if Garvey himself came, he would be arrested and placed
at the disposal of the British authorities. But there was no
need for this. On February 8, 1925, Marcus Garvey was
once again brutally seized by the American authorities,
handcuffed, and imprisoned this time in Atlanta, Georgia.
That same year, two babies were born, one in the Congo
and one in Nebraska,U.S.A.: the first was named Patrice
Lumumba, the second Malcolm Little.
Following the second imprisonment of Garvey, a real
campaign of terror was unleashed against Garveyites
throughout North, Central and South America and the
Caribbean. Garveyites were beaten in the streets, shot in
dark alleys, fired from their jobs and railroaded to prison
under any and all charges. Garvey, himself, had been pre-
5.Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, compiled by
Amy Jacques Garvey, Frank Cass & Co., Ltd., London, 1967, 2nd
edition, Part II, 295, 299, 300.
Marcus Garvey
	
27
viously wounded by assassin's bullets. And many were the
Garveyites who were murdered in "mysterious" circum-
stances.
The U.S. Communist Party, directly under the orders
of the Communist International, was more than once impli-
cated in the harassment of U.N.I.A. members. Goons of
the U.S. Communist Party broke up U.N.I.A. meetings with
physical violence. Chiefly through the voice of George Pad-
more-a then prominent Black figurehead in the Communist
Intern ational-marxists throughout the world were urged
to "vigorously" uproot Garveyism.
In his capacity as Executive Secretary of the "Internation-
al Trade Union Committee of Negro Workers" and Editor-
in-Chief of its official organ, theNegro Worker,Padmore
was assigned the task of organizing the struggle against
Garveyism on an international level. An example of the
campaign unleashed by the Communist International, can
be gotten from Padmore's vicious tirades against Garvey
and the U.N.I.A. during this period:
"The struggle against Garveyism represents one of
the major tasks of Negro workers in America and in
the colonies of Africa and the Caribbean. Why must we
combat Garveyism? For the simple reason that, as justly
stated in the program of the Communist International,
'Garveyism constitutes a dangerous ideology which bears
not a single democratic trait and which toys with the
aristocratic attributes o f a non-existent Negro Kingdom.
It must be vigorously combatted since far from being a
help, it is an obstacle, blocking the struggle o f the Negro
Masses. ...'Garvey is much more than a dishonest
demagogue who had profited from the wave of revolu-
tionary protest of Negro workers.... Garvey... is an
agent of American imperialism.... (T) he Garveyist


--- PAGE 14 ---
28 National-Separatists
ideology is the most reactionaryexpressionof Negro
nationalism....The landlords and black capitalists who
support Garveyism have only one objective: to mobilize
Negro peasants and workers to create a Negro republic
in Africa.... Garveyism is alien to the best interests of
Negro workers .. .. Negro workers should not be de-
ceived by the demagogic actions of Garvey and his par-
tisans. They must understand that the only road by
which they can acquire their freedom and emancipation,
is by organizing their forces. . . and establishing an
alliance with white workers	
George Padmore was not the only Black spokesman of
the Aryan Left against Garveyism. There were several other
subservient characters (such as, W. Adolphus Domingo,
William Patterson, James W. Ford, Cyril Briggs, Chandler
Owen, Richard B . Moore, Otto Huiswood and A . Philip
Randolph) who were then affiliated with either the Ameri-
can Communist or Socialist party. Also to be found in the
ranks of the prominent, Black anti-Garvey stooges of the
Left during the 1920-30's, was the Trinidadian left-wing
assimilationist, C. L. R. James (alias, J. R. Johnson). C. L.
R . James, who was affiliated with the trotskyist brand of
marxism (an offshoot of the CommunistInternational),be-
6. George Padmore, "La Vie et les Luttes des Travailleurs Ne-
gres,"Petite Bibliotheque de l'Internationale Syndicale Rouge,
No. XXXVII, Paris, France, no date given, pp. 163 & 164 (Our
translation and italics).
It is ironical that the same Padmore who, in the name of com-
munist "colorless fraternity," slandered Garvey as an "agent of
imperialism," a "black racist," a "reactionary" and "demagogue,"
would, in 1934, break with the Communist International and ac-
cuse it of "betrayal of the fundamental interests of my people."!!(See: James R. Hooker,Black Revolutionary,Praeger Publishers,
New York, 2nd printing, 1970, p. 31; also see: George Padmore's
Pan-Africanism or Communism?Dennis Dobson, London, 1956).
Marcus Garvey 29
came notorious for his vicious attacks against Garvey and the
U .N.I.A. Like others of his kind, this marxist-trotskyist
spared no efforts in venting his hatred and scorn for all that
Garvey and the U .N.I.A. represented.
Using both crude anti-Black propaganda and black-
skinned puppets-plus repeated attempts at assassinating the
leader of the U.N.I.A.-the international Aryan Left made a
concerted offensive to destroy both Garvey and his move-
ment. In face of this offensive, Garvey would later draw the
appropriate conclusions: "Communism among Negores .. .
represented...by such Negroes as' Cyril Briggs, and W. A.
Domingo, and my contact with, and experience of them and
their methods are enough to keep me shy of... communism
for the balance of my natural life," he exclaimed bitterly.
"A group of men of anyism or party who would seek to kill
or illegally or improperly dispose of a political adversary
because he doesn't agree with his particular brand of politics,
are no association for those who seek the perfection of Gov-
ernment."'Garvey continued: "Because I sought to build
up in Africa a democratic Negro State and not a Commune,
the Negro Communists preferred me dead than alive. .. .
I pray the day will never come for the Negro...when the
Government falls into the hands of such representatives of
Communism . I would rather be dead than alive under Gov-
ernment administered by such characters."9
7.The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, op.cit.,
Part II, pp. 333-334.
8. Ibid., Part II, p. 334 (Our italics.)
9. The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey,Ibid., Part
II, p. 334.
Garvey's indictment of the nefarious character of those Blacks
who embrace the marxist-leninist philosophy and of the vicious
role assigned to them thereafter, is far from having lost its actu-
ality


--- PAGE 15 ---
3 0
	
National-Separatists
As the brunt of repression fell upon the first universal,
national-separatist movement of this century, the traitors,
mercenaries and opportunists who had sought to make a
career within the ranks of the U.N.I.A. surfaced. No sooner
had Garvey been released from the Atlanta prison and de-
ported from the United States in 1927, than the fight had
begun over who would be the leader of the U.N.I.A. In time,
the U.N.I.A. leadership was to be immobilized by a crippling
internecine struggle of succession.
Following the directives of the U.S. Communist Inter-
national, Black members of the U.S. Communist Party had
infiltrated the U.N.I.A. and were at work in their nefarious
task of tearing down the organization from within. Paid
agents of the United States F.B.I. had also heavily infiltrated
the ranks of the U.N.I.A. By 1935, theU .N.I.A.,as it once
stood, had been systematically dismantled in every county.
Eventually the Universal Negro Improvement Association
was to crumble under the combined blows of the enemy
frcm without and the traitor from within.
In desperation, Garvey, who was hounded wherever he
went by the security forces of the chief Aryan nations, tried
to pick up the pieces of the world-wide movement he had
created. Banned from entering most countries, Garvey was
practically restricted to England. Nonetheless, our hero strug-
gled. Over and over again, he tried to reorganize theU .N.I.-
A. When Ethiopia was invaded by Mussolini's Italy in 1935,
it was Garvey who rushed to the defense of Africa, calling
upon the Blacks of the world to mobilize and organize their
forces on the side of Ethiopia and come to the aid of their
African brothers. To this end he devoted his every effort in
spite of a steadily declining health.
As the generalized European war broke out in 1939-40,
Garvey was cut off forever in London from the Black world.
Marcus Garvey
	
31
Sick, disheartened, sad and alone, the hero died on June 10,
1940.
Garvey's farewell address to his followers as he was
railroaded to the Atlanta, Georgia prison, may well have
been his last testament:.
"(I) n life or death I shall come back to you to serve
even as I have served before. In life I shall be the same:
in death I shall be a terror to the foes of Negro liberty.
If death has power, then count on me in death to be the
real Marcus Garvey I would like to be. If I may come in
an earthquake, or a cyclone,•°or plague, or pestilence...
then be assured that I shall never desert you and make
your enemies triumph over you. Would I not go to hell
a million times for you? Would I not...walk the earth
forever for you? Would I not lose the whole world and
eternity for you? Would I not cry forever...for you?
Then, why be sad? Cheer up, and be assured that if it
takes a million years the sins of our enemies shall visit
the millionth generation of those that hinder and op-
pressus....
If I die in Atlanta my work shall then only begin,
but I shall live, in the physical or spiritual to see the day
of Africa's glory. When I am dead wrap the mantle of
the Red, Black and Green around me, for in the new
life I shall rise...to lead the millions up the heights of
triumph with the colors that you well know. Look for
me in the whirlwind or the storm, look for me all
around you, for...I shall come and bring with me
countless millions of black slaves who have died in
America and the West Indies and the millions in Africa
to aid you in the fight for Liberty, Freedom and Life.""'
10. ThePhilosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, Ibid., Part
11, pp. 238-239.


--- PAGE 16 ---
II
i
32
CHAPTER 2
MYTHS AND FALLACIES
ABOUT GARVEY
Prior to, and after his death, Aryan propaganda has
devised every imaginable charge against Marcus Garvey. His
far-ranging appeal among Black people has been termed
"demagogy." In spite of his scrupulous integrity, the charge
of "swindler" has been levelled against him. His passionate
love for the Black race has been called "black chauvinism."
And to cap it all, Garvey is said to have advocated a policy
of "racial purity" which excluded all but the so-called fall-
bloodedmembers of the Black race, whatever that term may
signify. This is the only charge we will deal with, since it's
the only one which seems to have stuck with a great many
Black people.
The fallacy that Garvey was against light-skinned Blacks
as such, and that he was more violently against the fair-
skinned segments of the race than he was against the whites
themselves, is not novel. This falsehood was levelled against
the U.N.I.A. during Garvey's lifetime. As is to be expected,
the most active propagators of this fallacy were those light-
Marcus Garvey 33
skinned elements in the Americas whose systematic collu-
sion with white supremacy, and arrogant disdain for Black-
ness, Garvey unhesitantly challenged.
First of all, it must be said that Garvey wasn't the one
who drove a wedge between light-skinned and dark-skinned
Blacks. This antagonism within the Black race has persisted
intenselyeverywhere for many centuries. It's origin? It is
Aryan domination which is responsible for the ethnic frag-
mentation of the Black race. It is the Aryan who has fostered
and sustained it for centuries. It is the Aryan, and only the
Aryan, who draws the fullest economic and political advan-
tages from its maintenance.
White supremacy has split the Black world asunder
ethnically. Pitting straight-haired Blacks against curly-haired
Blacks; setting narrow-nosed Blacks against broad-nosed
Blacks; inflaming light-skinned Blacks against dark-skinned
Blacks; opposing Blacks of African origin to those of Asian
origin; and finally, pitting the Blacks of the Americas again-
st those of Africa and Asia. There is no end to the variety
of divisions fostered by white supremacy in the Black world.
In this respect, we should remember that the Haitian Revolu-
tion of 1804 did not succumb to the might of Aryan armies
but to the might of this fierce antagonism between light-skin-
ned and dark-skinned Blacks.
Garvey was one of the first Black men to set out to close
our ranks, to bring us together into one, healthy, strong,
proud body. No one has worked more for the ethnic unifi-
cation of the race than he. Throughout his active political
life, Garvey never ceased promoting racial unity between all
Black morphological types, regardless of their skin color or
other physical features. And any Black person who reads
what Garvey said himself, and not what has been said about


--- PAGE 17 ---
34
	
National-Separatists
him, will see that this was one of the capital points he stress-
ed time and time again.
Now, what Garvey did attack was the assimilationist,
integrationist Black-of whatever hue he may be-who pre-
dicated the falsehood that the "salvation" of the Black man
was dependent upon his ability to "become" an Aryan even
in physical appearance. Garvey clearly exposed the class of
traitors from within our fold, those lackeys and mercenaries
of white supremacy who have historically sold out the race
for less than breadcrumbs. When Garvey assailed Blacks for
hating their blackness, when he pointed to the spoken or
unspoken desire of Blacks in general to escape from the race,
he was not pointing to light-skinned Blacks exclusively. He
was pointing atany Black person who, by his shame of black-
ness, sought to escape the race either by denying his Black-
ness or worshipping at the altar of miscegenation.
Dominated by an intense hatred of their blackness, light-
skinned Blacks in general fiercely opposed and attacked
Garvey's efforts to instill all Black people with a sense of
racial pride. Their opposition to Garveyism was not due to
any personally-directed attack of Garvey against light-skin-
ned Blacks. Historically, the fairer-skinned elements of the
Black race, more than anyone else, have systematically sought
to "whiten" the race through a policy of racial amalgama-
tion with the Aryan. Their political role as "buffers" in the
Black world has been consistently nefarious.
Does this mean that the only traitors in the Black race
are those with light-skins? Far from it. The traitors from
within the race are ofallskin colors. No one was more
aware of this than Garvey. The difference between the dark-
skinned and light-skinned traitor, is that, in general, the
latter uses his lighter pigmentation to assert himself-in a
racist fashion-as "superior" to all those of darker complex-
Marcus Garvey
	
35
ion. This explains why, in face of Garvey who physically
represented all that he hated, the assaults of the light-skin-
ned lackey of Aryan oppression, bore definite racist over-
tones. Some of these bootlickers even described Garvey as
an "ugly black man," a "flat-nosed demagogue" of "unmixed
stock," with "protruding jaws and heavy jowels," while
others called him a "gorilla-jawed black man."
This brings us to another aspect of the question of light-
skinned-vs-dark-skinned Blacks in relation to Garvey and
the U.N.I.A. There is a widespread opinion among old-line
Garveyites that it was the.light-skinned Blacks who were
responsible for the destruction of theU .N.I.A.,the imprison-
ment of Garvey and the sabotage of the Garveyist program
altogether. For people who dare call themselves Garveyites,
such an opinion shows how little they understand about the
political, economic and racial forces which acted to thwart
the implementation of the U.N.I.A.'s titanic program. Have
they forgotten that it is the Aryan who rules the world?
Were the traitors within the U.N.I.A. fair-skinned Blacks?
Were the treacherous Liberian authorities, headed by Presi-
dent King and Co ., light-skinned Blacks? Either these fos-
silized "Garveyites" are wholly ignorant of the facts sur-
rounding the sabotage of the U.N.I.A.'s program, or they
are consciously bent upon exonerating therealforces that
combatted Garveyism down to the end . These forces were
none other than the international forces of Black oppression,
both Right (capitalist) and Left (communist).


--- PAGE 18 ---
36
CHAPTER 3
THE MEANING OF GARVEYISM
WAS THE U .N.I.A. A "FAILURE," AS SOME
would claim? Did Garvey "fail" in his enterprise? Garvey
did not fail. The establishment in Africa of a Black political,
economic, industrial, military, cultural and scientific bastion
from which the entire African continent first, and the rest of
the Black world' secondly, could be liberated, was the high
task Garvey had set for himself. Although he was kept from
accomplishing this goal by the concerted action of the lead-
ing Aryan powers of the world-both capitalist and com-
munist-his other accomplishments were gigantic.
Garvey organized, as best he could, the first national-
separatistmovement of this century. Hemobilized,as none
had done before him, the national-separatist aspirations
of tens of millions of Blacks the world over. He began the
organization of an embryonic national-separatistarmy.He
hada program which was national-separatist and he had a
national-separatistclassthat backed him. He lacked only a
Marcus Garvey
	
37
national-separatistideologyanda countrywhere he could
implement the national-separatist program of the U.N.I.A.
Garvey was the first Black internationalist of this centu-
ry. No one strove to mobilize and unify Black people the
world over as he. As Lumumba and Malcolm X after him,
Marcus Garvey had what few of us possess: a deep, genuine-
ly sincere love for all Black people, a love of the race which
cuts across any and all differences of country, culture, langu-
age, skin color and morphology. His racial love was based
on the historical experience common to Black men and
women everywhere. It wasn't sentiment or emotion that in-
stilled Garvey with Black love. A correct historical perspec-
tive is what made his love so profound for us. History re-
vealed to Garvey that we were once a great and mighty
people and that we could be a great and mighty people again
if only we would have self-confidence, pride in race, pride in
our blackness, andfirmly close our ranks.
Independent Black nation-building as Garvey envisioned
it, is still to be realized. There isn't a single country in the
world today where the Black man can raise his head in pride,
knowing that he is in control of that country's industrial,
commercial and scientific development-let alone the master
of his own armed forces, his own government. Nothing
could be further from Garvey's objective than the present
so-called "independent" Black nations in Africa, Asia, Ocean-
ia, South and Central America and the Caribbean. The chief
aim of these "independent" governments is to have a seat
in the so-called United Nations. Their role in the world is
reduced to facilitating the exploitation of their respective
countries by Aryan powers. These fictitious independent
governments are but the national watchdogs of international
Aryan economic, political, military and cultural interests. It


--- PAGE 19 ---
38
	
National-Separatists
was precisely these interests that Garvey sought to destroy.
A half-a-century ago, Garvey saw things that we have
yet to see. He clarified issues for us that we're still confused
over today. He defined the correct line of thought and action
that every conscious Black man and woman should follow
in the pursuit of their emancipation. We must resurrect
Garvey the visionary, the theoretician and the man of action.
Here was a man who saw the overall needs of the Black
world and who set out to fulfill those needs in ways that
defy our own narrow-minded imaginations. Here was a man
who didn't wait for his fellow man to do the job that he, as
a Black man, had to accomplish.
Garvey was a man with a vision, not a dream. His vision
was not "ahead of his time," as some would say. The vision,
or goal, of a thoroughly emancipated Black race, of a race
united and powerful, can never be ahead of the time of any-
body. It was this vision that was at the base of the Black
Haitian Revolution of 1804. Was Dessalines ahead of his
time? Was Christophe ahead of his time? Were the Black
masses in Haiti ahead of their times when they struck out to
implement what Garvey sought to bring about in the 1920's,
what Lumumba tried to build in 1960, and what Malcolm
X died to accomplish in the early 1960's? Garvey was not
"ahead of his time." It is the Black race as a whole which
has been dragging itself for centuriesbehindthe times. This
is the historically tragic situation that Garvey tried to upset
with the meagre means he had at his disposal.
Was he an "exceptional" man, as some would again try
to say? Or was he the type of man that we should all strive to
be in view of our history? Garvey was certainly no exception-
al man. He was just like each one of us; initially with the
same weaknesses, confusion and undetermination that charac-
Marcus Garvey 39
terizes men and women who belong to an oppressed, en-
slaved and brutally exploited race. He was not a man beyond
the reach of any of us. It is important to realize this because
deceptive propaganda is seeking today to make us complac-
ent with our own weaknesses, confusion and undetermina-
tion by subtly implying that he who raises himself beyond
this level, is an "exceptional Negro."
What made Garvey what he was, can make us what we
ought to be in view of our history. In his own words, we
have a vivid description of the nature of our weaknesses,
confusion and undetermination-the very source of our per-
sonal failures as individuals, and collective failures as a race.
Listen to Garvey again:
"Where can we find in this race of ours real men.
Men of character, men of purpose, men of confidence,
men of faith, men who really know themselves?
...So few of us can understand what it takes to
make a man-the man who will never say die; the man
who will never give up; the man who will never depend
upon others to do for him what he ought to do for him-
self; the man who will not blame God, who will not
blame Nature, who will not blame Fate for his condi-
tion; but the man will go out and make conditions to
suit himself. Oh, how disgusting life becomes when on
every hand you hear people (who bear your image, who
bear your resemblance) telling you that they cannot
make it, that Fate is against them, that they cannot get
a chance. If...Negroes can only get to know them-
selves, to know that in them is a sovereign power, is an
authority that is absolute, then in the next twenty-four
hours we would have a new race, we would have a
nation... resurrected, not from the will of others to


--- PAGE 20 ---
40
	
National-Separatists
see us rise-but from our own determination to rise, ir-
respective of what the world thinks."'
This is what the real Garvey, our Marcus Garvey taught
us. And this is the only Garvey we recognize.
1. The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey,Ibid., Part
I, pp. 30-31.
Part Two
I
PATRICE LUMUMBA


--- PAGE 21 ---
I
	
~I
	
I
q
i
r.
CHAPTER 1
LUMUMBA AND THE
"INDEPENDENCE" OF THE CONGO
MANY OF US HAVE ACCEPTED THE ARYAN
version of why massive turmoil and utter chaos greeted the
proclamation of Congolese "independence." According to
this widely diffused version, it was theCongolese peoplewho
were "unprepared" for independence. To back this up, we
are told that on June 30, 1960 (date of the Congo's fictitious
independence), there were only a handful of Congolese who
had "attended a university." Since when is a sizeable number
of university degree-holders the "prerequisite" of independ-
ence? By whose criteria is independence based on the greater
or lesser number of so-called educated people in a country?
Was Haiti "unprepared" for independence in 1804? How
can one justify the notion that the Black masses of any part
of the Black world are "unprepared" toregainan indepen-
dence which wastaken awaythrough Aryan aggressions?
To say that the Congolese people were "unprepared" or
"unqualified" for the obtention of their freedom from facist
European colonial enslavement is to argue in favor of coloni-
43


--- PAGE 22 ---
44
	
National-Separatists
zation as a factor of "civilization" and "advancement." Those
African or non-African Blacks who seek to explain their
peaceful and cordial "transition" from a colonial status to
an "independent" one, with the argument that they had
been "well prepared" by their colonial masters, are accredit-
ing a white supremacist falsehood. Moreover, the facts will
show that from a statistical standpoint,the conditions o f
illiteracy prevailing in the Congo on "independence" day
were no differenterent from those o f any other African state de-
clared "independent."Where is the difference, then, from
one "independence" to another?
Why was Patrice Lumumba the only leader who was
harassed, slandered and attackedfrom the very beginning,
while all other "leaders" who have "led their country to
independence" were applauded and encouragedbyone camp
or anotherof the Aryan world? Why was the Congo's "in-
dependence" sounusual?Why did. the Congo's first Prime
Minister meet such a swift and brutal death, only six months
after the proclamation of "independence?" What caused the
entire Aryan world to come down on Lumumba's head and
that of the Congo with such a crushing and devastating
force? Why did Lumumba pose such an imminent threat to
international white supremacy? Why did he have to bear
the most terrible blows that any single Black leader has had
to withstand, and all in the space of 200 days?
Patrice Lumumba took the Aryan world by surprise on
June 30,1960.Of this there can be no doubt. Before that
time, there were only inklings of a national-separatist Lu-
mumba. A reading of hisCongo My Country, written in
1956,will no doubt be a shock to us today when compared
with his statements from June 30th onwards. His lavish
praise for the Belgian butchers and their work of "civiliza-
tion" in Africa would later turn into violent condemnations
Patrice Lumumba
	
45
of Aryan domination and oppression of the Black man. This
paradox can have only one explanation: from1956 on-
wards, Lumumba's political thinking was quickly moving
from a position of integrationist-assimilationism to one of
national-separatism.
Already in March1959 at the International Seminar
held at Ibadan University in Nigeria, Lumumba was to
state: "Our only objective is to rid Africa of colonialism and
imperialism. We have suffered long enough; today, we want
to breathe the air of liberty. This portion of the earth-the
African continent...belongs to usand we are, in fact, its
only masters."' This was no mere "anti-colonial" rhetoric.
Nor was it an outburst of a "nationalism" easily appeased
with a high ministerial post, a big-sounding title or a fat
salary provided by the international Aryan concerns which
plunder Africa's riches. This was a clear statement ofnation-
al-separatistintransigence.'
Distinct echoes of national-separatism are also to be
found inCongo My Country .In less than five years, these
echoes were to develop into an uncompromising national-
separatist posture. When, inCongo My Country, Lumumba
said that "A man without nationalistic tendencies is a man
1. La Pensee Politique de Patrice Lumumba,Edited by Jean
Van Lierde, Presence Africaine, Paris, France, 1963, p. 26 (Our
translation and italics).2. In his "Oh Black Man, Beloved Brother," a poem written in
September 1959, Patrice Lumumba set down some of the thoughts
which were beginning to reshape his entire political, cultural andracial outlook. Unfortunately, we are unable to reproduce here
this strong statement of Lumumba's belief in Black brotherhood
and of his burning hatred for white supremacist domination.(SeeLa Pensee Politique de Patrice Lumumba,Ibid., pp. 69-70).


--- PAGE 23 ---
Ijl
ii
	
l!
46
	
National-Separatists
without a soul,"3he had actually taken the first step which
on June 30, 1960, would make him shout to the Aryan
world: "From today we are no longer yourMakak!" (mon-
keys).4
On the day that the Congo was declared "independent,"
with Patrice Lumumba as its Prime Minister, the Belgian
colonialists had not planned for Lumumba to make any
speech whatsoever. What a shock it was for them when Lu-
mumba rose to his feet, seized the microphone and, in his
memorable speech of June 30th, told his people that the colo-
nization of the Congo was nothing other than thedomina-
tiono fthe whites over the Blacks.Demystifying the coloni-
zation he had himself once termed a "work of civilization,"
he now lashed out against the "humiliating slavery which
wasimposed on usby force"and reminded millions of Blacks
of "the insults (and) blows we were made to endure morn-
ing, noon and nightbecause we wereBlacks."'
Such words were never uttered by any contemporary
Black "leader" to their people, either on the day of "inde-
pendence" or on any day thereafter. This fact alone estab-
lishes a neat dividing line between Lumumba and any other
"leader" who has "come to power" through an arrangement
with the dominating Aryan powers.
From his speech of June 30th, it was clear that Lumum-
ba had assigned no small role to the Congo and its people:
"Together, my brothers, my sisters, we are going to begin
a new struggle-asublime struggle that will take our coun-
3. Patrice Lumumba,Congo My Country,Frederick A. Praeger,
London, 3rd printing, 1969, p. 173.
4. Ibid., p. xiv.
5. La Pensee Politique de Patrice Lumumba, op.cit., p. 198
(Our translation, parenthesis and italics).
Patrice Lumumba 47
try to peace, prosperity andgrandeur,"'Then, voicing the
innermost aspirations of more than a billion Black men and
women the world over, Lumumba summoned the Black
Congo to its feet: "LET US SHOW THE WORLD WHAT
THE BLACK MAN CAN DO WHEN HE WORKS IN
FREEDOM ."!7
In a single powerful statement, Patrice Lumumba had
engaged30 million Congolese on the path of Dessalines
and Christophe. He had reestablished the link with the strug-
gle of Samory, Dingane, N'Zinga and Bambaata. He had
resurrected Garvey. To Lumumba, the Congo was to become
a bastion-abastion for the Black man, a bastion for Africa,
a bastion for the Black world. The international Aryan
enterprise of murder, enslavement, oppression and exploita-
tion of the Black race was quick to realize Lumumlba's his-
torical identity. On that very day of June 30, 1960, Lumum-
ba's fate was sealed.
6.Ibid., p. 199 (Our translation and italics).7. La Pensee Politique de Patrice Lumumba,Ibid., p. 199 (Ourtranslation and caps).


--- PAGE 24 ---
48
CHAPTER 2
THE ARYAN OFFENSIVE
AGAINST LUMUMBA
Out of all those who had been assigned posts in the
Congo's government, Patrice Lumumba was one of the very
few who believed that the Congocouldtruly be independ-
ent and that power could truly pass into the hands of the
Blacks. Anyone who will inform himself thoroughly about
the circumstances leading up to, and surrounding, the ficti-
tious granting,of independence to the Congo, will see that
Lumumba acted on this premise. What is amazing is that
Lumumba even managed to survive the night following
"independence" day.
Hardly twenty-four hours had elapsed before the inter-
national Aryan press began reporting "unrest" in the Congo.
The very first week of "independence" was greeted by state-
ments of Aryan powers concerning their "preoccupation"
over the "situation" in the Congo and their "anxiety" over
the safety of European nationals there.No sooner had these
declarations been made than the Aryan press began head-
lining news of "large-scale unrest" and the outbreak of "trib-
Patrice Lumumba
	
49
al warfare." As such news became increasingly widespread,
the Belgian government announced its intention of using its
troops (which had never left the Congo) to "insure the
safety" of the white settlers who were there. One of the most
sinister anti-Black plots in the history of the Black world had
begun.
Lumumba's immediate realization was that he had no
armed forces that could oust the Belgian troops from the
two huge military installations of Kamina and Kitona, and
stop the incoming Belgian contingents of paratroopers. His
appeal to Belgium to withdraw its troops and cease the
ensuing massacre of thousands of Blacks, was in vain. His
appeal to the Aryan powers to force Belgium to cease its
aggression, was also in vain.
As the white aggressor troops ravaged entire villages,
they spread in their wake the machiavellic lie that it was
Lumumba himself who had ordered these killings! Not only
death, but confusion as well was sown by the Aryan bayo-
net. When Lumumba attempted to go personally by air-
plane to the areas where his people were being slaughtered,
the Prime Minister wasrefusedby the white pilots-the
only pilots in the Congo. In desperation, Lumumba appealed
for help from the "independent" nations of Africa. Nothing!
Turning to the so-called Afro-Asian bloc, Lumum~ba then
sought its help. Nothing!
Less than two weeks after "independence," the Congo
was being torn asunder. Tribes were pitted against each
other in fraticidal warfare. Belgian troops were sowing ter-
ror throughout every corner of that vast country. At the
instigation of its Belgian superior officers, the Congolese
pseudo-army staged a mutiny in demand for higher wages-
wages that weren't demanded before. Unscrupulous, power-
hungry hirelings of Aryan domination (such as Tshombe,


--- PAGE 25 ---
i
C
III
I
d
d
u
U
J
d
5 0
	
National-Separatists
Kalondji, Munongo, Mobutu, Kasavubu, etc.) were busy
plotting to keep the Congo firmly in the hands of its Aryan
masters.
Against this background of sudden chaos, inter-Black
throat-cutting, the massacre by Belgian soldiers of thousands
of Black men, women and children and, in addition, assassi-
nation plots from the very men who were part of his entour-
age, Lumumba realized another source of weakness: the ab-
sence of a powerful and well-structured national-separatist
movement . HisM .N.C. (Mouvement National Congolais)
which had mobilized the people for independence was def-
initelynotsuch a movement.
Who were the leading men around Lumumba? Who
were his ministers and trusted aides? The greater part of
those who surrounded him (calling themselves "Lumum
bists") were nothing but career-seeking opportunists. Almost
to the last man, these "Lumumbists" were 100676assimila-
tionists.Secretly, they were opposed to Lumumba's actions.
Their dreams of becoming fat, corrupt and complacent bu-
reaucrats under the shadow of a fictitious independence
were being shattered. In their opinion, Lumumba was "mess-
ing up their chances." The angry reaction of most was to
waste no time in placing themselves at the feet of their Ary-
an masters. Others were readily enjoying their new roles as
Cabinet Ministers. At an hour when the Congo was being
torn asunder by an unimagineable series of Aryan-fostered
intrigues, one such minister even installed a bed right in his
office, not for the purpose of working twenty-four hours a
day, but for his own personal "peace-making" activities with
the "friendly" European females who began showing up in
the Congo's capital disguised as journalists!
As one desertion after another depleted the ranks of the
"Lumumbist" leadership, Lumumba was left with only a
PatriceLumumba
	
51
handful of loyal collaborators. It had become evident that
he suffered from still another great source of weakness: the
absence of a national-separatistclass,dedicated to the ac-
complishment of a free, independent and united Africa. The
broad masses of the people were Lumumbists. None had
summoned their national-separatist aspirations as Lumumba.
yet is was a mediocre, petty bourgeois, assimilationist class
that surrounded Lumumba. To this class, independence was
not the means of liberating the Congo, the African contin-
ent, and the rest of the Black world from Aryan domination
and exploitation, but the road towards satisfying thoroughly
integrationistaims and a means of personal enrichment.
In a chain of upsetting events, one tragedy succeeded
another. The entire Black world watched impotently as low-
down, despicable creatures, headed by Moise Tshombe of
Katanga, announced on July 11th the "secession" of the co-
balt and uranium-charged Katanga Province. Both South
Africa and the white regime of "Rhodesia" (then headed by
Roy Welensky) swiftly dispatched aides to the newly pro-
claimed "republic." From the neighboring Portuguese colo-
ny of Angola came white mercenaries. Huge quantities of
weapons flowed into Katanga, coming from West Germany,
England, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy and South Africa.
The rest of the country was held in check by 10,000 Belgian
troops. Rumors were also spreading that President Kasavubu
intended to proclaim himself "king" of a secessionist Bakon-
go state.
After nearly all of his calls for help had fallen on deaf
ears, Lumumba decided to follow the advice of one renowned
African leader, who himself was being "advised" by the So-
viet Union. Consequently, Lumumba requested the so-called
United Nations to immediately dispatch troops to suppress
the Aryan-inspired secession of Katanga, oust the Belgium


--- PAGE 26 ---
5 2
	
National-Separatists
troops, and cut off the inflow of mercenaries invading the
Congo from Angola and "Rhodesia."
From all evidence, the U.N. was already prepared to
send troops into the Congo, for no sooner had Lumumba
requested the U.N.'s military aid on July 12th, than 25,000
U.N. troops were hastily dispatched to the Congo. Lumum-
ba had walked right into the trap. The first evidence of this
was reflected in the politico-racial composition of the U.N.
forces: (a) the backbone of the U.N. forces was provided
by Scandinavian, Canadian and Irish troops; (b) the African
troops were, for the most part, drawn from countries entirely
subjected to Aryan control and domination; (c) the 25,000
U .N. troops were under a predominantly white High Mili-
tary Command.
Lumumba soon realized that he had fallen into a pre-
arranged trap by calling in the U.N. On August 8th, with
the connivance and full support of the U.N., another con-
temptible character, Albert Kalondji, declared the "secession"
of the diamond-rich South Kasai Province. With the earlier
"secession" of Katanga and now that of Kasai, Lumumba
had lost control of the Congo's two richest provinces. Their
strategic importance was (and is) capital. Katanga alone,
provides the Aryan world (particularly the U.S.A.) with
most of its uranium and cobalt-the chief strategic materials
for the fabrication of atomic and thermonuclear weapons.
The U.N. troops had been in the Congo for a month,
but not a single move had been made against the Katanga
secessionist province. They had neither dislodged the Belgian
troops, nor had they taken the least initiative to cut off the
inflow of weapons and mercenaries into Katanga. Instead,
the U.N. forces were busy implementing the plan decided
upon by Dag Hammarskjold (then U.N. Secretary-General)
Patrice Lumumba
	
5 3
whereby all pro-Lumumba forces were to be totally disarm-
ed. Now that another "secession" had been declared with
the full endorsement o f the U.N., it was clear that the white
U.N. contingents and the predominantly white U.N. High
Military Command were calling the cards. The role of the
"United Nations," as merely another instrument to carry
out international Aryan policies, had become obvious.
Lumumba had had enough. On August 13-14, in a
violent declaration to the U.N. Secretary-General, he de-
manded that all white troops and officers be immediately
ousted from the U.N. forces. The anti-Lumumba maneu-
vers of the Canadian, Swedish and Irish troops had become
all too clear. Furthermore, it was confirmed that Belgian
soldiers were continuing to enter the Congo under U.N.
cover, dressed in Swedish, Canadian and Irish uniforms! But
Lumumba's urgent demand for the expulsion of all white
troops from the U.N. forces was flatly and arrogantly turn-
ed down by the U.N's then Scandinavian Secretary-General,
Dag Hammarskjold! The Congo had become, at best, no
more than a U.N. protectorate.
The only government in the Black world which had ex-
plicitly promised aid to Lumumba was Kwame Nkrumah's
Ghana. Thus at the very height of the turmoil, when noth-
ing short of a swift, well-coordinated military onslaught
against the white forces supporting secessionist Katanga
could have turned the tables, Lumumba called on Nkrumah
for immediate and direct military aid. This was just prior to
the U.N.'s entry into the picture. Nkrumah, not willing to
commit himself militarily in a confrontation with the Bel-
gian forces, dispatched instead the Chief of Defense Staff of
his army to "advise" Lumumba. Patrice Lumumba must havereceived one of his first in a series of shocks when he dis-
covered that the Chief of Defense Staff of Ghana's Army,


--- PAGE 27 ---
d
I
ft I
54
	
National-Separatists
was none other than theBritishMajor-General H. T. Alex-
ander!
The 3,000Ghanaian troops who came into the Congo,
did not come in as anindependent forceas Lumumba had re-
quested from Nkrumah. The Ghana contingent came in as
Nkrumah had decided-as an integral part of the U.N.
forces with Major-General Alexander as its military Chief,
seconded by a host of other white (British) officers. Lumum-
ba, who was to demand the withdrawal ofall white troops
and officersfrom the U.N. forces, had to face the cruel reality
that even the Ghanaian forces were commanded bywhite
officers. Lumumba's apprehension to this effect was to be
quickly confirmed.
On September 5th, less than two months after the U.N.'s
intervention, Joseph Kasavubu brought his treachery out in-
to the open. Interrupting the normal radio broadcast, he an-
nounced that, as President of the Congo, he had decided to
"dismiss" Lumumba and replace him with another Prime
Minister(i.e.,Joseph Ileo). Lumumba, he said, had brought
"chaos" to the Congo, "provoked" the wrath of "friendly"
countries, etc., etc. Lumumba, who had been totally unaware
of Kasavubu's intentions, reacted vigorously. Going directly
to the national radio station in Kinshasha (ex Leopoldville),
he exposed Kasavubu's treachery for what it was, called on
the people to rise, and confirmed that none but the people
themselves could "dismiss" him as the Prime Minister.
It was during this most critical period that Lumumba
had to rely, more than ever before, on radio facilities to
communicate with a nation whose size is equivalent to that
of France, Italy, Belgium, England, Spain, Portugal, Ger-
many, Greece, Holland, Austria and Switzerlandput to-
gether.But even this last bridge of communication with30
million Congolese would be cut off dramatically. On Septem-
Fatrice Lumumba
	
5 5
ber 11th, as Lumumba made his way to the capital's radio
station, he came face to face with the Ghanaian forces. Not
only did the Ghanaian soldiers physically prevent the Prime
Minister from entering the radio station, but they threatened
to shoot him and his guards if he tried to force his way in. It
was now clear that thewhitecommanding officers of the
Ghana forces-with Major-General Alexander as the su-
preme boss-took their orders from Aryan headquarters,
not from Accra.
In anger and desperation, Lumumba wrote immediately
to Nkrumah:
"I hasten to express to you my indignation regarding
the aggressive and hostile attitudeofGhanaian soldiers
towards me and my Government....
At 4:30p.m. today, 11th September, accompanied
by my soldiers I personally went to take over the radio
station., The Ghana troops, however,opposed my deci-
sion with hostility and went to the extent of seizing arms
from my soldiers. The Ghana troops even wanted to
shoot me and my soldiers.
To these incidents add also thehostile declaration
o f Gen. Alexander o f your army against the Govern-
ment o f the Republic. All these acts committed by your
soldiers are far from proving the friendship I wanted to
maintain with you and your people. In the circumstances,
I feel obliged to renounce the help o f your troops in
view o f the fact that they are in a state o f war against
our Republic.Instead of helping us in our difficulties,
your soldiers are openly siding with the enemy to fight
against us."1
I. Letter of Patrice Lumumba to Kwame Nkrumah; in Nkru-
mah'sChallenge o f the Congo, International Publishers, New
York, 2nd printi-ig, 1969, p. 39 (Our italics).


--- PAGE 28 ---
II
r
V
56
A second attempt by Lumumba to get into the radio
station was once again fiercely opposed by the Ghanaian
troops. Meanwhile, however, Tshombe, Kasavubu, Bolikan-
go and other such hirelings had free access to the broad-
casting facilities of neighboring countries, as well as the
various radio stations of the Congo, including that of the
capital from whence Lumumba had been barred entry.
Ghana's Ambassador in the Congo, Mr. A. Y. K. Djin,
wrote to Nkrumah:
"In a grave tone and looking very serious, Mr. Patrice
Lumumba to,']me that he had called me to protest once
more against the hostile attitude of the Ghana troops
who were guarding the Radio Station against him. He
said that he had sent a note of protest to (you)...on
the previous day's incident and was very indignant that
the same aggressiveness of the Ghanaian soldiers was
repeated that afternoon.Mr .Lumumba continuedthat
he did not see the usefulness of the Ghana troops here.
...Some of the soldiers, he added, even used abu-
sive language against him.He continued that if there
was any thorn in their flesh, it was Ghana; the latter, he
said, was responsible for their failure tocarry out the
operation to seize the Airport and the RadioStation.
What was most surprising was that the Ghanaian troops
were now working for the Opposition. He could not
understand why Mr. Bolikango could be allowed to enter
the Broadcasting House and he the Prime Minister was
refused entry.
Mr. Lumumba further said that in his first note ad-
dressed to (you)...he had decided to break diplomatic
relations with Ghana if the Government of Ghana
National-Separatists Patrice Lumumba
	
57
would not withdraw its troops from the Radio Station.
He added that his Government had now decided to give
Ghana the last chance, and that within one hour, all the
Ghana troops in the Congo should cease their activities.
..If this was not carried out, his country would be
compelled to sever diplomatic relations with Ghana....
...He regretted...that our system o f continuing
to rely on expatriates (i.e.,whites) for appointment to
senior posts had caused him considerable harm and em-
barrassment."'
Lumumba was betrayed by one after another of those in
his government; he was confronted with Belgian-inspired
opposition within the ranks of the Congolese army; he was
faced with the aggression of 10,000 Belgian soldiers; he
was up against secessionist forces in Katanga and Kasai,
backed by Belgian troops and mercenaries from South Africa,
"Rhodesia," Portugal and Spain; he was opposed by the
hostile 25,000 U.N. forces with its Swedish, Canadian and
Irish contingents. Now, on top of all this, he was also faced
with the aggressive actions of Nkrumah's 3,000 soldiers-
commanded by British officers with Major-General H. T.
Alexander at their head-who were bent ondisarmingthe
Lumumbist forces.
In another plea to Nkrumah, Patrice Lumumba entreat-
ed him to withdraw his troops from the radio station, have
them break with the U.N. forces, and place them entirely
at the service of the Lumumbist forces. On September 13th
he wrote
"I am sorry to inform you about the hostile attitude
of the Ghana troops who actually hinder the movement
2. Challenge of the Congo,Ibid.,pp. 52 & 54 (Our italicsand
parenthesis).


--- PAGE 29 ---
58
	
National-Separatists
of the Government. I would like to remind you of my
letter which I sent about that subject two days ago.
Similar actions have been renewed yesterday, and I
immediately got in touch with your Ambassador, Mr.
Djin. I asked him to order the withdrawal of Ghana
troops who were surrounding the broadcasting station.
The Government has decided to breakoffdiplomatic re-
lations with Ghana in case your Government refuses to
withdraw its troops.
The action taken by Ghana troops will only lead to
strengthening the position o f the imperialists.Ghana
troops are now being used against the legally constituted
Government and in the interest of the opposition. We
are highly disappointed. We had hoped to find effective
support from Ghana and its troops.
My Government requests that you instruct your
troops as soon as you receive this message to stop all
activities within the framework of the United Nations
and act only with the Government o f Lumumba."3
An example of the type of replies which Lumumba was
receiving from Nkrumah can be gotten from the following
letter sent by the Ghanaian President to the man he was
supposed to be effectively aiding. Nkrumah wrote:
"I entirely appreciateyourpoint of view and under-
stand the difficult position in which you find yourself
vis-a-visthe Ghana troops.... I also find myself in an
embarrassing and invidious position in respect of the
way in which my Ghana troops are being used in the
Congo.
...I entreat you to be patient (sic) and calm (sic)
Everything will end well provided neither you nor I take
3. Ibid., p. 48 (Our italics).
Patrice Lumumba
	
59
any precipitous step.If Ghana troops are to be placed
completely at your disposal, then you and your Govern-
ment must find some way to declare that in this struggle,
Ghana and the Congo are one. Only thus would it be
possible for my Ghana troops to operate legitimately
(sic) with the Congolese forces."'
Backing up this letter with yet another, Nkrumah, adopt-
ing a paternalistic tone, urged and "advised" Lumumba:
"(Y)ou cannot afford...to be harsh (sic) and un-
compromising. Do not force Kasavubu outnow....Do
not make an issue o f his treachery now, or even o f
Tshombe's treachery.The time will come to deal with
them. Let sleeping (sic) dogs lie.Leave these people
alonenow....Be `as cool as a cucumber.'...(T) he
very critical situation in the Congo demands you adopt-
ing what I call `tactical action.'...
...I must repeat with all emphasis here...that
you must not push the United Nations troops outuntil
you have consolidated your position....
Whenever in doubt consult me. Brother,we have
been in the game for some time now and we know how
to handle the imperialists and the colonalists(! ! !).The
only colonalist or imperialist that I trust is a dead one.
If you do not want to bring Congo into ruin, follow the
advice I have given. Brother, have implicit faith in me;
I shall not let you down....
...I f you fail, you have only yourself to blame and
it will be due to your unwillingness to face the facts o f
lifeorasthe Germans call it, 'realpolitik.'...Your
policy `to do away with your enemies now' will fail; you
must adopt TACTICAL ACTION." s
4. Ibid., pp. 41 & 42 (Our italics).5. Ibid., pp. 43 & 46 (Our italics).


--- PAGE 30 ---
60
	
National-Separatists
What Nkrumah describes as Lumumba's`unwillingness
to face the facts o f life,' iswhat history will forever relate as
Patrice Lumumba's unwillingness to play games with the
Aryan oppressor or capitulate to Aryan imperialistic dictums.
International Aryan power said Lumumba should capitulate;
Lumumba thought otherwise. Lumumba was thinking along
lines that had nothing to do with German'realpolitik'!
Alarmed over the grave situation wherein the Ghana
contingent-rather than defending the Congo-was busily
thwarting every step Lumumba took to redress the situation
in his favor, Ghana's Ambassador to the Congo, A. Y. K.
Djin, pleaded with Nkrumah to dismiss General Alexander
as well as the other white officers of the Ghanaian conting-
ent. He immediately wrote to Nkrumah:
"If you would allow me, Osagyefo, I would say that
this is the culminating point o f Gen Alexander's in-
trigue and subversive action which I have time and again
pointed outand which was also confirmed by all the
delegations which had paid a visit to the Congo. If you
remember all that I told you during my last consultations
with you, you will no doubt agree that although we were
responsible for making possible the independence of the
Congo,since the Country became free we have been a
liability to Lumumba and the Congolese.Without doubt,
it was due to Gen Alexander's actions that Mr. Lumum-
ba had to give notice to the United Nations to quit from
the Congo.
At the moment the situation has so much deteriorat-
ed that if you still have interest in your main aim,I sug-
gest that you (i) dismiss Gen Alexander, (ii) withdraw
all white soldiers from the Congo, (iii) stop supporting
the idea o f disarming the Congolese Army, and (iv)
Patrice Lumumba 61
give strong support to the 'status quo' as against the il-
legal government put up by UNO."e
Ambassador Djin's urgent call for the immediate dis-
missal of General Alexander and the other white officers
serving in the Ghanaian forces, fell on deaf ears. Nkrumah
was no more willing to dismiss his white officers than he
was to place his troops at Lumumba's disposal. Lumumba's
solitude was complete-"friends" and foes alike were against
him. He was encircled by a thousand and one forces which
would find satisfaction in nothing but,his blood. His demand
that all of the U.N. forces, without exception, pack up and
leave the Congo, was greeted with the satisfied smiles of the
Aryan International. It was theU.N.-i.e.,Aryan powers-
which were in full control of the Congo. The encirclement
of Patrice Lumumba was complete.'
Aid for the anti-Lumumba forces in arms, men, money
and other facilities, was provided by the chief Aryan powers
6. Ibid., p. 41 (Our italics).
7. What could be said about the attitude of those governments
which werevocallyin favor of Lumumba and had also sent forces
to the Congo under U.N. command(e.g.,Mali, Guinea, Moroccoand theU.A.R.) ?Nothing could better explain their negative
attitude than the rather subservient letter Nkrumah sent to thethen U.N. American representative, Adlai Stevenson, after Lu-
rnumba's murder:
"I am sure you know that although I have consistently backed
Lumumba politically,my military contingent serving under
United Nations has throughout adopted a completely neutral at-
titude, obeying implicitly the United Nations Command in Leo-poldville.I thinkI can say the same for the contingents drawn
from Morocco and Mali. Nor have I had any information that
leads me to believe that the United Arab Republic and Guinean
contingents as a whole acted in any way favourably to the Lu-mumba Government,although I would concede that the actions ofcertainindividualswere suspect(sic)."(Nkrumah'sChallengeof the Congo,Ibid., p. 150, our italics).


--- PAGE 31 ---
62 National-Separatists
through intermediaries. Britain-which already had its di-
rect agent working in the Congo in the person of Major-
General Alexander and the British officers with him-acted
through South Africa and "Rhodesia," as well as through
its U.N. Irish contingent; France acted through the lackey
priest, Fulbert Youlou of Congo-Brazzaville; Spain and Por-
tugal through Angola; Italy and West Germany through
their commercial firms installed in the Congo; Belgium, di-
rectly from its military bases of Kamina and Kitona and
through Kalondji and Tshombe. The United Nations' forces
-with its Scandinavian High Military Command and Scan-
dinavian U.N. Secretary-General-were the direct expression
of American imperialist intervention. All Aryan nations
were, in one way or another, involved in the encirclement of
Lumumba.
On the international level, a vicious struggle was going
on between the Soviet Union and the U.S.A. Both of these
Aryan powers had a keen eye on the uranium and cobalt of
the Congo, not to mention its other minerals. The Congo
thus became the first subject of dispute between the two ma-
jor Aryan imperialisms overa new partition of the world
into zones of influence.
Caught in the cross fire of the most vicious and cynical
of international Aryan intrigues; trapped between Aryan
capitalist powers on the one hand, and the powers of the
Communist bloc on the other; unable to find the kind of aid
he desperately needed from a weak and divided Black world;
surrounded by men whose political firmness was far beneath
that demanded by the gravity of the situation; faced with
ceaseless plots of decrepit bootlickers and hirelings of white
domination, Lumumba stood alone, a marked man, cheered
and loved by a huge mass of disorganized, disarmed, divided
and helpless Black people.
Patrice Lumumba 63
The stage was set for the final act. It came on September
14, 1960when Joseph Mobutu,with the full support o f the
U.N. forces,staged his"coup d'etat."Lumumba had been
Prime Minister of the Congofor less than three months
when he was placed under house arrest by Mobutu and his
goons. Having no intention of sitting in his home to await
the day and hour of his execution, Lumumba managed to
escape on November 27th. He made a resolute dash for Kis-
angani (ex Stanleyville), where he intended to set up a Pro-
visional Revolutionary Government and wage an armed
struggle to achieve real power. In three months Lumumba
had drawn all of the logical conclusions and learned all of
the necessary lessons. To Lumumba it was now clearer than
ever before that an independence which had been taken
away by Aryan wars of aggression, could only be regained
by Black wars of liberation. The route to Kisangani was the
trail toRevolution!
But Lumumba was never to reach Kisangani. Mobutu's
henchmen, with the tactical aid of Aryan powers, caught up
with Lumumba and his fellow escapees on the first of De-
cember. Lumumba now had to face the fate decided upon by
the so-called Great (Aryan) Powers. Patrice Lumumba's
martyrdom had begun.
Unmercifully beaten and kicked, subjected to the atro-
cious torture and humilation reserved for men and women
of the Black race, not once did Patrice Lumumba ask for
mercy. Awaiting his imminent death in the prison of Camp
Hardy, Lumumba wrote his last letter. Addressed to his wife,
Pauline, this letter was to become his political testament:
"...All through my struggle for the independence of
my country, I have never doubted for a single instant the
final triumph of the sacred cause to which my compan-
ions and I have devoted all our lives....


--- PAGE 32 ---
64
	
National-Separatists
.. .Dead or alive, free or in prison. ..it is not I
myself who count. It is the Congo, it is our poor people
for whom independence has been transformed into a
cage.. ..I know and feel in my heart that sooner or
later my people will rid themselves of all their enemies,
both internal and external, and that they will rise as one
man to say No to the degradation and shame of colonial-
ism, and regain their dignity in the clear light of the sun.
.. . (W) ithout dignity there is no liberty, without
justice there is no dignity, and without independence
there are no free men.
Neither brutality, nor cruelty nor torture will ever
bring me to ask for mercy, for I prefer to die with my
head unbowed, my faith unshakeable and with profound
trust in the destiny of my country, rather than live under
subjection and disregarding sacred principles. History
will one day have its say, but it will not be the history
that is taught in Brussels, Paris, Washington or in the
United Nations....Africa will write her own history,
and ...it will be a glorious and dignified history."'
On January . 17,1961, after enduring a month and a
half of indescribable tortures, Patrice Lumumba, the hero,
was slaughtered. With him were massacred his loyal comp-
anions, Joseph Okito and Maurice M'Polo.
0. Congo My Country,op.cit., pp. xxiii-xxiv.
CHAPTER 3
THE ESSENCE
OF LUMUMBISM
Why was Lumumba the only leader of the African
continent to have met the fate he did? Why wasn't the "in-
dependence" of the Congo as "orderly" as that of all other
Black colonies in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and South
America which have been granted an "independent" status
to date? Why was the "independence" of the Congo saluted
with bayonets, invasions and massive disorder, whereas that
of all other Black colonies in the world was greeted with the
sympathetic accolades of the Aryan imperialist powers?
The above questions can have only one answer.Lumum-
ba was the only national-separatist leader to have emerged
at the head o f a Black nation since the days o f Jean-Jacques
Dessalines and Henry Christophe of Haiti.The Congo wasn't
independent on June 30, 1960. It was Lumumba who was
independent.
The philosophers of capitulation and adepts to ideolo-
gies alien to the Black world, constantly refer to Lumumba
as a man dominated by "naivety." They say he went "too
65


--- PAGE 33 ---
66
	
National-Separatists
fast,"was"reckless,""irresponsible,"andthathe lacked
"political tact." In short, he is accused of not having played
games with the Aryan powers of oppression. Lumumba's
greatness is that he refused from the very start to deceive his
people and become part of that gang of "dignified," "respect-
able" and "responsible" Heads of State to whom "independ-
ence" was granted. Through Lumumba's actions, more than
those of any other leader, Blacks throughout the world-
particularly in Africa-were made to understand the whole
farce known as "independence."
As was the case with Garvey, Patrice Lumumba was un-
able to accomplish the high task he had set before himself:
the establishment in the Congo o f a Black economic, politi-
cal, cultural, industrial, scientific and military bastion for the
liberation o f Africa and the rest o f the Black world.It was
to this end that hemobilizedthe national-separatist aspira-
tions of the Black masses in the Congo. It was towards the
accomplishment of this goal that he sacrificed himself. Lu-
mumba neither failed his people, his nation, his race, nor
did he fail his mission.
Lumumba had the type ofcountrywhich Garvey had so
desperately lacked. The Congo was-and is!-the ideal
strategic zone where, in a relatively short time, a Black rev-
olutionary bastion could be erected. Lumumba was a Black
internationalist. Lumumba had the people. Lumumba was a
national-separatist who lackeda national-separatistarmy,
movement and class to back his program. Hisprogramwas
national-separatist in nature, character and content. But
again, for reasons beyond his reach, Patrice Lumumba was
unable to rely on anideologypredicated along national-sepa-
ratist lines. His grandeur was to have shown us what a Black
man-even when alone-can do, once he is free from the
stiffling, crippling and binding shackles of assimilationism•
Part Three
MALCOLM X


--- PAGE 34 ---
mi
U
CHAPTER 1
MALCOLM X AND ISLAM
IS IT TRUE, AS SOME SAY, THAT THERE ARE
three Malcolm X's:i.e., Malcolmbeforethe Nation of Islam,
Malcolminthe Nation of Islam, and Malcolmafterthe
Nation of Islam? No. There were only two. The first was a
racially unconscious Malcolm X dominated by integration-
ist-assimilationism. The second was a racially conscious Mal-
colm X, the exponent of national-separatism.
The birth of a racially conscious Malcolm X came about
while he was in prison from 1946 to 1952. The decisive
factor that would forever lead Malcolm X away from inte-
grationism to national-separatism, was directly linked to the
teachings of a national-separatist movement, presently spread
throughout the United States. As implied by its name, the
Nation of Islam is an organization of a religious character,
founded and headed by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.
Malcolm X was to become an active spokesman and organiz-
er for this all-Black religious movement immediately follow-
ing his release from prison in 1952. His rupture with the
69


--- PAGE 35 ---
Ilir~i iui
7 0 National-Separatists
Nation of Islam in March 1964, came after more than ten
years of militancy within its ranks.
The dispute which led to this rupture was a dispute be-
tween national-separatists. It was not a dispute between a
Malcolm X who was either "reverting" to right-wing inte-
grationism or on his way to a marxist "conversion," and a
Nation of Islam which had become "reactionary." Malcolm
X's dissension with the Nation of Islam was twofold. First,
he was no longer satisfied with the limitations imposed by the
Nation of Islam in terms ofnon-religious political action.
Secondly, he was dissatisfied with theabsence o f an ideology
within the Nation of Islam-a void filled by religious rites,
observance and ordinances.
On the first point, Malcolm's contention that the Nation
of Islam was progressively isolating itself from the growing
politicalmilitancy of 30 million Blacks in the United States
was, as time proved, 100% correct. Malcolm X was also
100% correct in appreciating the fact that religion is no
substitute forideology.And this is the actual key to a com-
prehension of Malcolm X-the emphasis he placed on
ideology.
The fact remains that Malcolm X must have departed
from the Nation of Islam with a heavy heart. We have yet
to see in the United States a national-separatist organization
or movement other than the Nation of Islam, which places
greater emphasis on economic self-determination as an in-
dispensable prerequisite of the Black man's emancipation.
When Malcolm X left this national-separatist body, he left
an organization the likes of which was nowhere to be found.
Malcolm X's departure from the ranks of the Nation
of Islam did not mean he was leaving the ranks of national-
separatism. It was a step forward in search ofa national-
separatist ideology.It was in pursuit of this goal that Mal-
Malcolm X 71
colm X did what he did, said what he said, contacted the
people he contacted, read the books he read, and traveled to
the countries he did after his break with the Nation of Islam.
Malcolm X, whether fully conscious of it or not, was in
search of the very element, the absence of which has greatly
influenced the setbacks, defeats and political weaknesses of
the Black world for many a century. He was in search of an
ideology,anational-separatist ideology!
In the pursuit of this ideology, Malcolm X was ready to
examine anything and scrutinize everything. His travels
throughout the Middle East, Africa and Europe (the first
trip abroad dating from April 1964) were undertaken with
this in mind. Malcolm X held conversations with many of-
ficial and non-official people. He discussed with several
Heads of State. He visited a number of nations in Africa,
from those headed by Black stooges like Tubman of Liberia
and Kenyatta of Kenya, to those headed by the marxist-
oriented Sekou Toure of Guinea and Kwame Nkrumah of
Ghana. He also visited various countries in the Middle East,
headed by such Arab satraps as King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.
And he visited Arab-dominated North Africa, populated
chiefly by Blacks who consider themselves Arabs.
In his travels abroad, Malcolm X was confronted with
a great many paradoxes of a political, economic and ideo-
logical nature. Is it possible that during his trips outside of
the United States, Malcolm X was misled by the fictitious
picture of "colorless" Islamic "brotherhood," waved con-
stantly before his eyes by white Arabs who obtain thousands
of Black slaves from Africa every year? Is it possible that
Malcolm X was impressed by the marxian verbiage of so-
called anti-imperialist "leaders" whose ideology is composed
of two doses of "positive neutralism" and five doses of sheer,
unscrupulous opportunism? Is it possible that Malcolm's


--- PAGE 36 ---
72
	
National-Separatists
assurance in the type of world outlook he possessed was
somewhat shaken by the carnival of smiling, "friendly"
white faces that greeted him on his swift travels throughout
the Middle East, Europe and Africa? Is it possible that once
abroad, Malcolm X was unable to recognize those character-
istics of Black oppression which did not necessarily resemble
those he had learned to recognize by experience in the con-
text of theUnited States o f America?
All of this is possible. Malcolm X was neither a prophet
nor a god. Like all of us, he was subject to errors, mistakes
and wrong appreciations of situations that he was not ac-
quainted with. Malcolm X was not, and could not have been,
above mistakes. Neither could he have been in possession
of all the facts concerning the various situations he confront-
ed without a prior detailed study of these.
It is indeed possible that, in face of Mecca, Malcolm X
mistook the momentary, euphoric fervor unchained by reli-
gious belief, fora permanentstate of amity among peoples
of all colors. The scenes of "brotherhood" in Mecca have
impressedmanya Black person before and after Malcolm X.
So have the scenes in Vatican City for that matter, where
hundreds of thousands of Black, white and yellow Christians
-apparently unmindful of race-are seen together, sub-
merged in a common religious euphoria. Even at the wailing
wall of Israel, faithfuls of all colors gather, proclaiming
their momentary "class-less," "color-less" and"nation-less"
belief inoneGod.
In face of Mecca, Malcolm X wouldn't have been the
first Black person who has allowed his own personal relig-
ious convictions to overshadowhisglobal political, racial,
economic and social preoccupations. Yet, when one knows
about Malcolm X's great personal integrity and unquestion-
able loyalty towards the race he passionately loved, one
Malcolm X 73
could conceive of such a thing happening only against a
background of a total lack of information concerning the
position-both past and present-of Black populations in
predominantly Arab, or Arab-dominated countries.
Unfortunately, as so many of us today, Malcolm X was
not informed about the monstrous plight of millions of
Black men, women and children, subjected to the most de-
grading forms of oppression in the various Arab-dominated
portions of the Middle East and North Africa. Had Malcolm
X inquired from his host, King Faisal of Arabia, about the
estimatedhalf-a-million slavesheld in his kingdom, he would
have undoubtedly seen another facet of the "colorless
brotherhood" in Mecca.
Since most of us continue to be ignorant of the real facts
concerning the status of Blacks in the so-called Arab world,
the following newspaper excerpts will serve to detail some
of the cruder aspects of their plight:
"When Prince Faisal of Arabia (who is now a King)
came to power in November 1962, his governmentesti-
mated the number of slaves in that country to be 250,-
000 (sic!)....
Throughout the last ten years, the annual number of
pilgrims entering Saudi Arabia to visit Mecca has ex-
ceeded by 10-20,000 the number of those who leave.
Many, of course, come with the intention of staying.
Others die while there, or else escape the notice ofoffi-
cials, Nevertheless, 10,000 is still anumber unaccounted
for,l)'
"A limited discussion on the suppression of slavery
was called to an end on Tuesday by the ECOSOC (Eco-
1•Le Monde Diplomatique, April 7, 1968 (Ourtranslation anditalics).


--- PAGE 37 ---
11
11
u
:
	
IN
IAN
n
74 National-Separatists
nomic and Social Council of the United Nations)....
The debates were limited in scope because of the
absence of documents in any but the English language
and also due to the fact that, of the 114 countries to
which a questionnaire.. .was addressed, only 51 saw
fit to answer. .. .
The two countries which were the subject of the
gravest accusations-Saudi Arabia and Yemen-neither
replied to the inquiry, nor did they take part in the de-
bates. Mr. Awad charged that the slaves bought and
sold at the so-called `Dakkat al Abeed;' or slave market
of Mecca, are often subjected to torture. He also de-
scribed how the regular traffic from Africa to Arabia is
carried on.
Under the pretext of taking them on the pilgrimage
to Mecca, certain individuals recruit domestics from West
Africa with the promise of a safe return to their country
and of being well cared for while away. The latter are
generally takenacross the Saharathrough Niger, Chad
and Sudan. Having arrived at some distant point along
the coast, they are made to cross the Red Sea in small
boats and are then taken to Hedjaz wheretheyare sold
as slaves....
At the brief debate on Thursday it was also pointed
out that the United Nations should be more informed
on this matter.The fact is, that certain governments re-
f use not only to recognize the existence o f slavery in their
country,but also to provide information requested as to
the type of efforts they are undertaking to suppress it.
Moreover, it would be f oolhardly to take for granted the
accuracy of the reports provided by governments,let
alone depend exclusively on these."2
2. Le Monde,June 24, 1965 (Our translation and italics).
Malcolm X
	
75
"NEW STEPS TOWARDS THE
ABOLITION OF SLAVERY IN ALGERIA
A certain number of slaves have recently been freed
in Tamanrasset, reports one of our correspondents. As
is to be expected, this was not an easy task. Several
slaves were put to death.... One old slave, at the risk
of his life, was courageous enough to stand up. Expelled
from the Hoggar region, he made his way to Algiers,
where he obtained satisfaction and was ordered back to
Tamanrasset....
More than a year ago, a slave revolt broke out and
raged from Tamanrasset to Tinduf, but was quickly
stifled by the masters.... More jittery than in 'previous
years, the slave masters are responding with violence. It
is a fact that several slaves have been killed...
In 1963, Jacques Pucheu revealed the existence of
two thousand slaves in this region (Tamanrasset)
alone.'3
Malcolm X possessed none of this information. An ab-
solute lack of information, coupled to religious fervor, could
3.Liberte,July 1, 1965, France (Our translation and italics).
For further information concerning the existence of slavery in
Arab-dominated North Africa and the Middle East, and of the
huge mass of West African slaves taken each year to Middle
Eastern countries, see: Robin Maugham,The Slaves of Timbuktu,
Longmans, Green & Co., Inc., New York, 1961; "La Question de
l'Esclavage" (published by theAction pour l'Abolition de l'Es-
clavage, 14rue de Crussol, Paris 11, France);publications of the
Anti-Slavery Society,Denison House, 296 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
London S. W. 1. England; "Esclaves et Negriers 1967" and "1'Es-
clavage n'est pas mort,"Lectures Pour Tous,France, July 1963
and September 1971. Also see:Slavery-Report of the Special
Rapporteur on Slavery appointed under Council Resolution 960
(XXXVI),No. E/4056, 27 May 1965, United Nations Economic
and Social Council (39th Session; Item 29 of the provisionalagenda).


--- PAGE 38 ---
76
	
National-Separatists
very well have acted to obscure Malcolm X'spersonal assess-
mentof what he observed in Mecca. In view of this, Mal-
colm X (who was generallyon his guard vis-a-visall whites
in theU.S.A.)could have offhandedly mistakenthepersonal
attention paid him by white ArabMuslimmonarchs, Heads
of State and diplomats for an expression of "colorless brother-
hood." There is a lesson to be drawn from this. Chiefly,
that ourpersonal religious convictions(or absence of them)
should play no role whatsoever in determining the political
orientation ofa struggle such as ours, which is purely politi-
cal, socio-economic and raical.4
4. Those who go around criticizing Christianity as a "white
man's religion," should remember that Islam isalsoa "white
man's religion" and that Judaism isequallya "white man's reli-
gion." They should also remember that Blacks have no other
religion which can truly be calledtheir own,except for a "reli-
gion" of common suffering and oppression at the hands of the
same master, and a common histor.cal fate.
CHAPTER 2
MALCOLM X AND AFRICA
Malcolm X's trips to Africa and the Middle East un-
doubtedly gave him a great deal of knowledge about certain
prevailing conditions in these different areas, but they cer-
tainly didnotprovide him with any of the elements he was
looking for. The only national-separatist leader who had ap-
peared on the African continent-Patrice Lumumba-had
been disposed of three years before Malcolm X's arrival.
The Black leaders Malcolm X encountered in his travels
abroad were men who had never broken out of the shackles
of assimilationism-men such as Nkrumah and Sdkou Tourd,
who had accepted marxism as a means of filling their own
ideological void. These were the same men who were unable
to come to Lumumba's aid ideologically or otherwise. It is
clear that they could be of no help to a national-separatist
like Malcolm X who was, precisely, in search ofanational-
separatist ideology.
Malcolm X's contact with pro-marxist African "leaders,"
such as Nkrumah, was undoubtedly instrumental in bring-
ing about the type of uncertainty he manifested on certain
77


--- PAGE 39 ---
78 National-Separatists
vital questions during and after his trips abroad. The most
important of these being. (a) the relationship between the
Black man's worldwide struggle for emancipation and the
marxist "anti-imperialist" struggle ofwhites'in such places
as the Arab Middle East, Arab-dominated North Africa, and
Central and South America (so-calledLatinAmerica) and,
(b) the very character of the Black man's struggle itself.
This last item can be resumed in the question: Is the strug-
gle of the Black mana racialstruggle or aclassstruggle?
Both Nkrumah and the marxian colony he harbored in
Ghana tried impressing upon Malcolm X that it was "in-
correct" to place the struggle of Black people on a racial
level. Malcolm was told that the struggle wasnotracial, but
a "classstruggle." And to further drive home the "incorrect-
ness" of hisracially-orientedoutlook, Malcolm was constant-
ly being shown those "friendly" whites who were "helping
to build socialism" in Ghana. This was supposedly conclu-
sive "proof" that Aryans could be "devoted" to the Black
man's struggle for emancipation.
As most of us have believed until recently, Malcolm X
also believed that Nkrumah's Ghana-with its large, cor-
rupt bureaucracy of sycophants, embezzlers and political
clowns-was really anindependentBlack state, devoted to
the task of African and worldwide Black emancipation. This
belief was a highly determining factor in the shaping of
more than one opinion he expressed upon his return to the
United States.
As Malcolm X traveled throughout Africa, he found
whites in key positions everywhere-in states whose govern-
ments had proclaimed themselves "revolutionary" and "anti-
imperialist," as in those whose submission to Aryan domi-
nation went unmasked. In Ghana, for example, Malcolm X
was able to see that the French version ofThe Spark,the
Malcolm X 79
thecretical organ of Nkrumah's Convention People's Party,
was under the influence of a French marxist neophyte. He
also saw that other similar white non-entities-whose in-
sidicus racism was masked by a strange "devotion" to Nkru-
mah-held important posts of various kinds. Some were
even the trusted political advisors to President Nkrumah
himself. Nkrumah's fascination with white advisors is now
nctcrious. But at the time of Malcolm's visit to Ghana, he
could have known none of this. Nor could he have known
the story of British Major Alexander, another of Nkrumah's
advisors, in relation to the events in the Congo which led to
the slaughter of Patrice Lumumba.'
The power wielded by the colony of "friendly" Ayans
imported by Nkrumah into Ghana, is best illustrated by a
highly significant incident that occurred after Malcolm X's
first trip to Ghana in May 1964. The incident we are refer-
ring to involved one, H. M. Basner,awhiteSouth African
marxist who was Nkrumah's top-notch political advisor. No
sooner had Malcolm X left Ghana for other African coun-
tries than a long article (written by the South African, Bas-
net) was to appear in the official, government-controlled
1. Heading the list of the colony of white Nkrumists who held
sway during the epoch of the Osagyefo, were three interesting
characters, two of whom were Germans and the other a South Af-
rican Aryan. The German woman, Hanna Reitsch, head of Nkru-mah's G:idder's School, attached to the insignificant Ghana Air
Force, had occupied the same post in Germany during the ThirdReich. The German doctor, Horst Schumann, for whom the West
German Government had issued a warrant for "war crimes" dur-
siian, AfterHitler
h was toppledthis character wassextradit d
to West Germany where he seems to have been imprisoned for his
alleged participation in the elimination of "inferior" peoples.The third and perhaps the more colorful of all, was the white
South African, H. M. Basner, who during Nkrumah's period was
one of the most influential people in Ghana, serving as the Presi-
d°nt's top-notch advisor for political and ideological matters.


--- PAGE 40 ---
u
11
u
80
	
National-Separatists
newspaper,The Ghanaian Times(May 19, 1964), viciously
attacking Malcolm X both personally and politically. Mal-
colm X was accused of "ignorance" concerning the "eco-
nomic motivations and the class function of all racial oppres-
sion." Until Malcolm X admits these factors, argued Mr.
Basner quite arrogantly,"his politics can only be of service
to the American imperialists...."Making an insidious com-
parison between Malcolm X and the fascist, George Wallace
(Governor of Alabama), Basner went on to say that "noth-
ing suits the capitalists more than that Governor Wallace
and Malcolm X should be at each other's throats because one
is white and the other black	 2
This was not all. A week after Basner's article had ap-
peared-touching off a real storm of indignation from
Ghana's students and members of the Afro-American com-
munity residing in Ghana-Mr. Basner was at it again.
Using Nkrumah, Nelson Mandela and Jomo Kenyatta as
examples of "Africans who have slept in white men's prisons,
who have felt the lash of white supremacy over their contin-
ent and over their people; and who, in those very prisons,
reached an understanding that it is the lust for profit and
not racial differenceswhich makes the white man behavein
colonial Africaas he does," Basner urged Malcolm X to fol-
low fhcir example of collaboration with the "revolutionary"
Aryans.'
The Black American scholar, Leslie Alexander Lacy,
who was residing in Ghana at that time, gives us a glimpse
of the reaction to Basner's attack against Malcolm X.
2. See: Leslie Alexander Lacy, "African Responses to Malcolm
X," Black Fire,Edited by Leroi Jones and Larry Neal, William
Morrow & Co., New York, 1968, pp. 32-38 (Our italics).
3. Ibid. (Our italics)
Malcolm X 81
"The appearance of Basner's article stirred up a lot of
controversy and caught the Afro-American community
by surprise. Although we knew how Basner felt privately
about Malcolm's views, Basner's views had appeared in a
black, revolutionary, government-controlled newspaper.
And they didn't like it. No criticism, however objective,
could have appeared attacking Nkrumah-so why
should one appear attacking their political leader? Equal-
ly outraged about the appearance of the article were the
university students, who already hated Basner...and
now had another reason to want him out of what they
considered a confused political culture.
The day the article appeared, I was having lunch
with a friend of mine in Accra. Another Afro-American
whom we both knew came over to the table where we
were sitting....Finally, he said, 'Leslie, this political
situation in this country is too much.... Now, dig it-
when the brother leaves, a white man is allowed to cor-
rect his position in a government newspaper. What do
you think about that?"4
That an incident of this nature could occur, shows the
type of situation which was prevailing in Ghana under
Nkrumah. It shows how much power was wielded by Nkru-
mah's top Aryan advisors-such as the Afrikaaner, Basner,
and cohorts. To talk of a "counter-revolution," in the form
of the C.I.A. promotedcoupd'etat,as having toppled Nkru-
4. Ibid., p. 34. For another account of this incident, see also
Leslie Alexander's article, "Malcolm X in Ghana,"Malcolm X
The Man and His Times,Edited by John Henrik Clarke, MacMil-1an Co., New York, 1969.


--- PAGE 41 ---
82
	
National-Separatists
mah, is pure rhetorical nonsense. There had never been a
revolutionin Ghana in the first place.'
5. Ironically enough, the same Nkrumah who tried to inculcate
"racelessness" into Malcolm X, was to write (quite unconvincing-
ly!) from Guinea, his present country of exile: "In the modern
world, the race strugglehas become pzrtof the class struggle.
In other words, wherever there is a raceproblem(sic) it has be-
come linked with the class struggle." (Kwame Nkrumah,Class
Struggle in Africa,PANAF Books, Ltd., London, 1970, p. 27,
(Our italics).
By this time, however, Malcolm X-who had been teaching
us all the while that our exploitation and oppression had botha
class anda predominantlyracial character-had already been
dead and buried for five years!!!
CHAPTER 3
MALCOLM X
AND "THIRD-WORLDISM"
What imprint did all of his contacts with the world
outside of the United States have on Malcolm X's political
appreciation of reality as he had seen it prior to his experi-
ences in Middle Eastern countries, Europe and Africa?
From certainopinionsexpressed by Malcolm X during
and after his trips abroad, it is apparent that his ownper-
sonalassessment of certain issues did not correspond to the
actual reality. As remarked earlier, this was partially due to
either a lack of information or misinformation about certain
situations. The fact that Malcolm X was a ferventMuslim,
may have also favorably prepared the terrain for his brief
encounters with Semitic whites whose "revolutionary" revin-
dications went hand in hand with a proclamation ofIslamic
faith. It is not difficult to transform a religious bias into a
politicalone.
However,an unconsciousreligious bias is not enough to
explain certainopinionswhich Malcolm X expressed after
his trips abroad. There is no doubt that his Ghana experience
83


--- PAGE 42 ---
84
	
National-Separatists
and his exposure to a constant barrage of marxist propagan-
da-challenging over and over again his national-separatist
outlook-are factors which must also be taken into account.
The result of all this is that Malcolm X became somewhat
unsure about the relationship between the Black man's
struggle and that ofwhiteleft-wing "anti-imperialist" move-
ments both in Arab lands and in South America. This is re-
flected in the following statement he made in January 1965,
concerning his encounter and discussions with a white Arab
diplomat:
"(W) hen I was in Africa in May, in Ghana, I was
speaking with the Algerian ambassador who is extremely
militant and is a revolutionary in the true sense of the
word (and has his credentials as such for having carried
on a successful revolution against oppression in his
country). When I told him that my political, social and
economic philosophy was black nationalism, he asked
me very frankly, well, where did that leave him? Be-
cause he was white...he was Algerian, and to all ap-
pearances he was a white man. And he said if I define
my objective as the victory of black nationalism, where
does that leave him?...So he showed me where I was
alienating people who were true revolutionaries....
So, I had to do a lot of thinking and reappraising
of my definition of black nationalism."'
Yet we ask: How could an Arab reproach Malcolm X
for describing himself as a "Black nationalist" when this
Arab's very "credentials as a revolutionary" were establish-
ed under the banner of"Arabnationalism" and the fight for
"Pan-Arabism"Aren't terms such as "Arab nationalism,"
1.Malcolm X Speaks, Merit Publishers, New York, 1965, P-
228.
M alcolm X 85
"Arab world" and "Pan-Arabism," also exclusive? Or was
Malcolm X also expected to proclaim himself an Arab?
Malcolm X's conversation with this white Arab "revolu-
tionary" diplomat would have certainly taken another di-
rection had the latter been questioned about the socio-eco-
nomic status of Algeria's sizeable Black population--of
whichan estimated 3-5000 are still held as slaves in the
southern region o f that country.What ways and means did
this "revolutionary"Pan-Arabistand his "socialist" govern-
ment envision towards the immediate and total suppression
of the enslavement of Blacks?. What measures were being
taken by his government towards the prompt eradication of
the fierce racism rampant in fellow Arab nations, including
his own? These questions would have undoubtedly revealed a
great deal more about this white Arab "revolutionary" than
met the eye!
The ambivalent reaction of Malcolm X toa whiteArab
"revolutionary" is characteristic of a great many of our own
reactions today vis-a-vis the "anti-imperialist" struggle of
whites in the Middle East, as well as those in Central and
South America and the Caribbean (so-called Latin Ameri-
cans). This ambivalence is a reaction to a concept which has
become known as the "Third World."
In essence, the concept of a "Third World" is based on
the affirmation thatallthe inhabitants of the underdeveloped
areas of the world are linked by an "objective solidarity"
which cuts across all national, cultural, class and color lines.
The said "solidarity" is determined by a common feature of
socio-economic underdevelopment and exploitation by the
same industrial powers. The Martinican, Frantz Fanon-
whose active political life was devoted to fighting for the
independence of the Arabs of Algeria-was chiefly respon-
sible for the formulation of this concept. Is "Third-World-


--- PAGE 43 ---
86
	
National-Separatists
ism"a scientificconcept? Is it a valid concept? Is it a con-
cept that will advance and enlighten our struggle, or will it
retard and sidetrack the universal struggle of the Black man?
The first observation to be made concerning the concept
of "Third World" solidarity, is that the very basis of this
"solidarity" is neither stable nor permanent. For instance, if
country "A" in Africa is linked by a bond of "solidarity"
with country "B" in South America because both are under-
developed and exploited by the same industrial powers, what
becomes of this "objective solidarity" when country "B" be-
comes industrialized and country "A" remains in the same
underdeveloped status? For example, take Japan, Argentina,
Australia, the Soviet Union and Chile, just to mention a few.
Fifty years ago, all of these countries would have been class-
ed as underdeveloped. In the space of one generation, these
same countries have emerged into industrial societies. In the
case of Japan and the Soviet Union, we face two of the
greatest industrial powers in the world today. Both are pres-
ently committed to the exploitation of the underdeveloped
countries to which they were once linked by an "objective
solidarity" based on underdevelopment.
Another example is the case of Israel. Here is a country
which, in the space of 25 years, has gone from the status of
a conglomerate of raggedy Jewish fugitives to the position
of the most industrialized and technologically-developed state
in the Middle East. The Israelis, considered an "oppressed"
people, linked by an "objective solidarity" with all other
oppressed peoples, are just as committed to the plunder of
the Blacks of Africa as any other Aryan power. Is Israel
(solidly allied with South Africa and the Aryan fascist gang
in "Rhodesia," and whose entire economy is based on the
exporting of polished diamonds it obtains fraudulously from
Africa) a member of the "Third World?" If not, areJews
Malcolm X 87
as such, who fancy themselves as being an "oppressed
people," part of the "Third World?"
And how about the Arab whites? Will they continue
being part of the "Third World" once they achieve within
another decade the industrial and technological level of
-srael, Australia, South Africa, Argentina and Canada? Will
these highly developedwhiteArab nations be in a situation
of "objective solidarity" with the huge mass of Black
Africans who, for some strange reason will remain as always
holding the bag of hunger, misery, underdevelopment and
illiteracy? "Third World" solidarity is thus at besta shifty
"objective solidarity"-a solidarity whereby the "ally" of to-
day becomes the fierce enemy and exploiter of tomorrow!
Such is the basis of a solidarity which ignores the complex
and decisive influence of class, cultural and racial factors in
the historical development of societies.
The affirmation inherent to the "Third World" concept,
that the "objective solidarity" linking the inhabitants of un-
derdeveloped areas cuts across all lines-whether cultural,
national, racial or social-needs to be analyzed in detail.
How does one explain the situation ofracially heterogeneous
countries within the framework of a Third Worldist "color-
less" and "classless" solidarity?
For example, a country like Brazil is classed among the
underdeveloped nations. Brazil, as it now stands, is, there-
fore, a part of the "Third World." Blacks(7696)and whites
(7 %)inhabit Brazil-the former being the descendents of
slaves,and the latter the descendants of the slavemasters.
In Brazil, it is the white minority which rules; that is, from
a class, racial, culturaland historicalstandpoint, it is the
whites who are the dominant and exploitative element. Isthere at,."objective solidarity"insideof racist Brazil between
the white ruling class and the exploited, oppressed mass of


--- PAGE 44 ---
88
	
National-Separatists
Blacks? Who represents the "Third World" in countries
such as Brazil? When the "Third World" meets, the Black
representatives of a nation like Tanzania are liable to find
themselves shaking hands with the white supremacist repre-
sentatives of a country like Brazil.
Another example is South Africa which is classed
among the highest industrialized nations. South Africa is,
therefore,nota part of the "Third World." Are the exploited
and impoverished Black masses of South Africa part of the
"Third World" or not? Their country is considered an in-
dustrial country; in fact, South Africa is quickly becoming
a leading technological and industrial power. Are the masses
ofwhite South African workersa part of the "Third World"
or of the "industrial World?" Who represents the "Third
World" in South Africa? Are thewhiteworkers of South
Africa-viciously white supremacist and fascistic-linked
by a common bond of "objective solidarity" with the Aryan
rulers of that country or with the oppressed, crushed Black
masses of South African workers?
There are too many strange paradoxes involved in this
"Third World" business for us not to see that it is neither
a scientific, nor a politically valid concept. "Third World-
ism" stands as the direct successor of "non-alignment" and
"positive neutralism." Yesterday we were sold the idea of
a "Non-aligned bloc"-a group of underdeveloped "anti-
imperialist" nations linked by an "objective solidarity" based
on a refusal to accept either communism or capitalism.
"Non-alignment," we were told, was also a concept which
cut across all national, cultural, class and racial lines. "Non-
alignment" committed suicide. Now to replace it, is "Third
Worldism."
In reality, "Third Worldism" is butan attempt to trans-
fer integrationism from a national to an international level.
Malcolm X 89
Advocacy of "Third Worldism"-with its emphasis on a
"colorless" and "classless" objective solidarity-is nothing
but the advocacy of integrationism. The concept of a "Third
World" is an integrationist myth. It is a Leftist myth. As
such, it is not surprising to find the Mecca of the "Third
World" located in marxist Cuba. Nor is it surprising that
"Third Worldism" has now become "Tri-Continentalism."
Behind Cuban-based "Tri-Continentalism" we are faced with
ncne other than Soviet imperialism.
"Third Worldism" (or "Tri-Continentalism") is thus
nothing more than a marxist-integrationist hoax, supported
and promoted by Soviet imperialism, with the intent of put-
ting the brakes onaracial realignment o f forces, particularly
on the part o f the Black peoples o f the world.The chief
victims of this hoax are Blacks-a race exploited and op-
pressedby Latinwhites in South America,by Semiticwhites
(Arabs and Jews) in the Middle East and North Africa, by
Nordic(Anglo-Saxon) whites in South Africa, Australia,
Europe and theU.S.A.,andby Slavicwhites right in the
Soviet Union.
"Third Worldism" (alias "Tri-Continentalism") is, con-
sequently, no aid whatsoever to the universal struggle of
Black peoples for racial and socio-economic emancipation.
Rather, it is ore of the greatest single challenges to it that
has developed since the days of slavery and colonization. It
is a hoax, a mythaimed at the universal racial demobiliza-
tionof the Black World-the first step towards a marxist
"final solution" to the "black problem."
Under the influence of the myth of "Third Worldism"
(or "Tri-Continentalism"), a Black man could be kept from
seeing many things. For instance, he could be kept from see-
ing the "revolutionary" and "anti-imperialist" struggle of the
Arabs of the Middle East and North Africa for what it


--- PAGE 45 ---
l
u
it
90
	
National-Separatists
actually is:i.e.,a struggle to reconstitute, in a modern set-
ting, the Arab Empire of the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and
11th centuries. If this is not so, then why do the Arabs of
North Africa scornfully reject being called "Africans," pre-
ferring to link themselvesracially, culturally, politically,and
otherwise with Arabs in faraway Iraq, Syria and Lebanon?
Why the insistence of black-skinnedpseudo-Arabsin Mauri-
tania, the Sudan, Egypt, Eritrea and Somalia to designate
themselves as "Arabs" and as part of the "Arab world"
when, in fact, they are as black as any Black man in Ameri-
ca, and as part of Africa geographically, as is Ghana, Tan-
zania or Guinea???
Under the influence of "Third Worldism,"..Tri-Conti-
nentalism," or any other such "ism" bent on erasing Black
racial solidarity from the picture, a Black man could also
be kept from seeing the "anti-imperialist" struggle of white
Latins in Central and South America and the Caribbean, for
what it really is:i.e.,an attempt on the part of awhite left-
wing(or marxist)middle-classto unseat from power and re-
place old-time white bureaucratic oligarchies with its own
brand of white supremacist power(e.g.,Cuba).
What about the Black masses in Central and South
America and the Caribbean who form the overwhelming
numerical majority inmost o f the countries o f this area?
Are theLatin"revolutionaires" going to struggle for the en-
thronement of their own racial and class interests, only to
relinquish the power obtained to the majority population of
Blacks? If so, then why aren't theBlacksin power in Cuba?
They form more than 75 % of that country's population.
Yet it is the Aryan minority in Cuba-with Castro at its
head-which rules that country. Furthermore, why are all
of theLatin"revolutionary" and anti-imperialist" move-
ments of Central and South America and the Caribbean,
Malcolm X 91
composed and directed exclusively by the sons and daughters
of Spain and Portugal?
White "revolutionaries" of South America are no more
disposed to relinquish theright to rulewhich they, as whites,
have inherited from their slave-trading and colonialist fore-
fathers, than are the "revolutionary" rulers of the Soviet
Union disposed to relinquish to China those portions of her
territory seized by the Czarist Empire. It would be naive to
think that the Marxist and "anti-imperialist" struggle of the
whiteSouth American middle class is aimed at anything else
than the enthronement of its ownclass,racialandcultural
interests.
There is no reason to doubt what the nature of Malcolm
X's assessment would have been concerning the anti-im-
perialist" struggle of Latin and Arab whites, had he been
provided with all of the foregoing elements. Wasn't it Mal-
colm X who underlined the identity of the Bolshevik, French
and American revolutions aswhite nationalist?We do not
feel that Malcolm X'spersonalreligious convictions could
have kept him from seeing the "anti-imperialist" nationalism
ofArabsof the Middle East andLatinsof South America
for what it really is: white nationalism!'
2. The present-day breed ofwhite,middle-class, marxist "anti-
imperialists" (in what is erroneously designated asLatinArreri-
ca) has its historical antecedents in the 19th century when the
"anti-colonialist" struggle against Spain and Portugal was launch-
ed under the leadership ofwhitearistocratic classes (slave-owners,
intellectuals, big land-holders and merchants). With the massive
utilization of Black slaves as cannonfodder, white chieftains, such
as O'Higgins (Chile), San Martin (Argentina), de Cespedes
(Cuba), Miranda and Bolivar (Venezuela), initiated the wars
of "independence" from the "mother country." Once independ-
ence had been won with Black blood, the Black masses were im-
mediately put back in their places.The enslavement of Blacks
was maintained in all countries after the proclamation o f white
independence.Indians and Blacks were massacred in Chile and


--- PAGE 46 ---
9?
	
National-Separatists
Argentina to "whiten" the newly-independent republics. Bolivar
had to quell an insurrection of Blacks in Venezuela who refused
to accept the betrayal. The head of the insurrection, Carlos Piar,
one of Bolivar's Black generals, was executed along with un-
known numbers of his followers!
Another example of this phenomenon of revolutionary white
supremacy is also found in the "anti-colonialist," white "revolu-
tionary" struggle headed by George Washington-who proclaim-
ed the United States independent from Britain, but who main-
tained the enslavement of the Blacksafterindependence. Ian
Smith of "Rhodesia" simply came on the scenetoo lateto be a
"revolutionary" and "anti-colonialist" hero! When the Castro-
Guevarists of South America present themselves as "continuators"
of the work of Cespedes and Bolivar...they're not lying!
CHAPTER 4
MALCOLM X AND THE
BLACK AMERICAN STRUGGLE
There is no doubt that the program of the O.A.A.U.
(Organization of Afro-American Unity) and Malcolm X's
teachings in general, have been instrumental in bringing
about the wide-ranging changes that have begun to shape
the national destiny of 30 million Blacks in America. The
development of the national-separatist struggle of Black stu-
dents all over the United States; the upsurge of national-
separatist trends in the domaines of culture, politics and
economic organization; the increasing awareness and identi-
fication of North American Blacks with their brethren in
Africa, Asia, Oceania, Europe, Central and South America
and the Caribbean; the trend now observable in the United
States against Aryan aesthetic and cultural values, towards
"something of our own"-these and countless other less per-
ceptible, but significant transformations, bear the distinguish-
able imprint of Malcolm X's teachings and the program of
the O.A.A.U.
93


--- PAGE 47 ---
94
	
National-Separatists
Throughoutthetwelve years that Malcolm X spent
within the Nation of Islam, he voiced the chief theme of
the Honorable Elijah Muhammad's program: the obtention
cf "land somewhere" for the building of an independent
Black nation. Reference to "one" or "several states" in the
U.S.A. where this could be achieved, was common in Mal-
colm X's speeches during this period. After his departure
from the Nation of Islam, Malcolm X was less insistent (at
least, publicly) on this particular question. Is this to be in-
terpreted as an abdication of the objective of ultimate total
independence for the 30 million Blacks in the United States?
Malcolm X was indeed faced with a dilemma. To aban-
don the objective of Blacks constituting themselves into an
independent Black nationwould inevitably signify the ac-
ceptance of some sort of arrangement of "peaceful coexist-
ence" between Blacks and whites in the U.S.A. Such an "ar-
rangement" would mean that the whites, by virtue of their
majority status, wouldcontinueto maintain their dominant
economic, political, cultural and military supremacy, while
the Blacks would continue to be citizens of a nation whose
very existence is a daily proclamation of Black oppression.
A variant of this solution would be the adoption of the
old left-wing cry of "revolution." For Malcolm X, this would
have meant adopting the slogan, "Black and White Unite
and Fight," so dear to the trotskyists. This in turn would
have signified the adoption of the principle of "alliance"
with the treacherous Aryan left-wing groups. It would also
have meant accepting the concept that Black "emancipa-
tion" is directly linked and subordinated to the "revolution-
ary awakening" of the greedy, fat, ultra-fascist, white Ameri-
can proletarian swamp.
Hence, the dilemma facing Malcolm X was twofold. To
accept the "freedomnow under capitalism" solution-mean-
Malcolm X
	
95
ing, at best, a call for fullAmerican citizenshipof the 30
million Blacks in the United States-signified an abdication
of national-separatism in favor of right-wing integrationism.
To accept the marxist "freedomtomorrow under commu-
nism" _ solution, meant a relinquishment of national-separat-
ism in favor of left-wing integrationism. Both "solutions"
had been advocated many times before and always with the
same results of implacable deadlock.
The problem facing Malcolm X was the same problem
Marcus Garvey had confronted in the 1920-1930's. Garvey's
national-separatist program gave nonational tasksto the
Blacks either in the United States or elsewhere in the West-
ern Hemisphere, except that ofsupportingthe U.N.I.A.'s
program of building a Black bastion on the African contin-
ent. Garvey's total preoccupation with that part of his grand-
iose plan allowed him to sidestep the one vital question:
What should the mass of people who supported him do
for themselvesin their respective nationswhile the Black
bastion was being built??? Garvey's failure to face this
problem was the source of a great weakness, a weakness
which facilitated the dismantling of the U.N.I.A. everywhere.
The U.N.I.A. was implanted in many countries, but in none
of them did it apportion to its followersa national task
consistent with their day-to-daynational,political, economic,
cultural and social preoccupations and realities.
After leaving the Nation of Islam, Malcolm X's "silence"
concerning the building ofa separate, independent Black
nationin North America was NOT a sign that he had abdi-
cated this national-separatist goal. His thinking on the ques-
tion seems to have been more complex. The fact that he
made no explicit statement in this direction-added to the
more significant fact that after him no one has dealt with


--- PAGE 48 ---
96
	
National-Separatists
this aspect of the issue-shows the real complexity of the
question.
In more brutal terms, the dilemma facing Malcolm X
after his break with the Nation of Islam (and which
Garvey's U.N.I.A. sidestepped), can be resumed as follows
What should American Blacks struggle for? Integration in-
to Aryan America, either by becoming inferior "capital-
ists" without capital or political power, or by advocating a
communist "revolution" which, if ever successful, would
make them its first victims? Or should the Blacks of the
United States struggle for the realization of an independent
and separate Black nation in North America? Malcolm X
opted fully for the latter solution while,at the same time,
advocating a relentless struggle for the obtention by Blacks
of thehuman rights due to them as citizens of the U.S.A.
Malcolm X's position, then, was one which advocated
a struggle for the fulfillment of the Black man'shuman
rights in the United Stateswith national independence in
mind as the ultimate outcome.In other words: "Let's strug-
gle to build an independent nation right where we are by
initiating a struggle towards the fulfillment of our immedi-
ate and most basic needs and the progressive establishment
of our own separate institutions in every field." Malcolm X's
objective, his goal, the very essence of his O.A.A.U.'s un-
mistakeably national-separatist program, was to achieve
national-racial-autonomyas a first step in a long and compli-
cated process of struggle which would eventually culminate
intoindependentBlack nationhood.
The dynamic approach developed by Malcolm X to the
difficult and very complex struggle of Blacks in the United
States filled a great vacuum. The fact is that post-slavery
national- separatists in the U.S.A. had never concentrated on
political action.Booker T. Washington's national-separatist
MalcolmX
	
97
program omitted any emphasis on political and social activi-
ty; it subordinated everything to the goal of economic self-
sufficiency and technological advancement. Garvey'sU.N.-
I.A. in America was involved in no political action of signif-
icance. The same holds true for Elijah Muhammad's Nation
of Islam, and this was one of the reasons why Malcolm X
was dissatisfied with its program.
Malcolm X was the first national-separatist in the United
States to realize that the absence of apoliticaldimensionto
post-slavery national-separatist thought in American had
created a vacuum which has been filled by the reactionary,
integrationist, boot-licking stratum of American Blacks. Mal-
colm X pinpointed one very great source of weakness in
American post-slavery national-separatist movements: the
exclusive preoccupation with the angle of economic self-
sufficiency to the detriment of any nationalpoliticalactivity.
This attitude, he accurately realized, had left the way clear
for the development of integrationist-assimilationist organi-
zations. He summed up this idea as follows:
"I say this, that if the law of the land states that you
and I have the right to do thus and so, it doesn't take a
picket to establish that right. All we've got to do is go
and doit....
And you actually do the whole thing a disservice by
not getting involved, because what you do is create a
vacuum, into which steps Uncle Tom. And Uncle Tom
takes all the black belts and leads them the non-violent
way. No, I say let's all get in it, and get in it without
compromise....If black people in Alabama are trying
to register and vote, if they're trying to register, then
those black people in Alabama are within their rights.
Anyone who in any way interferes with them is break-
ing the law. Well, our people in Alabama, our people


--- PAGE 49 ---
98
	
National-Separatists
in Harlem, our people in California are the same people.
You and I will not get anywhere by standing on the
sidelines, saying they're doing it wrong. I spent twelve
years doing this in the Black Muslim movement, con-
demning everybody walking, and at no time were we
permitted to get involved to show a better way. Okay,
I say let's get involved. But let's get involved all the
way. Let's don't get involved in a compromise way."
Malcolm X saw that a program of economic self-suffici-
ency-the very basis of independent Black nationhood-had
to be coupled witha politicalprogram, addressing itself to
the political-social depradations imposed on the Black man
and woman. He saw the need to end that situation whereby
none but integrationist organizations agitated for those
political and social rights denied to Blacks. He realized that
as long as such a situation continued, Black people would be
misled, over and over again, in the direction of integrationist-
assimilationism. He saw that no program designed exclusive-
ly along lines of economic self-determination could sustain,
over a long period of time, the interest, support and atten-
tion of the` Black masseswho suffernot only from economic
exploitation and privation, but from every sort of social in-
dignity and political depradation.Malcolm X saw that Black
people needed urgent social and political solutions toim-
mediateand very serious problems(i.e.,filthy, deteriorated,
rat-infested housing; inferior-standard schools with Aryan-
oriented curricula; police brutality and harassment; the ab-
sence of jobs; low salaries; absence of health facilities, etc.).
Malcolm X's insistence on linking an ultimate goal of
independent nationhood with agitation of a social and polit-
3. Malcolm X on Afro-American History,Merit Publishers, New
York, 1967, p. 45.
Malcolm X 99
ical character did indeed fill a great and dangerous vacuum
in the development of post-slavery American national-separa-
tism. How can one turn his back on social and political agi-
tation for those rights which the mass of Black peoplepay
heavy taxes for, but have never enjoyed? Howcan one
preach total obeisance to the laws of a nation (including
that law which drafts a man and sends him abroad to die
"for his country"), and then relinquish the fight to acquire
those rights and prerogatives naturally associated with the
compliance to these laws?
"Let us set out on the ,road to ultimate independent Black
nationhood-right here where we are-by initiating a
generalizedstruggle towards the fulfillment of our immedi-
ate and most basic needs, the establishment of our own
separate institutions in every field, and the acquisition-by
any means necessary!-of the social and political rights and
prerogatives overdue us"; this was the essence of Malcolm
X's long-range and short-range program, his ultimate goal
and immediate preoccupation.
It is this very richness of Malcolm X's political think-
ing, his sharp hindsight and foresight, that has confused
those whose political thinking has never defied the complexi-
ty of devising a correct national-separatist strategy, either
short-term or long-term, in the gigantic, rich technological,
industrial and arch-reactionary United States of America,
with its 162 million white supremacists.
Consistent with Malcolm X's overall goal, the military
dimension of his thinking emphasized violence,notas an
end in itself, but as a means towards the accomplishment of
one of the most basic needs of Blacks: protection against
wanton murder, brutality and harassment.
Malcolm X's first step in the direction of adding a poli-
tical and social dimension to American national-separatist


--- PAGE 50 ---
100
	
National-Separatists
thinking was to launch the slogan,"Human Rights," and
reject the old, integrationist-oriented war cry of"Civil
Rights." The difference that Malcolm X made between
human rights andcivilrights was not a play on words. Nor
was he launching a "humanitarian" slogan. When he said
that "Civil rights is domestic. Human rights is internation-
al,""he was clearly rejecting the term "civil rights" be-
cause of its exclusivelydomesticorientation. Malcolm X did
more than emphasize theinternationalcharacter of the Black
man's struggle in the United States.By humanrights, Mal-
colm X meant any and all rights by whichBlackmen and
women can realize a dignified, happy andfreeexistence; an
existencefreefrom hunger, privation, racial oppression
(overt or covert), economic exploitation, cultural strangu-
lation and terror. In Malcolm X's thinking "human rights"
and ultimateindependent Black nationhoodwere one and
the same thing. Lumumba said it: "(W) ithout indepen-
dence, there are no free men!"
Within this perspective of ultimate independent Black
nationhood, the indispensable unification of Blacks in the
Western Hemisphere(i.e.,North, Central and South Ameri-
ca and the Caribbean) became one of Malcolm X's most
important goals. Within this same perspective, he also saw
the strategic importance of concretely linking the inter-Black
alliance in the Western Hemisphere with the struggle of
Blacks in Africa, Europe, Asia and Oceania.Malcolm Xen-
visioned the struggle for independent Black nationhood in
the U.S.A.inco-relation with the struggle of Blacks every-
where else. Hence, he realized that a solidily structured
Universal Pan-Black Organization-ofthe type Garvey had
created-was an absolute must sooner or later.
4. MalcolmX, ByAny Means Necessary,Pathfinder Press, Inc.,
New York, 1970, p. 20.
Malcolm X
	
101
Malcolm X thought in terms of concrete, strategicpan-
Black alliances,both on a continental scale and on a world
scale. Malcolm X wasa Black internationalist.He under-
stood the role which Blacks as a race had played in history.
His lucid political appreciation of theinternationalcharacter
of Aryan domination and of the balance of forces with which
Black Americans had to contend made him even more of a
Black internationalist.
Didn't Malcolm X, time and time again, stress the inter-
national character of the Black man's struggle, oppression
and destiny? Didn't hetryto impress this very point upon
Blacks wherever he went? Wasn't this the main theme of his
address to the gathering of African Heads of State which
convened in Cairo in 1964? Listen to him as he politely
drives home this point of a single struggle, a single oppres-
sion and a single fate of Blacks all over the world, in a
memorandum submitted to the meeting of the O.A.U. (read:
Organization of African Uncle-toms)
"Some African leaders at this conference have im-
plied that they have enough problems here on the
mother continent without adding the Afro-American
problem.
With all due respect to your esteemed positions, I
must remind all of you that the good shepherd will
leave ninety-nine sheep, who are safe at home, to go to
the aid of the one who is lost and has fallen into the
clutches of the imperialist wolf.
We, in America, are your long-lost brothers and
sisters, and I am here only to remind you that our prob-
lems are your problems....
Our problem is your problem. No matter how much
independence Africans get here on the mother contin-


--- PAGE 51 ---
102
	
National-Separatists
ent, unless you wear your national dress at all times,
when you visit America, you may be mistaken for one
of us and suffer the same psychological humiliation and
physical mutilation that is an everyday occurrence in
our lives.
Your problems will never be fully solved until and
unless we are also recognized and treated as human
beings.
Our problem is your problem. It is not a Negro
problem, nor an American problem. This is a world
problem..."S
To whom was Malcolm X addressing this clear, far-
sighted plea? To an assembly composed mostly of traitors
and hirelings of Aryan domination. Malcolm X was address-
ing this plea to many of the same treacherous "leaders" who
had turned a deaf ear to Lumumba's repeated pleas for help
less than five years before, and who had been more than hap-
py to see Patrice Lumumba crushed to bits by the ferocious
Aryan conspiracy. More than one of these "Heads of State"
had had a direct hand in facilitating the Aryan conspiracy
against one of the most dedicated sons to have emerged from
the womb of the Black World. It was to this assembly of
bare-faced plantation overseers of Aryan domination, that
Malcolm X addressed this beautiful call for international
pan-Black solidarity and unity!
Malcolm X'sBlack-orientedinternationalism was a lot
more than a heart-felt expression of his full comprehension
of the lessons of history. In addition, it was political com-
mon sense. How else, but in coordination and tight solidari-
ty with the struggle of Blacks throughout the world, could
one view the struggle of 30 million Blacks entrenched
5. AlalcolmX Speaks,op. cit., pp. 73, 74-75.
Malcolm X
	
103
in the very entrails of one of the two mightiest Aryan powers
to rule the world today?
Malcolm X saw that there was an organic link between
a concrete continental and worldwide alignment of Black
forces, and the fulfillment of the goal of independent nation-
hood for 30 million Black Americans. An alliance of Black
forceswithinthe United States was the first step towards
this goal. He set out to achieve this with the creation of the
ill-fated O.A.A.U.
To Malcolm X, the independent alignment of Black
forceswithintheU.S.A.,.coupled to an alignment of Black
forces on both a continental and worldwide scale, was the
onlyBlack national-separatist perspective possible. Any other
perspective than this would lead to capitulation to the old,
worn-out, left-wingintegrationisttemptation of "alliance"
with a decrepit, white supremacist Left. The idea of an "alli-
ance" with Left-wing white supremacy is a stillborn infant
which Black marxist fanatics resuscitate each time they mus-
ter enough force to rear their heads in the Black community
disguised as "black patriots." Nothing indicated that Mal-
colm X ever fell for this worn, torn and shorn marxist
cliche.


--- PAGE 52 ---
104
CHAPTER 5
MALCOLM X IN PERSPECTIVE
Many national-separatists feel a certain embarrass-
ment when confronted with some of the statements made by
Malcolm X during and after his trips to the Middle East
and Africa. Many of these statements have been avidly seized
upon by the white Left to "prove" its thesis that Malcolm
X had "abandoned," or was "on the verge of abandoning"
the path of national-separatism, to join the limping ranks
of one or another variant of the marxist caravan. The Black
adherents of marxism-leninism use these statements of Mal-
colm Xasa shield, behind which they go about implement-
ing their program of left-wing assimilation and "revolution-
ary integration."
Aided by the embarrassed silence of Malcolm X's inti-
mate companions and by the silence of Black national-sepa-
ratists in general, both white and Black marxists have had
a field day in portraying Malcolm X as a "repentant" con-
vert of the marxian religion. They have propagated the
image of a "transformed" Malcolm X, prostrated at the feet
of St. Marx, St. Lenin, St. Castro and St. Trotsky-worship-
Malcolm X
	
105
ing at an alien shrine and participating in this international
"revolutionary" fraternity of falsehood. Less than a decade
after his death, integrationists to the Left and Right of white
supremacy alike, have summoned Malcolm X to their ranks
of treason.
Was Malcolm X an integrationist-turned-national-sepa-
ratist who revertedagainto integrationism either in its right-
wing or left-wing expressions? Did Malcolm X make an
about-face so as to embrace those whom he had designated
all along as the universalenemy of Black mankind? Did
Malcolm X abandon the defense of his oppressed race by
relinquishing the dignified, proud, conscious national-separ-
atist stand he had acquired through so much intellectual
and personal effort?Nothingwhich Malcolm X did or said,
either prior to, or after his departure from the Nation of
Islam, can justify the belief that he was about to turn his
back on his suffering people, relinquish his revolutionary
mission and join the ranks of the enemy.1
Once having embarked on the path of national-separat-
ism, Malcolm X never abandoned it. The political, cultural,
social and economic evolution of his thinking was set against
a national-separatist background. In 1964, he left the
Nation of Islam in search of a national-separatist ideology.
After his trips abroad, Malcolm X returned to America
equipped with a thousand and one newly acquired, dispar-
ate, political, and socio-economic facts. He aimed at sorting,
coordinating and structuring these facts into a coherent
1. The most vigorous and lucid refutation of the fallacy that
Malcolm X was reverting to a stance of either right-wing or left-
wing integrationism, has been provided by his close brother and
friend, the Reverend Albert Cleage. Unfortunately, we are unable
to reproduce his long and highly interesting statement here. We
strongly urge a reading of his: "Myths About Malcolm X" in:
Malcolm X The Man and His Times, op.cit., pp. 13-26.


--- PAGE 53 ---
106
	
National-Separatists
framework of thought and action. A great many of these
facts were incorporated into the program of his O.A.A.U.
The O.A.A.U., its program and its goal were instrinsically
national-separatist in content, form and expression.
Malcolm X was a national-separatist. National-separat-
ism was not Malcolm X, any more than it was Marcus Gar-
vey or Patrice Lumumba. Whatever mistakes Garvey, Lu-
mumba or Malcolm X made in their appreciation of a given
situation, they are not enough to invalidate thepolitical
orientation oftheir existence as conscious Black men, dedi-
cated to one and the same goal. It is their contribution to-
wards bringing us ever so much closer to the goal of Des-
salines and Christophe, their dedication to this goal, that
we must consider. If there is confusion surrounding Malcolm
X, it is because certain Blacks have tried to substitute Mal-
colm X for a political orientation, for an ideology yet to,
appear.
Malcolm X was a national-separatist in search of a na-
tional-separatistideology.He was the first national-separat-
ist leader to be so acutely aware of the fact that the absence
of an ideological framework of thought and action-pattern-
ed after the needs of Black people and consistent with the
historical experiences of the Black race-was largely respon-
sible for the failures and setbacksofevery single national-
separatist effort undertaken since the Haitian Revolution of
1804.
In his search for a national-separatist ideology, Malcolm
X put his finger on the one chief determining factor, be-
sides actual experience, on which an ideology is based:the
scientific scrutinyofhistory.This he summed up as follows:
"(I)t is impossible to understand the present or pre-
pare for the future unless we have some knowledge of
the past....
Malcolm X
	
107
When you deal with the past, you're dealing with
history, you're dealing actually with the origin of a
thing.When you know the origin, you know the cause.
If you don't know the origin, you don't know the cause.
And if you don't know the cause, you don't know the
reason.... So the past deals with history or the origin
of everything.... And when you know the origin, then
you get a better understanding of the causes that produce
whatever originated there and its reason for originating
and its reason for being."'
Like Patrice Lumumba, Malcolm X suffered from the
lack of both a national-separatistclassand a national-separa-
tistmovementsimilar to the one possessed by Marcus Gar-
vey. Malcolm X lacked, as did Garvey and Lumumba, a
national-separatistideology. Like Lumumba and Garvey,
Malcolm X had a national-separatistprogram (worked out
only 8 months prior to his death). Like Lumumba and
Garvey, Malcolm X had the people. It was facing his people
that he accepted his fate.
On a cold afternoon, on February 21, 1965, as he had
barely begun to address his people, the long arm of the
enemy swiftly struck him down, with the treachery and bru-
tality characteristic to our history as an oppressed and suffer-
ing race. Thirty million Blacks in America lost their person-
al hero; the Black firmament gained another star, pointing
as brightly as the others, to the only direction of universal
Black emancipation.
2. Malcolm X onAfro-American History,op. cit., pp. 3, 4.


--- PAGE 54 ---
CONCLUSION
BLACK PEOPLE HAVE FALLEN PREY TO
every slanderous lie on every issue put out on the market
by our universal enemy and his hirelings. Why? Because to
begin with, there is no structured framework of revolution-
ary thought cut to suit the particular historical experience
of the Black man the world over. Where are Black theoret-
icians who link theory to practice, whose theory is Black-
oriented and drawn exclusively from the Black historical
experience? They are practically non-existent. For a race in
excess of one billion in numbers, spread out to the four
corners of the globe, so diverse culturally, ethnically and
linguistically, yet so alike in its experience of racist oppres-
sion and degradation, this is a grave situaton.
The absence of our own revolutionary ideology is the
dilemma confronting the Black world. It is not the ingre-
dients for such an ideology which are lacking. Ideologies are
not inventions, nor are they the product of "geniuses" or so-
called exceptional minds. In essence, an ideology is a set of
principles drawn from the historical experience of a given
people, a people submitted to the same general social, eco-
109


--- PAGE 55 ---
110
	
National-Separatists
nomic and cultural realities, in a common historical situa-
tion. An ideology can also have revolutionary or reaction-
ary aims; it can be for oppression or for liberation from op-
pression. If it is revolutionary, the aim of this set of princi-
ples is to explain to this given peoplethe causes oftheir past
situation and their present situation, andthe ways and means
to bring about a future situation consistent with their desire
of an independent and free existence. Ideological principles
come about through research . Once they have emerged
through research and are correctly put together in a coherent
whole, they serve for action. Briefly, then, an ideology is a
set of principles drawn from the historical experience of a
particular people and, as such, it provides the guidelines for
action, for change, in the direction desired by that people.
In view of the above definition, the dilemma facing the
Black world today is directly linked to another void: the
almost total absence of revolutionary, Black-oriented re-
searchers, dedicated towards extricating from our history
those principles which, gathered in a coherent whole, can
act as the only sure guide to Black revolutionary action.
When we talk about the absence of Black-oriented re-
searchers, we do not mean the absence of a pseudo-Black
clique of individuals who parade as intellectuals. This we
have. In small numbers, but we have it. And this is precisely
what we can do without. By and large, the Black intellectual
who has existed for centuries in the Black world, is an as-
similationist. The fact that he is essentially a copyist, already
shows to what extent he is mediocre. Devoid of all sense
of initiative, lacking the quality of independent thought, he
actually takes pride when white men, like Sartre, Daniel
Guerin, or, a George Breitman, prefaces the works of Lu-
mumba or Malcolm X . His interest in Garvey, if any, will
be limited to a reading ofBlack Moses by the white man,
Conclusion
	
111
Edmund Cronon, rather than Garvey's own Philosophy and
Opinions.
This assimilationist Black intellectual-who is both
Black and intellectual only in name-is only too glad when
Malcolm X, Lumumba and Garvey are used to futher marx-
ist propaganda. In fact, to him a Black man has no merit
unless he figures alongside some white supremacist like
Marx, Guevara, Lenin, Trotsky or Castro. It's the white
seal of approval which counts for him, not the thinking of a
Black individual. All of this explains why the assimilation-
ist Black intellectualis,eithera crude marxist pamphleteer,
mouthing slogans of the international communist movement
and seeking "revolutionary integration," or a sophisticated,
degree-hunting academician, parotting the crasset pro-cap-
italist, petty bouregois, assimilationist rubbish. In either case
-whether he is a right-wing or a left-wing assimilationist-
he is always a pamphleteer, never a researcher.
For these reasons, the Black layman, the ordinary Black
man and woman, must begin taking matters into their own
hands. If we wait on the integration-seeking intellectuals to
become researchers and engage in the far-ranging historical,
political and economic appraisals which stand at the base
of an ideology, we are doomed. Black men and women of
all walks of life must make a concerted effort to break the
deadlock. For this, we need to break through the barrier of
intellectual intimidation. We must begin voicing our opin-
ions, arriving at our own conclusions, instead of waiting on
the next fellow to do our thinking for us.'
1. The above implies that we are in dire need of independent
outlets of expression to gather and publish those works from all
over the Black world which will be instrumental in bringing about
an ideological framework of thought englobing the experience of
every single Black community and society. The wide-ranging di-
versity of the Black world makes this an imperative. We have


--- PAGE 56 ---
112
	
National-Separatists
Independent opinions and conclusions can only be the
product of research, conducted in all fields, in every aspect
of our past and present history, and embracing every single
segment of the Black race wherever it may be. The emer-
gence of a Black revolutionary framework of thought and
action, the product of our collective and very particular
historical experience, can only come about from a collective
effort undertaken not by self-seeking assimilationist-minded
intellectuals, but by the ordinary Black man and woman of
today.
We have our example in Garvey, Lumumba and Mal-
colm X. Initially, none of them had more than a formal
schooling. These were self-taught Black men who read and
studiedon their own.They arrived at the conclusions they
did from their own research, from their own analyses of the
Black reality, not from what they learned from some Aryan-
oriented university or college professor. Had they pursued a
university degree as such, there probably wouldn't even have
been a Garvey, Lumumba or a Malcolm Xaswe know
them.
These were men who set a high premium on learning
any and everything that would help to change the plight of
the Black race. They demystified the cult of book-ism and in-
already seen the consequences of not being able to depend on
independent Black publishing companies, printing presses, news-
papers and other mediums of expression. Besides, it just doesn't
seem right that a conscious Black person should be forced to go
through a publishing house, newspaper or reveue, controlled by
our oppressor whether of the Right or of the Left. Those who
want to stigmatize our call for an independent Black press as
"Black Capitalism," can call it that if they like. Yet, how can
one not see that it is these same characters who rush with their
manuscripts to leading Aryancapitalistpublishing firms, such
as Doubleday, Ramparts, Maspero, Gallimard, MacMillan and
Co.?!This is just another example of the shameless duplicity of
certain right-wing and left-wing intellectuals.
Conclusion
	
113
tellectual scholasticism. By their example, they brought us
to see the value of learning, studying, criticizing and analyz-
ingon our own,the value of independent Black theoretical
research and analysis. What is bookish about discovering
why the Black world is in its present state? What is scholas-
tic about finding the source of the Black man's misery?
With the means at their disposal, they tried to get at the
roots ofourreality. They sought answers and solutions which
correspond toour ownhistorical experience. It was into this
particular experience which they delved, not into that of the
white Arabs of the Middle East, the white Jews of Eastern
Europe, the white Europeans of Western Europe, or the ex-
perience of Aryans anywhere else.
Garvey, Malcolm X and Lumumba were our first modern
theoreticians. But they were not theoreticians engaged solely
in research. Another common feature that bound them to-
gether was the fact thatthey were men o f action.They did
researchbecausethey were men of action. Conversely, their
action constantly led them into more and more research. In
these three men, we have a clear example of the type of
revolutionary theoretician which the Black world is calling
for: men and women of action, who are engaged in research;
men and women whose research is geared towards more in-
tensified action. In essence, they showed us what a Black
theoretician ought to be.
When we point to the fact that these three men were
exclusively occupied with the historical experience of the
race they sought to emancipate, we are pointing to an im-
portant fact. Today many seem to believe that a theoretician
is per sesomeone who has either gobbled up, in whole or in
part, the writings of Marx and Engels, Lenin, Trotsky and
Stalin, or someone who goes about quoting Fidel Castro,
Che Guevara, Jean-Paul Sartre, Marcuse or some other such


--- PAGE 57 ---
114
	
National-Separatists
Aryan"eminence."Those who believe this are the same
ones who believe that there is no relevant ideology possible
outside of marxism. They even go to the extent of pretend-
ing that marxism is a "universal" ideology, colorless in es-
sence and, in nature, adaptable to "all" peoples. This is cer-
tainly a strange "universal" and "colorless" ideology, espe-
cially when its conclusions and principles were drawn from
analyses confined exclusively to the historical experience of
Aryan societies and communities!
Previously, we said that an ideology is a set of principles
drawn from the historical experience ofa given people, a
people submitted to the same general social, economic and
cultural realities, in a common historical situation. Marxism
is no exception to this definition. Marxism-leninism is a set
of principles drawn from the historical experience of a given
people-Aryan people-a people submitted to the same
general socio-economic and cultural realities in a common
historical situation-in this case, a situation we know as
white supremacy. Marxism, then, is nothing more and
nothing less than an Aryan ideology.'
Is it possible that either Garvey, Lumumba or Malcolm
X were on the path towards a marxist "conversion"-as
some have dared to claim-when their whole approach was
to seek their answers and draw their conclusions from the
historical experience of a given people (Black people), a
2. Is marxism-leninism a revolutionary ideology, seeking the
"liberation of mankind," as some would argue? Or is it an es-
sentially reactionary and white supremacist ideology whose chief
aim is to maintain Aryan world hegemony once capitalism is
overthrown? The answer to this question can best be found to-
day in the doings of the U.S.S.R. and its marxist satellites. Also
of interest, would be an examination of marxism in Cuba, where
the overwhelming majority of the population is Black, but whose
government is, strangely enough, lily-white. Everything seems to
indicate that concerning Cuba, the half has not been told!
Conclusion
	
115
people submitted to the same general social, economic and
cultural realities in a common historical situation-i.e., a
situation of enslavement, colonization,racistoppression and
subordination to the economic super-exploitation of Aryan
oppressors?
Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm X were on their way
to bringing about something new. That much is for certain.
Whatever research they were able to accomplish under those
difficult conditions of struggle which they faced, it was taking
them towards somethingnew.And, as we know, marxism is
not new; it has been here for over a century now.
What Marcus Garvey, Patrice Lumumba and Malcolm
X were leading up to through their own research and action
combined, was to the formulation of an entirely novel set
of principles drawn from the historical experience of the
given peoplethey fought and died for-Black people. That's
why we say they were our first modern revolutionary theore-
ticians. Had they been aiming at a marxist "conversion,"
they would have been delving into the historical experience
of the people whose social, economic and cultural realities
provided Marx and Engels with the basis for the marxist
ideology. Had these three men been aiming or drifting to-
wards a marxist "conversion," they would have spent their
time, like others have done before them and still continue
to do after them, memorizing marxist-leninist quotes. Had
this been the case, they would most likely be alive today; no
Black man or woman has ever been slaughtered for being
a marxist. But, then, they wouldn't be the Garvey, Lumumba
and Malcolm X we know.
Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm X were three Black
men with one burning, intransigent goal: the salvation of


--- PAGE 58 ---
116
	
National-Separatists
Black people everywhere. They were threemen with one
aim, one purpose, one vision: the total and complete libera-
tion of the Black world from the stranglehold of white
economic, political, military, cultural, psychological and
ideological domination and exploitation. Three men who
possessed a single aspiration: the coming of a new Black
race, a new Black civilization, a new Black destiny.
Pointing to our shame of Blackness, they instilled us
with a sense of racial, cultural and historical pride. Showing
us up as weaklings and cowards, they imbued us with self-
confidence and courage. Shaking us from our complacency,
they confronted us with our responsibilities. Exposing our
traitors from within and indicting our enemy from without,
they enlightened us. Whatever they demanded of us, they
demanded of themselves first. They were not seekers after
the impossible. The greatness they demanded of us was com-
mensurate with the greatness which they knew we could and
should attain: That greatness which, as Lumumba said so
beautifully, would make us "show the world what the Black
man can do when he works in freedom ."
Black people, we are the heirs of a great legacy: the
political thought of three of the greatest men to have emerg-
ed from the Black womb at any time. Yet, because we seem
to have the shortest memory of any people in the world, we
have let our legacy lie fallow. We have too quickly forgot-
ten the lessons taught us by Garvey, Lumumba and Malcolm.
And one of the main things they taught us was that without
a historical vision we, as a people, are doomed. Without a
historical perspective, we are bound to fail. It's like trying
to build a house on sand, on a foundation that will eventual-
ly crumble.
A strong vision and identity with our past is the only
sound basis for constructing an independent future. Only
Conclusion 117
when we can firstidentifyand then eliminate the causes
for our historical downfall,can we be in a position to plot a
course that will result in the reconquest of our worldwide
freedom. As long as we are unable to first identify and then
correct the basic economic, political, cultural and social
weaknesses responsible for our crushing historical defeat,
we shall remain the spectators of, and participants in, our
own oppression.
Garvey marked the opening of the 20th century with
one of the greatest revolutionary movements that the Black
world has known . He pointed the way to the Black man's
liberation. Yet, we let him go down notinhistory butoutside
of it, as if his life had been peripheral to our very existence.
It took two decades after his death for Lumumba and Mal-
colm to rise in his footsteps and once again point us in the
direction we should take. Now that they are gone, how long
will it be before we decide to strike out on our own, united
into one strong, determined body? How long will it be be-
fore we realize that it's not the greatness of any one Black
man or woman that will make our race great, but the con-
certed efforts of theentireBlack race?
We must follow the example of Garvey, Lumumba and
Malcolm X and assume our responsibility as they assumed
theirs. It's not any inherent qualities that make a Black
national-separatist, but a man and a woman who hold the
interest of the race above everything else. Black national-
separatists are neither "divine," nor are they "flawless" indi-
viduals. They are simply determined Black men and women
who are not afraid of waging a lifetime of conscious, self-
scrutinizing criticism so as to uproot their integrationist
origins. Men and women who, by their own self-efforts, will
confront and overcome the stumbling blocks put in their
path. Men and women who will neither flinch in face of the


--- PAGE 59 ---
118
	
National-Separatists
enemy, nor compromise the destiny of their race through
alliances with the historical oppressor.
The salvation of the Black race, the revolutionary re-
surgence of the Black world will not result from turns to
the Left or to the Right of Aryan supremacy. Our march, if
it is to be a glorious march to victory, must be ina new
direction.
Black man, Black woman, turn not to the Right, forsake
the Left.
Come now,
Let us march together
in a new direction;
FORWARD!

