=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Geneva Smitherman~Word FromThe Mother Language.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 194
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:24:05.402398
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
Word from the Mother
Word from the Mother presents a definitive statement on African American
Language (AAL) from the internationally respected linguist, Geneva Smitherman.
Her message is clear: all Americans, regardless of cultural background, must
appreciate the linguistic conventions and richness of AAL if they are to participate
in society as informed citizens.
Illuminated by Geneva Smitherman’s evocative and inimitable writing 
style, the work gives an overview of past debates on the speech of African
Americans and provides a vision for the future. The author explores the
contributions of AAL to mainstream American English, and includes a list of
idioms and expressions as a suggested linguistic core of AAL. 
As global manifestations of Black Language increase, Geneva Smitherman
argues that, through education, we must broaden our conception of AAL and
its speakers, and examine the implications of gender, age and class on AAL.
Most of all, we must appreciate the artistic and linguistic genius of AAL, pre-
sented in this book through Hip Hop song lyrics and the rhyme and rhetoric of
the Black speech community. 
Word from the Mother is an essential read for students of African American
speech, language and culture and sociolinguistics, as well as the general reader
interested in the worldwide “crossover” of Black Popular Culture. 
Geneva SSmitherman is University Distinguished Professor of English at
Michigan State University. A linguist and educational activist, she has been at
the forefront of the struggle for language rights for over 25 years. She is the
author of several books, among them, 
Talkin and Testifyin (1977), Black Talk
(2000), and Talkin That Talk (2000).


--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---
Word from the Mother
Language and African Americans
Geneva Smitherman


--- PAGE 6 ---
First published 2006
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 2006 Geneva Smitherman
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Smitherman, Geneva, 1940–
Word from the mother : language and African Americans / Geneva
Smitherman.
p.  cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0–415–35876–0 (pbk.) – ISBN 0–415–35875–2
1. African Americans–Languages. 2. Black English. 3. English language–
Variation–United States. I. Title.
PE3102.N42S525 2006
427′.97308996073–dc22
2005019719
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book available from the British Library
ISBN10: 0–415–35875–2 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–415–35876–0 (pbk)
ISBN13: 9–78–0–415–35875–0 (hbk)
ISBN13: 9–78–0–415–35876–7 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.
“T o purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”


--- PAGE 7 ---
For Amber and Anthony and all my peeps in the young
generation


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
Contents
Acknowledgements ix
1 African American Language: So good it’s bad 1
2 Words and Expressions, Proverbs and Familiar Sayings 20
3 The N-words 49
4 Honeyz and Playaz Talkin that Talk 64
5 “I used to love H.E.R.”: Hip Hop, in its Essence and Real 82
6 “All Around the World, Same Song” 108
7 “Negro Dialect, the Last Barrier to Integration”? 121
Notes 146
References 151
Discography 161
Index 162


--- PAGE 10 ---



--- PAGE 11 ---
Acknowledgements
I wish ﬁrst to acknowledge my editor, Louisa Semylen, who stayed on the case,
reminding me that this is a book I needed to write. Big ups to her editorial
assistant, Elizabeth Johnston, who stepped to the plate, large and in charge,
during Louisa’s absence. Thanks also to Routledge Editor Kate Ahl for advice—
and inspiration when I needed it.
Special shout outs to Austin Jackson and H. Samy Alim, scholar-warriors and
Hip Hop headz, who helped in innumerable ways that kept me righteous. And
to David Kirkland, for technological expertise, as well as patience with this Old
School head making her way in 21st century cyberspace.
Thanks to Camille Redmond for coming to my rescue with research assis-
tance during the long summer of 2004. To historian Pero Dagbovie, for
continuing advice and expertise in matters of African American History. And to
Lynn Mande, for help with permissions (couldn’t have done it without you, girl).
Finally, I must acknowledge my many MSU students over the years, who ask
the hard questions and present the real world data that force me to come
straight up and correct.
Acknowledgement is due to copyright holders for their kind permission to
include the following material in this book: 
Illustrations:
Fig no 1.1 “Herb & Jamal” cartoon by Stephen Bentley © Creators Syndicate,
reproduced by permission. 
Fig no 2.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon © Universal Press Syndicate, reproduced
with permission.
Figure 3.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon © Universal Press Syndicate, reproduced
with permission.
Figure 4.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon © Universal Press Syndicate, reproduced
with permission.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Figure 5.1 “Candorville Zoo” © 2004 Darrin Bell/Dist. By WPWG, Inc. www.
candorville.com, reproduced with permission.
Figure 6.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon © Universal Press Syndicate, reproduced
with permission.
Figure 6.2 “Juan Emilio Rodríguez and his brother” by Meredith Davenport,
reproduced with permission from Aurora Photos.
Figure 7.1 “Candorville” cartoon © 2004 Darrin Bell/Dist. By WPWG, Inc.
www.candorville.com, reproduced with permission.
Song lyrics:
“Fight the Power”
Words and Music by Carlton Ridenhour, Hank Shocklee, Keith Shocklee and
Eric Sadler.
Reproduced with permission from Universal Music Publishing Limited (62.5
percent)
© 1989 Terrordome Music Publishing, LLC. (BMI), administered by Reach
Global Songs and Songs of Universal, Inc. Used by permission (37.5 percent).
All rights reserved.
“By the Time I get to Arizona” by Public Enemy
Words and Music by Neftali Santiago, Carlton Ridenhour, Hank Shocklee and
Gary Rinaldo.
Reproduced with permission from Universal Music Publishing Limited (18.75
percent)
© 1991 Terrordome Music Publishing (BMI) and Suburban Funk, Inc. (BMI),
both administered by Reach Global Songs and Songs of Universal, Inc.
Used by permission (81.25 percent). All rights reserved.
“I Used to Love H.E.R”
Words and Music by Lonnie Lynn and Ernest Wilson
Reproduced with permission from Universal Music Publishing (50 percent)
Copyright © 1994 Songs of Universal Inc., Senseless Music, Chrysalis Songs
and No I.D. Music Publishing (50 percent)
All rights for Senseless music controlled and administered by Songs of
Universal, Inc. All rights for No I.D. Music Publishing controlled and administered
by Chrysalis Songs. All rights reserved.
“21 Questions”
Words and Music by Luis Resto, Curtis Jackson, Jimmie Cameron and Vella
Reproduced with permission from Universal Music Publishing (40 percent).
x Word from the mother


--- PAGE 13 ---
“Biscuits”
By Clifford Smith and Robert F. Diggs, Jr.
© 1994 Ramecca Publishing (BMI)/Wu-Tang Publishing (BMI)/Careers-BMG
Music Publishing Inc. (BMI), reproduced with permission.
“Niggers Are Scared of Revolution” 
Written by Omar Ben Hassen
Published by Douglas Music (BMI), Copyright © 1970. All Rights Reserved. Used
by permission.
“They Schools” by Dead Prez
Reproduced with permission from Notting Hill Music and The Royalty Network
Inc.
“Song Cry”
Written by Shawn Carter, Ralph Johnson and Douglas Gibbs.
Published by SC’s info/Extraslick Music (ASCAP)/Chitty Chitty Music (ASCAP)
“Song Cry” includes a sample of “Sounds Like A Love Song” written by Ralph
Johnson and Douglas Gibbs, published by Extraslick Music (ASCAP)/Chitty Chitty
Music (ASCAP). Both Extraslick Music and Chitty Chitty Music are administered
by Heavy Harmony Publishing Corporation. Used by permission. © 2001 EMI
Blackwood Music Inc., Lil Lulu Publishing and Heavy Harmony Music Inc. All
rights reserved. International Copyright secured. Used by permission.
“White Man’z World”
Words by Tupac Shakur and Darryl Harper
Music by Darryl Harper
© Copyright 1996 Universal Music Publishing Limited (50 percent)/Warner/
Chappell Music Limited (50 percent).
“Mr Nigga”
Words and Music by Dante Beze and D. Prosper
© 1999 Emi Blackwood Music Inc., Empire International, Medina Sound Music
and EPHCY Music.
All rights for Empire International Music and Medina Sound Music controlled
and administered by EMI Blackwood Music Inc.
All rights reserved. International Copyright secured. Used by permission.
“Spaceship”
Words and Music by Kanye West, Gwendolyn Fuqua, Sandra Greene, Marvin
Gaye, Dexter Mills, Leonard Harris and Tony Williams
© 2004 EMI Blackwood Music Inc., Please Gimme My Publishing Inc., Jobete
Music Co., Inc., MGIII Music, NMG Music, FCG Music, Get Ya Frog on Publishing,
Leonard Harris Publishing Designee and Tony Williams Publishing Designee.
Acknowledgements xi


--- PAGE 14 ---
All rights for Please Gimme My Publishing, Inc., controlled and administered
by EMI Blackwood Music Inc.
All rights for MGIII Music, NMG Music and FCG music controlled and admin-
istered by Jobete Music Co., Inc.
All rights reserved. International Copyright secured. Used by permission.
Contains elements of “Distant Lover” by Gwendolyn Fuqua, Sandra Greene and
Marvin Gaye.
“U Don’t Know”
Words and Music by Bobby Byrd and Shawn Carter
© 2001 EMI Blackwood Music Inc., Lil Lulu Publishing, Unichappell Music Inc.,
and Golo Publishing Company
All rights for Lil Lulu publishing controlled and administered by EMI Blackwood
Music Inc.
All rights for Golo Publishing Company controlled and administered by
Unichappell Music Inc.
All rights reserved. International Copyright secured. Used by permission.
“White America”
Words and Music by Marshall Mathers, Jeffrey Bass, Steven King and Luis Reslo
© 2002 by Eight Mile Style and Jaceff Music
All rights for Eight Mile Style controlled and administered by Ensign Music
Corporation.
International Copyright secured. All Rights Reserved. Used by permission.
“Gin and Juice”
By Cordazor, Andre Young and Harry Casey
© 1993 WB Music Corp. (ASCAP), Suge Publishing (ASCAP), Sony Tunes, Inc.
(ASCAP) and Longitude Music Co. (BMI)
All rights on behalf of Itself and Suge Publishing administered by WB Music
Corp.
All rights reserved. Used by permission.
Extracts:
“Ask Yo Mamma” From The Collected Poems of Langston Hughesby Langston
Hughes, copyright © 1994 by the estate of Langston Hughes. Reproduced by
permission of Harold Ober Associates Incorporated, and by permission of Alfred
A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
“For Saundra”
From 
Black Judgement by Nikki Giovanni
© 1968 Nikki Giovanni, reproduced by permission of the author.
xii Word from the mother


--- PAGE 15 ---
“The True Import of Present Dialogue: Black vs. Negro”
From Black Judgement by Nikki Giovanni
© 1968 Nikki Giovanni, reproduced by permission of the author.
“Black Art”
© Amiri Baraka, reproduced with permission.
Extract from Jungle Fever Spike Lee ﬁlm (1991) 
© Shelton Jackson Lee, reproduced with permission.
Acknowledgements xiii


--- PAGE 16 ---



--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter 1
African American Language
So good it’s bad
It was way back in The Day. I found myself on a hotel elevator alone with a
famous National Basketball Association (NBA) superstar that I thought was
the most beautiful man in the world. He was in town for a game. I was there
for a national convention. He noticed my name tag and said, “So, you’re an
English teacher?” Ah, my chance I thought, as I answered “Yes” in what I
hoped was my most charming tone of voice. Then he said, “I better watch
my grammar!” I hastened to reassure him: “No, YOU don’t have to watch
anything.” But this ﬁne baller ignored my lil attempt at mackin. Instead, he
went on to tell me about how, in high school, his English teacher had always
been on him about his grammar. He then proceeded to relate this
looooooooong story about his struggle to learn the distinction between “who”
and “whom.” It was clear that this beautiful Brotha’s whole experience with
language in school brought back painful memories. As I listened, I just
wanted to say: “Hey, forget about “who” and “whom.” Let’s talk about two
other pronouns—“you” and “me”.
(Smitherman, forthcoming)
Since the time I joined the Academy and entered the lists of the Language Wars,
I have often thought about Mr. Fine Baller. He had not only graduated from
Figure 1.1 “Herb & Jamal” cartoon, by Stephen Bentley.


--- PAGE 18 ---
high school, he had also gone on to college before being drafted into the NBA.
But for every Brotha like him, there are many thousands gone.
B.J . . . substitutes “who” for “whom.” And he can’t get his mouth ready
for them readers written in a language all their own and talkin bout no
news wouldn’t none of us kids want to play with anyhow. And time he
express himself his own way, teacher jump in his chest ranting, “Don’t say
‘I don’t have no homework.’ Don’t you realize that two negatives make a
positive? So you mean in fact that you do have your homework.” And B.J.
know exactly what he mean and so do she. So they send him to ...t h e
speech correction ofﬁcer or whatever his title is. And the creep ask a lot 
of dumb questions most which ain’t none of his business and then jump
nasty behind B.J. brief replies and threaten to do B.J. dirty in that dossier.
Sure enough he write the whole thing up in the school record. And come
to ﬁnd out B.J. verbally destitute. Got no language skills to speak of and
mayhap no IQ. This same B.J. the neighborhood rapper. Mouth they call
him since he was a little kid tellin tales on the stoop. Mackman the big
guys call him cause he writes tough love letters for them. Bottom they call
him in the projects he so deep . . . Who in his darin and inspired wordplay
rival the beautifulest brothers freakin off on the basketball court with
prowess that caint even be talked about less the language bust but B.J.
do it. B.J. verbally destitute. And B.J. liable to ﬁnd his behind in one of them
special classes takin them special pills schools recommendin these days
for students who don’t act specially right.
(Bambara, 1974)
In mid-June, 2004, throughout the State of Michigan, and especially in the
metro Detroit community, folks were celebrating the Detroit Pistons’ victory in
the NBA Finals, their first championship in fourteen years. The word, heard
everywhere, from all mouths, whatever their ethnicity, age, gender, or social
class was “Deee-troit.” The City’s metropolitan dailies headlined stories about
the Pistons’ big win over the favored Los Angeles Lakers, with phrases like
“Deee-troit Style” (
Detroit Free Press). Even Detroit baseball fans and sports
announcers got all up in the Deee-troit mix: “And wasn’t that Comerica’s [Detroit
baseball stadium] public address announcer who at one point bellowed: ‘Dee-
troit ba-a-se-ball!’” (Henning, 2004). Yet legions of Black folk who shift the stress
pattern in words like “Detroit” and “police” (“PO-lice” in Black Language) have
long been branded and castigated for such pronunciation. Now “Deee-troit” is
on its way to becoming the linguistic norm.
“Don’t nobody don’t know god can’t tell me nothin!” 
(From a middle-aged Traditional Black Church member)
We Black folks be knowin we got some unique patterns of language goin on
up in here in the U.S. of A. Yet, still today, in the twenty-ﬁrst century, after more
2 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 19 ---
than four decades—count ’em, foe decades!—of research by language scholars,
it’s some people who say Black Language ain nothin but “slang and cuss
words,” or “it’s just broken English.” Not to mention those who be sayin ain no
such thang as Black Language! Well, I guess it’s always gon be some folk don’t
believe fat meat is greasy. Dem’s the ones gon be left behind in the dustbin of
history. 
Black or African American Language (BL or AAL) is a style of speaking English
words with Black ﬂava—with Africanized semantic, grammatical, pronunciation,
and rhetorical patterns. AAL comes out of the experience of U.S. slave
descendants. This shared experience has resulted in common speaking styles,
systematic patterns of grammar, and common language practices in the 
Black community. Language is a tie that binds. It provides solidarity with your
community and gives you a sense of personal identity. AAL served to bind the
enslaved together, melding diverse African ethnic groups into one community.
Ancient elements of African speech were transformed into a new language
forged in the crucible of enslavement, U.S. style apartheid, and the Black strug-
gle to survive and thrive in the face of dominating and oppressive Whiteness.
Kitchen became not only the name of the room for cooking and eating, but
also the hair at the neckline, very tightly curled, typically the most African part
of Black hair. 
Yella/high yella, red/redbone, light-skinnded became references
to light-complexioned Africans. Ashy was used to refer to the whitish appear-
ance of Black skin due to exposure to wind and cold weather. Loan translations
from West African languages were maintained, like the Mandingo phrase, 
a ka
nyi ko-jugu, literally, “it is good badly,” that is, it is very good, or it is so good
that it’s bad! 
The Africanization of U.S. English has been passed on from one generation
to the next. This generational continuity provides a common thread across the
span of time, even as each new group stamps its own linguistic imprint on 
the Game. Despite numerous educational and social efforts to eradicate AAL
over time, the language has not only survived, it has thrived, adding to and
enriching the English language. From several African languages: the 
tote in tote
bags, from Kikongo, tota, meaning to carry; cola in Coca-Cola, from Temne,
kola; banjo from Kimbundu, mbanza; banana, from Wolof and Fulani. Even the
good old American English word, okay, has African language roots. Several
West African languages use kay, or a similar form, and add it to a statement
to conﬁrm and convey the meaning of “yes, indeed,” “of course,” “all right.” For
example, in Wolof, 
waw kay, waw ke; in Fula, eeyi kay; among the Mandingo,
o-ke. 
The roots of African American speech lie in the counter language, the
resistance discourse, that was created as a communication system unintel-
ligible to speakers of the dominant master class. Enslaved Africans and their
descendants assigned alternate and sometimes oppositional semantics to
English words, like 
Miss Ann and Mr. Charlie, coded derisive terms for White
woman and White man. This language practice also produced negative terms
African American Language 3


--- PAGE 20 ---
for Africans and later, African Americans, who acted as spies and agents for
Whites—terms such as Uncle Tom/Tom , Aunt Jane, and the expression, run
and tell that, referring to traitors within the community who would run and tell
“Ole Massa” about schemes and plans for escape from enslavement. It was a
language born in the crucible of Black economic oppression: tryna make a dolla
outta ﬁfteen cent—or to cast that age-old Black expression in today’s Hip Hop
terms, tryna make a dolla outta 50 cent. This coded language served as a mark
of social identity and a linguistic bond between enslaved Africans of disparate
ethnicities, and in later years, between African Americans of disparate socio-
educational classes. Today African American Language, which may also be
labeled U.S. Ebonics, is all over the nation and the globe. 
From enslavement to present-day, Africans in America continue to push the
linguistic envelope. Even though AAL words may look like English, the meanings
and the linguistic and social rules for using these words are totally different
from English. The statement, “He been married” can refer to a man who 
is married or divorced, depending on the pronunciation of “been.” If “been” is
stressed, it means the man married a long time ago and is still married. 
Little first-grade Kesha’s response to her teacher’s query about Mary’s
whereabouts—“She be here”—does 
not mean “She is here.” In fact, ignorance
of how the verb “be” functions in AAL can be a major source of miscommuni-
cation in classrooms of AAL speakers. Check it:
Teacher: Where is Mary?
Kesha: She not here.
Teacher: (clearly annoyed) She is never here!
Kesha: Yeah, she be here.
Teacher: Where? You just said she wasn’t here.
In AAL, “be” does not refer to any particular point in time. Rather it conveys the
meaning of an event or action that recurs over time, even if intermittent. Thus
Kesha’s “Yeah, she be here” means that Mary is in class at times even though
she is not there at the present moment. 
Back in The Day “The Greatest,” Muhammad Ali, speaking publicly while in
East Africa, caused much consternation in whitebread, non AAL-speaking U.S.
with his comment, “There are two bad White men in the world, the Russian
White man and the American White man. They are the two baddest men in the
history of the world.” When Ali made this pronouncement, he was using 
the word “bad” in a particular way, and he was speaking in a Black culturally
approved rhetorical style. His reference to the two “bad White men” was a
metaphor that captured the powerful status of what was then the world’s only
two super powers. Ali did not mean that the Russian and the American White
man were “evil,” or “not good,” nor was his commentary insulting. On the
contrary, it was an expression in awesome recognition of the world-wide
omnipotence of the two countries in which these symbolic White men were
4 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 21 ---
citizens. Such examples of Black Language rules and speaking practices illus-
trate the bilingualism of African Americans—or, at the very least, demonstrate
that Blacks are what linguist Arthur Palacas (2001) has called “bi-English.”
Generational continuity is important to understanding the relationship
between language and race. On the one hand, race does not determine what
language a child will speak, there is no such thing as a “racial language,” and
no race or ethnic group is born with a particular language. Children acquire
their language from the community of speakers they play, live, grow up, and
socialize with. This process of acquiring language and learning to speak is a
universal fact of life characteristic of human beings throughout the world. Thus,
regardless of a child’s race or ethnicity, she will acquire and speak the language
of her community, whether that language be the Zulu spoken in South Africa,
the French spoken in Paris, the Eﬁk spoken in West Africa, the Spanish spoken
in U.S. Latino/a communities—or the African American Language spoken on
the South Side of Chicago. 
On the other hand, since communities in the U.S. have been separated and
continue to exist along distinct racial lines, language follows suit. An African
American child will more than likely play, live, grow up, and socialize in any one
of the numerous African American communities of the U.S. and thus will acquire
the African American Language of her community. In the same way, a European
American child will more than likely play, live, grow up, and socialize in any one
of the numerous European American communities of the U.S. and thus will
acquire the European American English of her community. Same process of
generational continuity for the Zulu child in South Africa, the French child in
Paris, the Eﬁk child in West Africa, and the Latino/a child in the U.S. Even though
race does not determine what language a child will speak, race does determine
what community a child grows up in, and it is that community which provides
the child with language. Of course this process accounts only for the primary
or ﬁrst language of a child, what Old Skool linguists call the “mother tongue.”
The process does not preclude the possibility of a child learning an additional
language, or languages, in the process of schooling or growing up. Such bi- and
multilingualism is the norm in societies beyond the borders of the U.S. And it
is a vision and a worthy goal for future generations of American youth. 
Linguistic push-pull
Borrowing from DuBois’s concept of “double consciousness, “I coined the term
“linguistic push-pull” back in the 1970s to characterize ambivalence about
what was then called “Black English.” In that famous passage from The Souls
of Black Folk (1903), DuBois stated:
After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and
Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and gifted
with second-sight in this American world—a world which yields him no true
African American Language 5


--- PAGE 22 ---
self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of
the other world. It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this
sense of always looking at one’s self through the eyes of others, of
measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused
contempt and pity. One ever feels his two-ness—an American, a Negro; two
souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one
dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
Linguistic push-pull: Black folk loving, embracing, using Black Talk, while
simultaneously rejecting and hatin on it—the linguistic contradiction is manifest
in both Black and White America. Of course we done come a long way from 
the 1970s when Black leaders like Roy Wilkins, representing the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), railed against the
language spoken by millions of Black people as well as the emerging research
by linguists and educators who showcased the systematic nature of “Black
English.” Indeed, in that era, educational programs that acknowledged even
the 
existence of this language were lambasted, even though such programs
always had as their goal the teaching of the Language of Wider Communication
(LWC) in the U.S., that is, “standard American English.” But peep this: the LWC
ain decreed by the Divine One from on High. Naw, “standard American English”
is a form of English that gets to be considered “standard” because it derives
from the style of speaking and the language habits of the dominant race, class
and gender in U.S. society. 
In 1971, the NAACP’s magazine, 
The Crisis, billing itself as “a record of the
darker races” (how bout dat?) published an editorial essay attacking linguist-
educator Carol Reed and her colleagues in the Language Curriculum Research
Group at New York’s Brooklyn College. These language educators, with funding
from the Ford Foundation, had launched SEEK (Search for Elevation, Education
and Knowledge), an instructional program designed to teach students college
level writing skills by contrasting the differences between the students’ “Black
English” and the language required in college writing. I still rate SEEK as the
most creative and educationally sound language education program for AAL-
speaking college students that has ever been developed. (Big ups to Carol
Reed, Milton Baxter and all they peeps that worked in the SEEK Program.) 
The
Crisis editorial, as well as Wilkins in his pronouncements in Ebony magazine
and in other Black media venues, dismissed SEEK as “black nonsense.” The
editorial argued that these Black Brooklyn College students’ language is 
merely the English of the undereducated . . . basically the same slovenly
English spoken by the South’s under-educated poor white population . . .
It is time to repudiate this black nonsense and to take appropriate action
against institutions which foster it in craven capitulation to the fantasies
of the extreme black cultists and their pale and spineless sycophants.
(p. 78)
6 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 23 ---
Wild-ass, reactionary isht like this sounded the death knell for SEEK, and its
initial success with New York Black students was short-lived.
Wonder what Wilkins and company would think of today’s positive response
to “Deee-troit.” To say nothing of the thousands of other examples of Black
linguistic crossover into mainstream English—from the ever-popular Black “high
ﬁve” that can be seen everywhere in White America, to words like “phat” and
“bling-bling,” now comfortably housed in standard dictionaries of American
English. This linguistic crossover notwithstanding, our society continues to
reﬂect linguistic push-pull. Check it: in the same city now linguistically embracing
“Dee-troit,” a young Black female journalist who was a volunteer writing coach
in a Detroit middle school, bemoaned the language of the students:
Jelon . . . read his story with a nervous smile. He ended with, “It was off
the hizzee foe shizee,” street talk for “It was fun.”
“Did he say ‘Off the hizee?’” I asked in shock.
“What’s wrong wit’ that?” Donna replied.
Donna . . . was quick-witted, one of the smartest kids I met . . . Donna’s
language was that of the school, but the children didn’t just speak broken
English. They wrote that way, too.
I dubbed Kayla the Period Assassin . . . Her ice cream story was
coherent, but she used phrases such as “she be doing that” and used
“and” or “so” to create unending sentences.
Like many of her peers, she focused on spilling her imagination onto the
page, not attending to her punctuation.
(Pratt, 2004)
Here is an inner city classroom, in a school that has been labeled “failing”
in this “No Child Left Behind” era, in which Black students are not moaning
about writing and are not experiencing the terror of the blank page, but are, by
Pratt’s own account, enthusiastically “spilling [their] imaginations” onto paper.
Yet this journalist turned writing coach is bemoaning the use of “she be doing
that,” obviously unaware that this use is grammatical in African American
Language. In fact, this “showcase variable,” as linguist John Rickford has
dubbed it (1999), has become a linguistic icon in AAL, differentiating the
competent speakers of the language from the wanna be’s who always tryna
bite the language. Functioning within the semantic parameters of 
aspect,
Kayla’s use of “be” incorporates past, present and future simultaneously,
conveying the meaning that whatever “she” is doing, it is characteristic of her—
even though she may not be “doing” the thing at the particular moment that
Kayla is speaking. Furthermore, the focal point of instruction in Pratt’s class 
is on punctuation and other low-level matters of form, rather than content,
creativity, critical thinking, and style of expression. Pratt needs to take a page
from her own writing, which is profoundly dynamic and engaging—and it ain got
nothin to do wit her use of punctuation and LWC grammar. 
African American Language 7


--- PAGE 24 ---
On the national level, in television news and talk shows and in conversations
across the country, folks in mid-2004 talked about the big dis that comedian
Bill Cosby leveled at the culture of “lower economic” Blacks, including their
language. Cosby ﬁrst went off in his speech at the 2004 NAACP Legal Defense
Fund celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Supreme Court ruling, 
Brown
v. Topeka Board of Education(the 1954 Supreme Court case which dismantled
(at least legally) the educational apartheid that had reigned in the U.S. for more
than half a century). Cosby continued his attack for weeks in several other
public venues. In reference to Black Language, he said:
They’re standing on the corner and they can’t speak English. I can’t even
talk the way these people talk. “Why you ain’t?” “Where you is?” . . . And
I blamed the kid until I heard the mother talk. And then I heard the father
talk . . . Everybody knows it’s important to speak English except these
knuckleheads . . . You can’t land a plane with “why you ain’t.” You can’t
be a doctor with that kind of crap coming out of your mouth . . . There’s
no English being spoken . . . It’s time for you to not accept the language
that these people are speaking . . . We got these knuckleheads walking
around who don’t want to learn English.
(Cosby, 2004)
This is not the first time that Cosby has weighed in on African American
Language. He was as vociferously oppositional—and inaccurate and wrong-
headed—in his reaction to the December, 1996 Oakland, California School
Board’s Ebonics Resolution. However, by 2004, it had been eight years since
the Oakland Resolution, and I had assumed that Cosby had learned over the
years, that he had consulted the research and publications of linguists on AAL.
Obviously not, cause he singin the same song, just a different verse. Finally,
lest we all forget, this is the same Cosby who created and made mad Benjamins
off the language-impaired Black male, “Dumb Donald,” and that linguistically
rambling dude, “Mush Mouth,” in his “Fat Albert” show of the 1970s.
It is imperative that Cosby, any twenty-ﬁrst century Wilkinses on the scene,
teachers, and writing coaches, git up on the voluminous research literature on
AAL. And if they find the work of language scholars too dreadfully draining 
on the brain, then check out the elegant simplicity of Toni Morrison:
It’s terrible to think that a child with ﬁve different present tenses comes to
school to be faced with books that are less than his own language. And
then to be told things about his language, which is him, that are sometimes
permanently damaging. He may never know the etymology of Africanisms
in his language, not even know that “hip” is a real word, or that “the
dozens” meant something. This is a really cruel fallout of racism. I know
the standard English. I want to use it to help restore the other language,
the lingua franca.
(quoted in LeClair, 1981)
8 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 25 ---
Research on African American Language
Pratt, the journalist, is young, Black and female. Cosby, the comedian, is older,
Black and male. Both are, to use Cosby’s style of characterization, “higher
economic.” Their views on Black speech sound eerily reminiscent of the
resoundingly negative views of late nineteenth-century and early twentieth-
century White scholars who considered “speaking Negro” pathological and
nothing but “baby talk.” In Harrison’s 1884 study of “Negro English,” as he
called it, he argued that:
Much of his [the Negro’s] talk is baby-talk . . . the slang which is an
ingrained part of his being as deep-dyed as his skin . . . the African, from
the absence of books and teaching, had no principle of 
analepsy in 
his intellectual furnishing by which a word, once become obscure from a
real or supposed loss of parts or meaning, can be repaired, amended, or
restored to its original form.
(p. 233)
On into the twentieth century, White American scholars continued this line
of thinking about “Negro English.” In the ﬁrst study of Gullah (rural and urban
Black speech communities in the coastal regions of the Southeast), Bennett
argued: “Intellectual indolence, or laziness, mental and physical . . . shows
itself in the shortening of words, the elision of syllables, and modiﬁcation of
every difﬁcult enunciation . . . It is the indolence, mental and physical, of the
Gullah dialect that is its most characteristic feature” (1909, pp. 40, 45).
Mencken, in his famous 
The American Language, wrote of the “grammatical
peculiarities” in the speech of “the most ignorant Negroes” and concluded 
that “Black slave language may be called the worst English in the world” (1936,
p. 264). The folklorist Gonzales, in his collection of folk stories from the
Georgia–Carolina area, was equally critical of “Black slave language” and even
attributed it, as had Harrison, to the physiognomy of African people:
Slovenly and careless of speech, these Gullahs seized upon the peasant
English used by some of the early settlers and by the white servants of the
wealthier Colonists, wrapped their clumsy tongues about it as well as they
could, and enriched with certain expressive African words, it issued through
their ﬂat noses and thick lips as so workable a form of speech that it was
gradually adopted by the other slaves.
(1922, p. l0)
These conceptions of Black Language were challenged by the anthro-
pological research of White scholar Melville Herskovits (1941) and the linguistic
research of African American scholar Lorenzo Dow Turner (1949). Given the
continuing onslaught on the language of Black students, it should be noted
that Turner’s study of Gullah Language was motivated by a chance encounter
African American Language 9


--- PAGE 26 ---
with two Gullah women students in his class at South Carolina State College
in Orangeburg. According to Holloway and Vass, Turner’s “brief encounter would
change his life and the focus of his research for the rest of his life” (1993, 
p. ix). 
Turner ﬁrst set himself the task of mastering several African languages and
dialects because he felt this to be a necessary prerequisite to understanding
the linguistic origin and system of Black speech such as that he had heard from
those two Sistas in his South Carolina State classroom. His research would
span decades, during which he demonstrated not only the African language
background of Gullah speech but also laid the foundation to establish the
linguistic connection between African languages and the speech of the millions
of American Blacks who resided outside the Gullah region. 
Turner convincingly countered the “baby-talk” and African genetic inferiority
myths about Black Language:
When the African came to the United States and encountered in English
certain sounds not present in his native language, he did what any other
person to whom English was a foreign language would have done under
similar circumstances—he substituted sounds from his own language
which appeared to him to resemble most closely those English sounds
which were unfamiliar to him . . . The English inter-dental fricative 
th does
not exist in Gullah nor in the West African languages included in this study.
In pronouncing English words containing this sound, both the Gullah
speaker and the West African substitute [d] and [t], respectively, for the
voiced and voiceless varieties of it.
(Turner, 1949, p. 245)
Linguist Raven McDavid, who was known as the “Dean of American
Dialectology,” rendered an outstanding review of Turner’s research and
contended that his work would “inaugurate a new approach to the study of
American Negro speech.” McDavid concluded that Turner had presented “a
mass of evidence which should go far towards correcting previous investi-
gators” (1950, pp. 323, 326).
During the 1960s and 1970s, an era of profound social transformation 
in U.S. society, there was a virtual explosion of work on the language of U.S.
slave descendants. A new generation of scholars and linguists, both African
and European American, focused attention on African American Language.
Grounded in the new Chomskyan-inspired understanding of language as
fundamentally distinguishing humankind from other animal species and the
inherent systematicity and linguistic logic of 
all languages of the world, these
linguists successfully challenged the erroneous thinking of earlier scholars
about AAL. While not all the scholars of this period focused on (nor were in
agreement about) the origin of AAL, there was overwhelming consensus about
the logic and systematic nature of Black speech. Linguists then and now are
10 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 27 ---
united in our overwhelming rejection of assertions that AAL is illogical or
evidence of some kind of intellectual shortcoming in Blacks.
Beryl Bailey, the first Black woman linguist (1965, 1968, 1969) demon-
strated the differences in “deep structure” (syntactical meaning systems)
between Black and Mainstream English and by contrast, the striking similarities
between Black American English and Jamaican Creole.
I would like to suggest that the Southern Negro “dialect” differs from other
Southern speech because its deep structure is different, having its origin
as it undoubtedly does in some Proto-Creole grammatical structure . . .
The American Negro, like the Jamaican, operates in a linguistic continuum
. . . [although] there has not been an identical development of the systems.
(1965, p. 172)
Writing a few years after Bailey’s untimely death, White linguist J.L. Dillard
(1972) not only made a strong case for a connection between U.S. Black speech
and the Creole Englishes of the Caribbean, he also reafﬁrmed the West African
language background that had been foundational in Turner’s work.
The English of most American Blacks retains some features which are
common to both Caribbean and West African varieties of English . . . Like
the West Indian varieties, American Black English can be traced to a
creolized version of English based upon a pidgin spoken by slaves; it
probably came from the West Coast of Africa—almost certainly not directly
from Great Britain.
(Dillard, 1972, p. 6)
White linguist William Labov deftly dispelled the racist myth that African
American Language is illogical or ungrammatical. He presented analyses of
Black speech that revealed the language to be rule-governed and systematic,
not a collection of haphazard errors. His 
Logic of Non-Standard English(1970)
is a classic study that serves as the antidote to false impressions about
language, race and intelligence. Labov’s work (e.g., 1968, 1972), along with
that of other 1960s era linguists—such as Fasold (e.g., Fasold, 1972; Fasold
and Shuy, 1970) and Wolfram (1969)—introduced the study of Black Language
into mainstream social and scientiﬁc dialogue as a critical and legitimate line
of scientiﬁc and intellectual inquiry.
These pioneers in the Black Language research tradition laid the groundwork
for a generation of African American scholars who emerged in the 1970s 
and 1980s to produce work that significantly advanced the analysis and
understanding of the rich complexity of African American Language. The list
includes Baugh (e.g., 1983), Major (e.g., 1970), Morgan (e.g., 1989), Rickford
(e.g., 1973), Spears (e.g., 1982), Williams (e.g., 1975), and my ﬁrst major work,
which was published in 1977. This dimenson of the Black Language research
African American Language 11


--- PAGE 28 ---
tradition continues in current work by Alim and Baugh (forthcoming), Asante
(1990), Baugh (1999, 2000, 2003), Blackshire-Belay (1996), Crawford (2001),
Green (2002), Lanehart (2001), Perry and Delpit (1998), Rickford (1999),
Rickford and Rickford (2000), Rickford, 
et al. , (2004), Smitherman (1994,
2000a and b), Smitherman and Baugh (2002), Smitherman and Villanueva
(2003).
From King to Oakland
Martin Luther King Junior Elementary School Children, et. al., v. Ann Arbor
School District Board was formally ﬁled by Michigan Legal Services Attorneys
Gabe Kaimowitz and Kenneth Lewis on July 28, 1977. Widely known as “The
Black English Case,” the court action ended two years later, on July 12, 1979,
when Federal Judge Charles W. Joiner, himself a resident of the Ann Arbor,
Michigan community, issued his ruling in favor of the 
King children. (See Joiner,
1979; the full ruling is also reprinted in Smitherman, 1981a.) The Oakland,
California Uniﬁed School District Board issued its “Resolution on Ebonics” on
December 18, 1996. (The original Resolution as well as the later revised
version is reprinted in Perry and Delpit (1998) and in Baugh (2000). The 
King
ruling established the legitimacy of African American Language/“Black English”
within a legal framework and mandated the Ann Arbor School District to take
“appropriate action” to teach the Martin Luther King School children “to 
read in the standard English of the school, the commercial world, the arts,
science, and professions” (Joiner, 1979). The Oakland Ebonics Resolution
recognized African American Language/“Ebonics” as the “predominantly
primary language” of its African American students and mandated the use of
this language to “facilitate [the students’] acquisition and mastery of English
language skills.”
From my position as the chief advocate and expert witness for the parents
and children in 
King, the sound and fury that broke out with Oakland’s Ebonics
Resolution nearly two decades after King, and almost three decades after the
launching of Brooklyn College’s SEEK program, made me just throw up my
hands and say, “Ain we done been here befo?” The Oakland School Board’s
Resolution and educational plan wasn’t radical. Not even. They were simply
proposing to teach the students literacy and communication skills in the LWC
of the U.S. 
King and Oakland are two historic moments that share several signiﬁcant
similarities—reﬂective of the old truism that history repeats itself. And now as
we pull nearly a decade away from Oakland, it makes me wonder if there will
be yet another repetition somewhere around 2016 because it is surely true
that those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it.
Both 
King and Oakland centered on the lack of academic progress 
and educational underachievement of African American students in the
nation’s public school systems. Both considered language to be central to this
12 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 29 ---
deleterious state of affairs. To be sure these two public spaces were some two
thousand miles apart, but even in terms of location, the two events share
striking similarities. The 
King case occurred in Ann Arbor, an elite college town
that is home to the University of Michigan, often touted as the Harvard of the
Midwest, located only a 40-minute drive from post-industrialized Chocolate 
City Detroit. (In fact, the four-week trial in King took place in downtown Detroit
where the U.S. Eastern District, Southern Division courthouse is located.) 
The Oakland Ebonics Resolution was released in the racial rainbow setting of
Oakland, California, not far from another elite college community, the University
of California-Berkeley, often touted as the Harvard of the West. 
Both 
King v. Ann Arbor in 1979 and Oakland in 1996 occasioned a barrage
of national and international media coverage about an educational issue, the
likes of which ain been witnessed since 
Brown v. Board in 1954. However,
given the decentralized system of education in this country, both King and
Oakland were, in the ﬁnal analysis, merely local events with no broader venue
for impacting national policy about the education of Black children and youth.
Since King was a Federal court case, there was the potential for national impact
in that a legal precedent could have been set in a higher Federal court.
However, the Ann Arbor School District foreclosed this possibility when it voted
not to appeal Joiner’s decision to a higher court, thus preventing a broader,
legal ruling that could have gone beyond the conﬁnes of Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Even though the Oakland School Board’s Ebonics Resolution led to hearings
on Ebonics in the U.S. Senate, in January, 1997, the hearings did not result in
any Federal legislation which would have mandated the implementation of
language education policies for Black students across the Nation.
On the other hand, if we view these events from the vantage point of the
half-full glass, there are differences between these two historic moments that
point to Oakland’s forward advance over 
King. In other words, believe it or not,
we done made some, though not nearly enough, progress on the language
front.
The students in 
King represented only one school, not an entire district, and
they were a minority among a minority. Only 13 percent of the students at 
King Elementary School were Black, and most of that 13 percent were middle
and upper class Black youth who, being speakers of both African American
Language and “School English,” were not experiencing language barriers in
their quest for equal educational opportunities. Hence, they were not in the
group of plaintiffs in the court case. Only the Black students from the Green
Road housing projects, some twenty-four low-income units isolated in an Ann
Arbor neighborhood of large, expensive homes, were having language educa-
tion problems at King School. The numbers are signiﬁcant here. The parents
of the children in the lawsuit were a small group of single female heads of
household, who did not enjoy the support of the other (middle and upper class)
Black parents at King School. These Sistas was shonuff underdogs, boldly and
bravely taking on the whole Ann Arbor School District. 
African American Language 13


--- PAGE 30 ---
By contrast, Black students in Oakland were 53 percent of the School 
District population of 51,706 students, and virtually all—from kindergarten 
to high school—were adversely affected by Oakland’s lack of a language
education policy around the issue of Ebonics. This more closely parallels the
situation of twenty-first-century African American students in urban districts
nationwide. 
The Ebonics Resolution was launched by the Oakland School District Board
itself, on behalf of the entire District. Thus the battle for AAL rights did not have
to be waged against an unwilling administrative apparatus, for the Oakland
Board and its Superintendent, Carolyn Getridge, were solidly behind a renewed
vision of language education for Black students in the Oakland Public Schools.
Further, many, if not all, of Oakland’s teachers, desperate for instructional
policies and strategies to redress the dismal outcome of their Black students’
education, looked to the recommendations from the Task Force on Educating
African American Students, including its Ebonics Resolution, as potential winds
of change. By contrast, the teachers and principal at Martin Luther King Junior
Elementary School and the Ann Arbor School District Superintendent and other
administrators resisted the Green Road mothers’ pleas for help, vigorously
lambasted the court action, and conducted themselves with defensive self-
righteousness throughout the two years of the court case. 
Another important difference is the research in Oakland, made possible by
Federal funding, to develop a program of language and literacy instruction that
has the promise not only of elevating the educational achievement of Oakland’s
Black students, but also that of Black youth in other school districts which may
choose to replicate Oakland’s plan. This is in stark contrast to the remedy
implemented by the Ann Arbor School District, a half-hearted effort, doomed
from the outset. First, the District sought no outside funding and the plan was,
by deliberate design, seriously underfunded. Second, the plan was scheduled
to last only one year, during which there were to be twenty hours of inservice
language instruction for King School staff, which they would be paid to attend,
a library with materials on Black and Standard English, a language arts
consultant-specialist with expertise in Black English, and four sessions for
reading teachers. Amazingly, the plan speciﬁed no special language and literacy
instruction for the plaintiff children. Further, Ann Arbor’s proposed oversight
team included no parent representatives, none of the professionals comprising
King student advocates (“Friends of King,” as they called themselves), none of
the linguists and educators who had served as expert witnesses in the case,
no representatives of the Ann Arbor Student Advocacy Center which had been
counseling and assisting the King children’s mothers for years, and no teachers
from any other school in the Ann Arbor School District. 
Reading the plan as the continuation of the same kind of miseducation and
language prejudices that had been the focus of the two-year history of the court
case, Attorneys Kaimowitz and Lewis ﬁled a complaint against Ann Arbor’s so-
called “remedy,” requesting several modiﬁcations to the plan—e.g., that the
14 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 31 ---
mothers of the plaintiff children be involved in management team meetings;
that the language arts consultant-specialist work in the reading classroom with
the children on a regular basis. The Ann Arbor School Board rejected the
modiﬁcations, and Judge Joiner took the position that the Court was not able
to rule on the merits of an educational plan. Clearly the teachers and principal
at King merely gave lip service to the Judge’s order for a remedy. They circled
the wagons at King Elementary School and sought escape from the negative
glare of public scrutiny and opinion that they had been subjected to since 
the 1977 ﬁling of the case and particularly in the month-long trial itself in the
summer of 1979. 
Black speech—language or dialect?
One critical issue that was raised, but not followed up in the aftermath of the
King ruling, which is now being taken up, post-Oakland, is the language–dialect
issue. It is a fundamental question whether the speech of the Black community
constitutes a distinct language in its own right, or merely one of several varieties
(“dialects”) of English. We did not have to address the language–dialect debate
in 
King since the legislation under which Kaimowitz and Lewis ﬁled—1703(f) of
the Equal Educational Opportunity Act—did not require that the children had 
to speak a distinctly different language, only that the language in question 
had to constitute a “barrier” to the quest for equal educational opportunity.
This issue was clariﬁed in one of Judge Joiner’s early rulings in the case when
he stated:
The . . . list of persons covered . . . is only merely illustrative but could 
well include students whose “language barrier” results from the use of
some type of non-standard English . . . The statutory language places no
limitations on the character or source of the language barrier except that
it must be serious enough to impede equal participation by . . . students
in . . . instructional programs. Barring any more legislative guidance to the
contrary, 1703(f) applies to language barriers of appropriate severity
encountered by students who speak “Black English” as well as to language
barriers encountered by students who speak German.
(Joiner, 1978)
Yet, as I argued in my analysis of 
King (Smitherman, 1981b), the
language–dialect issue never left the court case, nor the minds of the public.
The question of whether Black speech is a language or a dialect is a logical
and an important one. While linguists easily accept the legitimacy of all
languages and all dialects of languages, this is very often not the perception
of non-linguists. In the minds of everyday people (and, unfortunately, even
among some of my non-linguist academic colleagues—hello!), languages have
high status, but dialects do not. 
African American Language 15


--- PAGE 32 ---
The question of whether we talk about African American “Dialect” or African
American “Language” is complicated by the socio-political—not the linguistic—
nature of the question. For example, one rule of thumb linguists use in differ-
entiating a language from a dialect is that of mutual intelligibility. If the speech
from one community can be understood by those in another community, with
relative ease, requiring only slight adjustment on the part of each group of
speakers, then we are dealing with dialects of the same language, not different
languages. However, history is replete with examples of speech forms from two
different groups which can be understood by members of both groups, but 
the speech forms are considered and are called different languages, not
dialects of the same language. Swedish and Norwegian are two such examples.
In 1997, the Linguistic Society of America unanimously passed a resolution in
support of Oakland’s Ebonics Resolution in which LSA takes the position that
languages are a matter of socio-political construction, therein intimating 
that language scholars do not have the deﬁnitive, ﬁnal say in categorizing and
labeling languages and dialects. (The LSA resolution is reprinted in Perry 
and Delpit (1998) and Baugh (2000).
A language can easily be seen to be legitimately different from another
language, whereas dialects are often viewed as mere corruptions of or depar-
tures from a given language. In his very powerful essay, “Ebonic Need Not Be
English,” linguist Ralph Fasold makes this compelling point:
Given the yawning chasm between the linguistic and folk ideas “standard”
and “dialect,” for linguists to attempt to convey what we have learned about
Ebonic while using terms like “standard English” and “African American
English dialect” starts us off immediately with a double handicap . . . If
Ebonic were a language and presented as such, much of the mismatch in
presuppositions can be avoided. The Ebonic language would not be a
dialect and would therefore not be assumed to be a corruption of anything,
but something real in its own right. As a language, the question of its “rising
up” to the standards of English would not even come up. A language has
its own standards, and the standards . . . of some other language would
be simply irrelevant . . . I do know that I have been able to get across the
linguistic perception of the nature of Ebonic much more efficiently by
framing its relation to English as one of language-to-language. This newer
discourse just seems to work better.
(Fasold, 2001a, pp. 277–79; see also Fasold, 2001b)
Taking up the language–dialect issue from the perspective of implications
for classroom literacy instruction, with numerous concrete examples of
applications in his ﬁrst-year college writing classroom, linguist Arthur Palacas
makes a strong case for “liberating American Ebonics from Euro-English.”
Employing a Chomskyan grammatical theory approach, he argues that “Ebonics
is both English and another language and deserves a name of its own” (Palacas,
16 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 33 ---
2001, p. 339). He goes on to demonstrate that this approach has facilitated
the advancement of the
academic cause of African Americans . . . we all believe that Spanish is 
a different language from English; we take it without argument that, 
of course, the exam results would be skewed downward for Hispanic
Americans taking a test in standard English. Once liberated from English
. . . Ebonics poses exactly the same reason why the authors should have
retreated from their pursuit of negative claims about African American
intellectuality—Ebonics is a different language too . . . The tide begins to
shift . . . when we accept as a reality that Ebonics is structurally (and often
semantically) another language. Taking the reality seriously can revolu-
tionize our attitudes and approach toward our Ebonics-strong students—it
has mine, to be sure—because the conclusion is based on objective
analysis, not subjective pressures to think well of Ebonics . . . This good
news about Ebonics as a language, a contrasting type of English—once
embraced—immediately inspires us to elevate our vision of the linguistic
capabilities of our students.
(Palacas, 2001, pp. 344–47)
As numerous examples in this chapter and other chapters demonstrate,
African American Language may look like English, but the meanings are totally
different from English. Consider yet another example:
1 Can’t nobody be in the room.
2 Can’t be nobody in the room.
(Sistrunk, 1998)
The contrast in meaning between the sentences above cannot be rendered in
LWC with a word-for-word translation. 
The bottom line is that languages evolve from peoplehood and nationhood.
Fasold’s (2001a) essay on Ebonics revives the work of linguist Heinz Kloss
(1967). His conceptualization and deﬁnition of two different kinds of language,
or two ways that languages can come into being, is highly instructive. Kloss
argues that there are “abstand” and “ausbau” languages. An “abstand” lan-
guage is a “language by distance,” that is, a language so distinctly different
from others that “a linguist would have to call [it] a language even if not a single
word had ever been written in it” (p. 29). An “ausbau” language, on the other
hand, is a “language by development.” It is a language “by virtue of its having
been reshaped . . . remolded, elaborated” (p. 29); such a language has been
socially and socio-politically constructed. Irrespective of whether one can make
a case for an “abstand” factor in comparing African American speech with LWC,
there is most decidedly an “ausbau” factor operating in the case of African
American speakers—these descendants of Africans enslaved in the U.S., whose
African American Language 17


--- PAGE 34 ---
collective will can bring about the declaration and acceptance of U.S. Black
speech as a language, in much the same way as a uniﬁed Black Nation, during
the Civil Rights and Black Liberation Movements of the 1960s and 1970s,
brought about fundamental legal, social, and cultural changes in U.S. society.
In short, as a collective, as a nation within a nation, Black people in this country
have the power to declare our language a language.
Who “speaks Negro”?
About “speaking Negro,” Dillard writes:
In 1704, according to Sarah Kemble Knight’s Journal, a “Senior Justice,”
attempting to interrogate a Connecticut Indian who was on trial for
receiving stolen goods (from a Negro slave), addressed him in the following
words:
You Indian why did you steal from this man? You shouldn’t do so—it’s
a Grandy wicked thing to steal. Hol’t Hol’t cryes Justice Junr, Brother
You speak Negro to him I’le ask him.
(Dillard, 1972, p. 146)
Who “speaks Negro” today? African Americans from all walks of life. They
can be found throughout the Black community talkin and testifyin, lyin and
signiﬁyin, workin the language to the max. The language is used by all sectors
of African America—from seniors to b-boys, preachers to politicians, among
both flyguys and lames, from Five Percenters to the Amen Corner, from the
African-Centered to the e-light. African American Language crosses boundaries
of gender, age, religion, social class, and region because it derives from the
same source: the Black Experience and the Oral Tradition embedded in that
Experience. Of course it’s true today in the twenty-first century that there is
greater diversity within the African American community than ever before in
the history of U.S. slave descendants. Take just a simple thang like a Sista’s
hairdo. There was a time when virtually all Black women straightened their hair,
using a heated metal comb, usually in combination with heated metal curlers,
called a “hot comb” and “hot curlers.” There was “good hair,” and there was
“bad hair.” The “bad hairstyle” (which would be celebrated in the 1960s as 
the “natural”) was almost nonexistent because it was viewed as ugly and
unsophisticated. And braids, they wahn’t even in the running! Today, however,
Sistas wear everything from the natural, in both long and short versions, to
dreads/dreadlocks, to a multiplicity of braided styles (zillions, twists, goddess,
etc.). There are permed hairstyles, relaxed styles, wave nouveau, and all sorts
of weaves. And the older hot combed and hot curled styles still exist. It is not
unusual to ﬁnd all of the aforementioned hairdos worn by the same Sista at
different points in time. 
18 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 35 ---
African American diversity notwithstanding, there is an underlying com-
monality among all those with the blood of a slave running in they veins (as Hip
Hop artist Nas would say). Culture, history, experience, not just skin color and
race, continue to deﬁne African America. And Black Language is all up in this
mix. At some point in their lives, in one context or another, some 90 percent
of Black Americans “speak Negro.” While Blacks also embrace and speak LWC,
as well as other languages, such as Arabic and Spanish, they have held onto
Black speech, from its “Negro English” days to African American Language of
this period. Despite elitist language pronouncements by folk like Cosby, despite
language eradication efforts in the schools, despite White America’s ambiva-
lence toward the language (borrowing and castigating it at the same time),
“speaking Negro” has persisted over generations and decades. The language
is bound up with and symbolic of identity, camaraderie, culture, and home. And
it ain goin nowhere.
African American Language 19


--- PAGE 36 ---
Chapter 2
Words and Expressions,
Proverbs and Familiar Sayings
There is a core of words and familiar expressions that cross boundaries of age,
gender and social class in African America. Some of these have been in use
for decades; others have been coined in more recent years. While these words
and familiar expressions may not be in the everyday speech of 
all Blacks, they
are heard and used, at some point today, throughout African America. We may
think of this linguistic core as “Black Semantics.” Like other aspects of African
American Culture, many of the words and expressions in Black Semantics have
now become the linguistic property of all Americans.
Truth be told, there are 
ﬁfty-leben words, expressions, proverbs, and familiar
sayings in the Black Semantics dimension of African American Language.1 But
I have compiled a list of frequently used key idioms and sayings that constitute
a cultural litmus test of Black Linguistic Knowledge. This list ranges from Church
to Street and from Old Skool to Hip Hop.
A aand BB
Two back-to-back musical selections by a singer or group during Black
Church service or on a church musical program.
A aand BB CConversation
Used to emphasize that a conversation or discussion is between two
people; a third party butting in will be told, “This is an A and B conversation,
so you can C yo way out of it.”
A hhard hhead mmake aa ssoft bbehind
If you don’t listen to reason, if your head is too “hard” to heed good advice,
you will suffer in life. For children, the suffering will be administered by
their parents by way of a spanking (
whuppin in Black Semantics) on their
butts, which will make the behind painfully “soft.”
Ace kkool
Close friend.
Act uugly
Behaving in a negative, unpleasant manner.


--- PAGE 37 ---
African HHolocaust
Term used by Black activists, writers, Hip Hop artists, and other Blacks to
refer to the European slave trade and centuries of enslavement of African
people in the United States and throughout the Diaspora. Term references
the wholesale destruction of a people, with some historians, such as the
late Dr. John Henrik Clarke, estimating the number of Africans forcibly
removed from their native lands at one hundred million, not all of whom
reached the “New World.” Millions perished from torture, disease, and the
horrendous Middle Passage across the Atlantic Ocean, and thousands
committed suicide.
African PPeople’s TTime
Reference to the African American concept of time. Being in tune with
human events, nature, seasons, natural rhythms, not a slave to the artiﬁcial
time of the man-made clock. Being “in time,” in tune with emotions, feel-
ings, the general ﬂow of things, is more critical than being “on time.” The
challenge continues to be how to reconcile an “in time” philosophy with
the “on time” demands of mainstream America. Also CPT, CP TTime.
Afro
Hairstyle in its natural African state, not straightened by chemicals or heat.
Also fro.
Ain aa tthang
It’s okay, everything’s ﬁne, no problem.
Ain sstudyin yyou
You are not important; not paying any attention to you.
All t
that
Superb, outstanding, highly accomplished.
All tthe wway llive
Person or event that is extremely lively, exciting, dynamic. Also live.
All uup iin tthe KKool-Aid aand ddon’t eeven kknow tthe ﬂﬂava
Describes someone who is butting in on someone else’s conversation or
business.
Amen CCorner
Corner or section of the Traditional Black Church, usually in the front, where
church-goers, often older women, provide dynamic, lively verbal responses
and “Amens” throughout the service. May also be used outside the Church
to refer to any area of the audience where there are lively expressions of
feeling and support for a speaker or performer.
Ashy
Whitish, scaly appearance of Black people’s skin due to exposure to wind
and cold. If you allow your “ash” to show, you are considered unsophis-
ticated, a country bumpkin type of person. 
Words and expressions 21


--- PAGE 38 ---
Ass
Added to the end of a word or expression for extra emphasis and intensity.
“He’s a slow-ass dude,” i.e., He is slower than slow.
Baby
Form of address for male or female.
Baby ddaddy
Baby’s or babies’ daddy, an unmarried father, considered irresponsible,
not providing for his child/children. Female version is baby mmomma.
Baby ggirl
Term of endearment for a female, generally one younger than the person
speaking.
Back
Buttocks, also behind, boody.
Back iin TThe DDay
1) Used to refer to an earlier period of time, often the 1960s or 1970s.
Sometimes has a nuanced tone suggesting that Black people were more
togetha and that things were better in this earlier period. 2) Used to refer
to the early years of Hip Hop, in the 1970s.
Bad
1) Describes person, thing, event that is outstanding, superb. From the
Mandingo of West Africa, 
a ka nyi ko-jugu, literally, “It is good badly,” that
is, “It’s so good that it’s bad!” 2) Describes something or someone who is
powerful, to be feared.
Beat ddown
Serious beating; could also be a verbal beating, a tongue-lashing.
Beef
1) Conﬂict, squabble, problem. 2) Penis.
Bees ddat wway
That’s how it is, that’s the way it goes, that’s life, accept it.
Befoe GGod ggit tthe nnews
Describes something that will happen swiftly, in a split second, so fast that
it’ll occur even before God knows about it—an impossibility, which thus
magniﬁes the description.
Behind
Buttocks, also back, boody.
Benjamins/Benjies
1) $100 bills, from the picture of Benjamin Franklin on the bill. 2) A lot of
money.
22 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 39 ---
Betta aask ssomebody
Said to or about a person who is acting as if they know what they’re doing
or saying, or appearing to be in control of a situation, when in actuality they
aren’t. 
Betta rrecognize
Acknowledge, come to terms with the truth, power or reality of something
or someone.
Bid 
Popular card game, played with partners, four people per game; traditional
social event, with players displaying a lotta signifyin and trash-talkin. 
Also Bid WWhist. (For examples of signifyin and trash-talkin, check out
Chapter 4.) 
Bip bbam, tthank yyou mmam!
Rapid action or event, usually premature; often used by Sistas to refer to
Brothas who complete the sex act in a matter of seconds. Also Wham bbam,
thank yyou mmam!
Bird
Vagina.
Bitch
Used by both males and females to refer to females; can be generic, pos-
itive, or negative. When used in reference to males, bitch is negative. Also
used to refer to objects and things—“Yall ain gon have but one problem
outta me. Uhma leave yall dis house, but after I do the reﬁ, it’s gon have a
helluva balance on it. So when uhm gone, yall can pay the bitch off, or you
can sell the ho” (from a senior Sista during a light-hearted talk with her
adult children about her “last will and testament”).
Black TThang
Any cultural or social practice, behavior, or attitude, stemming from the
Black Experience in the U.S.
Blind iin oone eeye, ccan’t ssee oout tthe oother
Long-standing saying in the Oral Tradition, used as a signifyin reference to
a person whose eyesight is failing but who is too vain to acknowledge it.
By extension, used to signify on a person who lacks insight and under-
standing about a particular situation or life in general. 
Bling-bling
Flashy, expensive jewelry. By extension, flamboyant display of wealth,
possessions, accomplishments in general. Coined by Hip Hop artist 
B.G. as the title of a 1999 song on the album, 
Chopper City in the 
Ghetto. Scheduled for inclusion in the Oxford English Dictionary , which 
will credit B.G. as the originator of this now widely used term (personal
Words and expressions 23


--- PAGE 40 ---
communication, Jesse Sheidlower, Editor at Large, Oxford English
Dictionary, April, 2005). 
Blood
Generic term for person of African descent, derived from the genetic kin-
ship and shared bloodlines of African people. This meaning long precedes
the use of the term by the California gang, the Bloods. 
Blue-eyed ssoul
Used when soul, deep feeling, intense emotion is observed in Europeans
and European Americans.
Bogod
To take over something, to take charge, act aggressively.
Boo
Term of endearment for person you’re in a relationship with; used by males
and females.
Boo-coos
A lot of something; many, very much. From the AAL pronunciation of French
beaucoup.
Boody
Buttocks, especially in reference to the female. For emphasis, may be
pronounced “BOO-TAY.”
Boojee
Elitist, uppity-acting African American person, also elitist Black event or
style; negative term for those who identify with European American culture
and reject Blacks and Black culture.
Born aat nnight bbut nnot llast nnight
Caution: don’t think you can make a fool of me, or deceive me. I am not
naive.
Boy
1) Used to refer to, but not to address, a male in a favorable way, as “Me
and my boy was chillin.” Should never be used to address any Black male
over the age of eight or nine. 2) Old Skool term for heroin.
Brang aass tto ggit aass
Used as response to a threat, conveys the idea that the person doing the
threatening can also be harmed.
Brick hhouse
A female with a sexy shape, especially if she has a round, ample behind.
Broth
a
Any African American male. Derived from the Black Church pattern of
referring to all male members of the “Church family” as Brotha. Also Bro.
24 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 41 ---
Busta
A male who is not with it, who ruins the social atmosphere because he is
uncool or fake.
Bustin rrhymes
Creation and rhyming of song lyrics in Hip Hop.
Butta
Smooth, excellent, very nice.
Call ssomebody oout
To publicly confront or criticize someone.
Call ssomebody oouta tthey nname
To insult someone, talk about them in a negative way, to accuse them of
something.
Call yyoself/myself/herself
/etc.
To intend to do a thing without actually achieving your goal, to consider
yourself to be doing something that doesn’t get done. “She call herself goin
to the store, but she up here runnin her mouth and ain got there yet.”
Can’t kkill nnothin, aand wwon’t nnothin ddie
Bad luck, hard times.
Cat
1) A male. 2) Vagina.
Cave
Derogatory term for European American or European. From the belief
among some Blacks that Whites led a barbaric existence in caves in Europe
during the heyday of ancient African civilization.
Charlie
Negative term for a White man. Also Mista CCharlie, Chuck, Charles.
Check
To criticize or monitor somebody’s behavior; also p
ut ssomebody iin ccheck,
check yyosef.
Chicken eeater
Derogatory term for a preacher.
Chicken hhead
Empty-headed, lightweight female, easily manipulated into pleasing males
at any cost. 
Chitlin ccircuit
Small bars, clubs, halls, modest places of entertainment located in the
Black community and usually Black-owned. Originally referred to places 
Words and expressions 25


--- PAGE 42 ---
in the Black South during segregation, where Black entertainers and
comedians performed.
Chitlins
Hog intestines; require extensive cleaning and long hours of cooking.
Originally scraps from the hog that slave masters discarded and gave away
to the enslaved, who took them and made a delicacy out of them. Nowadays
the big food corporations process, package, and sell these at very high
prices that many working and lower income Blacks struggle to afford.
Chocolate CCity
City with a predominantly African American population; contrasts with
Vanilla SSuburb.
Church ffamily
Traditional Black Church term for all members of the same church.
Clown
1) To talk or act inappropriately; to act up, go against the desired course
of action. 2) Having fun, in the partying spirit.
Cold-blooded
Describes a person who tells it like it is, speaks the unvarnished truth,
takes decisive action, regardless of the consequences.
Color sstruck
An African American obsessed with, and preferring, light-complexioned
Blacks and/or white skin.
Co-sign
To verify or afﬁrm a statement or action of another person; to take sides
with a person, to back up him or her.
Couldn’t hhit hhim/her/you iin tthe bbehind wwith aa rred aapple
Describes a person who is arrogant or conceited, or who acts like they are
beyond criticism or reproach. Also act llike hhis/her/yo sshit ddon’t sstank.
26 Word from the mother
Figure 2.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon, November 2, 2004.


--- PAGE 43 ---
CPT/CP TTime
Colored People’s Time. Same as African PPeople’s TTime. 
Cracka
Derogatory term for a White person.
Cross tthe bburning ssands
Initiation ritual of African American fraternities and sororities.
Crumb ssnatchers
Children. Also rug rrats, table ppimps.
Cut uup
1) To have sex. 2) To act disorderly, inappropriately, talking out loud, acting
out, especially in public.
Cuz
Form of address; person being addressed may or may not be a blood
relative.
Da bbomb
Describes something or someone that is superb, outstanding, excellent.
Damn sskippy
Used to emphasize a statement, to stress the truth of something.
Dead
Black Church reference to the absence of spirit, emotion, enthusiasm
during a Church service or Church program.
Dead PPresidents
Money, generally a lot of money; derived from the picture of dead U.S.
Presidents on paper currency. Newer Hip Hop term is Benjamins.
Devil
Derogatory term for any White person, equating Whites with the sinister,
immoral, corrupt character of Satan.
Dippin
Being nosy, getting involved in another person’s business or conversation.
Dog
1) Form of address and greeting used mainly, but not exclusively, by and
for males. 2) One’s close friend or associate. Form of bonding, probably
derived from African American fraternity tradition of addressing pledges
as “dogs.”
Don’t lleave mm
e hhangin
Said by a person extending his/her palm to get agreement (ﬁve/skin) from
someone, but the other person doesn’t reciprocate (either because they
don’t notice, or they are unaware of this conversational ritual).
Words and expressions 27


--- PAGE 44 ---
Don’t mmake mme nnone
Makes me no difference what is done or said; I’m indifferent.
Doofus
Person, event, thing that is inadequate, sloppy, disorganized, uncool, unhip.
Do-rag
1) A scarf, large handkerchief, or cap made from a nylon stocking, generally
worn to keep the hair in place and preserve the hair style (Old Skool). Today,
also a fashion statement. 2) Among gangs, scarf or handkerchief worn
around the head to identify gang afﬁliation.
Double DDutch 
Game of jump rope, played by young Sistas, in which players have to jump
over two ropes instead of one, as the ropes are turned around and over
each other in eggbeater motion. Rhymes and chants accompany the
jumping of the ropes. Builds coordination, style, and rhythm and becomes
a special form of bonding among young Black girls.
Down llow
Refers to something that should be kept very quiet, secretive, discreet.
Also d.l., loh-loh.
Dozens/playin TThe DDozens
Verbal game of talking about someone’s mother, using outlandish, highly
exaggerated, sometimes sexually loaded, humorous ritualized “insults.”
Other relatives can also be the target, but in the classic game the focus is
the mother. Played among close friends and intimates who are hip to the
rules of the game, the most signiﬁcant of which is that the “slander” must
not be literally true because truth takes the game out of the realm of play
into reality. Also s
naps, yo mmomma jjokes.
Dreads/Dreadlocks
Natural hairstyle created by growing one’s hair without combing it. Instead,
hair is twisted, and beeswax or oils are applied; hair naturally develops into
“locks,” which resemble loose, thick braids.
DWB
Driving while Black (or Brown), reference to unwarranted trafﬁc stops of
African American or Latino drivers, whose only trafﬁc “offense” is their race.
Eagle ﬂﬂies
Payday; also getting paid at any point in time and from any source.
Edges
The hairline, ﬁrst part of the hair to revert to its natural, African state after
being straightened.
E-light
1) Uppity-acting, elitist African American, who looks down on less fortunate
28 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 45 ---
Blacks. 2) A Black person who doesn’t identify with the race or Black
causes. Also boojee.
Every cclosed eeye aain ssleep; eevery ggoodbye aain ggone
Caution: Things are not always as they appear to be.
Everybody ttalkin bbout HHeaben aain ggoin ddere
Used to signify on hypocrites who believe in Christianity but don’t act like
Christians. Often applied to White folk who profess a belief in God but
practice racism.
Everythang iis eeverythang
1) Philosophical belief in the connectedness of people, places, events. 
2) Expression used to convey the idea that things are as they should be,
everything is in order.
Evil
Negative disposition, disagreeable, mean-spirited.
Extensions
Synthetic or human hair braided into one’s own hair to create a braided
style.
Feel yya
I feel you, understand you; I empathize with your viewpoint.
Fiendin
Wanting something or someone very badly, so much so that one is acting
or feeling like a person who is a dope ﬁﬁend.
Fifty-leben/ﬁfty-leven
An enormous number of something; so numerous, it can’t be precisely
named.
Fin
e
Good-looking, attractive male or female.
Finna/Finsta
About to do something. “They ﬁnna git up outa here.”
First mmind
The initial idea or thought of a person, believed to be the best course of
action; ﬁrst mind ideas come from intuition and natural instinct.
Five
Slapping of palms to show afﬁrmation, strong agreement, celebration of
victory, also used as a form of greeting. Contemporary term is high ﬁﬁve.
Also ﬁve oon tthe bblack hhand sside (opposite of the palm), ﬁve oon tthe ssly (so
outsiders won’t see it), give mme ﬁﬁve oor g
give mme ssome sskin (older phrases).
Derived from West African communication style, such as Mandingo of West
Africa, i golo don m bolo, literally “put your skin in my hand.”
Words and expressions 29


--- PAGE 46 ---
Five PPercent NNation
Group established by former members of the Nation of Islam under
leadership of Clarence “Pudding” 13X. Name derives from belief that only
5 percent of the people live a righteous, proper life, and that only those 5
percent will one day reign supreme.
Fix yyo mmouf tto ssay
Indignant commentary on something outrageous or incorrect that a person
is going to say or has said.
Flava
1) Style. 2) Attractiveness.
For ddays
A very long period of time, so long that one has lost track of time. 
Forty aacres aand aa mmule
Symbolic of reparations promised to U.S. descendants of African slaves
for their free African labor during centuries of enslavement.
Fox
Attractive female.
Freestyle
1) To perform spontaneous, unrehearsed Rap. 2) To do one’s own unique
thing in any area.
Fried,
 ddyed, llaid tto tthe sside
Hair that has been straightened and styled with a hot comb and curlers,
usually a ﬂashy style.
From GGenesis tto RRevelation
From beginning to end, referencing the books of the Bible; used to indicate
the intensity or length of time that something has occurred or will occur.
Front ssomebody ooff
To confront someone; particularly viewed as negative when done in the
presence of others.
Front sstreet
On public display, in a position of accountability for one’s words or deeds.
Also put ssomebody oo
n ffront sstreet.
Fruit
The Fruit of Islam, security force of the Nation of Islam.
Fuck yyou aand ddat hhorse yyou rrode iin oon
Said to discount or dismiss someone. (Why the poor horse got to git dissed
too? I ain nevah been able to ﬁgure that one out!)
30 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 47 ---
Funky
1) Soulful, in touch with the fundamental essence of life. 2) A bad smell,
unpleasant odor. 3) Describes someone acting unpleasant, disagreeable.
Funny
l) Inadequate, not up to par. “I needs to git a new ride, but my money is
funny.” 2) Describes someone who is disagreeable, unpleasant-acting.
G
Form of address for a male. In Five Percent Nation terminology, “G” is the
seventh letter of the alphabet and represents “God,” the Black man.
Game
1) Any entity or endeavor involving established practices and ways of doing
something—the Academic Game, the Rap Game, the Fashion Game, the
Game of Politics, etc. 2) A style of carrying and expressing oneself with
ﬂava and charisma; conveying the sense of being well-experienced in life.
“Game” enables one to achieve a desired end. To lack this ﬂava is referred
to as ain ggot nno GGame.
Game rrecognize GGame
Acknowledging that a rival is your competitive equal; indicating the
situation is at checkmate.
Gangsta
1) Describes an event, activity, behavior, person, object, thing that
represents rejection of mainstream U.S. standards. 2) Marijuana. 
Gatas
Alligator shoes, popular symbol of success, especially among males. 
Ghetto
Used to describe both the African American community in the urban core—
“inner city”—and a cultural style characteristic of Africanized “root culture”
Blackness. Depending on speaker and context, can be used either posi-
tively or negatively.
Ghetto ppass
Symbolic of identification with and knowledge of life and cultural style
associated with the Ghet
to. 
Girl
1) Form of address for a female, used by both males and females; term of
solidarity and bonding between Sistas. 2) Old Skool term for cocaine.
Git bback aat mme
Return my call; contact me.
Git hhappy
In Black Church service, to be overcome with emotion, to be possessed by
Words and expressions 31


--- PAGE 48 ---
the Holy Spirit; religious ecstasy, expressed by shouting, crying with joy,
holy dancing, fainting, Talkin in Tongue. Also git tthe SSpirit, shout.
Git uup iin mmy/his/her/etc. fface
To confront or argue with somebody, face-to-face, to show disapproval,
while positioning oneself in close proximity to that person.
Git uup oon tthis
Check this out; pay attention to this.
Give iit yyo bbes sshot
Try your very best to achieve a certain goal.
Give mme/her
/him/etc. ssome pplay
To acknowledge, to show interest (not necessarily romantic) in a person.
Give mme ssome sskin
Old Skool phrase for ﬁve/high ﬁﬁve.
Give mme/him/her/etc. ssome ssugar
To kiss.
Giving hhonor tto GGod, wwho iis tthe HHead oof mmy llife
Ritual beginning of a speech or any commentary or testifyin in the
Traditional Black Church.
Go ffor bbad
Projecting an image of toughness or ﬁghting ability.
Go ooff
To react with strong emotion and ﬁerce words to something that has been
done or said; appearing outa control.
God ddon’t llike uugly
Invoking God to express disapproval of a person’s actions or behavior.
“Ugly” does not refer to physical beauty, but to acting disagreeable and
negative.
Good hhair
Hair that is not tightly curled, but naturally straight or slightly wavy; akin 
to hair of Whites. According to Zora Neale Hurston, “good hair” was once
referred to as “nearer, my God, to thee.” Politically aware, socially con-
scious and African-centered Blacks reject this concept, as well as the
concept of bad hhair. 
Got iit ggo
in oon
Successful, competent person or event.
Got mmy mmojo wworkin 
My magic is working for me. Mojo is a source of personal power that
enables you to accomplish a goal or to persuade someone to do your
32 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 49 ---
bidding. Derived from moca, literally “cast a magic spell, by spitting,” in
the Fula language of West Africa.
Got tthe bbutta ffrom tthe dduck
To totally and thoroughly complete a task; sometimes used to refer to
sexual activity. This saying intensiﬁes the power and thoroughness of the
task performed. That is, the impossible has been accomplished because
ducks don’t produce butter.
Got yyo bback
Support for someone in any situation, event, plan, or scheme; protecting
the person from surprise “attack” by adversaries coming unexpectedly
from the “rear.”
Grown ffolk
Adults; people who have grown up and achieved the status of being
responsible, in charge. Young people prematurely acting or looking like
adults are chastised for acting or looking grown.
Ha-step
Doing something halfway, not putting your all into it. 
Handle yyo bbidness
Stay on top of things, take care of business, remain focused and in charge.
Old Skool phrase is take ccare oof
 bbidness.
Hate/Hate oon
Demonstrating envy, resentment or opposition to someone else, to that
person’s style or way of doing things, or his/her accomplishments. The
person engaged in this type of behavior is said to be a hata. The act itself
may also be referred to as hataration; also playa hhate.
Have cchurch
To sing, shout, clap hands, play instruments, to worship God with
expressions of loud praise and joy.
Hawk
Extremely cold weather; made even more intense by the wind, once
described by singer Lou Rawls as blowing on folks “like a giant razor blade.” 
Heifer
Any female, used by males or females; intimate reference, usually neutral.
Here ggo
Here is a pencil, my house, a scarf, a person, etc. 
Hip
1) Knowledgeable, aware of something. 2) Upscale, very desirable. From
Wolof language of West Africa 
hipi, literally “to open one’s eyes.”
Words and expressions 33


--- PAGE 50 ---
H.N.I.C.
Head Nigga In Charge. Term references a historical tradition dating back
to enslavement, wherein Whites would select Black leaders and authority
figures and put them in charge of other Blacks to keep them in line. 
A signifyin term implying that the “Head Nigga’s” power is limited and 
that this power can be taken away just as it was given. As an insider 
cultural joke, the person who uses the phrase to refer to him/herself is
letting you know that he/she knows what the Game is and who’s really in
charge. 
Ho
AAL pronunciation of “whore,” may be applied to males or females, to
indicate a person who allows him/herself to be exploited in any way (not
necessarily sexual). May be used among female intimates as a generic,
non-derogatory term. Also may be used in reference to things or events
(see the example at bitch).
Holla
Request to talk to or acknowledge someone, now or at a later date. May
be used as a form of closing in a message or letter. Hip Hop artist Tupac
Shakur made this a popular expression with his “Holla if ya hear me.”
Home
1) Black Church term for Heaven. 2) Any place south of the Mason-Dixon
Line. 3) Generic reference to person of African descent, also homes. 4)
Gave rise to Hip Hop term homey (plural homiez) for a person from one’s
neighbourhood or city; also a close associate, friend. 
Homegoing
Funeral service.
Honey
Term used when talking about or referring to a female (positive term).
Honky
Derogatory term for a White person.
Hood 
The neighborhood, especially the one where you live or grew up; your roots,
place where you feel welcome and at home. Like Ghet
to, can be used either
negatively or positively.
Hoodoo
“Black Magic,” fearful, negative; the negative aspect of the Voodoo religion.
Hook-up
1) Anything attractive; also a deal, arrangement, connection. 2) To connect
with someone.
34 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 51 ---
Hot ccomb aand hhot ccurlers
Metal comb and curlers, heated by a stove, extremely hot, used to
straighten and style hair. Also hot iiron.
House nnigga
1) An African American favored by Whites, who usually denies the existence
of or makes excuses for Whites’ racism or anything negative done by
Whites. 2)  Historically, referred to enslaved Africans who worked in Ole
Massa’s household, perceived by other slaves to be less rebellious against
enslavement and oppression.
I aain mmad aat yya/him/her/etc.
Indicates that one is not in disagreement with the behavior or statement
of another person, although there might appear to be grounds for such
disapproval.
I bbrought yyou iinto tt
his wworld aand II’ll ttake yyou oout oof iit 
Expression of anger and threatening to do bodily harm if need be, from a
mother (or father, but usually a mother) at a child’s behavior; rarely acted
upon, since the threat itself is usually sufﬁcient to bring the errant child
back in line.
I ccan ppeep tthrough mmuddy wwater aand sspy ddry lland
To boast of one’s power, insight, knowledge; favorite expression of
Bluesmen.
I/You/He/etc
. ddon’t pplay tthat
Said to convey disapproval and rejection of something that a person has
said or done.
I ggot tthis
I’ll take care of it.
I’ll rrun tthrough HHell wwith ggasoline ddrawers oon
Expression of deep commitment to a course of action if necessary to bring
about a desired result.
In tthe sstreet
Not at home, hanging out somewhere.
Ish
Euphemism for shit (which can be positive or negative). Also 
isht.
Jackleg
Unprofessional or phony preacher, also anyone perceived to be an amateur
at a skill.
Jimmy hhat
Condom.
Words and expressions 35


--- PAGE 52 ---
Jive
Lacking in seriousness, incompetent; also deceptive.
Jody
Old Skool term for a man having an affair with another man’s wife or
girlfriend.
Johnson
Penis.
Keep oon kkeepin oon
Encouragement to continue struggling, striving, living; also keep kkeepin
on.
Keepin iit rreal
Being true to the Black Experience; also true to oneself and one’s roots.
Kick tto tthe ccurb
To reject someone.
Large aand iin ccharge
Describes a person who is on top of things, in control, successful, doing
well ﬁnancially.
Layin iin tthe ccut
Someone or something that is hiding, lurking, surreptitiously waiting to
catch you by surprise.
Let tthe ddoor hhit yyou wwhere tthe ggood LLord ssplit yyou!
Take yo butt (“where the good Lord split you”) out of here!
Light, bbright, aand ddamn nnear
 wwhite
Very light-complexioned African American, so light he/she could pass for
White. Lighter in complexion than someone who is merely light-skinnded
or hhigh yyella.
Like wwhite oon rrice
To move on something or somebody intensely; closely attached to some-
thing or someone.
Lil ssum-n ssum-n
Reference to a gesture, event, thing, action, downplaying the signiﬁcance
of something that may be “lil” or big.
Lizzards
Lizzard-skinned shoes, popular among Black males. 
Look ffor yyou yyester
day, hhere yyou ccome ttoday
Expression of disapproval of the timing of a person’s actions, too late to
be helpful; also used to describe anyone not living up to expectations.
36 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 53 ---
Look llike ddeath eeating aa ssoda ccracker
Description of someone whose appearance has undergone a drastic
change, such that he/she looks to be on the brink of death.
Love
Expression of appreciation for someone, demonstrated by hugging,
applauding the person, etc., as: “Yall give our speaker some love” (call for
applause from audience).
Love mme ssome . . . 
Expression to show intense, deep liking or love for something or someone.
“That girl love her some Robert.” 
Mack
1) Sweet-talk to win a woman or man’s affection. 2) To exploit or
manipulate.
Mad
A lot of, very much.
The MMan
1) The person in charge, in power. 2) Old Skool reference to the White man.
Midnight hhour
Church reference for a time when a person is in search of answers,
engaged in deep meditation and reﬂection; any low point in one’s life.
Mind
’s eeye
The inner “eye” of the brain, source of insight and intuition.
Miss TThang
A self-important or arrogant woman.
Moanuh’s bbench
Special pew for the unsaved at a Traditional Black Church revival service.
Mother wwit
Intuition, wisdom not taught in school or found in books.
Muthafucka
Person, place, event, thing, can be used either negatively, positively, or as
a neutral, generic reference. Also muh-fuh, M-F, Marilyn FFarmer, mutha.
My bbad
My mistake; I apologize.
Nappy
Extremely curly hair, the natural state of African American hair, curled so
tightly it appears “wooly.” Also naps, kinky.
Negro, NNigga, NNigger, NN-word
See full discussion in Chapter 3.
Words and expressions 37


--- PAGE 54 ---
Nigga AApple
Watermelon.
None
No sex, as in “He ain gittin none.”
None-yuh
None of your business.
Nose oopen
Very deep in love, so much so that one is vulnerable to exploitation. Term
dates back at least half a century; used in chorus of Jay-Z’s “Girl, Girls,
Girls,” from his 2001 album, 
The Blueprint #1 (track 13). Also he/she ggot
my nnose, nose jjob.
Nurse
Females in the church, who are spiritual nurses, who look after anyone
who has gotten the Spirit, who is shoutin.
Ofay
A White person. Also fay.
Off ttha hhook/heazy/chain/hinges/everthang
Exciting, lively, superb.
Old SSkool
1) Style, behavior, expression, perspective, etc. from an earlier time, often
the 1960s and 1970s. 2) Used to describe a seasoned veteran, someone
highly experienced in something. 3) Style of Hip Hop in its early days in the
1970s.
On tthe rregular
Something done on a regular basis.
On ttime
The appropriate psychological moment.
One mmo oonce
A repeated occurrence, usually conveys impatience that a thing has to be
done yet again.
Open tthe ddoors oof tthe cchurch
Invitation to non-members to join the church, issued at the end of the
preacher’s sermon.
Oreo
African American, black in skin color but white in thinking and attitudes,
like the Oreo brand cookie, black on the outside, white on the inside.
Out tthe ggate
Extraordinary, highly unusual, can be positive or negative.
38 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 55 ---
Outside kkid
Child from a relationship outside of one’s marriage; either mother or father
– or both – married to someone else.
Overstand
Profound knowledge and insight, over and beyond that of mere “under-
standing.”
Packin cchitlins
Sista’s term for a man whose erection during sex is not ﬁrm, or a man who
is unable to maintain an erection because his penis has become like
chitlins. 
Paid
Getting a signiﬁcant amount of money, could refer to a paycheck but one
that is substantial (minimum wage does not qualify as “paid”). The person
who is getting the money may be described as “gittin paid,” or simply
“paid,” as in “She paid.”
Paper cchasin
Working hard, and usually long hours, at a job, or in any sort of endeavor
or business venture to amass money (“paper”).
Pass
Pretending to be a White person; a light-complexioned Black living as White
is said to be “passing.”
Pay ddues
l) What one has to do to achieve success in any endeavor, or simply just
to survive in life; the emotional or physical hardships; from the philosoph-
ical belief that nobody gets anything in life for “free,” everything requires
a “payment” of some kind. 2) Originally, hard times endured as a result of
oppression and White racial supremacy. 3) Sometimes refers to retribution
and punishment for wrongful deeds.
Peace
Greeting or farewell; originally to indicate uplift, self-love, Black social
consciousness.
Peckawood
Derogatory term for a White person. Also peck.
Peeps
Your “peoples,” either biological kin or people one is close to or hangs
around with.
Phat
Great, superb, excellent.
Words and expressions 39


--- PAGE 56 ---
Ph.D.
Playa hata degree, description of someone who is envious of someone
else, hatin to the extreme.
Picked yyo ppocket
In basketball, when a player has the ball stolen by an opposing player.
Pimp
1) Describes something excellent, cool, high-fashion, upscale. Also tight.
2) Old Skool term for man who has prostitutes working for him.
Pimp sslap
Slapping someone in the face, a gross symbol of disrespect.
Pimpin
1) Living a ﬂashy life style—wearing designer clothes and expensive jewelry,
driving luxury cars, etc. 2) Describes someone who is ﬁnancially well off;
whether the person displays their wealth or not, they may still be described
as “pimpin.” 3) Exploiting someone or something for personal gain. 4) Old
Skool reference to lifestyle of a man who has prostitutes working for him
and who lives off their earnings.
Play ssista, pplay bbrotha, pplay ccousin, ppl
ay aaunt, eetc.
Someone very close to you, as close as a blood relative; you and that
person are known as “play” kin. 
Playa
1) Person who is in control of his life, things, events, who is “large and in
charge.” 2) Person who has multiple relationships. 3) Flamboyant, ﬂashy
person living a dazzling life style. Also balla. Today’s “playa” can be male
or female although the female “playa” is often referred to as “playette.” 4)
Old Skool term for a male who possesses clever, verbal skills and who
survives by living off women or hustling in various con games. 
Played
Deceived; when somebody has put something over on someone, they have
played that person.
Poontang
Vagina. Also pootenanny, punany.
Program
Scheme or plan of action; also one’s life style or way of doing things.
Props
1) Respect. 2) Recognition for accomplishments. Also propers.
Put tthey
 mmouth oon yyou
When someone talks about you in a negative way.
40 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 57 ---
Put yyo/my/his/our/etc. bbidness iin tthe sstreet
To make personal affairs public.
Q
Barbecued ribs.
Quiet aas iit’s kkept
The little-known truth about something.
Race mman/woman
Person devoted to Blacks; promotes, staunchly defends, and works on
behalf of the race.
Rap
l) Music of Hip Hop Culture. 2) Original Old Skool term for strong, romantic
talk designed to win a woman’s sexual favor. 3) Later Old Skool term for
strong, aggressive, powerful talk in general. 
Read
To tell someone off in no uncertain terms, in a verbally elaborate manner.
Rebellion
Mass display of Black dissatisfaction with and expression of violence
against the System. Labeled “riots” by Whites.
Red, bblack aand ggreen
Color combination symbolizing Blackness and the Black Experience.
Originally referred to the ﬂag of the “Black Nation” (the African American
community in the U.S.).
Red nneck
Derogatory term for a White person. Also neck.
Represent
To exemplify or reﬂect your identity or the authentic style of your group or
community. Also reppin.
Ride oor ddie
Undying loyalty to something or someone, to support a person or a cause
to the very end.
Right HHand oof FFellowship
Extending a handshake to new members of the church; ritual involves
entire congregation shaking the hand of the new member, welcoming
him/her into the fellowship, community of the church.
Roll/
Rollin
1) To take a course of action or exhibit a particular pattern of behavior, to
express a preference for, or associate with something or someone. “He
rollin wit John nem these days.” 2) Old Skool term for selling drugs.
Words and expressions 41


--- PAGE 58 ---
Run aa BBoston
In the popular card game of Bid, to win every round of play, to turn all the
books. The losing team is said to have been “sent to Boston.”
Sadiddy
Snooty, uppity-acting (whether rich or poor), putting on airs, acting like yo
shit ddon’t sstank. Also dichty, haincty.
Sang tthe ssong!
Said to a singer or group of singers, to move them to perform the singing
of a song to the ultimate. (Note that “sang” is not past tense, but the
present imperative.) People who are good at singing are said to be
“sangers.”
Save tthe ddrama ffor yyo mmomma!
Stop the arguing and hysterics; uhm not tryna hear it, maybe yo momma
can tolerate it, but not me.
Say tthe bblessing
To ask God to bless food before eating.
Scared oof yyou
Said to applaud someone’s accomplishment, achievement, skill in some
area, or their verbal adeptness.
Sell-out
An African American who acts on behalf of Whites and compromises the
Black community’s principles, usually for personal gain. Also, by extension,
applied to anyone who goes for self and abandons his/her group’s
collective mission.
Serious aas aa hheart aattack/Serious aas ccancer
Extreme degree of seriousness about a condition, thing, event, person,
serious to the -nth degree.
Shit
Used to refer to almost anything—possessions, events, things, conditions;
can be used positively or negatively—“He had on some bad shit,” meaning
He was wearing a stylish outﬁt, or “We wasn’t goin for they shit,” meaning,
We refused to accept their abuse. Idiomatic phrases include: ain sshit
(event, person, thing is inadequate, insufficient); chicken sshit (petty,
unimportant, inadequate); full oof sshit (talks a good game but no follow
through); on ssomebody’s sshit llist (out of favor with someone); pull sshit (to
do something low-down, treacherous, mean); put sshit oon ssomebody
(to manipulate, take advantage of); shoot tt
he sshit (engage in general
conversational talk); slick sshit (clever, manipulative move to get what you
want); take sshit (endure physical, mental or verbal abuse); talk sshit (empty
talk, nonsense); up sshit ccreek (in serious trouble, vulnerable to exposure
42 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 59 ---
or defeat); weak sshit (insufﬁcient, inadequate action, words or behavior);
shit hhit tthe ffan (the start of an incident, commotion, disturbance, argument,
conﬂict, precipitated by some critical action or event); don’t kknow sshit ffrom
Shinola (lacking in common sense, poor judgement—“Shinola” is a brand
name for strong-smelling, cheap liquid shoe polish once widely used); 
the sshit (powerful, the ultimate); shit oout oof lluck, also S.O.L. (too late,
unsuccessful).
Shorty/Shortie
Term of endearment.
Shout
Expression of religious, spiritual ecstasy, in the form of hollering, moaning,
crying, loss of consciousness, holy dancing, Talkin iin TTongue. Also git
happy, git tthe SSpirit.
Show hhis/her aass
Acting outrageously, inappropriately, in a negative way, in public or in front
of outsiders. Also show oout.
Showboat
Flamboyant, loud, aggressive, ﬂashy talk, dress or action, to attract atten-
tion, promote oneself, show off.
Sick
Describes something that is exciting, great, superb; also tight
.
Signiﬁcation/Signifyin
1) Style of verbal play in which a speaker puts down, needles, talks about
a person, event, situation, or even a government. Depends on double
meaning and irony, exploits the unexpected and uses quick verbal sur-
prises and humor. Can be used for playful commentary or serious social
critique couched as play. 2) Also siggin, sig oon, signify oon.
Sista
African American woman. From the Black Church pattern of referring to
female members of the church ffamily as Sista.
Some
Sex, as in “She gave me some.” 
Some ffolk ddon’t bbe
lieve ffat mmeat iis ggreasy
Describes people who refuse to accept the truth, wisdom or validity of
something. Their rejection of this truth is irrational because fat meat is
shonuff greasy.
Sometimerz
Coined by Seniors to refer to failing memory. “I got sometimerz: sometimes
I remember, sometimes I don’t.” 
Words and expressions 43


--- PAGE 60 ---
Star
Very attractive man or woman.
Step sshow
An artistic performance involving intricate steps and movements per-
formed by fraternities and sororities. 
Steppin iin hhigh ccotton
Old Skool term for living large; being in successful surroundings.
Street ppharmaceuticals
Drugs sold on the street.
The SStruggle
1) The collective struggle of Black people against the System and struc-
tures of racism and oppression. 2) The struggle to survive on a daily 
basis.
Stylin aand pproﬁlin
Adopting a cool, poised, confident posture, usually accompanied by a
stylish manner of dressing.
Syste
m
1) The entire criminal justice system—jail, bail, parole, probation, under-
going trial, etc.—in which more Black men today are involved than are
enrolled in college. 2) Old Skool term for the dominant White society and
the Eurocentric political and economic System of the U.S.
Take aa ttext
In the Black Church, a fairly elaborate opening ritual that provides the
Scriptural reference and message of the preacher’s sermon. By extension,
to ttake aa ttext on a person is to tell that person off in an elaborate, dramatic
manner.
Take ccare oof bbidness
Get down to business, handle things, get serious, in charge. Also TCB,
handle yyo bbidness.
Take llow aand ggo
Assume a posture of humility to defuse a conﬂict or achieve one’s objective.
Talkin iin T
Tongue
In Black Church service, to speak in a secret, coded language, when
possessed by the Spirit.
Talkin ooutta tthe sside oof yyo nneck/mouth
Talking nonsense, empty words, also deceitful or lying talk.
Talkin ttrash
Using clever, creative language, generally in some sort of competition, in
44 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 61 ---
order to promote your skills, dis your opponents skills and get into his/her
head.
Tear tthe rroof ooff tthe ssucka!
Party hard; have a good time; it’s all big fun.
Tender-headed
Person who exhibits extreme sensitivity when getting their hair washed or
combed.
Tenderoni
Young, very desirable male or female. Also tender.
Testifyin
Black Church term for verbally acknowledging and afﬁrming the power of
God. By extension, to speak to or afﬁrm the signiﬁcance or power of an
experience outside the Black Church.
That’s aall sshe wwrote
The end of something.
That’
s mmighty wwhite oof yyou
Said to someone who is patronizing you or making up your mind for you.
There ggo
Used to indicate the presence of something or someone. “There go my
girl.” 
Thought llike llit
Used to dismiss someone’s attempt to explain away or excuse a mistake.
Shortened version of the saying: “You thought like lit / Thought you farted
/ But you shit.”
Tight
Term of approval to describe something that is excellent, great, cool.
Tight aas DDick’s hhatband
Used to describe someone who is extremely stingy or tight-fisted with
money.
TLC
Tender, loving care.
Triﬂin
Describes a person who fails to do something that he/she is capable of
doing or is supposed to do; irresponsible; inadequate.
Trippin
1) Behaving in an irrational manner. 2) Doing or saying something outside
the norm, or outside one’s usual pattern.
Words and expressions 45


--- PAGE 62 ---
True ddat
Used to emphasize the truth of something.
Truth bbe ttold
Expression of validity, emphasizing the truth of something.
Tude
Aggressive, arrogant, deﬁant pose; oppositional, negative outlook or dis-
position, also attitude.
Turn iit oout
1) To create a scene, causing people to vacate a place. 2) To party
aggressively, loudly, and with wild abandon, partying until the place is
emptied out.
Up oon iit
Informed, highly aware of something.
Upside yyo hhead
Hitting or slapping someone on the head. 
Vibe
1) Your style, how you carry and conduct yourself. 2) Intuition, hunch. 
Voodoo
A religion which is stereotypically associated with demonization and
“primitive Black Magic.” While there is an element of belief in the human
ability to control reality and events through the use of rituals, charms,
herbs, and potions, that is not the fundamental aspect of Voodoo. It means,
literally, “protective spirit,” comes from Dahomey (now Benin), and is
derived from 
Vodu in the Fon and Ewe languages in West Africa. In Africa,
this religious belief system was used to unite groups against a common
enemy. In the U.S., it became a force to organize, rally and strengthen those
rebelling against enslavement—undoubtedly this is why slave masters
banned meetings and services and attempted to suppress the religion. 
Wack
Not with it, undesirable, not good.
Watch MMeeting NNight
New Year’s Eve, when Blacks gather in the church to “watch” the old year
go out and the new one come in, praying and singing to bring in the New
Year, thanking God that they have made it through the year. Attending
church at this time is a popular activity among African Americans,
regardless of age or social position (some may leave church after service
and go out to party and celebrate). Although New Year’s Eve is a secular
holiday, in African America it has had religious overtones since December
31, 1862. On that evening, Blacks came together in meetings of prayer
and thanksgiving, in churches and homes, anticipating the “dawning 
46 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 63 ---
of freedom” on January 1, 1863, when President Abraham Lincoln’s
Emancipation Proclamation freeing the slaves went into effect. 
What ggo rround ccome rround
The essence of traditional Black belief about life, that whatever has
happened before will occur again, even if in a different form. Probably the
most frequently used and popular Black proverb. 
What iit bbe llike
A greeting; what’s happening? what’s up?
What ttime iit iis
The real deal, the truth, what’s actually occurring at the moment, reference
to political or psychological “time.”
What yyou oon?
Said to a person who has said or done something irrational, who isn’t
making sense, implies that the person must be on some kind of drug or
mind-altering substance.
When uuhm ggone
Statement made by a person in reference to actions or behaviors after
their death, like: “What difference do it matter 
who yo husband marry when
you six feet under? When uhm gone, my husband can marry Minnie Mouse
if he wonnuh.”
Whupped
Refers to a male or female who is being bossed around and controlled by
his/her partner due to the partner’s power over them. Males are said to
be pussy-whupped, females to be dick-whupped.
Wifey
Woman in a serious relationship with a man.
Wit tthe pprogram
Agreeable to, acting in accordance with a plan of action, activity, idea, or
event.
Womanist
A Black woman who is rooted in the Black community and committed to
the survival and development of Black women as well as the community.
Also womlish, womnish.
Wooﬁn/woof tt
icket
To threaten by using boastful, strong language, which in actuality is
generally a facade or mask; a style of acting or talking that one hopes will
convince another person to back down and surrender. If this happens, one
is said to have “sold a woof ticket.” Writing in 
Mules and Men in 1935,
Words and expressions 47


--- PAGE 64 ---
Zora Neale Hurston attributed the origin of the term to the “purposeless
barking of dogs at night.”
Word iis bbond!
Affirmative response to a statement or action, popularized by the Five
Percent Nation.
Wreck
Lyrical skill, so great that it “wrecks”/destroys the microphone or com-
petitors. By extension, to “bring wreck” is to come with truth and power
that can’t be denied.
Yella/high yyella
A very light-complexioned African American, praised in some quarters,
damned in others. 
Yo
1) Greeting. 2) Used to get someone’s attention. 3) In AAL grammar, the
possessive form, as in yo mmomma.
Yo mmomma
“Your mother”; the standard formulaic expression used in the verbal game
of The DDozens/Snaps/yo mmomma jjokes. This phrase can be used to signal
the beginning of the game.
You
 aain kknow?
Statement of surprise that a person was unaware of some action or event,
which he/she should have known about. Also I tthought yyou kknew.
You aare wworkin mmy nnerves!
You are getting on my nerves, irritating me, stressing me out!
You-own kknow mme llike tthat!
You don’t know me well enough to be talkin or actin in such a familiar,
intimate manner with me.
Young, ddumb aand f
full oof ccome
Signifyin description of a young person, usually male, who is immature and
acting irrationally or making poor decisions, based on emotions.
Zillions
Braided hairstyle, with numerous tiny braids; worn by women or men.
48 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 65 ---
Chapter 3
The N-words
The difference. That should be [Dennis] Rodman’s nickname. It describes
him best and on all levels. He’s different than the average brother, and
makes a difference on the court. He has the best I-don’t-give-a-fuck attitude
in sports . . . easily . . . “I came here [Chicago] to kick some ass. That’s all.
I don’t smile or laugh. Call me Satan. On the court, I go out there and do
my job . . . I used to slam [Michael] Jordan and [Scottie] Pippen in Detroit,
what the hell . . . As far as a relationship with Michael and Scottie . . .
I don’t sleep with them . . . If I did, I’d use a condom. Safe sex.” Dennis
Rodman’s complicated. As the NBA season goes, so does Worm. His calf
injury early in the season will keep him out of the NBA’s All-Star game, but
even if he was healthy, the league would have found a way to lock him out.
He’s the new nigga on the block in a city that don’t like niggas, but loves
niggers.
(Goldie, 1996, pp. 80–81)
This characterization of one of the NBA’s infamous, idiosyncratic bad boys aptly
captures Rodman’s rebellious, defiant, do-what-the-fuck-I-wannuh attitude.
Naw, in Worm’s case, make that 
tude. This is the essence of The Nigga,
distinguishing him from his more compliant, conformist, eager-to-please-the-
White-folk brotha, The Nigger. 
Tude accounts for why today’s widespread public
use of “nigga” has become so controversial. It’s the return of the Bad Nigger.
Historically, they spelled it “er,” but they deﬁnitely meant “a.” In the Black Oral
Tradition, the Bad Nigger didn’t take no shit from nobody (not even Whitey),
and as 1960’s poet Etheridge Knight said about that Bad Nigger Hard Rock,
he had the scars to prove it. Non-conformist, daring, breaking social con-
ventions, going against the established (read: White) norms for Black folk, the
Bad Nigger continues to be 
tude personiﬁed. 
The West Coast male Hip Hop group NWA (Niggaz Wit Attitude) bust onto the
national scene back in 1989, with raw lyrics about the oppressive urban
environment, complaining “Fuck tha police.” (The brutalizing of Rodney King
in Los Angeles two years later demonstrated that NWA’s complaint had been
righteous.) My use of the masculine throughout this discussion is not in keeping


--- PAGE 66 ---
with some played out notion of generic gender. Rather, it is deliberate, for the
archetypal Bad Nigger is the Black male. The Brotha has historically been feared
for what he might rise up and do to his White oppressor. The fear continues
today. Not even the baddest Sista—with all due respect and props to Queen
Latifah, Angela Davis, Sista Souljah, and Lil’ Kim—can bring the kind of emo-
tional wreck, panic, and fear that even the most diminutive Black dude can if
he done went from The Nigger to The Nigga. 
Despite the frequent use of “nigga” in public spaces today, there are some
African Americans, particularly those who are middle-aged or middle class, who
abhor this public language practice. Even some younger Blacks object to “nigga
here, nigga there, nigga, nigga, nigga everywhere,” as one young Sista told me
recently. Some African Americans cannot forget that this was (is?) the White
man’s term for us. Racial memory dies hard. Check out reactions to the pub-
lication of Harvard Law Professor Randall Kennedy’s 2002 book, 
Nigger: The
Strange Career of a Troublesome Word:
From writer Greg Tate, in “Nigger-’tude,” The Village Voice(January 30, 2002):
It . . . doesn’t seem anyone is arguing against nigger’s multiple meanings,
just that it still means the same thing to those in power and remains one
of their weapons against the Black and powerless who tend not to be
Harvard ensconced . . . Kennedy never comes out and says how much of
the word’s power comes from its position as a marker of White power—
especially in working class situations that ﬁnd one-paycheck-from-poverty
Black employees in the thrall of abusive White supervisors. As with most
things in life, power separates the men from the boys more than context
per se.
From journalist DeWayne Wickham, in “The N-word should keep its hateful
connotations,” 
The Detroit News (February 21, 2002):
In one passage, Kennedy cites the words of rapper Coolio, who intones in
one of his songs, “I’m the kind of nigga . . . little homies want to be like, on
their knees in the night saying prayers to the streetlights.” . . . [This] and
other attempts to redeﬁne the N-word caused Kennedy to conclude, “There
is much to be gained by allowing people of all backgrounds to yank nigger
away from white supremacists to subvert its ugliest denotation . . .” I don’t
think so . . . The insidious history of this word cannot be dismissed easily
. . . Should the word be redeﬁned before the attitudes that produced it are
gone?
In “The N-word: Black Britons Speak,” in the 
Guardian Unlimited Observer
(January 21, 2002), Blacks in England also weighed in on Kennedy’s con-
troversial book. From Brendan Batson, Britain’s ﬁrst Black footballer and deputy
chief executive of the Professional Footballers Association:
50 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 67 ---
But I just don’t see how the word nigger can become mainstream like the
way the gay community has tried to adopt the word queer. Queer does not
have the same sort of offensiveness. Nigger is a unique word in the English
language. 
From Floella Benjamin, a British television presenter who runs her own
production company:
How can you try and reclaim a word that started off as an insult? You could
perhaps reclaim the word Negro, but not nigger. If Black people started
using it here, then the racists would have won because it was a word
invented by them.
Still, it’s a fact that nigga is from the lexicon of the counterlanguage that
African Americans have created over the centuries, turning the White man’s
language upon its head, transforming 
bad into good. The impact of words
depends on who is saying what to whom, under what conditions, and with what
intentions. Meanings reside in the speakers of language. I ﬁrst described the
meaning, pronunciation and use of nigger and nigga/nigguh nearly three
decades ago: 
Another Black Semantic term that aptly demonstrates the multiple
subjective association process is the oft-used word 
nigger. Whereas to
Whites it is simply a way of callin a Black person outa they name, to Blacks
it has at least four different meanings as well as a different pronunciation:
nigguh. [For Blacks] it may be a term of personal affection or endearment
. . . Sometimes it means culturally Black . . . “shonuff nigguhs,” as con-
trasted to Negroes, who aspire to White middle-class values . . . [It] may
also be a way of expressing disapproval of a person’s actions . . . [Or] the
term may simply identify Black folks—-period. In this sense, the word has
neutral value.
(Smitherman, 1977, p. 62)
Late Hip Hop artist Tupac Shakur ﬂipped the script on nigga, making it the
positive image of a true Black man. He said that the word was the abbreviated
form of the phrase: “N
ever Ignorant, Getting Goals Accomplished.” Indeed, in
one of his songs, Tupac suggests that this is a more exalted status in a
relationship than that of mere boyfriend, rappin [to a woman] that he doesn’t
want to be “yo man. I wanna be yo nigga.” As if co-signing Pac, Hip Hop artist
DMX says this about his wife: “I tell my wife shit I don’t tell nobody. ’Cause that’s
my nigga . . . She’s like everything to me” (quoted in an interview in 
The Source,
February, 2000, p. 170).
For White America—at least until very recently among Afro-Americanized
White youth—there has only been the racialized name-calling word, “nigger,” a
The N-words 51


--- PAGE 68 ---
way of callin a Black person outa they name. However, in Black America, the
word has always had a whole range of meanings, as well as a different
pronunciation, 
nigguh, or to use the twenty-ﬁrst-century Hip Hop version, nigga.
These meanings can be positive, neutral, or negative. Check it:
1 Close friend, someone who got yo back, yo “main nigga.”
2 Rooted in Blackness and the Black experience, “That Brotha ain like dem
ol e-lights, he real, he a shonuff nigga.”
3 Generic, neutral reference to African Americans, “The party was live, it was
wall-to-wall niggas there.”
4 A Sista’s man/lover/partner, “Guess we ain gon be seein too much of
girlfriend no mo since she got herself a new nigga.” Like Hip Hop artist Foxy
Brown rap, “Ain no nigga like the one I got.”
5 Rebellious, fearless, unconventional, in-yo-face Black man. Like former
NBA superstar, Charles Barkley say, “Nineties niggas . . .
The Daily News,
The Inquirer has been on my back . . . They want their Black athletes to
be Uncle Toms. I told you white boys you’ve never heard of a 90s nigga.
We do what we want to do” (quoted in 
The Source, December, 1992). 
6 Vulgar, disrespectful, anti-social, conforming to negative stereotype of
African Americans. Like former Hip Hop group, Arrested Development
rapped in their best-selling song, “People Everyday” (1992): “A Black man
actin like a nigga . . . got stomped by an African.”
7 A cool, down person, rooted in Hip Hop and Black Culture, regardless of
race, used today by non-Blacks to refer to other non-Blacks. Ah, but can
they use it to refer to Blacks too? Keep readin.
8 Anyone engaged in inappropriate, negative behavior; in this sense, even
White folk may be called niggers. According to Major’s 
From Juba to Jive
(1994, p. 320), Queen Latifah was quoted in Newsweek as criticizing the
U.S. Government with these words: “Those niggers don’t know what 
the fuck they doing.” Then there is Senator Robert Byrd’s 2001 comment
on the state of U.S. race relations: “My mom told me, ‘Robert you can’t go
to heaven if you hate anybody . . .’ There are White niggers. I’ve seen a lot
of White niggers in my time. I’m going to use that word. We just need to
work together to make our country a better country.” According to media
reports, all hell broke loose when Senator Byrd ﬁxed his mouf to say this!
Black Queen Latifah using “nigger”—yes. White Robert Byrd—no.
It may seem like a minor point, but note that Blacks don’t 
call each other
nigga. “Call” implies name-calling, a linguistic offense, like he called me a name,
or in Black Talk, he called me outa my name. Rather, nigga is used to 
address
another African American, as a greeting, or to refer to a Brotha or Sista. So it’s
semantically inaccurate when the everyday, conversational use of nigga 
is critiqued by saying “They call each other nigga all the time.” Linguistic
technicalities aside, all the hysteria about and dissin of Black comedians, Hip
52 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 69 ---
Hop artists, and young people for their frequent public use of the term ain gon
stop the flow of nigga. Truth be told, Blacks done been usin nigga in they
everyday conversations since enslavement. 
Nigga is a versatile, complex term that serves many purposes. Any talk of
just eradicating it from the dictionary is simply absurd and won’t work, not as
long as the word is used by so many millions across the racial spectrum.
However, the Merriam-Webster dictionary deﬁnition of “nigger” can and has
been made more precise due to a campaign launched in the late 1990s. On
one level, this was a correct move. Two Sistas in Michigan, Delphine Abraham,
a computer technician from Ypsilanti, and Kathryn Williams, a museum curator
from Flint,
1 initially moving independently, ignited this national protest,
lambasting how “nigger” was deﬁned in Webster’s dictionary as synonymous
with Black person. After providing the linguistic origins of the term, the very 
ﬁrst Webster deﬁnition was: “a black person—usu taken to be offensive.” (Two
additional definitions were: “a member of any dark-skinned race” and 
“a member of a socially disadvantaged class of persons.”) Although the
dictionary’s usage explanation clearly indicates that the term is a racial slur
and offensive, the deﬁnition equates “nigger” with “a black person,” and that
was a major problem for both women. They joined forces, and their petition
drive protest was picked up by the NAACP. 
To its credit, Merriam-Webster took decisive steps to address the controversy,
commissioning a number of language specialists—including the Kid herself—
to advise them. Interestingly, the Webster folk took advantage of this
opportunity not only to revisit the dictionary’s deﬁnition of “nigger,” but also
some 200 other words labeled “offensive,” “obscene,” “vulgar,” or “used dis-
paragingly.” The revised deﬁnition of “nigger” notes up front that the usage is
offensive and refers the dictionary user to the descriptive paragraph about this
usage before mentioning the word’s association with a Black person. While the
usage paragraph did not need revising, what is signiﬁcant in the new Webster
is that the user is directed to read this paragraph 
before they are given the
deﬁnition. Here is the current, revised deﬁnition of the word “nigger,” including
the linguistic origins and the usage paragraph (neither of which required
changing):
nigger n [alter. of earlier neger, fr. MF negre, fr. Sp or Pg negro, fr. negro
black, fr. L niger] (1786) 1 usu offensive; see usage paragraph below : a
black person 2 usu offensive; see usage paragraph below : a member of
any dark-skinned race 3: a member of a socially disadvantaged class 
of persons <it’s time for somebody to lead all of America’s 
~s [niggers]
. . . all the people who feel left out of the political process—Ron Dellums>
usage Nigger in senses 1 and 2 can be found in the works of such writers
of the past as Joseph Conrad, Mark Twain, and Charles Dickens, but it now
ranks as perhaps the most offensive and inflammatory racial slur in
English. Its use by and among blacks is not always intended or taken as
The N-words 53


--- PAGE 70 ---
offensive, but, except in sense 3, it is otherwise a word expressive of racial
hatred and bigotry.
(Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, 2005)
A lot of Bloods thought that the Webster folk should have taken “nigger” out
of the dictionary altogether and were disappointed that Webster only revised
the wording of its deﬁnition. However, dictionaries don’t make language, people
do. This is true of languages around the world. Dictionaries do not PRE-scribe,
they only DE-scribe the language habits and practices of the speakers of 
a language. Once terms fall out of current usage, they no longer appear in
contemporary dictionaries. So if folks want “nigger” erased from the dictionary,
then they need to campaign to stop speakers of English from using the word.
Now that would be a sho-nuff campaign for the language morality squad.
Sometimes reactions to the use of what Kennedy called this “troublesome
word” (2002), go way over the top. In a 2003 letter to “Miss Manners” (Judith
Martin), a Brotha complained that “many young African American teens greet
each other with a certain racial slur.” Even though his “two ﬁne sons” have tried
to convince him that this is acceptable, Brothaman ﬁnds it “offensive no matter
what,” and “when anyone uses this term in my home, they must leave. I will
personally escort them out and take them back home if I need to.” He goes on
to relate the time a co-worker came to his house for dinner and used the term.
And this is what went down: “I calmly told him that was not allowed and he
would have to leave. He did, and we haven’t spoken since.” Now if this ain some
wild isht, I-own know what is! The Brotha does come to his senses enough 
to question whether or not he did the right thing. Also there is his wife’s
“embarrassment” and her thinking that he shouldn’t have said anything. Hence
his letter to Miss Manners soliciting her advice. Miss Manners agrees with him
about his home language policy: It is “unacceptable no matter who says 
it,” and: “Miss Manners . . . is with you in refusing to tolerate its being used in
your house.” However, she does ﬁnd his action too drastic. She recommends
that he give visitors, who surely don’t intend to be offensive, a warning before
throwing them out of the house because “ejecting a guest from your house is
the severest permissible punishment you can inﬂict” (Martin, 2003).
This Brotha and others who are so against the use of the “N-word” should
know that there are actually 
three N-words: Negro, Nigger and Nigga. The lin-
guistic origin is the same for all three. They made their way into English by way
of Latin (
niger/nigra/nigrum, “black or dark-colored”), Spanish and Portuguese
(negro, “black”), and French (negre, “black”). 
“Nigger” did not become a racial slur until sometime in the nineteenth
century. If you trace the history of the word—see, for instance, the Oxford English
Dictionary or dictionaries of English slang, such as the Random House
Dictionary of Slang—you will ﬁnd that for centuries this particular “N-word” was
simply an identifying label for African and African descent people, nothing more.
It was not a way of calling a Black person outa they name but used simply as
54 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 71 ---
a way of referring to a person who was racially Black. Although the precise
historical moment when “nigger” became a term of racial disrespect is
unknown, I think it had to do with the movement for abolition of enslavement,
which became particularly aggressive and strong during the nineteenth century.
With the looming possibility of millions of enslaved Africans being free and
remaining in the U.S. to live and work among the European American popu-
lation, the semantic landscape of “nigger” shifted: the term was recast as a
label to linguistically re-enslave African slave descendants. 
“Negro,” at least until around the mid-1960s, was a perfectly acceptable
label for the race—well, at least for the male members of the race (ah, the world
of patriarchy). The 
Oxford English Dictionary gives this deﬁnition for Negro: “An
individual (esp. a male) belonging to the African race of mankind. . . .” History
notes that W.E.B. DuBois, in his capacity as editor of Crisis, the magazine of
the NAACP, waged a nation-wide campaign in the 1920s for the capitalization
of 
negro, which for decades had been represented only in the lower case. 
By 1930, the White media had capitulated. The editorial section of The New
York Times stated: “In our Style Book, Negro is now added to the list of words
to be capitalized. It is not merely a typographical change, it is an act of
recognition of racial self-respect for those who have been for generations in
the ‘lower case’” (March 7, 1930). By May, 1930, only the U.S. Government
Printing Office and 
Forum Magazine continued to represent Negroes in the
lower case.
During the Black Liberation Movement of the 1960s and 1970s, “Negro”
fell into linguistic disrepute and was replaced with “Black” as the preferred
racial label for descendants of Africans in America. 2 Negro became a name-
calling word, used to blast those Bloods who weren’t down with the Black
Cause, who didn’t roll wit Black Pride, who didn’t endorse the new-found
celebration of Blackness and Black Culture. It became a term synonymous with
racial disloyalty and rejection of Black people’s racial heritage. Instead 
of “Negro,” the assertion of racial self-esteem was symbolized by naming,
accepting and celebrating yourself as “Black,” a racial label that had been
denied, denigrated, and denounced for generations—“If you white, you all right.
If you brown, stick around. If you black, stay back.” 
In the past few years, “Negro” has re-emerged as a twenty-first-century
euphemism for nigga. Like this from a Sista extolling the culinary talents of
Black cooks at an outdoor festival: “Was it good? Girl, those Negroes know they
was throwin down!” Like, instead of “Nigger, please!” to signal some absurd,
outrageous behavior or talk, it’s now “Negro, please!” Like P. Diddy commenting
on the photos of Blacks on the wall of his dressing room at Manhattan’s Royale
Theater; referring to his photo of O.J. Simpson: “I’ve been right at that place
. . . It’s a constant reminder of what they can do to you if you ever get too
comfortable. I’m one of those Negroes that’s allowed into certain parties, but
if I start believing the hype, like I’m the ‘special Negro,’ then I could end up just
like that” (quoted in Ogunnaike’s article in 
Vibe, 2004).
The N-words 55


--- PAGE 72 ---
With the revival of “Negro,” the preachaman of words these days has an old
familiar linguistic token that he can use to connect with the congregation. Like
the eloquent Reverend Dr. Creflo Dollar, pastor of World Changers Church
International in the ATL (Atlanta), in a televised sermon on the text of forgive,
forget, and move on: “Go to that person and say, ‘Listen, Negro, you know you
did me wrong, but I got to forgive you and love you.’” Or like the equally eloquent
Reverend Dr. Jim Holley of Detroit, in a sermon admonishing Christians to be
on the lookout for hatas: “Everybody ain happy bout yo brand new house.
Everybody ain happy bout yo beau—hep me, Holy Ghost—everybody ain happy
bout yo boo—whatever you call the Negro. Everybody ain happy about it.” Or
like Reverend Hiram McBurrows, Pastor of Romulus Community Baptist 
Church in Romulus, Michigan, in a tribute to the Pastor of Tennessee Missionary
Baptist Church, talkin bout the burden and responsibility of pastoring a Black
church: “You need to be an expert in Negro-ology if you pastoring one of our
churches.”
Someone asked me recently if Negro was destined to make a widespread
comeback, eventually replacing nigga in all its myriad uses and meanings. That
would be an intriguing linguistic phenomenon, but it ain hapnin. Negro does
not enjoy the colorful (no pun intended) history and lacks the dynamic, rebel-
lious punch of nigga. In the dedication to his 1964 autobiography, entitled
nigger, comedian and activist Dick Gregory wrote: “Dear Momma—Wherever
you are, if you hear the word ‘nigger’ again, remember they are advertising my
book.” Back in The Day Claude Brown discussed the difference between Negro
and nigga (using the 1960s spelling “nigger”). He clearly demonstrates
generational continuity in thought about and use of nigga as he illustrates its
common, everyday occurrence in Black families and the Black community in
the 1960s. Brown’s analysis is instructive for us in the twenty-ﬁrst century and
is worth quoting in full.
“Nigger” has virtually as many shades of meaning in Colored English as
the demonstrative pronoun “that,” prior to application to a noun. To some
Americans of African ancestry (I avoid using the term Negro whenever
feasible, for fear of offending the Brothers X). . . nigger seems preferable
to “Negro” and has a unique kind of sentiment attached to it. This is
exempliﬁed in the frequent . . . usage of the term to denote either fondness
or hostility.
It is probable that numerous transitional niggers and even established
ex-soul brothers can—with pangs of nostalgia—reflect upon a day in the
lollipop epoch of lives when an adorable lady named Mama bemoaned her
spouse’s fastidiousness with the strictly secular utterance: “Lord, how can
one nigger be so hard to please?” Others are likely to recall a time when
that drastically lovable colored woman, who was forever wiping our noses
and darning our clothing, bellowed in a moment of exasperation: “Nigger,
you gonna be the death o’ me.” And some of the brethren who have had
56 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 73 ---
the precarious fortune to be raised up, wised up, thrown up or simply left
alone to get up as best they could, on one of the nation’s South Streets or
Lenox Avenues, might remember having affectionately referred to a best
friend as “My Nigger.” A vast majority of “back-door Americans” are apt to
agree with Webster—a nigger is simply a Negro or Black man. But the really
profound contemporary thinkers of this distinguished ethnic group . . . are
likely to differ with Mr. Webster and deﬁne “nigger” as “something else”—
a soulful “something else.” The major difference between the nigger and
the Negro, who have many traits in common, is that the nigger is the more
soulful.
Certain foods, customs and artistic expressions are associated almost
solely with the nigger: collard greens, neck bones, hog maws, black-eyed
peas, pigs’ feet, etc. A nigger has no desire to conceal or disavow any of
these favorite dishes or restrain other behavioral practices such as bobbing
his head, patting his feet to funky jazz, and shouting and jumping in church.
This is not to be construed that all niggers eat chitlins and shout in church,
nor that only niggers eat the aforementioned dishes and exhibit this type
of behavior. It is to say, however, that the soulful usage of the term nigger
implies all of the foregoing and considerably more.
(Brown, 1968, p. 88)
To help us keep these linguistic dynamics in perspective, check out a lil bit
of humorous mother wit in an Old Skool joke that made its way around the
Internet some years ago:
There was a plane ﬂying over the Atlantic. The pilot got on the intercom
and said that the plane was experiencing difﬁculties and that the weight
would have to be lessened on the plane. So he said that everyone had to
throw their luggage off the plane and they did. He got back on the intercom.
“The plane is still too heavy, so people are going to have to jump off. In all
fairness we’re going to do this alphabetically. All African Americans please
jump off the plane.” No one stood up. He got back and said, “All Blacks,
please jump off the plane.” Still no one stood up. “All Coloreds, please jump
off the plane.” Again no one stood up. Then the smart, well-mannered little
African American boy turned to his proper, well-educated, afﬂuent father
and said, “Dad, aren’t we all those things?” And the father answered, “No
son, we gon be niggas today.”
As Brown quite rightly noted back in 1968, nigga has been around in Black
community speech a long, long time. What is different—and controversial—in
this postmodern era, as noted by other observers of the contemporary linguistic-
cultural scene, is the widespread 
public use of the term. With the social
transformation and profound cultural changes of the 1960s and 1970s, nigga
came out of the Black closet. 
The N-words 57


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Last Poets, lyrical activists who are deemed by many to be the forerun-
ners of today’s Rap Music, titled their 1960s wake-up call to Blacks, “Niggers
are Scared of Revolution.” Their unique poetic, spoken word style captivated
the minds, hearts, and imagination of a people on the move from Negro-ness
to Black-ness. With a message proclaiming the necessity for change and revo-
lution, they clearly used “nigger” in semantic solidarity with their people. Rappin:
I love niggers / I love niggers / I love niggers
Because niggers are me
And I should only love that which is me
I love to see niggers go through changes / love to see niggers act
Love to see niggers make them plays / and shoot the shit
But there is one thing about niggers I do not love
Niggers are scared of revolution.
Speaking on behalf of today’s Hip Hop Nation, Hip Hop artist and actor Mos
Def, writing in 1999, in the now-defunct Hip Hop magazine, Blaze, explains and
defends Hip Hop’s pervasive public use of nigga: 
If you look at the historical use of the word and place it in the larger context
of the collective experience of Black America, you will see that it makes
perfect sense that this generation embraces the term as one of endear-
ment. As the latest cultural phenomenon to appear on the continuum of
Black expression, Hip Hop, like its predecessors, Blues and jazz, has always
been about taking established norms and parameters and stretching them
beyond their known limits.
Ice Cube, one of the founders of NWA: “Black people have done this with a
lot of things . . . we take this word that’s been a burden to us . . . digest it, spit
it back out as . . . a badge of honor . . . as a deﬁance” (quoted in 
Detroit Free
Press, June 14, 2004, p. 2E).
Anyone from the Old Skool who would tell the truth would have to acknowl-
edge that they have heard or used nigga in everyday conversations with other
Blacks. As writer J. Clinton Brown so aptly put it, in his 1993 essay, “In Defense
of the N Word”:
I have heard the word “niggah” (note the spelling, dig the sound) all of my
life. Many of my elders and friends use it with phenomenal eloquence. They
say it to express amusement, incredulity, disgust or affection. These people
are very much about being themselves—proudly, intensely, sometimes
loudly.
In sum, despite all the language eradication campaigns, and notwithstanding
all the whoopin and hollerin, gnashing of teeth, whining, and complaining, nigga
is here to stay. 
58 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 75 ---
Can Whites use nigga? Kennedy suggests the possibility in the conclusion
to his 2002 book, Nigger: The Strange Career of a Troublesome Word:
As nigger is more widely disseminated and its complexity is more widely
appreciated, censuring its use—even its use as an insult—will become more
difﬁcult. The more aware judges and other ofﬁcials become of the ambiguity
surrounding 
nigger, the less likely they will be to automatically condemn
the actions taken by whites who voice the N-word. This tendency will
doubtless, in certain instances, lead to unfortunate results, as decision
makers show undue solicitude toward racists who use the rhetoric of
complexity to cover their misconduct.
Still, despite these costs, there is much to be gained by allowing people
of all backgrounds to yank 
nigger away from white supremacists, to subvert
its ugliest denotation, and to convert the N-word from a negative into a
positive appellation.
(p. 175)
Coming at it from a different perspective, Hip Hop artist and intellectual 
guru KRS-ONE (Knowledge Reigns Supreme Over Nearly Everyone) puts forth
a similar argument for the bi/multi-racial use of nigga. In his 2003 book,
Ruminations , KRS-ONE contends that nigga identifies and can be used by
anyone who is a member of the Hip Hop Nation:
If I say “nigga” and a disrespected image of an African American man or
woman comes to mind, then it is you who is a racist or you who thinks 
of disrespect and non-human characteristics when you hear that word. In
fact, in the Hiphop world, everybody’s a nigga. Even European-American
youth call themselves niggas. There are no non-human characteristics
attached to the word “nigga” when it is spoken by the members of the
Hiphop community. Actually, nigga means anybody; and it is not graphically
or verbally disrespectful because anyone who speaks the code correctly
The N-words 59
Figure 3.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon, March 4, 2005.


--- PAGE 76 ---
also shares in the oppression, sexism, and racism inﬂicted on them by the
American mainstream . . . So if one Hiphoppa calls another a “nigga” or a
“bitch,” there is no disrespect felt on either side because they know each
other’s conceptual thoughts.
(pp. 242–43)
In theory, I don’t disagree with the Brothas. But Life is played out on the big
screen of Practice. A mixed-race conversational context is not the time for
linguistic experimentation. Maybe up in the exclusive, rareﬁed “Git Rich Or Die
Tryin’” world of Hip Hop insiders like 50 cent, P. Diddy, Russell Simmons, and
other such folk, racial outsiders can get they linguistic nigga on. But not out
here in the real world of 39.2 million struggling and dying—not gittin rich—
everyday Black people. So it would behoove White folk to be very sure of their
surroundings, they girls, they boys, they peeps before sprinkling their conver-
sation with nigga’s. Some Whites view this as the operation of a linguistic
double standard, representing a kind of Black privilege. Well, yeah, that’s what
it is, make no bones about it. It’s a symbolic challenge to White hegemony, one
of the precious few to which Brothas and Sistas can lay claim in this society.
Here’s how comedian Chris Rock put it:
The New York Times: “Nigger” is a heavy-duty word. You better have a good
reason for using it.
Rock: It’s not that heavy-duty. The thing with “nigger” is just that White
people are ticked off because there’s something they can’t do. That’s
all it is. “I’m White, I can do anything in the world. But I can’t say that
word.” It’s the only thing in the whole world that the average White
man cannot use at his discretion.
(quoted in Hunter, 1997)
Cultural outsiders peppering they conversation wit nigga or other Black
insider lingo to show that they down run the risk of having their use of 
Black Talk backﬁre on them. This is exactly what happened back in 1998 when
Boston, a local magazine, used the phrase “Head Negro in Charge” on the cover
of its April issue and as the title of a lengthy story on Dr. Henry Louis Gates.
The story was written by journalist Cheryl Bentsen. On the magazine’s cover
were these words:
HEAD NEGRO IN CHARGE 
Why Harvard’s Skip Gates 
May Be the Most Important
Black Man in America
Gates, affectionately known as “Skip” to friends and colleagues across the
country, is Chair of Harvard University’s African American Studies Department,
a proliﬁc writer and a leading Black public intellectual, whose honors include
60 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 77 ---
a National Book Award and a MacArthur Foundation (“genius”) Award. At that
time, Bentsen’s article was the longest that had been done on Gates to date
(12,000 words), and it heaped high praise on him, detailing his earlier life and
struggles against racism and poverty, and lauding his accomplishments over
the years. 
Clearly the folks at 
Boston magazine misread the cultural, historical 
context in African America. “Head Negro in Charge” is typically phrased as
H.N.I.C. in Black Language. And the “N” does not stand for “Negro.” Rather 
it is a euphemistic way of saying “nigger” or “nigga.” Regardless of the Black
pronunciation “nigga,” the meaning is that of “nigger.” The phrase references
a historical tradition dating to enslavement, in which Whites select Black
leaders and authority ﬁgures and put them in charge of other Blacks to keep
them in line. Thus in Black Talk, H.N.I.C. is an ironic title, implying that the “Head
Nigger’s” power is limited and that this power can be taken away just as easily
as it was given. When Blacks refer to a Black person in authority with the title
“H.N.I.C.,” or when the H.N.I.C. him/herself uses the term in reference to
themselves, they are signifyin. It’s an insider cultural joke—they are letting you
know that they know what the Game is. That’s why we let out a soulful chuckle
when we heard H.N.I.C. used by Morgan Freeman, in the role of educator Joe
Clark in the ﬁlm, 
Lean On Me, and when we read, in the premier issue of Blaze
(1998): “H.N.I.C. Jesse Washington, Editor-in-Chief.” In her commentary on 
this controversy, “Bostonians Squabble Over Headline,” the ever-incisive Dr.
Julianne Malveaux had this to say:
At its best, the H.N.I.C. term is an anachronism, a throwback to a time past
when African American people were so segregated that one of us could
speak for all of us. Often it is a term used derisively to speak of one who
has an exaggerated sense of his or her own importance. When viewed from
this perspective, the article on Gates seems more a parody than ﬂattery.
Someone who is aware of the subtlety of the term would hardly describe
Gates in superlative terms on the one hand and with a disdainful historical
term on the other . . . For all his much-touted brilliance and many con-
tributions to our nation’s life, is Gates satisﬁed to be considered a ﬁlter,
an intermediary, an interpreter of Black folks? Are we content to have any
African American described that way? And is ignorance any excuse for the
insult 
Boston Magazine lobbed at Gates and the rest of us?
(1998, p. 28)
The story sparked local and national controversy and much media coverage.
Boston’s Mayor at the time, Thomas Menino, asked the magazine to apologize.
African American minister, the Reverend Charles Stith, backed by the
Massachusetts Urban League and the NAACP, demanded an apology for the
use of what Stith called this “historically offensive phrase.” There was talk 
of a campaign calling for advertisers to boycott the magazine. The issue was
The N-words 61


--- PAGE 78 ---
discussed on the Today show. Newsweek’s coverage of the story described the
conﬂict as “a tempest over a headline.”
When interviewed, the editor of Boston, Craig Unger, defended the maga-
zine’s use of the phrase: “‘Head Negro in Charge’ is part of the vernacular of
Black writers and intellectuals” (quoted in Mehren, 1998). In a news story in
the Boston Globe , Unger says: “Frankly, I’m perplexed . . . Professor Gates
seems to be saying different things to different people every day.” Unger goes
on to say that Gates saw an early copy of the story and “told me how happy he
was with the piece. I’m surprised he now says he was offended by the headline
. . . I ﬁnd it hard to believe he doesn’t understand the irony . . . namely that 
in assembling his dream team at Harvard, he has become an even greater
intellectual impresario, the ultimate Black academic superstar” (quoted in
Jurkowitz, 1998). Unger indicated that he was proud of the story although he
regretted the reaction that the H.N.I.C. headline had caused: “Our use of the
expression . . . has obviously upset some people, and I sincerely regret that”
(quoted in Mehren, 1998). 
For his part, Gates was out of town judging the Pulitzer Prizes when the
controversy ﬁrst hit and issued no response. A few days into the controversy,
however, he bemoaned the uproar that had been generated by the story’s
headline and lamented the possibility that the incident might “exacerbate racial
tension” in the city of Boston. According to Jurkowitz’ account in the 
Boston
Globe (1998):
“I [Gates] found it offensive primarily because I have written about and
challenged as an academic the whole notion of ‘Head Negro In Charge’
. . . I am against the whole historical concept of one Black person being 
a power broker over other Black people. The whole idea is anachronistic
and to have it associated with me was profoundly disturbing.” [Gates]
counseled the editor to “apologize for inadvertently offending members of
the community” ...G a t e s  said he had no major problem with the story
after seeing the early copy, but didn’t comment about the headline because
it was too late. He said he decided not to offer any immediate comment
when the controversy exploded “because I don’t believe in censorship. I’m
a journalist as well as a scholar.”
African Americans who oppose the use of nigga by Whites contend that this
is a historically negative White folk term that Black folk have flipped the
linguistic script on. That’s why only those who have paid Black dues, who share
the Black historical experience of racial oppression and White domination—
only they are allowed the use of nigga. As Dyson so deftly put it, in his essay,
“Niggas Gotta Stop,” published in 1999 in 
The Source:
Most White folk attracted to Black culture know better than to cross a 
line drawn in the sand of racial history . . . The whole point of Black folk
62 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 79 ---
using nigger, even in distasteful, unruly fashion, has been to undo white
supremacy . . . Long before hip hop, Black folk adopted and adapted the
term with an eye to making it off limits to White folk by mocking their
shameless denigration of Black culture . . . we seek to remind White folk
and ourselves of the hurtful history of race and how artful we are in
overcoming its brutal effects . . . if White rappers, or the White heads who
follow suit, insist on using a term that is, and should be, taboo, they’ve got
to be checked and actively resisted.
The N-words 63


--- PAGE 80 ---
Chapter 4
Honeyz and Playaz1 Talkin 
that Talk 
The language, only the language . . . It’s the thing that Black people love so
much—the saying of words, holding them on the tongue, experimenting with
them, playing with them. It’s a love, a passion. Its function is like a preacher’s:
to make you stand up out of your seat, make you lose yourself and hear
yourself. The worst of all possible things that could happen would be to lose
that language. There are certain things I cannot say without recourse to my
language.
(Toni Morrison quoted in LeClair, 1981)
African American Language (AAL), like all languages, is a tool for ordering the
chaos of human experience. AAL gives shape, coherence, and explanation to
the condition of U.S. slave descendants and functions as a mechanism for
teaching and learning about life and the world. Our language practices reﬂect
a generational continuity that has stood the test of time and they continue to
demonstrate the uniqueness of Black folks’ journey in this land. These styles
and ways of talkin Black have persevered in African America because they allow
for the fullest expression of the mind and the heart. Journalist Omowale Diop
Ankobia, who done been baptized in the Black Linguistic Fire, echoes this view.
In his “Calling It Like It Is: Mel Farr’s Running Game” (1999), he jams the former
National Football League (NFL) superstar for his exploitative business practices
against poor Black folk. Ankobia explains his choice of language:
Before I begin I’d like to apologize to all who will be offended by me using
my native language, Ebonics. Usually, and with great pain, I attempt to 
use my second language, English, when writing. Not this time. Ebonics is
appropriate because those for whom this piece is written speak Ebonics.
And I want them to feel me as well as hear me. So I bring it to them in the
only language I know that is capable of doing both.
Black folk are masters of linguistic improvisation and manipulators of the
Word. We use our language as a mark of personal style and creativity. We also


--- PAGE 81 ---
use it to deﬁne and control reality. AAL helps us to impose an orderly expla-
nation upon a disorderly world. Like Reverend Jesse Jackson, still one of the
best for spitting rhyme, rhetoric, and reason, speaking against the election of
George Bush at the 2000 Democratic National Convention: “If you put one seed
under a bush and one under the sunlight, which one grows tall? You want your
seed to grow tall? Stay out the bushes.” Brotha Ron Daniels, Democratic Party
strategist, got a taste of linguistic game too. In a 2004 television news show
interview, Oliver North argued that the Republican Party is racially diverse and
promotes Black leadership because (at that time) two members of President
Bush’s Cabinet were African American. Daniels countered: “But see, the
problem with that is it’s the 3 C’s disease—Condi, Colin, Clarence.” (You mean
you ain know? That’s Condoleeza Rice, Colin Powell and Clarence Thomas.)
AAL is a vehicle for achieving recognition and afﬁrmation. Black folk applaud
skillful linguistic inventiveness and verbal creativity. We likes folk who can play
with and on the Word, who can talk and testify, preach and prophesy, lie and
signify. Like Rapper Omega of the former Fugees, lambasting conditions in 
the so-called “Garden State” (New Jersey): “In the Garden State, it grows stink
weeds and criminals / Government funds are minimal / Oppression is sub-
liminal.” Like this NAACP slogan admonishing Black folk to get out and vote:
“Remember to take your soles to the polls and vote!” Like Hip Hop artist
Shawnna talkin in 
XXL Magazine bout what it was like touring with Ludacris:
We had the crusty, broke-down-ass bus, pull-over-every-five-minute-ass,
can’t-nobody-cut-no-water-on-ass, window-won’t-open-ass, bottom-of-the-
bus-ﬂooded-everybody’s-clothes-ass, radio-don’t-work-ass, speakers-blown-
ass, nasty-bunk-bed-rubbers-on-the-ﬂoor. . . It needed to be two bathrooms,
that’s all I’m saying.
(quoted in Caramanica, 2004, p. 098)
Like Brotha Torrance Stephens, writing in 
Rolling Out, an “urbanstyle weekly”
newspaper (2004), recounting the story of a trip to South Africa. At his ﬁve-star
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 65
Figure 4.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon, July 18, 2003.


--- PAGE 82 ---
hotel, he encountered another Black American Brotha, a “very popular actor”
who more than once ignored Stephens’s greeting and even tried not to make
eye contact.
I was very troubled by his actions . . . So people please, whenever you 
are in Africa, and you see a person who looks American, or hear a 
distinctly American voice, speak and be courteous, for you never know 
who you will run into. And please, whatever you do, don’t act like a . . .
well since I can’t say what I would like to, a female dog gluteus maximus
Negro. 
Our preachers continue to be masters of rhetorical, linguistic inventiveness.
In his “Where Are the Men?” sermon, exhorting Black men to step to the
challenges facing African American communities, Reverend Dr. Charles Adams,
Pastor of Hartford Memorial Baptist Church in Motown, manipulates repetitive
words and phrases and deploys poetic alliteration to drive home his message.
Known in the Black Church world as the “Harvard Whooper” (his doctorate is
from Harvard), Pastor Adams preaches: 
The strong capable Black male or female has never been tolerated by
White society . . . They suppressed W.E.B. DuBois. They compromised
Booker T. Washington. They excoriated Malcolm X. They murdered Medgar
Evers. They persecuted Paul Robeson. They expelled Adam Clayton Powell,
Jr. They smeared George Crockett and Charles Hill. They slew Martin Luther
King, Jr. They ﬁred Ben Frazier. They erased Max Robinson . . . Some of us
are . . . lying down when we oughta be standing up, sinking backward when
we oughta be standing forward, vanishing out of sight when we oughta be
vanquishing our enemies . . . Stand up, Black man . . . If you don’t stand
up, the church will be debilitated, the community will be devastated, the
school will be dominated, the world will be disintegrated, the children will
be truncated, the race will be asphyxiated, the globe will be annihilated.
Stand up, glorify the church, fortify the race, rectify the wrong, purify the
community, sanctify the family, satisfy the need, qualify the children,
beautify the world, dignify yourself, and magnify the Lord . . . Stand up,
Black man . . . If it’s a problem, you can solve it. If it’s cancer, you can 
cure it. If it’s crack cocaine, you can defeat it. If it’s a misunderstanding,
you can settle it. If it’s a grudge, you can drop it. If it’s hatred, you can 
shake it. If it’s trouble, you can take it. If it’s a mountain, you can move it.
If it’s a handicap, you can rise above it. If it’s a bottle, you can ﬁght it. If it’s
temptation, you can conquer it. If it’s a cross, you can bear it. If it knocks
you down, you can get up. If they push you against the ropes, you can come
out swinging. If they hate you, you can keep loving. And if they kill you, you
can, you will, you must rise again! 
(Adams, 1992)
66 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 83 ---
In the African way, blending the sacred and the profane, Reverend Dr.
Jeremiah Wright Jr., Pastor of Trinity United Church of Christ in Chi-town, expertly
incorporates vernacular street language. Preaching on the subject “Demons
and Detractors,” he takes us on a journey “to see what a First Century text can
teach those of us who live in the Twenty-First Century”:
Church folk who oughta be shoutin, instead of celebratin, they go to hatin
. . . Folk who talk about you, detractors, hellions and hatas, are folk who
can’t do what you do. That’s why they hatin on you . . . These Pharisees
hadn’t gotten rid of any demons—psychological demons, theological
demons, physiological demons . . . These Pharisees hadn’t touched any
blind men and opened their eyes . . . These Pharisees couldn’t do what
Jesus did. So they talked about Him. They went to hatin on Him . . . What
hatas and hellions do is distract you from doing what God told you to do.
Somebody’s missing this. Somebody’s missing this. So let me put it another
way. Don’t you let what people say about you stop you from being who God
says you aaaaaarrrreee! Other people don’t deﬁne you, so don’t let them
conﬁne you . . . All my White friends here tonight, White folk, listen to me,
hear me tonight . . . You ain no honky . . . You are a child of God . . . just
like an Asian, an African, an Arab, an Indian, an Afghanistanan; an Iraqi is
also a child of God . . . Freddie Haynes says I’m an equal opportunity
preacher . . . Black folk, Colored, Negro, African American, here I come.
Hear me tonight. You ain no coon, you ain no jungle bunny, you ain no
spear-chucker, you ain no boy, you ain no gal, and I don’t care what Def
Comedy said, you ain no niggaaaaaaa! You are a child of God! So stand 
up and start living up to who God says you are! . . . Listen, Listen. Listen.
Stop looking to other folk for validation and afﬁrmation, for deﬁnition and
recognition. God is the source of everything you need!
(Wright, 2002) 
“Don’t hate the playa, hate the Game”
Verbal play occupies a central role in the African American Language tradition.
The notion of “play” itself has a long-standing history in African America dating
back to enslavement. Adults and children were expected to provide enter-
tainment for their masters as well as physical labor. In fact, there were Black
“play children” during the reign of that “peculiar institution” for whom play
became their line of work. In her 1995 historical account of play and leisure
among slave youth, King describes several instances which exemplify this
disruption of the binary of work and play:
Tryphena Fox [the White mistress] worried little about any negative
inﬂuence the young “house pet” might have upon her daughter Fanny since
she already knew that Adelaide was a good natured, tractable, “bright little
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 67


--- PAGE 84 ---
negress.” Whenever Fox did not feel up to entertaining her daughter, she
called Adelaide in to dress doll-babies and play “set table” with Fanny.
(p. 51)
The conception of “work” as “play” in the cultural semantics of Black America
has expanded and evolved over the centuries. Recasting the Serious as Play
became a way of camouflaging the precarious, unpredictable essence of
serious-as-a-heart-attack behavior, issues, events. Involvement in love affairs
outside of one’s marriage came to be referred to as “playin.” If you can ignore
the disagreeable actions or words from someone in your personal or social
world, if you can avoid potential confrontation and push on toward your goal,
you are said to have “played past” the negativity. If you’re unsure how someone
is going to react to your request for something, you can check things out ﬁrst
with a kind of verbal pre-test, “playin somebody for their reaction.” You can opt
out of an activity you ﬁnd disagreeable with the familiar expression: “I don’t
play that.” The Black Language expression “playin for blood,” to refer to hard,
aggressive play in cards, basketball, video games, or any other competitive
activity, such as a debate or court case, reminds us that “play” can also be a
serious and life-altering affair.
Taken together, “play” and “game” constitute a powerful linguistic icon. Every
game in the social universe has its clearly deﬁned rules of play. Conceptualizing
reality and life as a game is a framework that ﬁxes things, puts structure and
system in place, gives one the comfort of order in a random, disorderly world.
When a rival is a person’s competitive equal, they accept the checkmate with
the well-known Black expression: “Game recognize Game.” And if you are
outdone by a competitor, you may have to hear, “Don’t hate the playa, hate the
Game.” 
The whole industry of Hip Hop music—bustin rhymes, studio production,
instrumental technology, art work and C.D. cover design, video choreography
and production, and so forth—is referred to as the Rap Game. The industry of
drugs—selling, exporting, all the other related criminal activity, as well as,
according to Hip Hop duo, dead prez in “Window to My Soul” (2003), U.S.
Government involvement—all of this has had such a devastating impact on
communities throughout urban Black America that it is not only referred to as
the “Dope Game,” but often also simply as “The Game.” The Hoops (or B-Ball)
Game is not just the game of basketball itself, but the totality of the NBA—multi-
million-dollar contract negotiations, lucrative endorsement deals, and so forth.
Some scholars even refer to life in the Academy as the Academic Game. 
In 
As You Like It, Shakespeare wrote: “All the world’s a stage / And all the
men and women merely players.” Not in African America, no “mere” players
there. Along with a crucial recognition of the precarious status of Black Life
and a keen awareness of racialized oppression, there has also existed a
profound belief in the possibility of controlling your destiny on the world’s stage.
The “playa” is one of the major symbols of this belief. 
68 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 85 ---
Following the linguistic rules of African American speech, the term “player,”
taken from the lexicon of the Language of Wider Communication, is trans-
formed both in form and meaning. Following West African pronunciation 
rules, which inﬂuenced the Black use of English, the “er” sufﬁx of “player” is
reduced to the vowel sound spelled in Hip Hop with an “a,” hence “playa.”
Although the term and the concept of “playa” predates the Blackploitation 
ﬁlms of the late 1960s and 1970s, it was during that era that “playa” became
synonymous with Pimp or Mack, who was characterized as a shrewd
manipulator of women or a scam artist with dazzling rhetorical skills. He was
celebrated in some quarters and castigated in others. Films such as 
Players’
Ball, The Mack and Superfly had an impact on Black Popular Culture that
resonates today in Hip Hop Culture. Rappers from the late Biggie Smalls (aka
B.I.G.) and Tupac Shakur to today’s Snoop Dogg and 50 cent boast of being
super playaz. 
In more recent times, a different image of “the playa” has arisen alongside
the exploitative, ambiguous image of old. “The playa” is also being celebrated
as someone who is in control of a situation, large and in charge, someone who
can “make a dolla outa ﬁfteen cent.” Playaz are imbued with power on the stage
of the social universe. They are not “merely players,” not objects, but subjects
in the grand scheme of life. And increasingly, in twenty-first-century Black
America, playaz are women.
“Signiﬁcation is the nigga’s occupation”
Signification/signifyin is a style of verbal play that focuses humorous state-
ments of double meaning on an individual, an event, a situation, or even a
government. Signifyin can provide playful commentary or serious social critique
couched in the form of verbal play. In fact, a common strategy is to ﬁrst boldly
state your critique and then retreat to the familiar Black expression: “I was jes
playin.” This is exactly what Hip Hop artist Eminem, whose language reveals
residual influences of the Black speech community, is doing in his creative
song, “White America” from his 2002 album, 
The Eminem Show. His opening
signifyin lines—“America!! Ha Ha Ha! We love you! . . . How many people are
proud to be citizens of this beautiful country of ours? . . . The women and men
who have broke their necks for the freedom of speech the United States
government has sworn to uphold . . .”—set the stage for his critique of White
America for its hypocrisy, racism and social contradictions:
Hip Hop was never a problem in Harlem, only in Boston
After it bothered the fathers of daughters startin to blossom
So now I’m catchin the ﬂack from these activists when they raggin
Actin like I’m the ﬁrst rapper to smack a bitch or say faggot . . .
I am . . . the ringleader of this circus of worthless pawns
Sent to lead the march right up to the steps of Congress
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 69


--- PAGE 86 ---
and piss on the lawn of the White House . . .
To spit liquor in the faces of this democracy of hypocrisy . . .
Fuck you with the free-est of speech this
Divided States of Embarrassment will allow me to have.
Em’s conclusion repeats his opening lyrics and then adds this clever tag: “Ha!
Ha! Ha! Uhm just playin, America.” 
Signiﬁcation involves rhetorical hyperbole, irony, indirection, metaphor, and
deployment of the semantically or logically unexpected. Most importantly, the
signifyin must be funny. There are double—and sometimes multiple—layers of
meaning; there is always a subtext. Although signifyin is tantamount to a “dis,”
an expression of disapproval, it’s acceptable because it is a well-known, long-
established Black verbal tradition, with socially defined rules and linguistic
norms that those born under the lash share. Out of all the styles of talkin Black,
this continues to be my favorite. 
There’s an old saying in the Black Oral Tradition: “Signification is the 
nigga’s occupation.” I’ve always felt that this has got to refer specifically to 
the 
Sista’s occupation because Black women have no peer when it comes 
to Signiﬁcation. 
Let’s start by going way back . . . to the late 1960s research of Sista linguist
Claudia Mitchell-Kernan. In one of her studies, she analyzes a conversation
between Rochelle and Grace who are Sistas by both biology and race. Grace
had sworn to herself and to Rochelle and all they girls that she was not gon
have no mo babies. She already had four kids and that was enough. Therefore,
she was too through when she discovered that she was pregnant, and so she
didn’t tell anybody. But one day, Rochelle came over, and Grace had started
to show by that time. This is what went down (slightly updated to ﬁt the cultural
context of the twenty-ﬁrst century):
Rochelle: Girl, you sure do need to join the Weight Watchers for lunch crowd.
Grace: (noncommitally) Yeah, I guess I am putting on a little weight.
Rochelle: Now look here, girl, we both standing here soaking wet and you still
trying to tell me it ain’t raining.
In her analysis of this conversational exchange, published in 1972, Mitchell-
Kernan observes:
Grace found the incident highly amusing. She reports the incident to
illustrate Rochelle’s clever use of words, the latter’s intent being simply to
let her know in a humorous way that she was aware of her pregnancy. “She
was teasing—being funny.” Such messages may include content which
might be construed as mildly insulting, except that they are treated by the
interlocutors as joking behavior.
(p. 323)
70 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 87 ---
Fast forward to a beauty salon in 2000. Keisha, a beautician, asks her client,
Amina, what kind of hair style she is planning to get: “Hey girl, whatcha want
today?” Before answering, Amina removes her hat. Keisha, seeing her hair,
shouts: “Damn, girl, you waitin for slavery to roll back around?!” Amina and
other women nearby laugh heartily at Keisha’s signifyin question. Which is, of
course, not a question at all, but a commentary that conveys a double message
in a humorous style. First, Keisha is critiquing the tightly curled (aka “nappy,”
“kinky”) condition of Amina’s hair. In its natural state the Sista’s hair had done
become extremely curled, wooly, and seemingly impossible to comb. Keisha
thinks it is in dire need of some TLC from her competent hand. Second, 
Keisha is acknowledging that during enslavement, wearing one’s hair in its
natural, unstraightened, unprocessed, uncombed state was an acceptable
practice. However slavery’s been over for nearly a century and a half, and its
recurrence is not possible now, nor are the hairstyle norms of the slavery era
now acceptable.
A home in an upscale big-city suburb, 2002. Two couples are playing a game
of Bid. As the cards are being dealt, Rashidah says to her opponents: “Hope
you and yo husband been practicing.” Before they can reply, she follows up
with: “But that’s aight, we got some tissue.” As is typical with Signification,
Rashidah’s statements are not about what they say on the surface. Her ﬁrst
statement is a signifyin commentary about the lack of Bid Whist card-playing
skills of her opponents. Her follow-up statement is a prediction that she and
her partner are going to be victorious in the game. In fact, they are going to
beat their opponents so tough that they are going to need tissue to wipe away
the tears they will shed from losing the game.
Signification is particularly effective in the service of political and social
critique. You can make a statement about a hot button, controversial topic and
get a profound point across with the punch of signifyin humor. The linguistic
archetype has got to be 1960’s revolutionary leader Malcolm X. He once began
a speech to a Black audience with these words: “Mr. Moderator, Brotha Lomax,
Brothas and Sistas, friends and enemies.” Of course one doesn’t usually begin
a speech by addressing one’s enemies. Malcolm’s Signiﬁcation let his audience
know that he knew inimical forces were up in their midst. More recently, in this
twenty-ﬁrst century, Pastor Stacia Pierce, co-Pastor of Life Changers Christian
Center, offers us a lil signifyin sum-n sum-n. In an evening workshop for Sistas,
she chides those Church Sistas who have a problem with tithing. “Some of you
give $20.00 a week in tithes and act like you regret that. Twenty dollars!! Twenty
dollars!! You spend that much at Burger King.” Several Sistas look surprised
and guilty at Pastor Pierce’s reference to their spending money at BK. Her
response: “Un-huh, yeah, I see yall up in there.” 
Surely the best Signification to be found in the African American Verbal
Tradition has got to be Janie’s verbal duel with her husband Jody in Zora 
Neale Hurston’s master work of ﬁction, 
Their Eyes Were Watching God(1937).
Given Hurston’s skill as a folklore scholar and her penchant for collecting lyin
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 71


--- PAGE 88 ---
and signifyin tales and conversations throughout Black communities in her
time, this exchange was undoubtedly taken from a real life conversation in her
day:
Jody: A woman stay roun uh store till she get old as Methusalem and still can’t
cut a little thing like a plug of tobacco! Don’t stand dere rollin yo pop
eyes at me wid yo rump hanging nearly to yo knees!
Janie: Stop mixin up mah doings wid mah looks, Jody. When you git through
tellin me how tuh cut uh plug uh tobacco, then you kin tell me whether
mah behind is on straight or not. 
Jody: You must be out yo head . . . talkin any such language as dat.
Janie: You de one started talkin under people’s clothes. Not me.
Jody: Whut’s de matter wid you, nohow? You ain’t no young girl to be gettin
all insulted bout yo looks. You ain’t no young courtin’ gal. You’se uh ole
woman, nearly forty.
Janie: Yeah, ah’m nearly forty and you’se already ﬁfty. . . Talkin bout me lookin
old! When you pull down yo britches, you look lak de change uh life.
Let me interrupt this ﬂow to throw in a little Signiﬁcation quiz, see if yall feelin
this. In the scenarios below, choose the response that you think the honey or
playa used.
Nicole and Sheila
Nicole is a medical technician in a large medical complex in a major metro-
politan area. Her job is to draw blood from patients for medical diagnosis. For
the past couple of weeks, much to her obvious-to-everybody-lined-up-in-the-
hallway distress, she has been handling the overwhelming number of patients
all by herself because, as she put it to me on the loh-loh, “my triﬂing co-worker
is out on this fake medical.” However, on this day, surprisingly, there are only
two patients in line, one of whom, Sheila, had also been there the previous two
weeks. Sheila says to Nicole: “Hey, Sista-girl, ain nobody here today but us. Not
like last week, huh?” What did Nicole say in response? Choose one:
A “And believe me, girl, I am happy and relieved.”
B “Thank goodness! Cause this job was about to get the best of me.”
C “Praise God, from Whom all blessings ﬂow.”
Camera Man and the store owner
Harry, who says his Gangsta name is “Camera Man,” is at a used foreign auto
parts store to buy a rim for his older model Mercedes Benz. The store owner
checks the computerized list and veriﬁes that they have the rim in stock. He
then directs one of his workers to get the rim from the supply room in the back
72 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 89 ---
of the store. Camera Man waits and waits as other customers come into the
store, make their purchase, and leave. Finally after he’s been waiting for 
the worker to return from the supply room for over half an hour, Camera Man
says to the store owner (choose one): 
A “Man, I been here half an hour waitin for this rim. He went to get it from
the supply room. What 
is the problem?”
B “Hey, man, yo service sucks. I been waiting over half an hour for a rim that
your computer said you had in stock. And I ain got it yet!”
C “Say, man, you musta had to send all the way to Berlin for that rim.”
Juliette and the White social workers
It is a week after the Los Angeles rebellion, that massive, violent uprising by
Blacks in the wake of the jury’s verdict of not guilty for the White police ofﬁcers
in the 1991 beating of Black Rodney King. Despite all the evidence, including
a videotape of that infamous scene of the California police ofﬁcers beating and
bludgeoning Rodney King—the video footage shown all around the world—the
jury had acquitted the ofﬁcers. Juliette, a Sista who is a clinical social worker
in L.A., is in a discussion with her White co-workers about the L.A. rebellion,
police brutality against African Americans, and the general oppression of
Blacks, especially Black men, in the state of California. One of the Whites
remarks that Juliette seems to be very angry. How does Juliette respond?
Choose one:
A “I’m no different from many other African Americans who are upset about
this situation.”
B “If you were Black, don’t you think you would feel the same way?”
C “Hey, baby, I been angry since 1619.”
John and Gil
John is owner of a barbershop in the hood. He is kickin it with his electrician,
Gil, and the conversation turns to crack cocaine. This is undoubtedly a painful
conversation for John because his Uncle Bub, who used to live at John’s house,
is a drug addict, now in his forties. John asks Gil how long crack stays in 
a person’s system. Gil answers: “Three weeks.” John counters with: “Bub says
three days.” Gil responds to John’s counter by saying (choose one):
A “Bub is a dope ﬁend. He might say anything.”
B “Bub crazy. He know it’s longer than any three days.”
C “That’s why Bub isn’t working now.”
(See note 2, p. 147, for correct answers.)
2
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 73


--- PAGE 90 ---
Standard wisdom in the ﬁeld of language studies is that women are more
linguistically conservative than men and tend to use LWC grammatical patterns
more frequently than men. While doing some historical work on Black women’s
language, using interviews of Black women radio disc jockeys,
3 a ﬁeld where,
if anywhere in society, departures from LWC would seem to be acceptable, I
was surprised to ﬁnd instances of this linguistic conservatism. One Sista D.J.,
Peggy Mitchell Beckwith, who started doing radio in 1952, told the interviewer
that she envisioned it as her mission to correct the language of Blacks, to be
a linguistic representation of the race through her use of LWC. Speaking on the
state of Black radio in the 1950s, Mitchell Beckwith, who was a physician’s
wife as well as a D.J. at the time, said:
There was one lady on the radio station. Her delivery was really what turned
me off . . . I was listening one day, and they had a lot of women who had
honorary doctorates. She said, “Well I’m going to introduce Dr. So-and-So
now and she is going to deliver her thesis.” That’s a long ways from thesis,
to me. 
Evaluating the impact of her radio show, she goes on to say:
So they wanted to be competitive, and I really saw improvement. I’m not
putting myself on a pedestal. I’m not saying I was the best one out there,
but at least I knew I could speak correct English . . . And often times I had
other disc jockeys who would . . . ask me to come and read the commer-
cials with them, or they would want to read the commercial for me and ask
me what I thought of the way they read. So, to me . . . this was upgrading
radio.
On the other hand, the most successful and popular Black woman D.J. in the
twentieth century, Martha Jean “the Queen” Steinberg, who achieved iconic
status, was a clever wordsmith, who deftly merged AAL and LWC. “The Queen”
exhibited a ﬂair for creative language use, and she was acutely conscious of
the social, cultural, and political advantages of Black speech. Noting that “in
this business, baby, you got to think like a man, act like a lady and work like a
dog,” she told the interviewer about the impact of Black radio during the Civil
Rights Movement:
If it hadn’t been for Black radio, Martin Luther King would not have gotten
off the ground, in my estimation because we talked about it . . . and
everybody listened . . . We talked like the African drummers used to talk
years ago. We talked in code. “Yes, Mammy O, Daddy, get on down.” 
We would talk about what to do . . . the . . . language that we used . . .
was something in our communit y...[ messages] about what was going
on racially in town, what you should do and what you should not do. And
we’d say “You know what we mean.” 
74 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 91 ---
Contemporary honeyz have inherited the Martha Jean “The Queen” linguistic
tradition. Not only do they riff off the language of the Black speech community,
they also come real and raw, especially in intimate, all-female contexts. The
“War Council” scene from ﬁlmmaker Spike Lee’s 1991 ﬁlm, 
Jungle Fever, which
Spike did not script, allowing the Sistas to improvise, reﬂects the spontaneous,
clever, verbally rich skills of today’s honeyz. Freestylin, these Sistas—in real life
professional, college-educated women—created a linguistic slam dunk.
Nilda: You know what the options are: be a nun, be gay, or see somebody who
likes you no matter what, Chinese, Black, White, or whatever.
Inez: Exactly.
Drew: Wrong, Nilda. You’re wrong as the day is long. There’re [Black men] out
there. The problem is we’re looking in the wrong places . . .
Vera: Well, the fact remains that we are losing our men, that’s the bottom
line.
Drew: Black men . . . I know we want to blame them, and it is their blame. But
part of it is that these White bitches throw themselves at Black men
. . . You can’t walk down the street with your man without 29 thousand
White bitches comin on to him. And they will give up the pussy because
their fathers tried to keep it from ’em all their lives. When they turn 
18 and they leave home, they gon get that Black dick, they gon get it
. . . and it could be yours, yours, yours, or mine.
Inez: Deal with the Black man for a minute. There’s a lot of self-hate goin on
when he can’t deal with a sista.
Drew: Yeah, Inez, how would you know? You won’t deal with a Black man.
Inez: Oh yes, I do date Black men, but I also date Chinese, Latino, Jewish, the
full spectrum...I  know you think I should date Black men, but I’m going
to date who I like. Give me a man, regardless of the color of his skin, who
is nice to me, who is sweet to me, and who I strongly believe loves me.
Drew: Inez, I am not the rainbow-fucking kind. You are the reading rainbow.
Inez: Drew, if it will make you happy, honey, I will make a pilgrimage to Africa
. . . and ﬁnd myself a true tribesman.
Vera: A true Asiatic Black man.
Inez: With a dick down to his knees to keep me happy for days.
Nilda: Oooh, Zulu dick.
Inez: That’s right, girl. Ima get me some serious Zulu dick in the bush . . .
Nilda: Everything we’ve been doin, everything in the society, we keep on doing
the same thing over and over again . . . Most of the Brothas who have
made it got White women on their arms. Their responsibility level isn’t
the same as ours.
Vera: It isn’t a question of responsibility. It’s just a fundamental disrespect
. . . for women.
Nilda: I don’t care, the best man, it’s hard for him to say no, some pussy staring
him in the face . . . I don’t know the man that’s been born, that’s gon
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 75


--- PAGE 92 ---
say no . . . He gon look around, ain nobody looking, he gon fuck the
pussy. If you are in a committed relationship, you are supposed to be
able to say “no.” It’s the “Art of No” theory for me . . . There is such a
thing . . . you gon get turned on . . . you gon see somebody you want to
fuck. But your mind supposed to tell you, “I have a committed relation-
ship here, I have a wife, whatever” and tell the dick to shut the fuck up.
Tell the dick to get down, strap that muthafucka down.
Ask yo momma
They rung my bell to ask me
Could I recommend a maid.
I said yes, your mama . . .
And they asked me right at Christmas.
If my blackness, would it rub off?
I said, ask your mama.
(Hughes, 1961)
The White folks might not have known it, but Hughes’s retort is an old 
verbal game in the Black Oral Tradition. Today it has come to be known as “yo
momma” jokes and “snappin.” The older term is “The Dozens”/“playing The
Dozens.” Like, “Yo momma so dumb she thought a quarterback was a refund.”
And: “Yo Momma so ugly she went to see a freak show and got offered a
permanent job.” Or: “Yo momma so fat, when she stepped on the scale, it said,
‘To be continued.’” And: “Yo momma so ugly, her nickname should be Moses
cause every time she steps in water it parts.” This verbal ritual has been around
in the linguistic-cultural repertoire of African American Language speakers since
enslavement. It is a style of highly exaggerated, hyperbolic talk that takes place
among social intimates. The conversational objective is to ﬂaunt your verbal
skills, to keep going until you shut everybody else down.
4
The subject of The Dozens, in its classic, archetypal form, was an opponent’s
mother. While it may be considered a form of Signification—and indeed, in
contemporary times, it is conﬂated with Signiﬁcation in the form of “Snaps”
—straight signifyin is generally more subtle, indirect, and double-voiced; it 
also often carries a serious social message. The Dozens, on the other hand, is
blunt, raw, in-yo-face, and playful—that is, if you up on the game. Both require
verbal acuity, innovative language skills, and speakers who can maintain 
their psychic composure and linguistically retaliate in the face of rhetorical
bombardment. 
While the subject of The Dozens is mothers, occasionally, folk will bring in
fathers, sisters, grandparents, and other kinfolk. Zora Neale Hurston referred
to The Dozens as “low-rating the ancestors of your opponent.” While one can
ﬁnd “yo momma” jokes all over the Internet these days, the classic oratorical
bout of snappin is to be found in face-to-face conversations. In these contexts,
76 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 93 ---
the game tests a person’s ability to maintain their “cool,” or grace under pres-
sure. For Blacks, faced with economic discrimination and racial assaults 
at every turn, The Dozens taught you how to chill—Black folk could ill afford 
to be hot. It’s a lesson in survival by one’s verbal skills and adeptness at 
rhyme, rhetoric, and reason. For the losers, there is a face-saving way out
because The Dozens makes you laugh so hard you wanna cry. The loser’s
laughter blends right on in with the loud laughter of others on the conversational
set.
The Dozens undoubtedly dates to verbal games in the several cultures 
of Africa from which Black Americans came. From the Efik group in what is 
now known as Nigeria, there is: “You are a child of mixed sperm.” Africans in
enslavement would have tapped into remembered cultural practices and verbal
rituals from home and adapted them to life in the strange land of the “New
World.” The game existed in the oral tradition until the first known written
documentation in 1891. In a folk song collected in Texas, there is: “Talk about
one thing, talk about another / But ef you talk about me, I’m gwain to talk about
your mother.” It was clearly widespread in early twentieth-century Black culture.
It shows up in the songs of bluesmen and women, like Speckled Red’s 1929
“The Dirty Dozens,” Ledbetter’s 1935 “Kansas City Papa,” and sangin Sista
Memphis Minnie’s 1920s recording, “New Dirty Dozen.” That Sista turned it
out, rockin lines like:
I know all about yo pappy and yo mammy,
Your big fat sister and your little brother Sammy,
Your aunt and your uncle and your ma’s and pa’s.
They all got drunk and showed they Santy Claus.
There are definitely some rules to playin The Dozens. Traditionally, the
conversational participants would have to be known to one another. This is still
true to some extent today. However, as “yo momma” done cross ovuh (like
everthang in Black culture), people engage in the game who are not known to
one another, but in these instances it is even more critical that they be true 
to the game. The Snaps must be exaggerated, hyperbolic, wild, and fantastic.
They must employ creative images and clever turns of phrase. You can’t 
just say something simple and lame, like “Yo momma.” Timing is critical. A
Dozens line has to be delivered immediately and spontaneously, in the form
of freestyling; ain no time for thoughtful, lengthy deliberation. Most critically,
whatever you say about someone’s mother must 
not fall within the realm of
literal truth. If you do this, you strip away the camouﬂage of play, reality intrudes,
and you are propelled into the real world where ain nobody playin. However,
the “playin” itself is serious bidness in that The Dozens game functions as an
outlet for what countless Blues people and Hughes’s Jess B. Simple folk called
“laughing to keep from crying.” If a playa in the group resorts to factual/real
statements or displays anger during the course of play, they are considered to
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 77


--- PAGE 94 ---
have lost the game. In playin The Dozens/snappin, you learn lessons about
discipline, self-control, verbal wit, and cunning rhetoric.
Although the playa is more likely to engage in this verbal game than the
honey, still Sistas of all ages be knowin bout The Dozens. Some occasionally
come wit it. Two thirty-something Sistas at a wedding shower:
Linda: Girl, what up wit that head? [Referring to her friend’s hairstyle]
Betty: Ask yo momma.
Linda: Oh, so you going there, huh? Well I DID ask my momma. And she say,
“Cain’t you see that Betty look like her momma spit her out?”
Instead of a direct answer to Linda’s question, Betty in effect tells her that her
hairstyle is none of her business—“Ask yo momma.” But she is also symbolically
saying “Let the game of The Dozens begin.” Which Linda clearly recognizes—
“Oh, so you going there, huh?”—and decides to enter the game. She ﬁres back
with a Snap that trumps Betty’s simple formulaic “Ask yo momma.” Linda’s
Dozens retort implies that Betty is the spitting image of all that is negative about
her mother. 
Some professional, middle-aged Black women I know told me at ﬁrst that
they didn’t know what The Dozens was. I came out with some lines I remember
from back in The Day: “Down in the jungle where the coconut grows / Lived yo
old-ass momma who was a stomp-down ho.” They laughed and all of them got
all the way up on it. 
Renee: I don’t play The Dozens cause The Dozens is bad—
Barbara: But I can tell you how many dicks yo momma had.
Arlene: I hate to talk about yo momma, Barbara, cause she’s a good old soul
/ She got a two-ton pussy and a rubber ass hole.
Sellin woof tickets and a lil mackin on the side
They say I’m getting older . . . But can’t nobody mess with me. I’m like toliet
paper. Pampers and toothpaste. I’m deﬁnitely proven to be effective.
(NBA superstar, “Shaq”—Shaquille O’Neal—commenting 
on his departure from the Los Angeles Lakers to the 
Miami Heat, quoted in “Morning Line,” 2004)
A.C., if God is so good, how come he didn’t give you a jump shot?
(Former NBA superstar, Charles Barkley to the religious A.C. Green)
Language makes the impossible possible. If you can name it, you can claim
it.
They all must fall in the round I call.
If he mess wit me, I’ll drop him in three.
78 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 95 ---
The crowd did not dream when they laid down their money
That they would see a total eclipse of the Sonny.
[Sonny Liston, heavyweight champion, whom Ali defeated] 
(Woof tickets from Cassius Clay, aka Muhammad “The Greatest” 
Ali, known in his boxing champ days for boastful predictions 
about the impending defeat of his opponents).
Called “trash-talking” these days, and “woof tickets”/“selling woof tickets”
back in The Day, African American rhetorical braggadocio has been around a
long, long time. Back in 1935, in 
Mules and Men, Zora Neale Hurston explained
it this way: “Wooﬁn is a sort of aimless talking. A man half seriously ﬂirts with a
girl, half seriously threatens to ﬁght or brags of his prowess in love, battle or in
ﬁnancial matters. The term comes from the purposeless barking of dogs at night.”
The verbal art of the woof ticket requires skill at manipulating language to
get in another person’s head, to mess wit them, to intimidate them, to force
them to make mistakes or take a course of action that will be detrimental to
them. Two senior Brothas are throwing bones [playing dominoes]. One ponders
his next move, prompting his opponent to say: “Study long, study wrong.”
Whether referring to how bad you are in ﬁghting ability, how tight yo Love Game
is, how great your skill at cards, hoopin, reality videos, how much bling-bling
you got, how down and cool you are—whatever—the goal is to convey omnipo-
tence, to convince others that you are capable of doing the undoable. All is in
keeping with a vision of the world where the power of the word is believed to
affect reality. It is in concert with a belief in the capacity of Nommo to, as
Ishmael Reed once put it, “roll stones aside, raise the dead and empty the river
beds of their content” (1970). 
New generations of Black folk are continuing the tradition with woof tickets
both deviously subtle and boldly raw. Check it: male musical artists closing their
concerts with “Gentlemen, good night. Ladies, good morning.” Two young Sistas
competing for solo lead in the Church’s Annual Spring Concert, one woofs:
“Uhm gon sing it like it’s never been sung. I ain gon sing it like it is on the tape
by Shirley Caesar. Ima be original.” 
In hoops, the woofin is always raw. “Ima strong arm you like a lil girl and 
back you down. Spit that game to you and swish.” Some young trash talkers
on today’s b-ball courts even go so far as to invoke religious motifs and deify
themselves. Cleverly playing on the common pronunciation of “him” and
“hymn,” one sold this woof ticket: “You cain see me! Even if I’m having a bad
day, I’m HIM! Matter of fact, I wrote all dem old Spirituals. Sold it to the Church
and now they call it The Book of HIMS.”
During a game of Spades, Marilyn uses a subtle signifyin woof ticket. She
and her girl, Sandra, have just beaten two Brothas. The four players, college
students who hail from Suburbia U.S.A., are all in their early twenties. An 
on-looker, a male graduate student, who is thirty-something, rags on the two
young dudes for having let the Sistas beat them:
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 79


--- PAGE 96 ---
Man, what’s wrong wit yall? You let these broads come in here, in yo own
house and ﬂight you [kept them from earning any books during the play].
Uhm embarrassed for you. It’s time to git some real muthafuckas at the
table. Who wanna play wit the Don?
To which Marilyn says: “Nigga, we don’t take it easy on senior citizens.”
It is not unusual for young Sistas, like some of their older counterparts, to
come raw and rough with their wooﬁn. In another game of Spades, Tomeka has
just ﬂighted her male opponents with her ﬁnal play of the Queen of Spades. “I
tole yall niggas! Yall let my Black bitch walk! Look at that ho strut! I tole yall
asses—now, get the fuck up!” Tomeka projects herself as a metaphorical pimp,
the haughty and proud owner of “that ho,” the Queen of Spades. 
What Goffman (1963) called “engagements among the unacquainted” may
be thought of as wooﬁn with a lil mackin on the side. Despite the popular and
media stereotypes that have distorted much of African American Culture,
mackin ain all bad. To be sure, there is the exploitative, manipulative sort of
mackin in male–female affairs as reﬂected in those Blackploitation ﬁlms of the
1960s and 1970s. But there is another kind of mackin, one akin to verbal love
play. This linguistic jousting, especially in the initial stages of getting acquainted,
lends an exciting energy to ordinary, mundane boy-meets-girl scenarios. We can
take it all the way back to nineteenth-century courtship rituals, like: “My dear
kin’ miss, has you any objections to me drawing my cher to yer side, and revolvin’
de wheel of my conversation around de axle of your understandin?” In the mid-
twentieth century, one homeboy, whose Gangsta name was “Sweet Mac, “ used
what has gotta be an unparalleled mackin strategy. Sweet Mac introduced the
Bible into his verbal play with a “foxy, religious” woman:
I been quoting the Good Book . . . telling her . . . Something or someone
is trying to keep us—two pure American religious people of the same order—
apart . . .
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife, and baby, since you’re
not anybody’s wife . . . Do unto others as you would have them do unto
you . . . Only something like that no-good Satan would want to stop some-
thing as mellow as laying naked in the Foggy Night with MJQ or Ravel on
the hi-ﬁ . . . [Satan] trying to put game on us, momma.
(from King, 1972, pp. 396–97)
The mackin woof ticket is sold in the interest of romance. In male–female
encounters aimed at deepening the acquaintance between unknowns, the
seller of the woof ticket, whether male or female, puts themselves out there
as the baddest that ever did it. The linguistic style they use to hit on the opposite
sex is a way of magnifying their persona. Language becomes the instrument
of self-description and self-disclosure. It gives the other person an initial overall
glimpse of you and enables them to decide if they want to take the next step
in this “engagement among the unacquainted.” 
80 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 97 ---
Special props are given for woof tickets that are artfully constructed and
expressed with verbal adroitness and ﬂair. However, if you can’t git up on some
clever romantic trash-talkin, then it’s best to just come with something plain
and simple, like “Hello, how is life treating you today?” A raw, blatantly sexual
hit, from a female point of view, is not the way to go. One twenty-something
Sista tells the following story: 
I noticed this guy at the club and he was ﬁne! Me and my girl had just been
talking about him. She asked me, “Who’s that dark-skinned dude wit the
dreads?” And I said, “I-own know, but I think I need to.” Then he came
toward us and said to me: “Can I be yo baby daddy?” I couldn’t believe he
said some shit like that. I was so mad!
The realm of the romantic woof ticket is much deeper and more complex
than the usual “Hey baby” vernacular lines that have become Ghetto chic
caricatures in popular culture today. While bland lines may engender a bland
response, nonetheless, verbal mackin has to be something other than the well-
worn lines in B movies about life in the hood, or those lame raps that so quickly
get played out on the singles circuit. In the real world of potentially romantic
engagements, honeyz git tudes bout stereotypical mackin rhetoric. In several
surveys my research team and I have conducted over the years, Black women
in all age groups and across broad socio-economic lines are asked to rate
opening lines that Brothas use in the hittin stage. Some of the most common
are: 
1 “Haven’t I seen you someplace before?” 
2 “Girl, you got it goin on!” 
3 “Hello, how are you?”
4 “Hey, what’s up?”
5 “Hi, how ya doin?”
6 “You got a man?”
7 “Hey, Miss Fine!”
Overwhelmingly, Sistas express a preference for lines like (1), (3), (5), and even
(4), rather than (2), (6), and (7).
At the end of the day, though, however linguistically bad a honey or playa
might be, and however innovative and clever their rhetorical mack might be,
there is always the possibility that the other person just does not feel you. That’s
what the Blues is all about. As an eighty-two-year-old one-time playa put it: 
There’s two types of Hell. There’s a general Hell and a particular Hell. Now
we all know what general Hell is. Let me tell you about particular Hell. That’s
when you want somebody, but they don’t want you. In my time, I’ve known
some women who gave me particular Hell.
Honeyz and playaz talkin that talk 81


--- PAGE 98 ---
Chapter 5
“I used to love H.E.R.”
Hip Hop, in its Essence and Real
I met this girl, when I was ten years old
And what I loved most she had so much soul . . . 
And she was fun then, I’d be geeked when she’d come around
Slim was fresh, yo, when she was underground . . .
I might’ve failed to mention that this chick was creative
But once the man got you, well, he altered her native
Told her if she got an image and a gimmick
That she could make money, and she did it like a dummy . . . 
Now she’s a gangsta rollin with gangsta bitches
Always smokin blunts and gettin drunk . . . 
Stressin how hardcore and real she is
She was really the realest, before she got into showbiz . . .
I see niggaz slammin her and takin her to the sewer
But Ima take her back hopin that the shit stop
Cause who I’m talkin bout yall is Hip Hop.
(Common Sense (now Common), 1994)
I ﬁrst developed a glimmer of interest in this new sound, this “Black Noise”
(props, Tricia Rose), back in 1979 when I heard the Sugar Hill Gang’s master
hit, “Rapper’s Delight.” Then in 1982, when Joseph Saddler, aka Grandmaster
Flash, and the Furious Five came wit “The Message”—“It’s like a jungle some
times / It makes me wonder / How I keep from going under”—my interest
shonuff peaked. A few years later, with the entry of P.E. (Public Enemy) into the
game, I was all in. P.E.’s sampling of the speeches of Malcolm X (“too Black,
too strong”) gave sustenance to us weary souls then witnessing the gradual
loss of hard-fought Civil Rights Movement gains in the wake of the evolving
Reagan–Bush Second Reconstruction.
1 Rap music held out the promise of a
beacon of hope that could help revive the Black Liberation Movement. 
Much of Rap musical art of the 1980s and early 1990s made us ﬂash back
to the Black Arts 2 street poetry of the 1960s/70s that was the artistic com-
panion of the Black Liberation Movement. A movement that had proclaimed
and lifted up a new Black Nation that was sick and tired of being sick and tired—


--- PAGE 99 ---
and wahn’t gon take it no mo. Rap artists blasted conditions in the USG (United
States Ghetto, props to Fredo Starr of Onyx). They urged Black folks to “ﬁght
the power” cause “life in the hood is all good—for nobody.” Rappers in this era
were committed to being “niggaz for life” in the best sense of the N-word,
pushing “dope beats and lyrics” instead of crack or smack (Ice T), administering
lyrical “lethal injections” to perpetrators of oppression (Ice Cube), and “moving
the crowd” to higher levels of understanding and self-knowledge (Eric B. and
Rakim). 
Although the story of Rap Music’s origins and its innovative pioneers is not
as well known as it should be—given Hip Hop Culture’s global impact and the
multi-billion-dollar proﬁts it generates—crucial details have now been preserved
in a few annals of contemporary history. It all began with Clive Campbell, 
aka D.J. Kool Herc, widely recognized as the father of Hip Hop, whose family
migrated to the U.S. from Jamaica in 1967. Kool Herc rejected 1970s disco
for the Rhythm and Blues and Black Arts poetic traditions, foundational sources
of Rap Music. Yasin tells us:
Kool Herc, whose bedroom in his family’s apartment was next to the
recreation room in the building, gained a reputation for playing soul and
other types of music loudly so that neighborhood youths gathered in the
adjacent recreation room to hear it. At the end of the summer of 1973,
according to Herc, his sister persuaded him to provide music for a back-
to-school party. That party, deejayed by Kool Herc, is deemed by many to
be the event which spawned hip-hop . . . He began giving parties in the
streets, in the parks, utilizing any available space—public or private—
deejayin’ anywhere he got free electricity.
(2003, p. 76)
The coining of the term “Hip Hop” itself has been attributed to three different
New York artists: Busy Bee Starski, D.J. Hollywood, and D.J. Afrika Bambaataa.
The historical records remain unclear as to which of the three is the originator
of the term, but according to Kool Herc, “only these three could argue it”
(personal communication, January, 1994). 
Afrika Bambaataa and Grandmaster Flash are the other two major pioneers
of Rap Music. Both were contemporaries of Kool Herc and attended his 
street parties. They eventually began deejayin themselves. Bambaataa,
inﬂuenced by the Muslim community and the Last Poets, organized his gang,
Black Spades, and other local gangs into the Universal Zulu Nation. Instead 
of physical violence, these various gangs started battling each other on the
dance ﬂoor as b-boys (“break boys”). Today the Zulu Nation is an international
community collective committed to social transformation (Yasin, 2003).
Grandmaster Flash, a brilliant electronics student at a vocational high school
in the Bronx, added the technology of scratchin and backspinnin to deejayin.
In an interview for Ted Koppel’s three-part series on Hip Hop for his show,
Hip hop, in its essence and real 83


--- PAGE 100 ---
Nightline, which aired in 2000, Flash explained that he spent all of his “kid
years” in his room, trying to transmit what was in his head to turntables. More
youth began deejayin, and early M.C.’s like Koke La Rock and Melle Mel
expanded the art form with rhythmic talk over the deejay’s beats. Rap even-
tually spread out from its New York City underground hoods to other parts 
of the U.S. With the commercial success of the Sugar Hill Gang’s “Rapper’s
Delight” in 1979/80, Hip Hop Culture came up from the underground and
entered the cultural mainstream.
Rap, neither strictly music, nor narrowly song, is a rich, postmodern Black
art form. Early on, I and a few of my Old Skool comrades recognized that this
was more than just spitting rhymes over a tight beat. In an interview on Tavis
Smiley’s old BET show, musical genius Quincy Jones related that Tupac had
once asked him what the “musicians and singers think of us.” Quincy said that’s
when it dawned on him that Rap Music is a third genre in the Black Musical
Tradition. Nowadays, Rap Music is more commonly referred to as “Hip Hop.”
However, more precisely speaking, Hip Hop encompasses much more than
music. In its totality, which many headz of the present generation embrace, it
is a culture, a world view, a way of life. KRS-ONE, considered one of the key
founders of politically conscious Rap Music, says:
Some people continue to regard Hiphop as a form of music and dance,
while others are only interested in using Hiphop to further their individual
careers. Still there are others (like myself) that live Hiphop beyond 
its entertainment value . . . True 
Hiphop is a term that describes the
independent collective consciousness of a specific group of inner-city
people. Ever growing, it is commonly expressed through such elements 
as : Breakin’ (Breakdancing), Emceein’ (Rap), Graffiti art (aerosol art),
Deejayin’, Beatboxin’, Street Fashion, Street Language, Street Knowledge,
and Street Entrepreneurialism. Hiphop is not just music and dance, nor is
Hiphop a product to be bought and sold . . . The true Hiphop community
is made up of predominantly urban people that rap, dance, draw, write,
think, sing, photograph, act, speak, and perform for a living. In the early
1970s, such people were experiencing extreme poverty and the sting of
mainstream rejection and disregard. Although forgotten today, Hiphop was
(and still is) the collective consciousness that created and expressed Rap
music, Grafﬁti art and Break dancing. Such expressions saved thousands
of families from the more destructive effects of poverty and injustice.
(2003, pp. 179–81)
Those of us in the Old Skool were ecstatic about the potential of this new
musical art form to embed deeper social meanings into rhymed couplets—
“Cause I’m Black and I’m proud / I’m ready and hyped, plus I’m amped / Most
of my heroes don’t appear on no stamps” (P.E.). This third genre, while stamping
its own, unique aesthetic imprint on the Game, was clearly grounded in and
84 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 101 ---
often revisited the Black Musical Tradition. Activists from The Movement days
embraced Hip Hop’s artistic re-connections to Black Cultural roots, applauding
this rhetorical strategy that triggered cultural memory in the service of political
awareness. With a title recalling the era of Isaac Hayes’ 1969 talk-singing love
jam, “By the Time I get to Phoenix,” P.E. raps about the State of Arizona’s refusal
to recognize the national holiday for Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.: 
They can’t understand why he the man
I’m singin bout a king
They don’t like it when I decide to mic it . . .
I’m on the one mission to get a politician
To honor or he’s a goner
By the time I get to Arizona.
(Arizona finally came on board nearly a decade after the King holiday was
established, observing its ﬁrst statewide King holiday on January 18, 1993.)
3
The decade of the 1990s brought increasingly disturbing strains of misogyny
into Hip Hop. But many Old Skool Sista Womanists peeped the divide-and-
conquer tactics. We took the young Brothas to task for the virulent rhetoric of
“bitches ain shit but hoes and tricks.” But we was also hip to the big picture:
“Every woman in America, especially Black / Bear with me, can’t you see we’re
under attack?” (Tupac, “White Man’z World”). We knew who the real enemy
was—then and now. “50 ain’t the only thug or pimp in the room—there are more
than a few in the White House and at the Pentagon” (Neal, 2004). 
Looking at the big picture reveals that even among the work of today’s most
hard core Hip Hop artists, there are glimpses of the old H.E.R.—H
ip Hop, in its
Essence and R eal. Think Jay-Z’s plaintive lyrical agonizing about lost love in
“Song Cry.” Or the probing interrogatives of 50 cent and Nate Dogg testing the
realness of a honey’s affection in “21 Questions”: 
Would you love me if I was down and out? . . .
If I ain rap cause I ﬂip burgers at Burger King, 
would you be ashamed to tell your friends you feelin me? . . .
Do you trust me enough to tell me your dreams? 
Looking at the big picture forces us to acknowledge the complexity of Hip
Hop art and artists in all of their contradictory glory. “At its best, Hip-Hop is an
unmatched vehicle for inﬂuence and change. At its worst, the culture can mire
an entire generation in commercialism and misogyny” (Barrow, 2004, p. 124).
Son-of-an-Old-Skool-Black-Panther-Sista,
4 Tupac Shakur was one of the fore-
most proponents of Thug Life. But we should recall that he shaped that phrase
into the acronym: “T
he Hate You Gave Little I nfants F ucks E veryone.” And
according to those who knew him well, including some fellow “thug” Rappers,
he read everything, from the socio-historical writings of W.E.B. DuBois to the
Hip hop, in its essence and real 85


--- PAGE 102 ---
philosophical tracts of Friedrich Nietzsche, from the feminist writings of Robin
Morgan to the Black Arts poetry of Nikki Giovanni, from spiritual literature on
Buddhism to classic texts on Christianity. In his bio-analysis of Tupac, 
Holler If
You Hear Me (2001a), Michael Eric Dyson tells us:
Tupac’s voracious reading continued throughout his career, a habit that
allowed him to ﬁll his raps with acute observations about the world around
him . . . His reading not only gave depth to his lyrics, but it inﬂuenced his
fellow rappers as well. “I feel what Pac gave to me and gave to a lot of
these cats is that you can be street, but you can be smart, too,” says rapper
Big Syke . . . Beyond that, Tupac inspired many of his rap mates to read
seriously, many for the ﬁrst time. “He had the words, and he was articulate,”
Syke says. “That’s what made me start reading books . . . the more I
started dissecting him, the more I started seeing what all his game was
coming from.”
(pp. 99–100)
But Pac wasn’t the only artist of complexity and depth among the so-called
“Gangsta Rap” crowd. The Game is legion with Rappers who put the lie to the
simple-minded, one-dimensional stereotypical images of Hip Hop artists. One
such stereotype is that of Hip Hop Music and its artists as the motivator of acts
of crime and violence among youth. Rapper Ice T was all over the national news
during the nation-wide controversy about and subsequent erasure of the 
song “Cop Killer” from his album 
Body Count. The song was blamed for having
caused four young men to shoot two Las Vegas police officers on patrol in 
July, 1992. According to Dennis R. Martin, former President of the National
Association of Chiefs of Police, this “music of murder” inspired the shooting:
“[Two] Las Vegas police officers were ambushed and shot by four juvenile
delinquents who boasted that Ice-T’s ‘Cop Killer’ gave them a sense of duty
and purpose, to get even with ‘a f–king pig.’ The juveniles continued to sing 
its lyrics when apprehended.” Notwithstanding the impossibility of demon-
strating a causal relationship between an Ice T song and an act of violence by
four of the millions of youth who heard “Cop Killer,” Ice T was taken to task for
the song. But how come folks don’t also talk about Ice T’s book, 
The Ice Opinion
(1994)? In this work, he drops knowledge about Ghetto life, justice and
injustice, how to ﬁght and overturn the System, and reparations, among other
topics. Check it: 
Young urban capitalist guerrillas remember the injustice because their
wealth is a means to an end. They remember being pulled out of their car
on their way home from school by brutal police and being thrown to the
ground because they “ﬁt a description.” They remember not ﬁghting back
because they didn’t have the money to pay an attorney. Young urban
capitalist guerrillas remember being turned down for a job because their
86 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 103 ---
hair was too long and being too broke to fight the employer’s policy of
discrimination. They remember the humiliation they suffered, and today
they want to ﬁght back . . .
I know we could ﬁght back if we can get economic footing. . . If we could
just get our forty acres and our mule, we’d be satisﬁed. We’ll take that in
cash and distribute it through our charities and colleges and start insti-
tuting real changes. It would at least give us a foot up . . .
Time to ante up, America. Give us our restitution. Allow us a chance to
live decently and humanely. I believe America can change if we can just
get things straight. Dr. King said that anybody who wants more than to be
equal is ludicrous. That’s all we’re asking.
(Ice T, 1994, pp. 187–88)
There is a spiritual dimension to a number of “Gangsta Rappers.” Not
surprising, given that the Church is the one institution that Black people
completely own and control, and given the major social and political role of the
Black Church, dating from enslavement days, when a number of rebellions
were planned in the Church. Virtually all Black American leaders have come
out of the Church, from preacher-revolutionary Nat Turner, leader of an 1831
slave rebellion, to the twentieth century’s Martin Luther King, Jr. Here I also
include religious leaders not of the Judaeo-Christian faith, for example, Malcolm
X and Minister Farrakhan from the Nation of Islam, because of their socio-
political role in African America, coupled with the fact that most Muslims see
Islam as a religion that conﬁrms what Judaism and Christianity brought into
the world. Moreover, many Black musical artists not only have roots in the Black
Church, they also started their singing careers in the Church, from Old Skool
Queen of Soul Aretha Franklin (daughter of the late renowned Reverend C.L.
Franklin) to Hip Hop diva, Faith Evans. 
Snoop Dogg and DMX are two of the better known artists who proclaim being
sent here on a divine mission. In recent years, Snoop (formerly “Snoop Doggy
Dogg”) has become known for his role in ﬁlms, often playing the villain. But 
he first flashed on the Nation’s controversial radar screen for “rollin down 
the street, smokin indo, sippin on gin and juice.” Then during Snoop’s widely
publicized trial, it seemed that “murder was the case” that would put him on
permanent lockdown and derail his Rap career. Fortunately, the jury had the
good sense to realize that the murder charge was unjust and unjustiﬁable and
acquitted him. Read Snoop’s autobiography, 
Tha Doggfather(1999), and peep
that this “Gangsta Rapper” is very spiritual and a strong believer that God has
inspired his artistic work.
Increase the peace. Spread the music. Elevate and educate. Word: it starts
with you and me . . . Crack cocaine dealer. Ex-con. Accused murderer. 
Rap star. Family man. Loyal son of Long Beach, California. But none of that
shit matters. The good or the bad. It’s all just pictures on the late news.
Hip hop, in its essence and real 87


--- PAGE 104 ---
Headlines in a morning paper. Images in a mirror you’re only holding up to
yourself. What matters is increasing the peace. Spreading the music.
Elevating and educating. That’s my mission . . .
Being where I am, being 
who I am, was never about what I could get
. . . It was always about what I could give. Understand: I’ve got responsibili-
ties . . . I’ve got a responsibility to God. He put me here. He’ll take me down
in a heartbeat the minute I start tripping on myself and how great I must
be . . . That’s why I’ve got to stay real, to remember where I came from and
where I’m going . . .
In every rap I ever recorded, in the mad flow of every street-corner
freestyle I ever represented, there was only one thing I wanted to get
across: the way that it is. Not the way I might want it to be. Not the way I
think 
you might want it to be. But the way it really is, on the streets of the
hoods of America, where life is lived out one day at a time, up against it,
with no guarantees . . . telling the truth has given me the props I need to
carry out God’s purpose and plan.
(pp. 1–3)
Earl Simmons, who named himself DMX after a strong, powerful drum
machine, explains his raw Hip Hop style in his autobiography, 
E.A.R.L. (Ever
Always Real Life). That style is grounded in a rhetorical strategy designed to
get his audience’s attention. This enables him to deliver a divinely-inspired
message to them. 
That’s why I start off all of my shows with “fuck you,” “suck my dick,” “where
my niggas at,” but then at the end I hit you with the “Prayer.” I have to say
“fuck that bitch” to get you to listen, or “smoke that blunt” or “I robbed 
this nigga” to get your attention. I talk to you like you expect me to talk to
you, like a nigga 
should talk to you, but then I bring you somewhere else.
Okay, you listening now? Then check this out; come over here for a minute. 
I wanna show you something . . .
When it rains it pours / Now my pains
are yours, as yours were once mine / Divine / Revolving doors.
The greatest gift the Lord has given me is the gift of the word, the ability
to communicate with, and I know now that I’m here to share everything
that I have learned. That’s why I’ve always said I don’t want 
sales, I want
souls. Fuck a sale, a sale is eleven dollars, thirteen dollars. But if you give
me a soul, I’ve got that for life and I’m going to try my best to bring it to the
right place. Now if I take what he gave me and I use it right / In other words,
if I listen and use the light / Then what I say will remain here after I’m gone
/ Still here, on the strength of a song, I live on.
(DMX/Earl Simmons, 2002, pp. 291–92)
DMX, Snoop, Ice T, the late Big Pun, 50 cent, Fat Joe, Missy Elliott, and other
Hip Hop artists became household names among White youth as Rap Music
88 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 105 ---
moved from Black and Latino communities in Chocolate Cities to the Vanilla
Suburbs of the U.S. 
Today as much as 70 percent of Hip Hop Music record sales are in the
suburbs. Hip Hop is all over the media. It is a prime marketing tool for all kinds
of products, from SUV’s and iPod’s to sneakers and fast food. There is a Hip
Hop sightseeing tour in New York City where for $75.00 per half day, one can
check out the playgrounds, parks and other venues where Hip Hop was born.
Using Hip Hop as a recruiting tool, even the U.S. Army “be thugging it” (Joiner,
2003). Note, however, that the 2004 National Hip Hop Political Convention, in
its “Human Rights” agenda, stated: “The National Hip Hop Political Convention
strongly opposes any entity—corporate, media, entertainment, or other—which
attempts to use Hip-Hop Culture to support the potential drafting of our youth
into the military.” (As of this writing, it was unclear whether Convention
delegates ultimately passed this proposal.) As Jigga Man say, Hip Hop didn’t
cross over to the mainstream, the mainstream crossed over to Hip Hop. It fuels
a multi-billion-dollar market, and it has a significant and influential cultural
impact on youth.
5
Today as I write, I find myself still asking what happened to the activist
promise of Hip Hop? To what those of us who first loved H.E.R. saw as
possibilities for raising the political dead? What happened to Hip Hop’s potential
to restart the aborted Black Revolution now that niggas is no longer scared of
revolution? Has the bling-bling that Hip Hop succumbed to made it impossible
for this art form to return to the political awareness we witnessed in X-Clan,
P.E., Ice Cube, BDP, Geto Boys, Poor Righteous Teachers, Eric B. and Rakim,
and other artists of the 1980s and 1990s? Can Hip Hop resolve its con-
tradictions? Is it not possible for artists to dispense social critique and still pay
the rent? As if responding to my line of questioning, one Hip Hop journalist,
Justin Monroe, suggests that the issue is the Hip Hop audience: today’s
youngun’s reject political critique spit by what he calls “overbearing political
rappers.” Monroe writes:
Since 9/11, things done changed . . . Suddenly, even neophyte activists
like Missy Elliott and Jadakiss are giving listeners doses of social criticism
. . . Rappers . . . getting their messages across on mainstream media 
tend to avoid the puritanical instruction of artists like the Coup, Immortal
Technique, and dead prez. (What’s beef? Red meat, and to listeners 
who enjoy a tasty burger, dp’s “Be Healthy” may resemble food fascist
propaganda.)
(2004, p. 60)
While many Hip Hop artists and their fans have become entrapped in
materialist consumption, artistic commodiﬁcation, and the capitalist bottom
line, nonetheless I agree with Hip Hop journalist Harry Allen that “artists should
ﬁnancially beneﬁt from their powerful inﬂuence” (2004, p. 30). Many of them
Hip hop, in its essence and real 89


--- PAGE 106 ---
are, and I ain mad at ’em. But could it be that bling has blurred their vision?
Here’s what Hip Hop pioneer D.J. Kool Herc says:
To me, hip-hop says, “Come as you are.” We are a family. It ain’t about
. . . bling-bling . . . Don’t you have other issues? What things touch you?
. . . Talk about things going on in the neighborhood. . . Hip-hop has always
been about having fun, but it’s also about taking responsibility. And now
we have a platform to speak our minds. Millions of people are watching
us. Let’s hear something powerful . . . How will we help the community?
What do we stand for? . . . This culture was born in the ghetto . . . We’re
surviving now, but we’re not yet rising up. If we’ve got a problem, we’ve 
got to correct it. We can’t be hypocrites. That’s what I hope the hip-hop
generation can do, to take us all to the next level by always reminding us:
It ain’t about keeping it real, it’s about keeping it right.
( 2005, pp. xi–xiii)
Allen suggests that you can keep it right and bling-bling at the same time:
“Art and commerce can coexist if it’s done responsibly” (2004, p. 30).
Unfortunately, the general public, including middle-age, middle-class Black
America, does not get to witness Hip Hop artists engaging in and promoting
such responsibility. All too often many of these voices are silenced. To be sure,
there are many Hip Hop artists who are socially irresponsible. Yet there are
many others whose artistic productions are not showcased on MTV, BET, VH1,
and so on, and whom the media keeps beneath the radar, ignoring not only
their artistic but also their community work and instead showcasing the violent
beefs, female bashing and gaudy bling-blinging of the platinum sellers. 
Lemme here, then, give props to those Hip Hop artists and Hip Hop youngun’s
who on the case.
6 Although it was only a one-time event, still shout-outs are in
order to the many artists who came together to record “Hip Hop for Respect”
in memory of Amadou Diallo (Mos Def, Talib Kweli, Kool G Rap, Common, Rah
Digga, Ras Kass, and Q-Tip, among others). 
90 Word from the mother
Figure 5.1 “Candorville Zoo” cartoon, by Darrin Bell, May 20, 2004.


--- PAGE 107 ---
Props to the Hip-Hop Summit Action Network under the leadership of Russell
Simmons, which at last count had registered 12 million youth to vote. And for
all those who raised eyebrows at the 2004 slogan, “Vote or Die,” it’s a clever
play on the “ride or die” phrase common among Hip Hop headz to convey
undying commitment to someone. In the get-out-the-vote campaign, “Vote or
Die” was saying to youngun’s if they don’t make a fervent commitment to
exercising some level of political control over the sorry state of affairs in this
country, they gon perish.
7
Big ups to Sean (P. Diddy) Combs for his establishment of “Daddy’s House
Social Programs,” a not-for-proﬁt corporation for urban youth ﬁnanced by the
Diddy and his Bad Boy Entertainment business. With Sister Souljah as Executive
Director, “Daddy’s House” has created and funded several innovative pro-
grams, such as “Daddy’s House Weekend Boys and Girls Club.” This program
provides academic tutoring and life skills for nearly 800 boys and girls every
weekend throughout the school year. 
I also need to give some love to the Bay Area’s JT the Bigga Figga for his
community outreach work, linked with his recording company, “Black Wall
Street.” Through this program, JT brought about a truce between local gang
factions. He links local Hip Hop artists up with promoters, studio engineers,
graphic design artists, and others in the Hip Hop business. JT’s program also
offers courses in video editing, music distribution and other aspects of the Hip
Hop Game through his “Black Wall Street Business College.” 
Big ups to all the Michigan State University Brothas and Sistas who, since
1990, have given up their Saturdays and part of their summers to serve as
mentors for young males, ages l0 to 14, in “My Brother’s Keeper” Program in
the Detroit Public Schools (now concentrated at the Public Schools’ Malcolm
X Academy). Under the leadership of Austin Jackson, David Kirkland, and
Stephen McClain, mentors now incorporate Rap Music and Hip Hop Culture
into mentoring sessions. The mentors use Hip Hop to open up opportunities to
explore with their mentees questions such as What does it mean to be cool?
and Can you be Afrocentric and cool? and to talk about issues of language and
identity, Black masculinity and “money, power, and respect.” 
In a powerful and highly informative interview with “Project Censored” on
Black Electorate.Com (2003), journalist, Hip Hop historian and community
activist Davey D (DaveyD.com) discusses a number of community, artistic,
educational, political, and social action programs conducted by Hip Hop headz.
Here are just some of the numerous ones he talked about in that interview:
• Hip Hop Political Action Committees, established by Russell Simmons, Ras
Baraka (Newark’s Deputy Mayor), and Afeni Shakur (Mother of Tupac).
• Urban Think Tank, headed by Yvonne Bynoe, which publishes a journal,
Doula, holds workshops to train folks to do political organizing, and is
publishing a collection of essays and white papers addressing issues
impacting the Hip Hop community.
Hip hop, in its essence and real 91


--- PAGE 108 ---
• Hip Hop Congresses on several college campuses; held their third national
convention in Los Angeles in 2003.
• Establishment of websites by Hip Hop artists to convey political and
entertainment information. Davey D details the accomplishments of one
of these:
One prominent site is BlackElectorate.Com . . . run and conceived 
by Cedric Muhammad, former general manager for the popular multi-
platinum group, The Wu-Tang Clan. His day to day articles and
insightful political analysis have been so much on point that many
elected officials around the country actually purchase his services.
He’s launched an online political university and has become a frequent
commentator on radio and TV stations around the country. That’s not
bad for a Hip Hopper who is under 30.
• Another landmark web site is “Popandpolitics.Com,” run by former
CNN/ABC news commentator Ferai Chideya.
• A two-year campaign against Clear Channel’s number one radio station,
KMEL, to hold them accountable to the community; Hip Hop activists
demanded more community access, more airplay for local artists, and
attention to social justice issues. The campaign was led by Bay Area’s
Mindz Eye Collective, Let’s Get Free and the Touth Media Council.
• Turn Off the Radio campaign, under the leadership of long-time activist
and radio veteran Bob Law with Hip Hop artists Afrika Bambaataa, Chuck
D, dead prez, and Daddy O of Stetsasonic, calling to account the harmful
impact on the Black community of commerical radio in New York and
Viacom’s video shows on BET and MTV. The campaign has spread to other
cities, including Detroit and Kansas City.
• Project Islamic Hope, under Hip Hop activist Najee Ali, an organization
which Davey D says has “gone head to head with everyone from Clear
Channel to Russell Simmons to Snoop Dogg about misogynist, negative
imagery.” Additionally, Ali, “a former gang banger, who served time in
prison, has been a key player in helping forge peace and understanding
amongst LA’s gangs . . . His most recent campaign helped in forcing the
offensive Hip Hop TV show, 
Platinum, to be taken off the air.”
Finally, Davey D urges “folk . . . to start to look beyond the headlines and
include members of the Hip Hop community in . . . important conversations
[such as the war effort in Iraq] . . . support the efforts that are already being
undertaken to combat some of the problems . . . start the important process
of dialoguing so we can share resources, learn from one another and have a
true cultural exchange.” 
It’s all good, but we need much more because our communities are at 
the breaking point. As I tell my Hip Hop nephews, Kwame and Koﬁ, and other
92 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 109 ---
young Brothas and Sistas I work with, yall gotta step up to the plate, my 
children, cause in a few short years, me and my Old Skool peeps gon fade to
black. 
For their part, many Old Skool headz reject Hip Hop Culture out of hand.
Sadly, they don’t have a clue, and some of them don’t even wanna have none.
Many Bloods of my generation refuse to consider even the 
possibility that Hip
Hop artists and their generation have something to contribute. So I say to my
Old Skool peeps that we got to bring to bear the same kind of serious focus
and analytical openness to Hip Hop Culture and the Hip Hop Generation that
we bring to other social, cultural, and political areas of life and struggle in the
twenty-ﬁrst century. 
Dyson also takes the Old Skool to task. Nicole Saunders, in an interview with
Dyson, published in 
Essence in June, 2004, poses the question, “How did our
songs become so materialistic and hypersexual?” Dyson responds:
We neglected our children. This current group of artists comes from 
the left-behind generation. We were focusing so hard on knocking down
barriers that we didn’t transmit to them the values that sustained us. We
moved to the suburbs and left behind an entire generation that was
victimized by Reaganomics and parented by television. We have to nurture
our young people on their own great history.
(Saunders, 2004, p. 40)
But all is not lost. Fortunately, there are some Old Skool peeps who ain
abandoned Hip Hop headz. So lemme give props to Dyson himself and to Cornel
West, both of whom 
been reaching out to the Hip Hop Generation in dialogue
and understanding; to Marcylienna Morgan, working with Hip Hop groups ﬁrst
in Los Angeles before moving on to establish the Hip Hop Archives at Harvard
University; to James G. Spady, holding it down, working with youngun’s in the
Philly hood since Day One; to Abdul Alkalimat, long-standing supporter of Hip
Hop headz in Chicago and other cities, working, in recent years, with Toledo’s
Hip Hop community in weekly evening meetings—just checked out their recently
released Hip Hop compilation C.D. on the digital divide, titled 
Reboot, it’s tight;
to the James and Grace Boggs Center in Detroit, for its work with youth in Detroit
Summer and other programs; to Old Skool poetic giants Sonia Sanchez and
Amiri Baraka, who continue to encourage and nurture the linguistic fire 
and creativity in Hip Hop headz. Most especially, and with honor and much
respect, I acknowledge the work of Minister Farrakhan who has been advising
and supporting the Hip Hop Nation for many years, with Hip Hop Summits,
speeches and rallies, meetings at his house, and private conversations with
artists to resolve beefs and turf wars. 
At the same time that I applaud these Old Skool efforts, I also sadly lament
the hundreds (thousands? dang, hopefully not millions) of other older and
middle-class Brothas and Sistas who are completely down on and reject all Hip
Hip hop, in its essence and real 93


--- PAGE 110 ---
Hop artists as well as Black youth who vibe with Hip Hop. Yall gotta stop this
generational and class conﬂict. At this very crucial time in our history, the skills,
knowledge, resources—and, yes, love—of the Old Skool is needed more than
ever, for the survival of our youth, our communities, and our people.
Hip Hop Linguistics
The language of Rap/Hip Hop Music continues to be fresh, raw, hard-hitting,
in-yo-face, and unabashedly sexual. It is not true, as some have tried to argue,
that early party people Rap Music consisted mostly of clever dancing beats and
deliberately unmeaningful rhymes, that is, rhyming just for the sake of rhymes.
If the music seems more “hypersexual” today, that’s because there’s more of
it, and it’s more socially pervasive. Rap Music, like the Black Oral Tradition
itself, with its tales of bad niggas like John Henry, Stag-O-Lee and Shine, has
always been a venue for boastful, braggadocious Fancy Talk about how bad
you are, physically, ﬁnancially, sexually, and otherwise: “I’ll sell ﬁre in hell / I’m
a hustler, baby, I’ll sell water to a well” (Jay-Z). In “Rapper’s Delight” Hank rocks
lyrics about his sexual prowess in contrast to Lois Lane’s boyfriend, Superman,
with his undersized penis.
8 (Unfortunately, I was unable to quote any of these
bold, innovative lyrics here. See note 8 for details.)
Now, it ain no point in nobody trippin over the exaggerated sexual boasts 
in Hip Hop Music. This is a long-standing motif in the Black Oral and Musical
Traditions. Like the Dominoes in the 1950s bragging about their powerful hour-
long sexual performance in “Sixty Minute Man.” Like Jelly Roll Morton in 1938:
“Come here you sweet bitch, give me that pussy, let me get in your drawers /
I’m gonna make you think you fuckin’ with Santa Claus.” (Thanks to Robin D.G.
Kelley’s 
Yo’ Mama’s DisFUNKtional! (1997) for reminding me of this and other
old Blues Music that I used to sneak and listen to as a young girl.) 
The Black verbal traditions in Hip Hop, however bawdy and raw they may 
be, did not originate with Rap artists. “Dolemite” was recited and enjoyed by
Brothas—and Sistas—decades before Snoop Dogg came on the scene. And the
“yo momma” rituals (aka The Dozens or Snaps) date back to the enslavement
and pre-enslavement past. In Zora Neale Hurston’s classic novel, Their Eyes
Were Watching God, published in 1937, she writes: 
Yo mama don’t wear no draws
Ah seen her when she took ’em off
She soaked ’em in alcohol
She sold ’em tuh de Santy claus
He told her ’twas against de law
To wear dem dirty draws.
Working out of the same Oral Tradition, Hip Hop artist Method Man raps in
“Biscuits” in 1994:
94 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 111 ---
Yo mama don’t wear no drawers!
I saw her when she took them off!
Standin on the welfare line, eatin swine
Tryin to look ﬁne, with her stank behind. . . .
This raw linguistic vernacular is exactly what Berry Gordon excised from
1960s/70s Motown artists. To create the Motown Sound, he took away the
harsh tones, the blue notes, the braggadocious rifts, the bawdy sexual refer-
ences, the raw soul of Rhythm N Blues. Even the dance movements had to be
soft and smooth; none of those booty gyrations that niggas showed out wit on
dance ﬂoors in funky jazz and chitlin strut Blues houses. Gordy sanitized the
music and reinvented it as smooth, sweet verbal fantasies full of light-hearted,
if on occasion sad, lyrical melodies. (“Oh, how I wish it would rain.”) This made
the Motown Sound palatable to Whites and facilitated crossover into the
musical mainstream.
In keeping with the Black Language Tradition, reﬂecting generational con-
tinuity, Hip Hop linguistics infuses new life into old verbal forms. Hip Hop artists
are about the business of what Toni Morrison calls “word-work.” Some of this
work involves the introduction of new words. “Phat,” spelled with a “ph” but
pronounced the same as “fat,” meaning excellent/great/superb, was probably
coined by grafﬁti writers in Hip Hop Culture. Baugh and I have argued that these
writers diverged from the Language of Wider Communication as a direct result
of their awareness of the LWC. That is, they know that “ph” is pronounced like
“f.” Their divergence was thus not by chance linguistic error, but a matter of
personal identity (Smitherman and Baugh, 2002). “Phat” has now entered
mainstream dictionaries, with the grafﬁti writers’ spelling. 
While there are countless words, expressions and idioms that have 
come from Hip Hop’s linguistic enrichment of English, the use of “peace” is 
an intriguing case of crossover from a staunch Black-radical-no-White-folks-
included tradition. “Peace” entered African American Language from the Black
Nationalist, radical arena. Its use dates to the 1980s where it was a greeting
by Bloods who were down wit the Nation of Islam (NOI) and the Five Percent
Nation of Gods and Earth. It was probably a shortened version of the phrase,
“As-Salaam Alaikum” (Peace unto you and the Mercy of Allah). Gradually
Brothas and Sistas who thought of themselves as politically and socially
conscious, whether NOI members and Five Percenters or not, would use
“Peace” with other Blacks, both as a greeting and a farewell (Jackson, in 
L. George, 2004). Hip Hop artist and Five Percenter Rakim is credited with
spreading the use of “peace” throughout Hip Hop Culture where it has been
kept alive by artists like Nas and Wu-Tang Clan:
It seems to me that Rakim deserves most of the credit for the use of
“peace,” ending most of his songs with it, along with other Five Percent
M.C.s, such as Big Daddy Kane, Bran Nubian, the Supreme Team, Just 
Hip hop, in its essence and real 95


--- PAGE 112 ---
Ice. M.C.s like Nas and Wu-Tang clan appear to have kept the Five Percent
inﬂuence and vocabulary alive in the 1990s, including short dialogues in
songs in which speakers greet each other with, “Peace, GOD,” or “Peace,
King.”
(Austin Jackson, personal communication, May 2004)
Other word-work by Hip Hop artists involves the introduction of new, dynamic
uses of old words that have been resurrected. The Hip Hop duo dead prez (short
for “dead Presidents”) named themselves after a phrase that has been around
in Black Semantics for at least half a century (Smitherman, 2000b). “Dead
Presidents” is Old Skool terminology for money, derived from the U.S. govern-
ment’s practice of printing pictures of U.S. Presidents (dead ones only) 
on various denominations of paper currency. Deftly playin on the semantic
ambiguity of a “dead President” (past, present, or future), dead prez musical
artistry addresses two major issues that oppressed people, both here in the
U.S. and throughout the global village, are grappling with, issues that are no
longer talked about (“dead”) in Hip Hop: money and power. In “‘They’ Schools”
(2000), they rap:
Man, that school shit is a joke
The same people who control the school system control
The prison system and the whole social system
Ever since slavery, knowhutumsayin? . . .
You see, dog, see how quick these muthafuckas be . . .
Like tellin niggas get a diploma so you can get a job . . .
But they don’t never tell you how the job
Gon exploit you every time, knowwhutumsayin?
9
Today, dead prez, Talib Kweli, The Roots, The Coup, Mos Def, Nas, the Wu,
and others, among them, most recently, Kanye West, be reppin for the style of
Rap Music in which new language also carries political and social messages.
Holdin up the blood-stained banner of The Struggle. It is a rhetorical strategy
reminiscent of the raw linguistics of Black Arts poets like LeRoi Jones (later
Amiri Baraka):
Poems are bullshit unless they are
teeth or trees or lemons piled
on a step . . . Fuck poems
and they are useful, wd they shoot
come at you, love what you are . . .
We want “poems that kill.” . . .
There’s . . . another negroleader
on the steps of the white house one
kneeling between the sheriff’s thighs
96 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 113 ---
negotiating cooly for his people.
Agggh . . . stumbles across the room . . .
Put it on him, poem. Strip him naked
to the world! . . .
We want a black poem . . .
Let the world be a Black Poem
And Let All Black People Speak This Poem
Silently
or LOUD
Like Nikki Giovanni:
i wanted to write
a poem
that rhymes
but revolution doesn’t lend
itself to be-bopping . . .
then, well, i thought the sky
i’ll do a big blue sky poem
but all the clouds have winged
low since no-Dick was elected
so i thought again
and it occurred to me
maybe i shouldn’t write
at all
but clean my gun
and check my kerosene supply
Nas at his Hip Hop best (“If I Ruled the World,” “One Mic”) reﬂects the legacy
of this rhetorical tradition. More recently, “The College Dropout” Kanye West
has taken up the banner of this style of generational continuity. Talib Kweli
says that “Kanye came from the generation after us. He grew up equally
influenced by both parts of hip hop so his music is a synthesis of the two”
(quoted in Callahan-Bever, 2004, p. 120). Hold up. Wait a minute. Let’s pause
for the Cause.
Kweli and Common are among the Hip Hop artists who have talked about
two divergent strands of Hip Hop. Jay-Z is another although he came at it from
the opposite end, signifyin bout the “head wrap and back pack” crowd. As well,
a few Cultural Studies scholars have bemoaned this bi-level development in
Rap Music. The two types might loosely be labeled “Gangsta” and “Conscious”
Rap, or “Booty/Bubblegum” and “Political” Rap. This is an issue that needs
more exploration, more light, less heat. Lemme say, straight up, that this is an
illusory dichotomy, emanating from old-line bourgeois thinking, and it surely
delights our contemporary would-be oppressors. It is designed to divide, to
Hip hop, in its essence and real 97


--- PAGE 114 ---
confuse, to distract. Reminds me of those old Harlem Renaissance and Black
Movement arguments about art for art’s sake vs. art for people’s (or politics’)
sake—polemics of distraction to get us off course. 
Hip Hop, like other Black cultural productions, such as literature, is first 
and foremost art. It has to be assessed not by whether it is “Gangsta” or
“Conscious,” “Booty,” “Bubblegum,” or “Political,” but by the aesthetic accom-
plishment (or lack of such) of the Hip Hop artist. Kanye is right on point when
he says that “the ultimate thing is the quality of the song” (quoted in Callahan-
Bever, 2004, p. 120). At the same time he is conscious of being on a mission
of service:
All my songs are about something that was negative and how God can help
you through it. Like how a minister will bring up problems in service; I try
to do that lyrically. I have a responsibility to other Black men around 
me to help us make sane decisions and use our heads instead of always
trying to look cool.
(quoted in Golianopoulos, 2004, p. 101)
What’s important up in this seeming dilemma is this: the ultimate art is both
“Conscious” and “Gangsta.” It’s both booty-shaking rhythms and droppin
knowledge. The best, the greatest artistic shit knocks you upside the head—
and heart. 
It is well to remember that the Black musical tradition represents an outlaw
cultural form. The musical funk and booty-shaking bodies are reflections of
Black Gangsta-ism on the wild—and real—side. It is counter to mainstream
American norms of conformity and adherence to the ordinary. In the same vein,
even hedonistic Bubblegum, partyin Rap is against the grain and staid norms
of conventional mainstream U.S. society. After all, Rap Music was illegal in
those early years when Kool Herc and nem was takin over streets, parks, and
public spaces to party down. It didn’t become legit until the capitalist main-
stream became aware of its money-making potential. NWA’s 
Straight Outta
Comptonwas released on an independent, unknown label, not by a major White
recording studio. It had no radio play—in fact, no stations would play it—and it
had no promotion or advertising, other than word-of-mouth. Yet it went gold in
less than two months. That was a wake-up call to corporate America.
On the one hand, the critique of Hip Hop’s recent development is under-
standable. Hip Hop has become endangered by commodified gangsterism. 
On the other hand, the “brown sugar” essence in Hip Hop, 
is Gangsta—Black
Gangsta, that is. Corporate capitalism has recast Gangsta in Hip Hop, narrowing
it to violence of the Black-on-Black variety and misogynistic assaults against
Black and Brown women (although Eminem may be signaling a sea change up
in here). However, in its classic Black sense, Gangsta is not just Brothas taking
out other Brothas. As the story goes, even White folks was scared of the Bad
Nigga Gangsta Stag-o-Lee. “Gangsta” for Black people has always been about
98 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 115 ---
operating outside the boundaries of what Blacks knew was abusive, oppressive,
and culturally destructive on any and all levels—dress, music, food, values, life
style. Black Gangsta is anti-mainstream, anti-establishment, anti-Government,
anti-convention—in short anti those institutions and social domains that per-
petrate White supremacy. Check out Black Arts “Gangsta” poet, Nikki Giovanni,
rappin back in the day in “The True Import of Present Dialogue: Black vs. Negro”:
Nigger
Can you kill . . .
Can a nigger kill the Man . . .
A nigger can die
We ain’t got to prove we can die
We got to prove we can kill . . .
Can you kill the nigger
in you
Can you make your nigger mind 
die . . .
We kill in Viet Nam
for them
We kill for UN & NATO & SEATO & US
And everywhere for all alphabet but
BLACK
The best work in Hip Hop is a skillful blend of sound and sense. Its verbal
clothing is the rhetorical garb of the outcast. So back to Kanye West who
brilliantly represents the Black Cultural Tradition of us “Blues people.” In his
“Spaceship,” he blends ancient African folk understanding, the enslavement
voice, twentieth-century Gospel Quartet harmony, and the contemporary Hip
Hop perspective. The result is a work of pure musical genius. (And you can
dance and party to it too!) The entire narrative is set against the backdrop of
the Black belief that traditional Africans could fly. In Colonial America and
beyond, the enslaved often spoke about one day ﬂying back to Africa.
Voice: Ise cain keep workin like dis. Dis grave shift is like a
slave ship.
Quartet harmony: One glad morning, when this life is over, I’ll ﬂy away
To a land where joy shall never end. . . Oooooh, glory,
I’ll ﬂy away
When I die, Hallelujah by and by, I’ll ﬂy away.
Kanye (chorus, rappin): I been workin this grave shift, and I ain made shit 
I wish I could buy me a spaceship and ﬂy past the sky.
Hip Hop linguistics is grounded squarely in African American Language, its
syntax and sound, its discourse and style (as I ﬁrst argued at a conference in
Hip hop, in its essence and real 99


--- PAGE 116 ---
South Africa over a decade ago; see Smitherman, 1997). At the same time,
Hip Hop artists bring it wit a postmodern ﬂava, stamping their own linguistic
imprint upon the Game. Compacting a rich cultural sub-text into rhymed
couplets, Biggie (Notorious B.I.G.) went from “ashy to classy,” and Salt N Pepa
were mesmerized by the Brotha’s “Voodoo that you do.” Taking up where the
Last “Niggers Is Scared of Revolution” Poets left off, Mos Def crafted the brilliant
“Mr. Nigga,” who is living testimony to the Civil Rights–Black Power Revolution—
that wasn’t:
Who is the cat eatin out on the town
Make the whole dining room turn they head round
Mr. Nigga, Nigga Nigga . . .
Yes, yall, the best crib, the best clothes
Hottest whips on the road, neck and wrists on froze . . .
Straight all across the globe, watch got three time-zones
Keep the digital phone up to his dome . . .
They say they want you successful, but then they make it stressful
You start keepin pace, they start changing up the tempo . . .
America’s ﬁve centuries deep in cotton money . . .
Ima cop a nice home to provide in
A safe environment for seeds to reside in
A fresh whip for my whole family to ride in
And if I’m still Mr. Nigga, I won’t ﬁnd it surprisin.
In Hip Hop linguistics, even old controversial words have expanded into 
new semantic territory. “Bitch” and “ho” now are used to refer to both women
and men, as well as objects, things, and events. And “bitch” can be neutral and
generic as well as negative—or positive. For example, Hip Hop artist Nikki D: 
“It ain’t like we hate niggas [Black men]. We love ’em . . . but bitches gotta 
get down with one another just like men do . . . We’ve got to come together”
(quoted in 
The Source, June, 1993). Or: “They towed the bitch before I could
get back down there to pick it up” (from a twenty-something Black female in
reference to her car—“the bitch”—that stalled out on her and got towed while
she was looking for help). 
An interesting and enlightening commentary on “bitch” is provided by Miami
Hip Hop artist Trina. Alim posed the question, “Is there any functionality to using
the word ‘Bitch’ to describe yourself? What does it mean to Trina to be ‘The
Baddest Bitch,’ which is the title of one of her albums?” Trina responds:
It’s actually a great feeling. A great thing. That’s a strong word to use so
you got to be ready to stand up to it . . . I feel like there ain’t nothing that
I can’t accomplish. Nothing that I can’t endure. That is why I use that title.
Actually it is a term of empowerment as far as women are concerned
because most women seem to have a tendency to have low self-esteem
100 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 117 ---
. . . Bitch is a strong word. If you gon use the word “Bitch,” you’ve got to
represent to the fullest . . . I wanted to make sure that it was known that
I am defending women ...I  reversed that to let you know, “Yeah, OK, 
if you gonna say bitch, just say, “Miss Bitch.” . . . Don’t just say Bitch like
you’re saying any other bitch. I like to stand out. I’ve very dominant. I’m
very controlling. So I’m always gonna be on top of my game. So, therefore,
bitch doesn’t offend me at all. That’s why I can use it so brazenly and so
strongly. BAMMMM! It’s in your face. That’s that and it doesn’t even matter
how you feel about it.
(quoted in Alim, forthcoming)
“Pimp” is no longer a term only for a man who has prostitutes working for
and supporting him. In Hip Hop terminology, the “pimp” is any flashy, well-
dressed, smooth-talking, large and in charge, stylin-and-profilin-wit-attitude
man—or woman. Bishop Don Magic Juan, the Pimp King from the Old Skool
(now a preacher), says that “anyone, including a woman, can be a pimp, 
as long as he or she embodies the pimp attitude” (quoted in Moody, 2003).
That attitude is “big pimpin.” It’s a way of acting, talking, dressing, and carrying
oneself with the arrogance of somebody who know they got it goin on, who
don’t care about pious, conventional societal norms like “pride goeth before a
fall.” 
Not every Hip Hop head ﬁnds the Rapper-as-Pimp a reality, however. Ahmir
Thompson (“?uestlove”) says that it’s all “an illusion of control, posturing for
power.” In fact, he argues that “if you want to talk about really pimping, you’ve
got to talk about being a government ofﬁcial” (quoted in Moody, 2003). Now,
that’s shonuff Gangsta.
The language of Hip Hop originates with Black working and 
unworking class
youth who take patterns and styles of AAL and play with them. The major and
most significant changes taking place in AAL today are those generated by
Black urban/Ghetto youth who are masters of the Word. The best Hip Hop
artists in this group of language pace setters are conscious linguistic innovators
who forge new thought in fast forward meter, renewing AAL with syntactical
and rhetorical reinventions. These innovations that come out of urban hoods
are transforming the linguistic landscape of the English language, contributing
not only new, dynamic “slang” words and expressions, but also restructuring
and enriching the grammar of English. For example, these days you can talk
about “paying” and “being paid” in conversational patterns that disrupt the
syntax of LWC. 
Michelle: (with her girls in a restaurant, as they are divvying up the bill) “Wait
a minute. We short here. Who missing? Where Martha go?”
Sheila: “It ain her. She paid.”
Tomeka: “Martha got it goin on now, ain’t she?”
Sheila: “Yeah, girl, she paid.”
Hip hop, in its essence and real 101


--- PAGE 118 ---
In LWC/“standard English,” the verb “paid” would have to be followed by an
object, either explicitly stated or implied. That is, Sheila’s statement, “She paid,”
could only mean “She paid her part of the bill.” Now, however, two different
meanings of “paid” are possible. You can be the grammatically active agent
who has paid for something. This is the meaning of Sheila’s ﬁrst “She paid.”
She is telling Michelle that Martha paid her part of the bill. Or you can be the
fortunate, grammatically passive recipient, who is described as being paid a
lot of money. That is the meaning of Sheila’s second “She paid.” 
Another striking example that Black youth have contributed stems from their
playing with the word “hate.” If you “hate” someone, that’s different from “hatin
on” someone. When you “hate on” a person, you are expressing envy; you are
begrudging that person’s accomplishments, possessions, style, or they game.
And/or you are also talking bad or negatively about that person. Here again,
Black Hip Hop linguistics imaginatively extends the boundaries of traditional
English syntax because in the Hip Hop sense of the word “hate,” you can use
the form “hatin” without the LWC requirement that it be followed by an object.
You can say “She hatin,” meaning that whatever she said about someone else
was an expression of envy about that person or her way of talking negatively
about the person.
Even the Black Language “showcase variable” (Rickford, 
et al., 1991) be
has been expanded by Hip Hop’s Black Language pioneers. In traditional AAL
use, 
be as a full verb form conveys the message that a reality is continuing,
intermittent, or recurring. “He be too slow” means that he is generally slow, on
more than one occasion. And even if he fast at this moment, just wait, he gon
be too slow again, cause “he be too slow.” If the AAL speaker makes a state-
ment about this man’s slowness, without using 
be, that is, if the speaker says,
“He too slow,” it means that this person is too slow now, at this moment, today.
But the statement says nothing about whether or not this man is too slow at
other points in time. Typically, the AAL 
be is not used with static meanings, that
is, in contexts where there is no sense of repetition in the meaning being
conveyed. 
For more than four decades in Black America, you would hear statements
like “This my pastor,” not “ This be my pastor.” However, today’s Black Hip Hop
youth have expanded (or perhaps resurrected) the domain of the Black
Language icon, 
be. Today in Hip Hop Music, we hear: “Dr. Dre be the name”
(from the producer and co-founder of NWA); “I be the insane nigga from the
psycho ward” (from Method Man); “My grammar bees Ebonics” (Nelly); “This
be that put-you-out-of-your-misery song” (Busta Rhymes). Based on his research
in 2002–03, linguist and Hip Hop scholar, H. Samy Alim, was the ﬁrst to note
the emergence, or most likely, the re-emergence of this use of 
be (re-emergence
that is, from older slave speech). He argues that it can be found not only 
in Black Hip Hop artists’ language but also in the speech of everyday Blacks
today, especially the younger crowd. Referring to what he calls a “‘new’ equative
copula” in AAL, Alim states:
102 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 119 ---
The literature on invariant be (Labov, et al., 1968; Wolfram, 1969; Fasold,
1972) has deemed sentences like, *He be my fatheror I be the head nurse
to be ungrammatical . . . I have documented several examples of this
construction . . . We might have what appears to be a semantic shift [from
older forms of be]... Be is usually used when a speaker attempts to speak
an ultimate truth (and often emphatically in relation to one’s identity) . . .
Ultimately be equates the subject and predicate nominal in such a way 
as to reveal what the speaker believes to be a “realer than real” state of
affairs.
(2004a)
In other important research on what he calls “Hip Hop Nation Language”,
Alim (2004b) has demonstrated the code switching ability of Hip Hop artists,
that is, from AAL to LWC, depending on context and situation. Recognizing the
power of language in identity formation and community bonding, it can be
argued that Hip Hop artists vary their grammatical patterns to exhibit a more
AAL style in their song lyrics. In his ground-breaking research, “We are the
streets”, Alim (2003) refers to this as the “strategic construction of a street
conscious identity,” and goes on to suggest here and elsewhere (Alim, 2004a)
that this linguistic consciousness has implications for the use and development
of AAL beyond Hip Hop Music.
While Hip Hop is primarily concerned with oral production and expression,
written forms of Hip Hop are also sources of linguistic change. Changes 
in spelling reflect Hip Hop’s dominance and insistence on being masters of 
the word, rather than subservient to English language traditions. Some of the
spelling innovations are clearly motivated by efforts to produce words in writing
that reﬂect the way they sound in speech, such as “nigga,” “ho” (for “whore”),
and “playaz,” (for “players”). This explanation accounts for some of Hip Hop’s
written language forms. Further, this is consistent with the generational con-
tinuity I emphasize throughout this book—the same Hip Hop practice reﬂected
in 1960s/70s Black artists’ poetic quest to reproduce in their written poetry
the sound and syntax of Black Orality. 
On the other hand, though, some of the spelling changes in written Hip Hop
do not reﬂect AAL. Language scholar Warren Olivo (2001), in a stunning and
refreshing analysis of Rap Music lyrics, puts forth an intriguing argument about
spelling ideology in Hip Hop. His line of argument reﬂects and expands on the
inherent Gangsta (in the archetypal Black sense) essence of Hip Hop:
The non-standard spellings. . . are used deliberately for various purposes,
one of whic h... can be seen as a way for the writer to demonstrate a
positive evaluation of [African American Vernacular English] . . . [Other]
usages serve as a playful way of calling attention to the arbitrariness of
dominant spelling conventions, and to the ways that these conventions
reﬂect the values of mainstream society . . . The playful way in which these
Hip hop, in its essence and real 103


--- PAGE 120 ---
alternative spellings are created . . . indicates a more general critique of
linguistic standards, of the social inequities they help to reproduce, and 
of the constraints they impose on linguistic and cultural practices. . . This
analysis . . . has shown that writers use a variety of alternative [spelling]
conventions, some of which are used to graphically represent the spoken
forms of AAVE, while others are stylistic innovations of the writers and of
non-mainstream writing in general. Taken together, the deliberateness 
of this “hip-hop” writing style indicates a rejection of linguistic standards,
as well as an . . . appeal to an “authentic” local audience . . . [which]
signiﬁes rap artists’ attempt to create and reproduce the alternative values
of hip-hop culture.
(Olivio, 2001, pp. 67, 81–82)
The writing style of Brothas and Sistas responding to the call, indeed, the
absolute necessity, of preserving Hip Hop Music and Culture represents yet
another dimension of language renewal and creation that has come about with
the dominance of Hip Hop Culture in the postmodern era. The cultural critiques
of writers and scholars in 
Vibe, The Source , XXL, Rap Pages , and other Hip 
Hop magazines and newsletters, and in books such as Todd Boyd’s The New
H.N.I.C., Mark Anthony Neal’s Songs in the Key of Black Life , Gwendolyn
Pough’s Check it While I Wreck It, Joan Morgan’s When Chicken Heads Come
Home to Roost, are fresh, live, dynamic. The formal, stilted, lifeless discourse
of the English mainstream has been replaced with a “Brand Newbian” ﬂow of
linguistic brown sugar. Joan Morgan (baaaad Sista) is an exceptionally gifted
writer in this emerging rhetorical tradition. Declaring herself a “hip-hop
feminist,” in her 1999 book, 
When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost , she
insightfully captures the complexity of her status (and that of other Sistas of
her generation) in her bold, unique Hip Hop writing style:
Just once, I didn’t want to have to talk about “the brothers,” “male domi-
nation,” or “the patriarchy.” I wanted a feminism that would allow me to
explore who we are as women—not victims. One that claimed the powerful
richness and delicious complexities inherent in being black girls now—
sistas of the post-Civil Rights, post-feminist, post-soul, hip-hop generation.
I was also looking for permission to ask some decidedly un-P.C. but very
real questions: . . . Is it foul to say that imagining a world where you could
paint your big brown lips in the most decadent of shades, pile your phat
ass into your fave micromini, slip your freshly manicured toes into four-inch
fuck-me sandals and have not one single solitary man objectify—I mean
roam his eyes longingly over all the intended places—is, like, a total drag
for you?
Am I no longer down for the cause if I admit that while total gender
equality is an interesting intellectual concept, it doesn’t do a damn thing
for me erotically? That, truth be told, men with too many “feminist”
104 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 121 ---
sensibilities have never made my panties wet, at least not like that
reformed thug nigga who can make even the most chauvinistic of “wassup,
baby” feel like a sweet, wet tongue darting in and out of your ear . . . And
when one accuses you of being completely indecipherable there’s really
nothing to say ’cuz even you’re not sure how you can be a feminist and
insist he respect you as a woman, treat you like a lady, and make you 
feel safe—like a li’l girl. In short, I needed a feminism brave enough to fuck
with the grays.
(J. Morgan, 1999, pp. 56–58)
There are days when I optimistically predict that Hip Hop will survive—and
thrive. The potential of that brown sugar essence is still there, waiting to be
mined. Over the years we have felt it every now and then when we was suddenly
jolted by bittersweet interlocking rhyme metaphors coming at us—sounding
every bit like a love song to me (Jay-Z, “Song Cry”):
I can understand why you want a divorce now
Though I can’t let you know it
Pride won’t let me show it
Pretend to be heroic
That’s just one to grow with
But deep inside a nigga so sick.
We also feel it when we hear those edited re-mixes with off tha hook “Still 
Fly” beats that make us “Stand Up,” “Lean Back,” and “Get Low,” bringing a
party-time, “Dr. Feel Good” amnesia that masks Hip Hop’s bling-bling, Black-
on-Black violence, and misogynistic motifs. But the amnesia is only temporary.
And so we find ourselves awaiting the full and permanent rescue of Hip 
Hop Music from the commercialized gangsterism of corporate capitalism and
the beginning of the end to a musical chord that done been played way too
long. 
In the larger realm of Hip Hop Culture, there is cause for optimism as we
witness Hip Hop youngun’s tryna git they political activist game togetha. The
National Hip Hop Political Convention, held in Newark, New Jersey, June 16–19,
2004, recalls Chuck D’s (P.E.’s co-founder) astute comment that “Rap Music
is Black folks’ CNN.” Bringing together some 4,000 folks from all over the U.S.,
the Convention was launched on June 16, Tupac’s birthday, and it ended on
June 19, date of the original Juneteenth celebration. Hip Hop journalist Davey
D (2004) reports that the Convention “was patterned after the 1972 Gary,
Indiana convention, where members of the ‘civil rights generation’ came
together to chart a course of action and vote on a political agenda.” The vision
for this coming together was to expand Hip Hop into the political arena 
and bridge the current divide between the Old Skool Civil Rights and the Hip
Hop Generation. Each Convention delegate was required to register at least
Hip hop, in its essence and real 105


--- PAGE 122 ---
50 people to vote and to send the names to the National Hip Hop Political
Convention’s headquarters prior to the Convention. 
Convention organizers included Chuck D, M C Lyte, Newark Deputy Mayor
Ras Baraka, Kevin Powell, Rosa Clemente, and Bakari Kitwana, among others.
Author of The Rap on Gangsta Rap(1994) and The Hip Hop Generation: Young
Blacks and the Crisis in African American Culture(2002), and former editor of
The Source, Kitwana articulated the mission of the Convention:
We want people to understand what a vote is for and how to use it. Telling
young people to vote without giving them any other tools is wrong. We want
to educate voters to understand what being part of a political process is
all about and how that can bring about change.
(quoted in Bowman, 2004)
The Convention formulated a Five-Point Agenda of proposals dealing with: 
l) Education, 2) Economic Justice, 3) Criminal Justice, 4) Health, and 5) Human
Rights. Workshops and seminar topics growing out of this agenda included:
“Art and Resistance,” “Our Schools, Our Kids and the Money Issue: Revisiting
Brown vs. the Board of Education,” “Violence Against Women and Children,”
“Why We Don’t Have Any Money: Reparations, Gentrification and Bad-ass
Credit,” and “How to Get Stupid White Men Out of Ofﬁce.” 
Projecting activism beyond current election year politics, the National Hip
Hop Political Convention is the most promising, exciting development in 
Hip Hop Culture since its inception. As an Old Skool Womanist, I applaud this
political effort from the Hip Hop Generation, and I await the fruits of their labor
in the vineyards of social change.
At the end of the day, Hip Hop Music will also come to itself. As more people
like Kanye West
10 come forth, those who have kept the faith all these years
will be rewarded. Hip Hop’s ride-or-die-girl Joan Morgan put it ever so eloquently
in her critique of Hip Hop Music. Framing her analysis in the form of a metaphor-
ical letter to her “boo,” she wrote:
It’s been six years since I’ve been writing about hip-hop on the womanist
tip . . . It’s easy to judge—to wonder what any woman in her right mind
would be doing with that wack motherfucka if you’re entering now, before
the sweet times. But the sweetness was there in the beginning of this 
on-again, off-again love affair. It started almost twenty years ago . . . The
old-school deejays and M.C.s performed community service at those
school-yard jams. Intoxicating the crowd with beats and rhymes, they were
like shamans sent to provide us with temporary relief from the ghetto’s
blues. As for sistas, we . . . became fly-girls, and gave up the love . . .
But girlfriend’s got a point, Boo. We haven’t been fly-girls for a very 
long time . . . Dre, Short, Snoop, Scarface, I give them all their due but the
mid school’s increasing use of violence, straight-up selﬁsh individualism,
106 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 123 ---
and woman-hating (half of them act like it wasn’t a woman who clothed
and fed their black asses . . .) masks the essence of what I fell in love 
with . . .
Things were easier when your only enemies were white racism and
middle-class black folk who didn’t want all that jungle music reminding
them they had kinky roots. Now your anger is turned inward . . . One thing
I know for certain is that if you really are who I believe you to be, the voice
of a nation, in pain and insane, then any thinking black woman’s relation-
ship with you is going to be as complicated as her love for black men . . .
So, Boo, I’ve ﬁnally got an answer to everybody that wants to talk about
the incongruity of our relationship. Hip-hop and my feminism are not at war
but my community is. And you are critical to our survival.
(J. Morgan, 1999, pp. 67–70)
Yeah, a lotta Old Skool Movement folks used to love H.E.R. And some of us
still do. 
Hip hop, in its essence and real 107


--- PAGE 124 ---
Chapter 6
“All Around the World, Same
Song”1
The absorption of Black Language and Culture by White America has been
dubbed “crossover.” While the label is new, and while it has been accelerated
by the twentieth-century evolution of technology and mass media, the process
is as old as the African Holocaust itself. In his history of African American
Language, linguist J.L. Dillard (1972) tracked young White Americans’ borrow-
ings from the speech of Africans during and after enslavement. During the
Harlem Renaissance in the 1920s—a period in which the Negro was so-called
“in vogue”—Whites ﬂocked uptown to Harlem clubs and cabarets to immerse
themselves in the language, music and culture of the “New Negro.” In 1957,
White writer Norman Mailer, who came to be celebrated for his critical, award-
winning novels, published a bombshell essay in 
Dissent magazine.
In certain cities . . . New York . . . New Orleans, Chicago, San Francisco,
and Los Angeles ...t h i s  p articular part of a generation [of whites] was
attracted to what the Negro had to offer . . . And in this wedding of the
white and the black it was the Negro who brought the cultural dowry . . .
So there was a new breed of adventurers, urban adventurers who drifted
out at night looking for action with a black man’s code to ﬁt their facts. The
hipster had absorbed the existentialist synapses of the Negro, and for
practical purposes could be considered a white Negro.
(Mailer, 1957, pp. 3–4)
Thus wrote Mailer, in a piece he entitled “The White Negro,” nearly half a
century ago, long before today’s generation of young African Americans and
Whites were even thought about, much less born. While Mailer’s piece created
widespread controversy, he had simply set out in the public sphere what many
African American writers, intellectuals and cultural theorists had been saying
privately for years: “They done taken my blues and gone.” 
Today, Mailer’s “white Negro” has morphed into Eminem and dozens of
lesser known (and lesser talented) White Hip Hop artists and millions of wiggas
(“white niggas”). In appropriately saggin gear, they be lyin and signifyin, talkin
and testifyin, trash talkin, snappin, and hoopin all over the place. This too is


--- PAGE 125 ---
generational continuity, as contemporary White Americans borrow from African
American Culture as did their foreparents during enslavement and on down
through the generations. Same song.
What Cornel West has dubbed the “AfroAmericanization of youth” is evident
today not only among youth but also among adults of varying ages and
throughout the global village. It is writ large in fashion, music, attitude, dance,
and even what useta be Black children’s games. White women have now picked
up “Double Dutch,” the jump rope game young Sistas have been playing on
the streets of the Bronx, Motown, South Central, Chi-Town, the ATL, Houston,
and in other urban hoods throughout the U.S. since at least the Great Migration
of Blacks out of the rural South after World Wars I and II. A San Francisco 
group of women formed “Double Dutchess” and give performances throughout
the Bay Area. Writing in 
The New York Timesin 2004, journalist Elizabeth Ahlin
described the group: “White and in their 20s, the women of Double Dutchess
are bringing a new look to a pastime long considered the province of young
African American girls.” (Uhm sho they gittin paid.) 
AfroAmericanization can be witnessed in American mannerisms, speech,
gestures, and life style. The Black Style, indeed the Black Essence, cuts deep
into the American psyche. Back in the great Josephine Baker’s day, whose
dance performances wowed her White audiences, she accentuated the loving,
sexualized province of Sistas and Brothas: the Behind. According to Phyllis
Rose, in her 1989 biography, 
Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker In Her Time: 
A Russian-born dancer named Mura Dehn . . . remembers [Baker] as
walking onto the stage with tiny quick steps, in proﬁle, her rear end sticking
out, “walking like a little hummingbird with her heinie moving so fast behind
her like a hummingbird.” Her heinie, as Mura Dehn called it, moved at
incredible speeds and seemed to take on a life of its own in her dancing.
She handled it as though it were an instrument, a rattle, something apart
from herself that she could shake. One can hardly overemphasize the
importance of the rear end. Baker herself declared that people had been
All around the world, same song 109
Figure 6.1 “The Boondocks” cartoon, September 4, 2003.


--- PAGE 126 ---
hiding their asses too long. “The rear end exists. I see no reason to be
ashamed of it. It’s true there are rear ends so stupid, so pretentious, so
insigniﬁcant that they’re good only for sitting on.” With Baker’s triumph,
the erotic gaze of a nation moved downward: she had uncovered a new
region for desire.
(p. 24)
Today, Sistas’ big old booty—Gangsta on the Real!—done got up in the
crossover process. In an insightful and irreverent 1997 essay on “The Butt,”
by African American Los Angeles writer, Erin J. Aubry, “baby got back” was
described as:
Unlike hair and skin, the butt is stubborn, immutable—it can’t be hot-
combed or straightened or bleached into submission. It does not
assimilate; it never took a slave name. Accentuating a butt is thumbing a
nose at the establishment, like subverting a pinstriped suit with waist-
length dreadlocks.
Not no more, especially if what Ludacris called this “new phenomenon . . .
White women with ass” continues. In a 
Village Voiceessay in 2004, White writer
Sloane Crosley tells us that Whites are now taking the “Butt Seriously.” 
White girls with big asses, man . . . They’re taking over this city. They’re
everywhere I turn . . . Yes, I’m one of them . . . I welcome the omigod-
Becky-would-you-look-at-her-Nordic-baby-got-back . . . and plan to per-
petuate my ass off . . . White female butts are on display as never before
and they’re being checked out by people of every race, sex, and contact
prescription. 
In the mid-twentieth century, Mailer attributed European American fasci-
nation with and attraction to Black Culture to the marginalized, rebellious
nature of African American life, an existence in which African Americans go
against the American grain and dare to live life on their own terms. Writing
toward the end of that century, in a provocative 1997 essay entitled, “Are Black
People Cooler Than White People?,” writer Donnell Alexander contends that
it’s the tryna-make-a-dollar-outa-ﬁfteen-cent outlook that accounts for crossover.
“Cool, the basic reason Blacks remain in the American cultural mix is an
industry of style that everyone in the world can use. It’s making something 
out of nothing. It’s the nigga metaphor. And nigga metaphor is the genius of
America.” Notwithstanding the creative genius of Black Style, it is a culture 
of struggle that gave birth to the “nigga metaphor.” Whites get it at bargain-
basement prices, don’t have to pay no dues, but they reap the psychological,
social—and economic—benefits of a culture forged in enslavement, neo-
enslavement, Jim Crow, U.S. apartheid, and continuing hard times. 
110 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 127 ---
The “Africanization of American English” (Smitherman, 2000b), while 
much more pervasive today than when Langston Hughes was lamenting 
the loss of our Blues Culture, did not escape Mailer’s discerning eye back in
1957:
The child [in the cultural marriage of White and Black] was the language
of Hip, for its argot gave expression to abstract states of feeling which all
could share, at least all who were Hip. . . The language of Hip is a language
of energy . . . I have jotted down perhaps a dozen words, the Hip perhaps
most in use and most likely to last with the minimum of variation. The words
are man, go, put down, make, beat, cool, swing, with it, crazy, dig, flip,
creep, hip, square. They serve a variety of purposes, and the nuance of the
voice uses the nuance of the situation to convey the subtle contextual
difference.
(p. 11)
These Black innovations in word, sound and syntax have continued unabated.
In this postmodern, high-tech, cyberspace, media-driven era, African American
Semantics crosses over fast and furious.
•
Like white on rice: “The Monica [Lewinsky] evidence helped Republicans;
they were on Clinton like white on rice” (a White female lawyer on a
televison talk show). 
• Hit on: “If you’re attractive, you’re going to get hit on” (two White females
on issues professional women face while traveling for their jobs). 
• In the research of linguist Michael Adams (1998) on “[restaurant] server’s
lexicon,” he found numerous examples of Black Language crossover—e.g.,
throw down. He concluded that “it should not surprise anyone that African-
American Vernacular English has lent terms to restaurant jargon, as to
most other registers of American English.”
•
Playa hate: Commenting on CBS late night show host, David Letterman’s
long-running feud with Jay Leno, journalist John Smyntek pens this
headline: “Player-hating is so unbecoming” (“Names & Faces,” 
Detroit Free
Press, October 14, 2004, p. 2f; of course Smyntek could use a lil spelling
lesson).
• Upside the head : “When serendipitous happenstance hits numbers-
crunching Charlie upside his brainy noggin, there’s a spark of inspiration
. . .” (Mike Duffy in a review of the film, “Numbers,” Detroit Free Press ,
January 23, 2005).
• Mojo: “How to Get Your Mojo On,” headline for review of a book about
physical exercises and other techniques for getting out of a rut (William 
L. Hamilton, The New York Times, January 4, 2004, p. 9).
• Phat: “Pretty, hot and tasty” chicken, KFC should give out “phat degrees”
(radio advertisement for Kentucky Fried Chicken).
All around the world, same song 111


--- PAGE 128 ---
• Kick to the curb: “Kicking Chalabi to the curb doesn’t erase U.S. damage”
(New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd, writing on May 25, 2004, in
reference to the U.S. raid on Iraqi Ahmad Chalabi’s house). 
• Don’t go there : a fashion journalist for Glamour Magazine (May, 1999)
provides a list of celebrities “kicked to the curb” for their “don’t go there
get-ups.”
• TLC/tender, loving care : “A Little TLC for New Businesses” (headline,
Detroit News, November 1, 1995).
• Git-go, dis, chill/chill out, cool, twenty-four-seven, boom box, and on and
on are used so readily and frequently, in both speech and writing, that it’s
often difﬁcult to discern where Black Language ends and White Language
begins. 
One linguistic crossover that I have been tracking for years is what has 
come to be called the high ﬁve, known for decades in African America as “giving
ﬁve” or “giving skin.” In a 1992 children’s book, entitled Kids’ Shenanigans,
published by Klutz Press, White faces appear throughout the book illustrating
various styles of 
giving five . I was shocked to see that the book even had 
an illustration of the old five on the sly , which was once a well-kept racial 
secret. The illustrations are referred to as “Hand Jive.” Seeing all of this in print
painfully brought to mind the work of African American linguist Benjamin G.
Cooke. Over three decades ago, Cooke came up with the idea of publishing a
guide book based on his research on the various styles of what he called “giving
and getting skin.” He labeled these styles “emphatic, superlative, greeting,
parting, complimentary, agreement, sly,” and there were also combinations of
styles. Cooke’s idea was to incorporate illustrations of real-life Black people
performing the various styles of giving and getting skin. However, at the time,
Cook was unable to interest a publisher in his book idea and ended up 
just publishing a summary of his research, with a few photographs of the
various giving (and getting) five styles, in a 1972 academic book, edited by
Thomas Kochman, 
Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban Black
America. 
These days it is not unusual for young White male students on college
campuses to debate me vigorously when I talk about the high ﬁvecrossing over
into the White American mainstream from Africa by way of African America. In
the virtually all-White communities and schools they come from, these young
dudes done been high fivin among themselves as well as witnessing White
adults high ﬁvin all they lives. Back in the early 1990s the ﬁrst President George
Bush, “in a moment of elation,” even gave a high ﬁve (Turner, 1991). So young
Whites’ skepticism about 
high five’s African American (and African) roots is
understandable. They are totally blown away when I show them 1960’s photos
of Blacks “giving and getting skin/ﬁve.” Now performed with palms in the air,
giving and getting skin/five was originally done with each person’s palm
extended from their waist area. And, as Cooke noted, there were all kinds of
112 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 129 ---
variations—low ﬁve (with palms extended in the lower body area), ﬁve on the
black hand side (giving skin on the darker, outer side of the palm), five on 
the sly (giving skin behind your back). Early written evidence of giving and
getting skin/ﬁve can be found in Cab Calloway’s 1938 Hepster’s Dictionary.
There are several West African language sources, including Mandingo, i golo
don m bolo, meaning literally “put your skin in my hand” as an expression of
agreement and solidarity. 
Practiced on the down low in Black America for most of the entire twentieth
century, “put your skin in my hand” morphed into the “high ﬁve” around 1990,
bustin outa the conﬁnes of New York’s Harlem, Chicago’s Southside, Detroit’s
Black Bottom, and other hoods inhabited by this nation’s “Blues people.” The
“high ﬁve” has now become so thoroughly ingrained in White American main-
stream culture that one can observe its use not only among White males, but
also among elite White women on the golf course as well as among elderly
White females conﬁned to nursing homes.
Africanized English is all over the place, from White males hoopin on courts
in Great Falls, Montana, Oak Park, Illinois, Orange County, California, and even
my rural birthplace, Brownsville, Tennessee. Words that were once frowned
upon and dismissed as “Black slang” in my youth now come forth from the
mouths and pens of White folk on the regular. Some AAL words appear so often
in the mainstream that they done just got wore out. 
Hip and baby are two that
come immediately to mind. (Hip is one that was vociferously objected to by my
White teachers as well as uplift-the-race folks in my community.) 
Way back in The Day, Claude Brown, in his classic 1965 autobiography,
Manchild in the Promised Land, was the ﬁrst to analyze the import of the Black
use of the term baby as a form of address—even among men. 
The ﬁrst time I heard the expression “baby” used by one cat to address
another was up at Warwick in 1951 . . . The term had a hip ring to it, a real
colored ring ...I  knew right away I had to start using it. It was saying, “Man
look at me. I’ve got masculinity to spare.” It was saying at the same time
to the world, “I’m one of the hippest cats, one of the most uninhibited cats
on the scene. I can say ‘baby’ to another cat, and he can say ‘baby’ to me,
and we can say it with strength in our voices.” If you could say it, this meant
that you really had to be sure of yourself, sure of your masculinity. The real
hip thing about the “baby” term was that it was something that only colored
cats could say the way it was supposed to be said. 
Baby not only signalled Black masculinity, it also was culturally coded Black.
As Brown said, it has a “hip . . . a real colored ring” to it. It became a verbal
icon of Black solidarity and bonding. During rebellious events of the 1960s and
1970s, an oft-heard rallying cry was “Burn, baby, burn.” Not just “Burn,” but
“Burn, 
baby, burn.” Here baby suggests a tone of Black defiance (often the
meaning implied when it’s used in antagonistic encounters with Whites). Baby
All around the world, same song 113


--- PAGE 130 ---
was and still is used not only between males but between males and females
as a rhetorical bond of Black unity and peoplehood.
On the nationally televised Weather Channel , a White female announcer
used baby in reference to the upcoming report on weather in foreign countries,
which was to be given by her White colleague: “My favorite part of the show.
Let’s spin that globe, baby!” On the cover of 
Time magazine, baby appeared as
part of the by-line of a story on Las Vegas, which is, according to Time writer
Joel Stein, “America’s No. 1 tourist town”: “It’s Vegas, baby!” (July 26, 2004).
And so it goes. A long, long way from the 
baby of Black solidarity.
Hip has been around even longer than baby, and it has West African linguistic
roots. In the Wolof language of West Africa, hepi, hipi, means to “open one’s
eyes, to be well-informed and aware of what’s happening.” Given the continuing
presence of the past Oral Tradition, it probably dates to the enslavement era.
In written form, it appears in Calloway’s 1938 
Hepster’s Dictionary, where the
deﬁnition includes “sophisticated” and “wise.” 
According to a story on cable television station TBS, in 2003, the station
reinvented itself as a sleeker, “hipper” network, producing a clean version of
“Sex and the City,” and getting “hip and funny” (Caroline Wilbert, Cox News
Service, July 7, 2004). An advertisement for Berlitz dictionaries in French and
Spanish, with pick-up lines and put-downs, describes them as “hip guides to
teach common foreign speech and slang” (
Detroit News , May 20, 2004).
“Hipness” is the descriptive word in stories and ads about upscale condo-
miniums and houses in the Nation’s cities—e.g., Seth Sutel, “Empty Nesters
Flock to Hip Downtowns” ( July 8, 2004); real estate writer, Judy Rose: Her
“Hipness in Birmingham” describes “the last big piece of land . . . being devel-
oped as dense, hip, urban housing” (September 28, 2002). And of course
“Global English” has incorporated this Black term. According to educational
television producer, Dr. Gregory Hahn, of Germany, 
hip “continues to live a
curious global life.” He notes a German Green Party election poster with the
sentence: “Hip young people will vote for [X]” (personal communication, August,
2004).
While African American Language has continuously influenced White
American speech since the era of enslavement, mass language crossover was
launched during the Black Movement of the mid-twentieth century. In the
1960s and 1970s, Black Language and Culture began a mass exodus out of
Chocolate Cities into Vanilla Suburbs. The Movement became the poster child
for the social rebellion of disaffected groups, its language and rhetorical style
the venue for expressing protest by marginalized groups seeking entrée into 
the center of American life. 
Today the raised, clenched ﬁst of the Black Power Movement has become
an iconic symbol of power and protest around the globe. In late March of 2004,
in Taipei, Taiwan, a place far removed from America’s “Black Ghettoes,” thou-
sands of supporters of Lien Chan, who lost the Presidential election by only
30,000 votes, bogarded the area near the Presidential palace, to protest the
114 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 131 ---
re-election of Chen Shui-bian. A photograph of the protest scene, which
appeared in several major newspapers, showed a protestor with a raised,
clenched ﬁst in the air, Black Power style. 
The revolutionary refrain in James Brown’s 1968 best-selling song was 
once the rallying cry of the movement to rescue Black minds from the 
cultural enslavement of White America: “Say it Loud (I’m Black and I’m Proud).”
Today the title of that song, which Soul Brother Number One unabashedly 
sang in venues all across America, including on national television, has
morphed into an uplift marketing slogan. In one newspaper, “trendy trucker
hats” were pictured beneath this bold advertising option: “Say it loud, wear it
proud.” 
In Colombia, where the best-selling Hip Hop artists are 50 cent, NWA and
Eminem, the language of vocal artists is Spanish, but the rhetorical and
communicative style is Black Hip Hop, politicized and Gangsta. These artists
use Hip Hop linguistic-cultural style to express their anger against the U.S. and
their government for the “blood in the ﬁelds, colonized lands, invisible bonds
of slavery, in the Amazon.” Juan Emilio Rodríguez, who also goes by the name
“3X” and is a member of the Hip Hop group, Cescru Enlace, says: “This is real
rap, not fake. It is contrarian. It is political. It is not about cars and women. They
do not do this in the U.S. any more. We are doing it” (quoted in Forero, 2004).
All around the world, same song 115
Figure 6.2 Jaun Emilio Rodríguez, right, and his brother, Andrey, left, of the rap group
Cescru Enlace, practice at their mother’s home in Bogotá. “This is real rap, not fake,”
Juan Emilio said. “It is contrarian. It is political.”


--- PAGE 132 ---
It has become commonplace these days to rip off Black Language expres-
sions for consumer marketing. Like What’s up: “What’s up at the Falls,” by-line
on an Automobile Association of America magazine cover, promoting tourist
getaways at Niagara Falls, and “What’s up in Omaha!,” from the Greater Omaha
Convention and Visitors Bureau brochure. Like the clever play on “You go, girl!”
in Pantene’s shampoo commercial, “You glow, girl.” Like bling: “Fragrance with
bling. These new summer scents don’t just smell delicious—they give a glittery
glow, too,” ad in 
Health magazine (June, 2005); “Bling-a-ding. No longer just a
fad for ﬁngers and ears, bling is even on electronic devices,” ad for cell phones
with a “Superstar Bling Kit,” in 
Detroit News (June 10, 2005); “Bling’s the thing
in glittery new everyday fashion,” article about adding sequins and rhinestones
to belts, sandals, etc., “an inexpensive way to add fun to the wardrobe”
(
Baltimore Sun , June 13, 2005). (They probably gon wear bling out just like 
they done did hip now that Hip Hop artist B.G.’s “bling-bling” is scheduled for
inclusion in the Oxford English Dictionary (Jesse Sheidlower, O.E.D. Editor-at-
large, personal communication, April, 2005).
One can witness the public media use of even AAL grammatical and pronun-
ciation patterns, including some of the very same patterns that teachers and
language purists be trippin bout. The White television sports show host’s “Spurs
be choking” (referring to the San Antonio Spurs’ loss in the NBA 2003 playoffs),
on the 
Best Damn Sports Show Period , may not be surprising given the free
and ready use of AAL by the White dudes on that show. But no way did I expect
to read “Don’t be hatin Malibu” as the newspaper by-line of a review of the
2003 ﬁlm, 
Malibu’s Most Wanted (actor Jamie Kennedy and the ﬁlm’s racial
theme notwithstanding). Nor did I expect to read “How ’bout these Olympic
games?” (’bout?) as the headline in the USA Weekend Magazine during the
August, 2004 Olympics in Greece. 
The unfortunate number of young people addicted to drugs lends a certain
rhetorical logic to “Yo, slave!” in the full-page newspaper ad, “Addiction is
slavery.” However, 
yo is a most unlikely, if effective, attention-getter in “Yo,
Picasso!” (on the cover of the New York Times Book Review, in reference to the
newly published second volume on the life of the “gigantic artist”). Ditto for the
use of 
yo during a televised panel discussion on the “Cavuto Business Show”
on cable Fox News. This all-White, very talkative group of male ﬁnance experts
was completely taken off guard when one of their advanced-middle-age peers
blurted out “Yo, Bob!” as he struggled to make his point heard in their noisy,
heated debate about the impact of the Iraq war on the stock market. Equally
unexpected was the use of 
chill up in the staid halls of the U.S. Senate—“Chill,
Orrin,” Senator Patrick Leahy told Senator Orrin Hatch at a Senate Judiciary
committee hearing during an exchange between Hatch and then Attorney
General Janet Reno. Imagine my surprise, while sitting in my doctor’s office
flipping through magazines, upon seeing an old Black saying used by the
medical editor of 
Arthritis Today to encourage arthritis sufferers: Keep on
keeping on (November/December, 2004). Well, why not? These unexpected
116 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 133 ---
and unlikely uses of Africanized English expressions and idioms have gotta be
a sign that a linguistic sea change is taking place. 
Chuck D, Hip Hop intellectual guru, co-founder of the Hip Hop group Public
Enemy and the “Commissioner of Rap,” as Time magazine called him in its
special 1999 issue on Hip Hop, sums up the impact of Hip Hop Culture here
in the U.S., as well as its impact world-wide:
Rap music/hip-hop is . . . the child of soul, R. and B. and rock ’n’ roll, the
by-product of the strategic marketing of Big Business . . . This grass-roots
transformation of culture has spread over the planet like a worldwide
religion for those 25 and under . . . It’s something to see videos connect
White kids in Utah to Black kids in South Chicago to Croats and Brazilians. 
On the linguistic aspect of international Hip Hop, Chuck D, who has traveled to
forty countries, addresses what linguists call “Global English”:
This is the sound and style of our young world, the vernacular used in
today’s speak from scholastics to sports . . . [Because of Hip Hop], young
people around the world are training themselves to speak English quicker
than their schools could, albeit a tad different from the King’s version.
Mos def not the King’s or Queen’s version of English, but a fascinating
mixture of African American Language and the international Hip Hop head’s
own native tongue. On German Hip Hop websites, “Was geht” merges the collo-
quial German greeting, “Wie gehts?” (“How’s it going?”) with the AAL greeting,
“What’s up?” (pronounced “Was up?”). “Yo, mein rap is phat wie deine mama”
(“Yo, my rap is phat like yo mama”) incorporates the Hip Hop word “phat”
(excellent, superb) and puts you right into The Dozens, that ritualized, verbal
play about somebody’s momma in AAL.
“Exams? Take a chill pill, brother.” A South African newspaper headline for
a column providing advice to South African university students about their
upcoming national examinations (
City Press, November 5, 2002). 
There are Hip Hop heads incorporating Black linguistic terms and expressions
in France, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland and throughout Europe, in Africa,
the Middle East, Japan, the world. “All around the world, same song.” 
Identifying with America’s outcasts, many cultural borrowers refer to
themselves and their homiez as “niggas.” In a New York Timesarticle in 2003,
Murad Kalam, an African American Muslim visiting in Cairo, Egypt, describes
a conversation he had with an Egyptian youth:
One night during Ramadan, a skinny hustler in knockoff American clothes
joined us for dinner. He was one of those twenty-something lotharios who
haunt downtown Cairo, seducing tourists. After dinner we sat alone in front
of the shop. “Do you know the story of Tupac Shakur?” he asked me. 
All around the world, same song 117


--- PAGE 134 ---
I nodded and smiled . . . ”They killed him in the ghetto,” he continued. “I
love all the Rap, all the niggers.” My face went hot. I told him he shouldn’t
use that word . . . ”Please, don’t be upset,” the young man said, offering
me his hand. “I’m a nigger. I’m a hustler, like Tupac.”
Speaking from the homefront, linguistic crossover should not be taken to
mean that Bloods is cool wit all this language borrowing, especially in the U.S.
context. As Dyson put it in a 2001 article in 
Savoy dealing with the distinctive
head nod greeting style of Brothas:
Of course, we have to be careful, even guarded, about the head nod, lest
it go the way of all black affectations that shine in the glare of public
attention and is co-opted by the Backstreet Boys, or worse yet, Britney
Spears. (It wouldn’t be so bad if Eminem sampled our nods, sans his tired
homophobic routines. But Dr. Dre must promise to cram his videos with
all manner of black nodding heads, dreaded and blunted heads, corn-
rowed and bald heads, too, and give a portion of his royalties to start the
BHN Foundation, to preserve the art of black head-nodding.) 
(Dyson, 2001b)
One young college student wrote:
We can clearly see that Ebonics has entered a phase of commercialization,
resulting in some deeper ramiﬁcations. As it is being appropriated to suit
the culture that constructs the mainstream . . . the experiences of African
Americans . . . are being denied . . . It is possible to identify the hegemonic
culture’s commodiﬁcation, modiﬁcation, and stereotyping of Ebonics. As
this occurs in the absence of recognition, the African American culture is
essentially being further dispossessed.
In a survey of young African Americans’ opinions on “wiggers/wiggas,” twenty-
two-year old Jamal, struggling to make it off his low-paying job at Mickey D’s,
said: “White folk kill me tryin to talk and be like us. They just want the good
part. But it don’t go like that. You got to take the bitter with the sweet.” 
Yeah, Bro. Langston, our Blues is long gone. Author Ralph Wiley (
Why Black
People Tend to Shout , 1992) put an exclamation point on Black folks’ per-
spective on the whole cultural borrowing/crossover process when he said:
“Black people have no culture because most of it is out on loan to White people.
With no interest.” 
Some White writers and scholars also view crossover with a jaundiced eye. 
As long ago as 1972, David Claerbaut became interested in AAL as a result 
of his experience as a White teacher in a “virtually all-Black urban school.” 
He attacked this absorption of 
Black Jargon in White America (title of his 
book):
118 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 135 ---
A vast number of once uniquely black terms have in recent years been
pirated by white society, especially by the white youth culture. Although
imitation is often considered the highest form of compliment, and although
a certain amount of cultural interchange is natural, such indiscriminate
theft is deeply resented by many blacks. I am uncomfortable when I hear
young whites glibly using originally black terms . . . as though they have
been imported directly from white northern Europe along with the rest of
the culture. This thievery is evident even in the media . . . It requires little
insight . . . to understand that such practices hardly bring about [the]
idealistic objective [of identifying with black people]. Stealing a man’s
culture is hardly a way of befriending him.
(Claerbut, 1972, pp. 42–43)
Two decades later, in the dizzying midst of Hip Hop Culture’s ever-widening
impact on mainstream White America, journalist James Ledbetter wrote in 
Vibe
in 1992:
Call ’em wanna-bes, call ’em rip-offs, call ’em suckers, but they’re every-
where—white folks who think they’re black . . . Whites have been riffing
off—or ripping off—black cultural forms for more than a century and making
a lot more money from them . . . [Whites] cavalierly adopt . . . the black
mantle without having to experience life-long racism, restricted economic
opportunity, or any of the thousand insults that characterize black
American life.
But the genie is out of the bottle and there’s no way to put it back. Fueled
by Hip Hop, the dispersion of African American Language and Culture shows
no signs of slowing its pace. If anything, the power of the media and the Internet
are accelerating the movement of the Language and Culture out of African
America’s hoods and ghettoes into White Bread lands of the U.S. and
communities all across the globe. On the one hand, this dispersal can be 
seen as a good: it sustains and preserves the generational continuity of Black
Culture while simultaneously it enriches the language and culture of the 
U.S. and world communities. On the other hand, there is a negative character
to this kind of generational continuity as the material and social conditions of
life in African America today call into question the value of crossover to African
Americans. 
A Brotha seeking advice from “The Ethicist,” in the 
New York Times Magazine
(May 30, 2004), writes about his job-hunting experience:
I am an African American male looking for Web programming work. 
When I used my ethnically identifying ﬁrst name on my resume, I got few
calls for job interviews. Now I use my middle name instead, and I’ve been
getting more interviews. My resume is accurate about my education and
All around the world, same song 119


--- PAGE 136 ---
experience. Is it wrong to change my ﬁrst name to conceal my ethnicity?
Malik Raymond Ingleton, Brooklyn.
“The Ethicist” (Randy Cohen), while acknowledging that “the disheartening thing
is that such a tactic may be called for,” nonetheless says that “this name
change is a reasonable response to racial bias.” Clearly there are serious social
contradictions that we have to consider up in this mix even as we might be 
high fivin the global bling-bling of Hip Hop and African American Language 
and Culture. White Hip Hop journalist Upski, writing from the “front lines of the
White Struggle,” was right on point when he wrote in 
The Sourcein 1993: “Even
lifetime rap fans . . . usually discount a crucial reason rap was invented: white
America’s economic and psychological terrorism against Black people—reduced
in the white mind to ‘prejudice’ and ‘stereotypes,’ concepts more within its
cultural experience.”
There is a multi-billion-dollar industry based around the crossover of Black
Language and Culture while at the same time, there is continued under-
development and deterioration among the people whose genius produces the
innovative, dynamic cultural phenomenon of African American Language and
Culture, fueled in the twenty-ﬁrst century by Hip Hop. Despite a trickle of African
Americans into the upper echelons of bling-bling, despite a larger middle class
than at any point in Black American history, despite increased Black educa-
tional levels in this “post-Black” era, the bottom line fact is that the masses of
Black people ain gittin paid. They remain socially, educationally, and econom-
ically marginalized outsiders while their language and culture is absorbed into
the corporate mainstream and used for marketing everything from fast food
and soft drinks to cereals and shampoo for White folks’ hair. 
At the end of the day, we must ask the question: What crossover?
120 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 137 ---
Chapter 7
“Negro Dialect, the Last Barrier
to Integration”? 
In 1963, at the height of the Civil Rights Movement, Gordon C. Green, who had
served on the faculty of historically Black Dillard University, published “Negro
Dialect, the Last Barrier to Integration,” in The Journal of Negro Education .
Characterizing the changing racial climate of the time, he presented an opti-
mistic projection of a future America in which overt racism and apartheid racist
practices would be a thing of the past. 
The obvious barriers such as separate lunch counters and separate
schools are disappearing. The segregation of people according to skin
coloring is no longer valid according to Federal law. In theory as well as in
practice, the position of the segregationist is untenable; the artiﬁcial social
inclosures which he has traditionally maintained are collapsing everywhere
. . . The handicap of inferior education . . . will begin to disappear notice-
ably even in the present generation.
(1963, p. 81)
According to Green, once such obstacles are overcome—and overcome they
will be, he conﬁdently asserts—there will remain only “one prejudice,” only one
ﬁnal obstacle that the “colored man” will have to surmount. 
After these obstacles have been overcome, the one prejudice of the
educated white man toward the educated colored man which may remain
in this country—certainly outside the backwashes of a few rural Southern
areas and outside the minds of the fanatic minority of Southern tradi-
tionalists—will be based on the American Negro’s dialect . . .
(p. 81)
Green ﬁnds it imperative that the Negro address this “corrupt and illiterate
speech” that has persisted for generations “in the South and in the large
industrial cities of the North, such as Harlem in New York and the South Side
in Chicago” (p. 81). And he chides the Negro for lack of attention to this “social
barrier”:


--- PAGE 138 ---
Much has been written lately about the segregation of the Negro and the
white children in the schools . . . Something has been written about the
segregation of the Negro and white populations in the lunchrooms and
theatres . . . Nothing has been recorded concerning what will be the ﬁnal
barrier to integration . . . long after the separate drinking fountain signs
are taken down—the Negro dialect . . . Besides seeing to it that his civil
rights are respected, that his vote is not wasted, and that he has an equal
opportunity in obtaining the best possible education [the colored man]
should take special pains to see that he and his children destroy this last
chain that binds him to the past, the Negro dialect.
(pp. 82, 83)
The racial labels “Negro” and “colored” clearly locate Green’s article in the
sociohistorical context of yesteryear. Even more profoundly dated is the article’s
assumption that U.S. style apartheid would pass away in just a brief historical
moment. To be sure, legalized segregation has been dismantled, but the racial
separation between Whites and African Americans, in the year 2006 of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, is just as pronounced as it was in 1963. Neighborhoods,
schools, churches, theaters, and various entertainment venues, parties and
other social events—today all are clearly demarcated by race (albeit today’s
racial separation is not the result of laws). Yet what Green deemed the “last
barrier to integration” has crossed over not only into White mainstream
America, but has also gone global as cultural groups as far away as Europe
and the Middle East imitate African American speech. And in some parts of the
world, the obsession with Blackness extends to endeavors to even 
look Black:
“fashion-conscious Japanese teenagers . . . want to look cool, black and
American, much like their hip-hop idols. Known as the ganguro, these teenagers
dress in funky clothes, dye and weave their hair into cornrows and darken their
skin at tanning salons or with makeup” (Genocchio, 2004). Indeed, the irony
of Green’s four-decades-old argument is that in the U.S., the “Negro Dialect”
has been integrated, but the “Negro people” have not.
1
Despite this crossover of African American Language and Culture, the notion
that America has now become a color-blind society is a bogus argument. In the
Foreword to 
White Men Challenging Racism: 35 Personal Stories , James W.
Loewen states:
We are entering a “postracist” era. . . . Few white Americans now
announce, as did so many before World War II, “I am a white supremacist.”
Few admit to choosing where they live or where their children go to school
on the basis of race. Yet we know that overwhelmingly white neigh-
borhoods, even whole towns, not only still exist but are even regarded 
as prestigious places to raise a family. We know that history as taught 
in grades 1–12 is largely a justiﬁcation of our national past, which thus
subtly reinforces white supremacy. And we know that without effort by
122 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 139 ---
white men, race will remain a problem even as our country grows more
racially diverse.
(Thompson et al., 2003, p. xxvii)
In many ways and on many levels, race—and racism—are even more signiﬁcant
today than was the case back in 1963 when Green’s article appeared. In her
analysis of “whiteness and the literary imagination,” the brilliant, Nobel prize-
winning novelist, Toni Morrison, put it this way:
Race has become metaphorical—a way of referring to and disguising forces,
events, classes, and expressions of social decay and economic division 
far more threatening to the body politic than biological “race” ever was.
Expensively kept, economically unsound, a spurious and useless political
asset in election campaigns, racism is as healthy today as it was during
the Enlightenment. It seems that it has a utility far beyond economy,
beyond the sequestering of classes from one another, and has assumed
a metaphorical life so completely embedded in daily discourse that it is
perhaps more necessary and more on display than ever before.
(Morrison, 1993, p. 63)
The more things change, the more they remain 
the same
While there now exists a large and thriving African American middle class, only
a small percentage own their own businesses, and there remains a major gap
between Black and White wealth, that is, ownership of assets. The material
conditions of the Black working and 
unworking classes, primed for progress in
the aftermath of the Civil Rights era, are deteriorating today. In fact, some
activists argue that the Black working class and economically marginalized
Black groups are worse off in the twenty-first century than their 1960s era
counterparts were. Everyday racialized assaults, such as getting unwarranted
trafﬁc tickets for “driving while Black,” and “linguistic proﬁling” (Baugh, 2003)
continue to characterize life in African America for both the economically
privileged and those living below the poverty line. Political scientist Ronald
Walters’s compelling argument is that we are witnessing the emergence of a
“new White Nationalist movement” which is in control of and shaping public
policy.
We appear to be living in an era when a dominant sector of the 
White majority . . . is proceeding to concentrate economic and social 
power . . . using its control over the political institutions of the state to
punish presumptive enemies. The targets of this punishment have been
Black, Hispanic and other non-White communities . . . Perceiving itself
under threat, this sector mobilized, pursuing a politics that dictates
The last barrier to integration? 123


--- PAGE 140 ---
institutionalized resources should be withdrawn from the target group and
rules eliminated which are in any way conceived to disadvantage Whites
. . . Given a condition where one race is dominant in all political institutions,
most policy actions appear to take on an objective quality, where policy
makers argue that they are acting on the basis of “national interests” rather
than racial ones . . . If Blacks are empowered, then White interests suffer.
This interpretation is reflected in the new definition of “racial discrim-
ination,” whereby courts have reversed policies designed to provide
fairness to Blacks because they are seen as unfair to Whites. Indeed, this
view has been constitutionalized, resulting in the decimation of large areas
of civil rights and the devaluation of Black social mobility. Moreover, this
logic promotes government actions which have had the consequence of
punishing Blacks by withdrawing resources and subordinating them by
such practices as racial profiling and high rates of incarceration and
execution.
(2003, pp. 1–3)
The adverse impact of current social and public policies on the Black
community is strikingly evident in national statistics on the state of the race.
According to the National Urban League’s most recent annual reports, 
The State
of Black America (issued 2004b and 2005a):
• The Black unemployment rate is more than twice the rate for whites. [But
even for Bloods who have jobs, there are still significant disparities.
According to 
Raise the Floor: Wages and Policies that Work For All of 
Us, the median 2001 income for a full-time African American male worker
was $31,921, compared to $40,790 for White full-time male workers. In
fact, that Black male worker’s 2001 income of $31,921 was 
less than
what the typical White male worker made way back in 1967 (Sklar et. al.,
2002).]
• Less than 50 percent of Black families own their homes, compared to 70
percent of Whites.
• The average jail sentence for Blacks is six months longer than that of
Whites for the same crime.
• There are nearly three times as many White-owned businesses as Black-
owned.
• Three times as many Blacks as Whites live below the poverty line. [And if
we were to focus on Black children (i.e., as opposed to all Blacks) living in
poverty, the Black–White poverty gap might be even greater. While the U.S.
Census Bureau (2003) indicates that in 2002, 30 percent of Black children
lived in poverty, compared to l0% of White children, Gates (2004) asserts
that “since the 1968 assassination of Martin Luther King Jr . . . the per-
centage of Black children living in poverty has hovered between 
30 and
40 percent” [italics mine].]
124 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 141 ---
Equally disturbing social statistics come from a study of home mortgage
lending practices:
• Blacks are twice as likely as Whites to be rejected when they apply for a
home mortgage loan. (Study conducted by the Association of Community
Organizations for Reform now (ACORN), reported in Burnett (2003).)
• Upper-income Blacks were rejected more frequently than moderate-income
Whites whose incomes were only about half as large (ACORN study,
reported in Burnett, 2003). 
• But even when you get a mortgage, if you’re Black, your brokerage fees
are likely to exceed those paid by Whites. According to a study of some
2,700 mortgage ﬁles, conducted by Susan Woodward, former chief econ-
omist for the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, all other factors being equal, Blacks
pay an average of $500 more in broker’s fees than Whites (reported in
Harney, 2003).
Prison statistics provide a snapshot of another domain of racial inequality
today. This snapshot of what 
Black Commentator (2004) labels the “mass
incarceration” of the Black community reveals an outrageous, intolerable social
condition. The statistical portrait is that of our brothers, nephews, sons—Black
males. 
• Nationwide, Black men of all ages are incarcerated at more than seven
times the rate of White males (U.S. Justice Department, 2002).
• Nationally, African Americans are 12 percent of the U.S. population but 47
percent of the U.S. prison population (Boulard, 2005).
• In every state in the U.S., the proportion of Blacks in the prison population
exceeds the proportion of Blacks among state residents (
Human Rights
Watch Backgrounder, 2003).
• In twenty states, the percentage of incarcerated Blacks is ﬁve times greater
than their percentage of the state population ( Human Rights Watch
Backgrounder, 2003).
• In Texas, President George Bush’s state, Blacks are 11 percent of the
population and 44 percent of the prison population (Boulard, 2005).
Unless you are prepared to argue that Blacks are genetically inclined to
criminal offenses, you have to call these rates of imprisonment into question.
The ﬁrst thing that is notable is that Blacks are generally not in prison for violent
crimes but for drug offenses, primarily being users of drugs. The proportion of
all drug users who are Black is 13–15 percent, but Blacks constitute 36 percent 
of the arrests for drug possession. In at least ﬁfteen states, Black men were
sent to prison on drug charges at rates ranging from twenty to ﬁfty-seven times
those of White men (
Human Rights Watch Backgrounder, 2003). According to
The last barrier to integration? 125


--- PAGE 142 ---
the Justice Policy Institute (2002), noted in Human Rights Watch Backgrounder
(2003), the punishment for distributing crack cocaine (primarily a “Black
thang”) is a hundred times greater than the punishment for powder cocaine
(primarily a “White thang”). According to 
Human Rights Watch Backgrounder
(2003):
The high and disproportionate rate of minority incarceration, particularly
in the context of the war on drugs, is a grave challenge to the country. 
It exposes and deepens the racial fault lines that weaken the country;
contradicts principles of justice and equal protection of the laws; and
undermines faith among all races in the fairness and efficacy of the
criminal justice system. 
Or as 
Black Commentator put it succinctly: “The evidence is irrefutable: mass
incarceration of African Americans is national policy” (2004).
Black education since Brown
Some historians and social theorists mark the beginning of the Civil Rights
Movement with the 
Brown v. Board of Education unanimous decision, issued
by the United States Supreme Court, May 17, 1954. That case combined
lawsuits that the NAACP had filed in four states—Kansas, South Carolina,
Virginia, and Delaware—challenging legalized educational apartheid. The case
was named after Oliver Brown, whose daughter, Linda, had been refused
admission to the White elementary school near her home in Topeka, Kansas.
The landmark 
Brown decision made the segregation of Black and White
children in public schools unconstitutional and therefore illegal. Declaring that
separate educational facilities were inherently unequal, Chief Justice Earl
Warren, delivering the opinion of the Court, wrote: 
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local
governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expen-
ditures for education both demonstrate our recognition of the importance
of education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance
of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed 
forces. It is the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal
instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for
later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his
environment. In these days it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be
expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education.
Such an opportunity, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a
right which must be made available to all on equal terms.
What does the statistical picture look like for Black youth in the educational
system in this post-
Brown era?
126 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 143 ---
• According to a 2004 report of dropout and graduation rates, issued by
Harvard University’s Civil Rights Project and the Urban Institute, in 2001,
75 percent of White students graduated from high school, but only 50
percent of Black students graduated from high school (reported in 
Black
Issues in Higher Education, 2004). 
• According to the same Civil Rights Project study, drop-out rates are highest
in segregated high-poverty high schools.
• In some cities, more than 70 percent of African American boys do not
graduate from high school (Smith, 2003). 
• School districts with the highest proportion of minority students receive
substantially fewer state and local education dollars than districts with the
lowest percentage of minority students (The Education Trust, Inc., 2002).
• According to the President’s Commission on Excellence in Special
Education, thousands of children each year are mislabeled as mentally
retarded (reported in Smith, 2003).
• According to the National Research Council, this mislabeling most affects
African American children, who are twice as likely as White children to be
identiﬁed as mentally retarded (reported in Smith, 2003).
• Twice as many Black boys are in special education as Black girls. According
to Smith (2004), this “rules out heredity and home environment as primary
causes and highlights school factors.”
These are all our children and we will benefit by or pay for what they
become.
(James Baldwin)
Despite the historic nature of Brown, and despite the fact that a number of
school districts did, indeed, desegregate, half a century after Brown, the loom-
ing issue remains: What has been (continues to be?) the impact of race and place
on educational equity? Gordon (2004) effectively answered the question thus:
The state of education in Black America is considerably better than it was
. . . 50 years ago. However, evidence suggests that our progress has been
uneven . . . We face complex and serious problems related to the signif-
icant gap between the academic achievement levels of peoples of color
and the achievement levels of Asian American and European American
peoples . . . Even more problematic may be the changing and rising
demands for intellectual competence at the same time that Black people
are trying to close the academic achievement gap. Such a moving target
may . . . exacerbate the challenge.
(p. 110)
In the Harvard University Civil Rights Project study of race and public
education, one of the fundamental findings is that more White kids go to
The last barrier to integration? 127


--- PAGE 144 ---
overwhelmingly White schools and more minority kids go to predominantly non-
White schools than a decade ago (Orﬁeld, 2001). Since the 1980s, which most
historians label as the peak years of school integration, the resegregation 
of schools has been on the rise, with no end in sight. This time around, the
schools are segregated not by law, but by virtue of housing patterns, due in
large part, to “White ﬂight,” that is, Whites abandoning core city areas, or cities
altogether, and establishing all-White suburbs, towns, villages. Today, more
than 70 percent of Black students attend predominantly Black or minority
schools (Orﬁeld, 2001). 
Segregated schools are typically isolated by both race and poverty. Half a
century after the 
Brown decision that called for the desegregation of America’s
public schools, schools and school districts across the nation are generally
segregated—and once again unequal. The inequality is manifested in several
critical areas, one of which is Black students’ performance in high-stakes
testing, such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT). According to a study in the
Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 
Only 800 to 838, or about 1 percent, of the 122,684 Black students who
took the 2002 SATs scored above 700 on either the mathematics or verbal
sections of the test—the test-score threshold for the nation’s top-ranked
colleges and universities. [Black students’ performance on the American
College Testing [ACT] . . . was comparable.]
(cited in Ross, 2004, p. 1)
Further, the racial inequality is manifested in teacher quality, school facilities
and curricula. Ross asserts:
The contributing causes of the test-score gap between blacks and whites
show the enormous educational disadvantage most black students . . .
endure . . . an extraordinary gap in wealth and income . . . the over-
whelming majority of black SAT test-takers have attended predominantly
black secondary schools characterized by inferior physical facilities,
dumbed-down curricula, outdated textbooks, high teacher turnover, and a
signiﬁcant number of less-experienced and less-qualiﬁed teachers.
(2004, p. 2)
According Orfield and Frankenberg (2004): “Black students are the most 
likely racial group to attend what researchers call ‘apartheid schools,’ schools
that are virtually all non-white and where poverty, limited resources, social 
strife, and health problems abound.” In the irony of ironies, most of the schools
likely to be sanctioned by President George Bush’s No Child Left Behind policy
are those which are high both in poverty and segregation. As Orﬁeld says, “It’s
not coincidental that we are beating up on the same places that we have
resegregated” (2004, p. 2).
128 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 145 ---
Linguistic push-pull revisited
On the one hand, Blacks have believed that the price of the ticket for Black
education and survival and success in White America is eradication of Black
Talk. On the other hand, Blacks also recognize that language is bound up with
Black identity and culture. As psychiatrist Frantz Fanon (1967) put it nearly four
decades ago, “to speak . . . means to assume a culture . . . every dialect is a
way of thinking.”
In the Black community world of everyday talk, language ambivalence reveals
itself in peculiar ways—a Black Thang, no doubt. In talks and seminars about
our language that I would give back in The Day, whenever I got to the topic of
linguistic push-pull, I would pull out my favorite illustration of this cultural
phenomenon: writer Claude Brown. In his popular essay, “Language of Soul,”
first published by 
Esquire Magazine in 1968 and later reprinted in several
collections, he wrote at length about the vocal beauty and tonal lyricism of AAL:
The language of soul—or, as it might also be called, “Spoken Soul” or
“Colored English”—is simply an honest vocal portrayal of Black America
. . . “Spoken Soul” . . . generally possesses a pronounced lyrical quality
which is frequently incompatible to any music other than that ceaseless
and relentlessly driving rhythm that flows from poignantly spent lives.
Spoken Soul has a way of coming out metered without the intention of the
speaker to invoke it . . . To the soulless ear the vast majority of these
sounds are dismissed as incorrect usage of the English language and, not
infrequently, as speech impediments. To those so blessed as to have had
bestowed upon them at birth the lifetime gift of soul, these are the most
communicative and meaningful sounds ever to fall upon human ears: the
familiar “mah” instead of “my” . . . “yo” for “your” . . . No matter how many
“man’s” you put into your talk, it isn’t soulful unless the word has the proper
plaintive, nasal “maee-yun.”
(Brown, 1968, pp. 88, 160)
The last barrier to integration? 129
Figure 7.1 “Candorville” cartoon, by Darrin Bell, June 29, 2004.


--- PAGE 146 ---
However, in his autobiographical novel Manchild in the Promised Land(1965),
Brown recalls that he was ashamed of his parents when they went to juvenile
court, talking to the White judge in “Spoken Soul.”
Contemporary examples are provided by the uproar from some members 
of the Black middle and leadership class. Maya Angelou and Reverend Jesse
Jackson (he later changed his position) came out against Oakland’s Resolution
which called for accepting Ebonics as the students’ primary language and man-
dating the use of Ebonics not only for “maintaining the legitimacy and richness”
of the students’ primary language, but also to “facilitate [the students’]
acquisition and mastery of English language skills” (from the reprint in Perry
and Delpit (1998, p. 145). Yet both Angelou and Jackson are masters of the
Black Word. Angelou’s creative work, her poetry especially, demonstrates
brilliantly crafted uses of Ebonics. Check out her set of poems, “The Thirteens”
in which she uses the Verbal Tradition of playin The Dozens to dis Blacks and
Whites alike. Jackson’s speeches reﬂect his rhetorical gift for moving the people
using the language of the Black community.
Bill Cosby, as discussed at the beginning of this book, presented a resound-
ingly negative critique of the Black Language of today’s “lower economic” folks
in his 2004 speech commemorating the 50th anniversary of the 
Brown decision
and in subsequent media commentary about the problems of African America’s
working and unworking classes. Yet in that same speech, he acknowledges the
importance of speaking both AAL and LWC: “You used to talk a certain way 
on the corner and you got into the house and switched to English.” Moreover,
not only did Cosby once upon a time put the rhythms of Black speech into the
mouths of the cartoon characters he created, he also used the language
himself—perhaps on more than one occasion. According to Dyson, Cosby gave
a talk to the ﬁrst gathering of the Congressional Black Caucus in 1971, which
“suggests he possessed precisely the sort of humor and wordplay against 
which he has recently raged” (Dyson, 2005, p. 239). In that speech, which was
recorded by Motown’s Black Forum label, Cosby made remarks such as:
“I think that all you niggas need to . . . check yourselves out . . . So I say
good evening, niggas, because . . . that’s what a lot of you gon’ be when
you leave the room . . . And I mean the white people sittin’ there, too . . .
Niggas come in all colors . . .”
(quoted in Dyson, 2005, p. 240)
Dyson’s analysis of Cosby’s speech is incisive:
Cosby was not only ﬂaunting convention and bringing into his august crowd
the word “nigga”—and it was that blackened version he smoothly, effort-
lessly deployed, not its derisive mainstream white pronunciation—but he
was ﬂowing in the vernacular, ebonicizing his pronunciation, inﬂection and
intonation throughout . . . It is more than ironic that Cosby begrudges the
130 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 147 ---
same freedoms to the young folk of today . . . the persistent freedom of
black folk, especially artists and leaders, to open their mouths and speak
with all the spirit and spunk their people love them into, is what he could
take for granted. Perhaps he should think about extending that same
freedom to those he castigates for cursing and saying “nigga,” both of
which he did that night.
(Dyson, 2005, pp. 240, 242)
Linguistic push-pull persists in African America despite the absorption of
Black speech into White mainstream talk, a phenomenon so pervasive and
widespread today that Hip Hop artist Jay-Z can declare that we didn’t cross over
to the mainstream, the mainstream crossed over to us. Perhaps the swiftness
of this linguistic-cultural change caught some Black folk off guard, particularly
the middle age, middle class. In linguist Arthur Spears’s words:
Such Blacks are victims of not realizing how fast cultural change has
occurred in Black America since the 1960s . . . Under segregation, upper-
status Blacks did have a clearer picture of the range of behaviors
throughout the social continuum. Those who have reached the age and
position to see their writing published in major outlets of hegemonic
discourse such as the largest circulation newsweeklies and 
The New York
Times are too old and too removed by class and cultural change to retain
any authority they may once have had.
(1998, p. 244)
Perhaps the lingering ambivalence about our language is due to the
persistent educational, economic, and social inequality in Black America, as
revealed in the foregoing bleak statistics. Perhaps it is the seeming intractability
of racism (see, for instance, Joe R. Feagin’s 
The Continuing Significance of
Racism: U.S. Colleges and Universities , 2002 and his Racist America: Roots,
Current Realities, & Future Reparations, 2001). Perhaps it is the outing of Black
Language that some Black folk dislike, that is, calling attention to it, as was
done in the Ebonics controversy and almost two decades earlier in the 
King
Black English Federal court case, in which I worked for two years as chief expert
witness and advocate for the children and their mothers.
2 In their description
of Howard University’s 1997 commencement, where the speaker has just
lambasted Ebonics, to the applause of many members of the audience,
Rickford and Rickford comment on the audience’s—and the speaker’s—
reception of the Howard University Choir and Orchestra who presented a well-
known spiritual:
Their voices were buoyant, and Simpson [the commencement speaker]
and the crowd nodded and swayed approvingly: Lord, I done done / Lord,
I done done, Lord, I done done / I done done whatcha tole me ta do . . .
The last barrier to integration? 131


--- PAGE 148 ---
No one appeared to realize how odd the disdain for Ebonics . . . seemed
when paired with the obvious delight in such utterly idiomatic lyrics. This
spiritual draws much of its poignancy and soul from the vernacular itself
. . . But getting folks 
consciously to celebrate their ancestors’ innovations
on English—the living evidence of an African encounter with a socially and
linguistically hostile New World—can be as exacerbating as getting them
to confront the legacy of slavery itself. There will probably always be an
astonishingly large number of blacks in this country who applaud the black
vernacular only when they don’t realize it is the black vernacular they’re
applauding.
(Rickford and Rickford, 2000, p. 75)
Or, alas, perhaps the lingering linguistic push-pull is due to the still remaining
association of Black Language with negative stereotypes and perceptions of
Black people. As Dr. Orlando Taylor put it recently:
Language is a reflection of a people. For example, French culture is
perceived as high quality, its cuisine is considered to be great, its fashions
are considered to be avant-garde, so if a person speaks with a French
accent, it’s perceived to be very positive because the people are perceived
positively. But if a group is considered to be ignorant, primitive, backward,
ill-informed, then their language is given similar attributes. The problem 
is that African American people and Black people around the world are
perceived by dominant societies to be inferior, and so their language 
is perceived in a similar way.
(quoted in Hamilton, 2005, p. 35)
As mentioned in Chapter 1, this kind of negative thinking about Black Language
among some “upper economic” Blacks in the 1970s sounded the death knell
for a number of innovative language and literacy programs of that era. This line
of thought was still evident in October, 1998, twenty-seven years after the
publication of that 1971 stinging 
Crisis editorial blasting “black English.”3
On October 9, 1998, The New York Times printed, free of charge, an anti-
Ebonics ad. The advertisement showed an image of a Black man wearing a hat,
suggestive of the ﬁgure of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. from the back, as if turning
his back on Ebonics. Superimposed across that image were the words, “I has a
dream.” In the lower right corner of the ad were the words: “Speak out against
Ebonics,” and beneath that were the words “The National Head Start Association.”
There was a lengthy caption beneath the image, which had such statements as:
Does this bother you? It should. We’ve spent over 400 years ﬁghting for
the right to have a voice. Is this . . . how we’ll teach our children to use it?
. . . By now you’ve probably heard about Ebonics (aka, black English) . . .
The fact is language is power. And we can’t take that power away from our
132 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 149 ---
children with Ebonics. Would Dr. Martin Luther King, Malcolm X and all the
others who paid the price . . . with their lives embrace this? 
A group of linguists and educators, organized as “Concerned Linguists and
Educators” and headed up by me, joined together to protest the ad. Several of
us attempted to determine the source responsible for the ad. When I called
the National Head Start Organization, the folks in charge denied that the ad
was sponsored by the National Head Start Organization even though its name
appeared there. Ultimately, all we were able to determine is that the ad had
been created by the Ketchum Agency in Pittsburgh for a group identiﬁed only
as “Atlanta’s Black Professionals.” We also learned that this ad had won a
$100,000 award for advertising excellence from the Newspaper Association
of America. Outraged, our group of “Concerned Linguists and Educators” sent
a collective letter, with all of our names and professional afﬁliations, more than
200 strong, to 
The New York Times, protesting this ad and urging The Times
to print the statement on Ebonics by the Linguistics Society of America (LSA).
After all, that’s what a professional journalistic organ would do, provide both
points of view. The LSA resolution, which had been unanimously adopted at
our annual convention in Chicago, supported the Oakland School Board’s
position. 
The New York Times turned us down, with the lame excuse that its
policy did not allow the paper to print an ad for free and that it had made 
an exception in the case of the “I has a dream” ad only because it had won a
prestigious award. Adding insult to injury, the bold words on the image, “I 
has a dream,” do not even conform to the rules for Ebonics! Speakers do not
say “I has.” The rule is to use “have” for all subjects, thus: I have, You have, He
have, She have, It have, We have, They have.
To be sure, then, linguistic myths and misconceptions about AAL yet live. But
an honest summing up of the Language Question in African America since
1963, when “Negro Dialect, the Last Barrier to Integration” was published,
demands that we recognize the progress that has been made. For one thing,
AAL-speaking students are no longer routinely sent to speech therapy classes
as was done to the Black Language-speaking kids in the 
King v. Ann Arborcourt
case. In great measure this has been due to the research of and policies
promoted by scholars in the national organization of Black speech, language,
and hearing professionals. Props to hard-working, righteous speech scholars
Ida Stockman, Fay Vaughn-Cooke and Toya Watt. 
Another sign of progress is that no one with half a brain today declares that
African American Language is the result of genetic inferiority and “intellectual
indolence,” issuing forth from “clumsy tongues,” “ﬂat noses and thick lips” (see,
for instance, Bennett (1909), Gonzales (1922) and Harrison’s 1884 study of
“Negro English”). The voluminous body of research conducted by linguists in
the latter half of the twentieth century made a lie out of these racist pronounce-
ments (e.g., Turner (1949), Bailey (1965), Wolfram (1969), Major (1970), Labov
(1972), Fasold (1972), Dillard (1972), Williams (1975).
The last barrier to integration? 133


--- PAGE 150 ---
Twentieth-century linguists have demonstrated the existence of systematic
patterns and rules in AAL, a fact that, unfortunately, still not enough people
know, including those who call theyself using AAL to disparage the language
and its speakers or to demonstrate that AAL does not have rules. Green (that’s
Lisa J., of the twenty-first century, not Gordon C., of 1963) cites a classic
example of such ignorance about AAL rules:
One well established syntactic feature of AAE [African American English]
is the use of the verbal marker 
be to signal the habitual occurrence of 
an event . . . it ha s... been used as the topic of jokes and derogatory
remarks about AAE and its speakers. Ironically this be is often used
incorrectly by the same people who try to show that what is taken as AAE
is illogical speech . . . misleading characterizations [of 
be] were given in
newspaper and magazine articles written during discussions about the
Oakland Ebonics case in 1997. In an article in 
The New Yorker , Louis
Menand explains that be is used “to indicate a habitual condition, as in
‘Johnny be good,’ meaning, ‘Johnny is a good person’” . . . The deﬁnition
. . . is correct, but the characterization, in particular the explanation of the
example, provides little insight into the meaning indicated by 
be.
(Lisa J. Green, 2002, p. 35)
A related example demonstrating lack of knowledge of AAL rules is incorrect
formulations of the negative in sentences with 
be. In AAL, what is the negative
of “Kamal be workin”?4
Persistent examples in the public media reveal that ignorance about the
systematic nature of AAL is still with us today. However, in the twenty-first
century, in the everyday world of everyday people, many who once thought 
of AAL as simply a bunch of sloppy, careless mistakes, without “rhyme or
reason” (as one person once put it), shift their views when they are exposed 
to the research describing the rule-governed system of AAL. This exposure
occurs today in college courses, in school and community workshops, through
programs on public television, and through informal, everyday conversations
when those who have seen the light pass their knowledge on to others. 
There are other signs of change. Contemporary Black comedians, such as
Adele Givens, Cedric the Entertainer, Steve Harvey, Monique, Dave Chapelle,
Bernie Mac—and all other reigning Kangs and Queens of Comedy—use Black
speech as an integral part of their comic art. And all enjoy a multi-racial fan
base. Check out news stories about Black NBA, NFL and other sports stars in
major metropolitan newspapers. Today these athletes are often quoted exactly,
AAL and all, lending authenticity to their commentaries. But back in The Day,
reporters or editors would translate (de-blacken?) their language before going
to press. There are any number of Blacks today who pride themselves on their
ﬂuency in both AAL and LWC. Marlon Hill, featured in a “Discovery” channel
television documentary in August, 2004, is described as a “word whiz” who
134 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 151 ---
won second place in the 1996 national Scrabble competition and who “reads
dictionaries for fun” (italics in original). Now training for the number one spot
in the national Scrabble competition, Hill is proud of and uses Ebonics as his
preferred spoken language, “but he can wow the proper-English crowd, too”
(
USA Weekend, 2004, p. 22). 
Even perceptions of the word “Black” itself have changed since 1963. There
was a time when—as poet and publisher, Haki Madhubuti, then Don L. Lee,
once wrote—“if somebody hadda called us black, we woulda broke his right eye
out, jumped into his chest, talked bout his momma, lied on his sister and dared
hm to say it again”(1969). But like the old Bluesmen sang, the thangs we useta
do, we doan do no mo. 
Today there is clearly a new linguistic mood afoot, most evident in what
several cultural critics have called the Hip Hop Generation and among Old Skool
intellectuals and activists who never abandoned The Struggle. Yet while White
America and even nations far beyond the U.S. revel in and imitate African
American Language, there are generational and class contradictions preventing
the full realization and celebration of Black speech by Black people themselves.
Many middle-class and/or middle-age Blacks publicly reject AAL even as they
use it in their private and intimate settings. Many younger and/or working 
class Blacks celebrate AAL but dis the Language of Wider Communication (U.S.
“standard English”). Exacerbating these tensions is the tendency to embrace
what Alim (2004b) calls “Hip Hop Nation Language” by this latter group and
the resounding tendency to reject it by the former group. African America is 
ill-served by these either–or positions on language. For that matter, other
racial/ethnic groups in America are ill-served by either–or positions advocating
monolingualism.
So what we gon do? 
It has now been over three decades since that fantastic wordsmith, the 
late Sista Toni Cade Bambara, wrote these words “on the issue of Black
English”:
Most folks ﬁnally agree that yes, Virginia, there is a Black English. But at
that point agreement ends and folks splinter into fifty leven directions,
most shouting that it’s a low life ignorant shameful thing that must be
wiped out. Some arguin in terrible tones of reasonableness that it’s ok for
literature classes, learn a little Dunbar with your Shakespeare, but it holds
us back from respectability and acceptance. . . There’s another crew that
don’t say nuthin at all, just steady workin, investigatin the grammar, roots,
forms, styles of Black English and tryin to design materials in its spirit so
that Bloods can develop multi-media competency and the capacity to make
things happen.
(1974)
The last barrier to integration? 135


--- PAGE 152 ---
I am a part of that latter crew, seeking to continue the quest that Bambara
wrote about so powerfully back in The Day. I seek to help create conditions for
the language and literacy development of Black Americans—and ultimately all
Americans who would participate as enlightened, informed citizens in the global
community.
It is time for new thought on the Language Question, time to move beyond
the simplistic thinking of the twentieth century, time to move the language
conversation to higher ground. 
Broaden the conception of African American Language
The speakers of AAL are not just Black youth, nor Black youth who wear baggy
clothes and listen to Hip Hop Music on head phones, nor even stereotypical
Gangsta Black males chillin with 40s in they hands in front of the many liquor
stores that blight Black communities across the nation. Rather, AAL speakers
are persons of African descent on all levels. They come in all colors and sizes,
they are young, they are old, they are male, they are female, they comprise both
Cosby’s “lower” and “upper economic,” they are preachers and sinners, they
are pimps and Ph.D.s, they are Reverends and Revolutionaries. The speakers
showcased in this book reﬂect this demographic diversity among speakers of
AAL as do those in analyses of Black Language by most Black linguists—for
example in Alim and Baugh’s 
Black Language, Education and Social Change
(forthcoming); the American Book Award-winning Spoken Soul (Rickford and
Rickford, 2000); in African American English: A Linguistic Introduction (Green,
2002); in Baugh’s Out of the Mouths of Slaves: African American Language
and Educational Malpractice (1999); in Morgan’s Language, Discourse and
Power in African American Culture (2002); and in critical articles such as John
and Angela Rickford’s classic 1973 piece on “cut eye and suck teeth,”
Troutman’s “African American Women: Talking That Talk” (2001) Spears’s
“Directness in the Use of African American English” (2001), and Spears’s
classic work on the unique Black meanings of “come”—as in “He come comin’
in here actin’ a damn fool” (1982) and stressed “stay”—as in “She 
stay over to
Alfred house” (2000). Taken as a whole, all of these diverse speakers reﬂect
the totality of Black Language: patterns of grammar, syntax and pronunciation,
voice quality, intonation and other paralinguistic features, the Black Lexicon
(including slang and more general Black Semantics), rhetorical styles and
communication patterns (signiﬁcation/signifyin, tonal semantics, narrativizing,
directness, etc.). 
I’m talking about the numerous African Americans, from all walks of life, 
who are bilingual, conversant in both AAL/U.S. Ebonics and LWC/”standard
English”—professionals and other educated members of the Black community,
race men and women, public intellectuals, community activists, preachers,
elected ofﬁcials, D.J.s, and many, if not most, entertainers. For Black youth,
then, the linguistic role models become African Americans themselves, which
136 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 153 ---
was the case for generations under legalized segregation. This gets us away
from the notion that LWC is “talkin White” or a variety of American English only
used by White folk. At the same time, since these role models also plug into
various patterns of AAL, they also reaffirm the value of Black community
speech.
Study of African American Women’s Language
Linguists have traditionally assumed there was no difference between male
and female language. Except for the pioneering work of Claudia Mitchell-Kernan
(1969, 1972), the voluminous body of work on AAL from the 1960s and 1970s
focused on the speech of young children or adolescent and adult males. The
consequence is that the vibrant, dynamic quality of Sista Talk was neglected
within the AAL research tradition. Morgan (2002) writes with clarity, insight and
power about the uniqueness of what she calls the “Black woman’s laugh”:
This is not a hysterical or deep laugh that ripples through your body. I mean
the laughter that sits ready at the surface to comment on the irony and
hypocrisy witnessed daily in Black life . . . It occurs as a surprise even to
the speaker, as though she didn’t know that opening her mouth would
reveal what lay beneath the layers of her memory and longing . . . [It] often
functions as a critique on situations where injustice and the exercise of
power deﬁne their role in the event at hand . . . This laugh can seem out
of context because it often occurs in reference to bigotry, patriarchy,
paternalism, and other situations that may be responded to with outrage
and indignation. What’s more, it is never accompanied by a direct
explanation. It seems to occur as a reﬂex within discourse that is tragic or
may have dire consequences for the speaker—who never provides an
explanation for why she’s laughing . . . Though it often seems inappropriate
when it appears . . . it is an indictment of the person/statement to which
the laugh refers.
Morgan goes on to witness unforgettable examples from the world of African
American women talkin that talk:
I... heard it in a conversation when two women in Chicago talked about
their trip to New Orleans and marveled at what they referred to as “the
beautiful, wonderful and courteous Black men.” When they returned ﬁve
years later, they found that the Black community was literally gone with no
remaining trace—no monument to those who had lived there—nothing. In
its place was a new gated community and fashionable stores.
ARTHEL: When I went back um this year Judy to the world’s fair, I didn’t see
NONE of those men. (laughter)
The last barrier to integration? 137


--- PAGE 154 ---
JUDY: You mean, so they’re gone from there now?
ARTHEL: They’re GONE, honey.
JUDY: We don’t have ANYthing on the FACE of the earth?
ARTHEL: That’s right.
I’ve also heard it when, without warning in the middle of a conversation,
women use the voice of slave masters as commentary to describe feelings
of loss, betrayal and frustration. Judy and Arthel use it when they talk about
how Black women are expected to be grateful to get a job and not complain
when they are not compensated:
JUDY: You know, well, the—“You know my slave drank the milk. She’s
dead.” (laughter)
JUDY: “No sense in you taking her to the hospital! She’s dead!”
ARTHEL:( laugh) Right . . .
Sometimes [this laugh] locates a fool—but mostly it locates the truth, even
if for one quick second. When you hear the “Black woman’s laugh,” it’s
never about anything funny.
(Morgan, 2002, pp. 84–85,101)
Props to other Sista linguists who are addressing this gap in the Black Language
research tradition: Etter-Lewis (1993), Troutman (2001; forthcoming) and
Lanehart (2002).
Language awareness programs in elementary and 
secondary school
If language attitude change is tantamount to changing a world view, as Gere
and Smith (1979), for instance have argued, then we need to get to work on
these attitudes quick, fast and in a hurry. Everybody goes through school, and
it is in school that negative language attitudes are reinscribed and reafﬁrmed.
Education about language diversity has to start early on—with 
all children. No
one has done more in this area than Wolfram (e.g., 2004), whose work on AAL
dates back to his 
Detroit Negro Speech(1969). In recent years, he has worked
in Baltimore, Maryland and with the Ocracoke and Lumbee communities in
North Carolina, both in the schools and in community institutions, such as
museums, to launch language preservation and language/dialect awareness
campaigns to promote acceptance and celebration of language diversity. His
experimental curriculum (Wolfram 
et al., 2000) provides a multi-media model
for addressing language attitudes and questions about dialects for middle
school students. Although Wolfram thinks this age is still “way too late,” he has
had to git in where he ﬁt in, working with teachers and schools receptive to his
dialect awareness campaign (personal communication, 2003). 
138 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 155 ---
Hip Hop linguistics and pedagogy
This Afro-Diasporic cultural production combines new technologies, Oral
Tradition rhythms and rhyming lyrics with Afrocentric and Ghettocentric themes.
We have not even begun to understand the artistic and linguistic genius of this
polyrhythmic, polysyllabic “third force,” with its interlocking, intricate rhymes
and artists like E40 bustin rhymes and spittin verses faster than you can blink
your eye. Yes, some Hip Hop musical content is problematic, but no more than
the low-down dirty Blues once was. African American popular culture, music
especially, has always been a resistance culture, operating way outside of the
norms and conventions of White mainstream America. 
Historians of Hip Hop (e.g., Rose, 1994; Chang, 2005) assert that the music
represents the voice of and was created for and by urban youth. Many Hip Hop
artists perceive themselves as teachers, incorporating Black historical ﬁgures
and Black Cultural subjects into their work. Morrell and Duncan-Andrade
brought Hip Hop into their secondary school classrooms in the San Francisco
Bay Area and Southern California for eight years. They make a compelling case
for studying “Hip Hop Linguistics”:
Hip Hop texts are literary texts and can be used to scaffold literary terms
and concepts and ultimately foster literary interpretations. Hip Hop texts
are rich in imagery and metaphor and can be used to teach irony, tone,
diction, and point of view. Also, Hip Hop texts can be analyzed for theme,
motif, plot, and character development. It is possible to perform feminist,
Marxist, structuralist, psychoanalytic, or postmodernist critiques of par-
ticular Hip Hop texts, the genre as a whole, or subgenres such as “gangsta”
rap . . . Once learned, these analytic and interpretative tools . . . can be
applied to canonical texts as well. . . Hip Hop texts . . . can be . . . valuable
as springboards for critical discussions about contemporary issues facing
urban youth . . . These discussions may lead to more thoughtful analyses,
which could translate into expository writing, the production of poetic texts,
or a commitment to social action for community empowerment . . . The
knowledge reﬂected in . . . lyrics [by, for example, Refugee camp, Public
Enemy or Nas] could engender discussions of esteem, power, place, and
purpose or encourage students to further their own knowledge of urban
sociology and politics. In this way, Hip Hop music should stand on its 
own merit in the academy and be a worthy subject of study in its own right
rather than necessarily leading to something more “acceptable” like a
Shakespeare text.
(2002, pp. 89–90)
Hip Hop Culture can, should be, and is being studied as a subject in its own
right in the Academy. In my undergraduate courses, I incorporate Hip Hop texts
as a way of addressing issues about Black Language and Culture—past and
The last barrier to integration? 139


--- PAGE 156 ---
present. In this regard, the following works have proved to be extremely useful:
Joan Morgan, When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My Life as a Hip-Hop
Feminist (1999); Todd Boyd, The New H.N.I.C.: The Death of Civil Rights and
the Reign of Hip Hop (2003); Mark Anthony Neal, Songs in the Key of Black
Life: A Rhythm and Blues Nation (2003); Gwendolyn Pough, Check it While I
Wreck It: Black Womanhood, Hip-Hop Culture, and the Public Sphere (2004);
Michael Eric Dyson, Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur(2001a);
Bakari Kitwana, The Hip Hop Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African
American Culture (2002); Larry Platt, Only the Strong Survive: The Odyssey of
Allen Iverson(2002); Greg Tate, Everything But the Burden: What White People
Are Taking from Black Culture(2003); Nelson George, hip hop america(1998).
Pough provides an extensive discussion of the ways in which she uses Hip
Hop pedagogy in her college courses, including in her “Introduction to Women’s
Studies” course. She notes:
Viewing the classroom as a public space in which to grapple with, discuss,
and write about [students’] wide and varied experiences and connections
to rap music and Hip-Hop culture can open the ﬂoor for other possibilities.
The combination of the classroom as public space, Black feminist peda-
gogy, and rap music grants students the opportunity to see and recognize
things they might not in other classroom situations. “You can’t see me” is
a Hip-Hop boast that touts how wonderful and superb the person doing 
the boasting is. Its translation is “I am so fantastic that others do not come
close,” that is, close enough to see. “You betta recognize” is a Hip-Hop
warning that cautions the hearer to have respect for the person giving 
the warning. When combined, the two convey that rap in the classroom is
a rich tool that we would do well to value and make use of.
Discussing rap music and Hip-Hop culture in the class allowed students
to explore sexism in popular culture as well as the race and class issues
that sexism is connected to. Rap provoked a discussion that went beyond
the dismissive “This is sexist, therefore this is bad” response. It com-
plicated the discussion and disrupted dismissive attitudes. And rap, more
than any rock song, MTV alternative video, cartoon, or real-sex talk show,
offered the perfect way into discussions on intriguing intersections of race,
class, and gender that I felt would spark the passionate and lively debates
I desired.
(Pough, 2004, p. 199)
Pough’s students listen to and discuss songs from various women Rappers,
using these works to stimulate discussions about Black women’s constructions
of identity and sexuality. The students grappled with “commonly held ideas
about the proper role for women . . . the madonna/whore dichotomy” and why
the “concept of motherhood and giving birth is separated from the concept 
of sexual freedom and agency for women” (Pough, 2004, p. 202). One of her
140 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 157 ---
Black women students posed the question: “Are these new female rappers
reclaiming their sexuality or taking the feminist movement back 20 years?”
Pough addresses the issue thus:
This [Black female] student’s response offers an example of the Black
feminist outrage against Foxy Brown and Lil’ Kim. She was, however, able
to begin to question whether the two women rappers were doing something
positive in reclaiming their sexuality. The readings and class discussions
provided her with a space to open her mind and bring wreck to initial 
knee-jerk reactions that dismiss without dialogue and critical inquiry. This
student’s writing also offered an example of the way Black women have
been conditioned to think about their sexuality. She noted the historical
past of U.S. racism and sexism as it applies to and still haunts Black
women. And the fact that she’s such a young woman showing this kind of
uneasiness with sexual expression gives credence to the unrelenting hold
of slavery’s past—at no point in United States history have Black women
known a true place of freedom from these issues.
(p. 202)
Pough urges academics to consider Hip Hop music as a vehicle for critical
thinking and social change: 
When we think about the creative force that is Hip-Hop culture and how it
now has a global impact . . . it is not so much of a leap to think about the
implications for imagination, globalization, and change within and utilizing
Hip-Hop culture . . . My arguments [in this book] have largely been about
imagining change, about bringing wreck and disrupting the status quo
. . . If we continually ignore the political potential of rap music and Hip-Hop
culture more generally, not to mention that of our own classrooms and
students, things will not change . . . [the] public spaces discussed here
highlight several that are ripe for critique and transformation of the existing
order.
(pp. 216–21)
National, ofﬁcial policy of bi/multilingualism for the U.S.
We need a national ofﬁcial policy of bi/multilingualism, not just for Blacks, but
for all U.S. citizens. This policy would make mandatory, for all students going
through school in the U.S., the study of “foreign” languages, and their respective
cultures, in K–12 education. African American Language–Culture would be one
of the subjects that students, regardless of race/ethnicity, could select.
Depending on local conditions and interests, various districts might offer
different languages, but the goal is that all students, after graduation from 
high school, would enter the adult world, as bi/multilinguals and with a global
The last barrier to integration? 141


--- PAGE 158 ---
perspective on and acceptance of linguistic-cultural diversity. And yes, Virginia,
English of the LWC variety would continue to be taught. In fact, that has never
been an issue, despite the moaning, groaning, and gnashing of teeth from
language purists and conservatives. Let me say this here, if you don’t never
read or hear it no mo, nowhere else in life: I know of no one, not even the most
radical-minded linguist or educator (not even The Kid herself!) who has ever
argued that American youth, regardless of race/ethnicity, do not need to know
the Language of Wider Communication in the U.S. (aka “Standard English”).
African American students should be taught early on, starting in elementary
or even preschool, Spanish and an African language, or languages, along with
study of LWC. Black students studying an African language is not a new idea.
For example, Kiswahili was widely promoted during the Black Movement of the
1960s and 1970s. 
Beginning in the high school years, Black students should be introduced 
to the study of African American Language—its systematic properties, its 
history, the connection between AAL and African American life and culture. This
is not a novel idea. Carter G. Woodson made this recommendation in his
Miseducation of the Negro (1933): 
In the study of language in school pupils were made to scoff at the Negro
dialect as some peculiar possession of the Negro which they should
despise rather than directed to study the background of this language as
a broken down African tongue—in short to understand their own linguistic
history, which is certainly more important for them than the study of French
Phonetics or Historical Spanish Grammar.
(p. 19)
W.E.B. DuBois (1936) suggests that the language of instruction in the “Negro
university in the United States . . . [should be] that variety of the English idiom
which they understand.” In 1982, linguist and African American Studies scholar
Selase Williams called for “the development of a language policy in the Black
community to protect our own interests.”
The languages that African American and all other students would study
would not be studied simply for their syntax, nor even as “mere” tools of
communication. Rather, the language study would be conducted with a broad
stroke and include the culture, history, values, social and political structures
of the speakers of these languages. Spanish has the advantage of having
readily available speakers that non-Hispanic students could practice with and
learn from.
5
The study of African languages as well as the study of African American
Language would reflect an African Diasporic perspective, and for Black
students, particularly, this language study would open up avenues of self-
exploration and discovery. At the height of the Ebonics controversy, in
December, 1996, I appeared on 
CNN debating a Black woman who was
142 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 159 ---
president of an organization called Americans for Family Values. Although we
were there to talk about language and the Oakland Ebonics Resolution, she
diverted the debate to the topic of Africa, noting that Black folk in America know
nothing about Africa, and that our Black children aren’t African. In his infamous
2004 speech, Bill Cosby also sounded this same note: “We are not Africans.
Those people [the “lower economic”] are not Africans. They don’t know a
damned thing about Africa.” However, as Kirkland, Robinson, Jackson, and I
noted in our response to Cosby in The Black Scholar issue on “Black Education
and the Bill Cosby Debate” (2004, pp. 11–12), this lack of knowledge about
our history, indeed, the very disavowal of that history, is at the root of the
problem of miseducation of Black youth today. They have no sense of their role
and purpose in history, no understanding of where they came from, and
consequently, no vision for where they’re going. Howard Dodson, Chief of New
York’s Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, eloquently makes the
case for a new vision of education for Black youth:
Every expert agrees that a critical factor in the despair that obviously
envelops so many African American youth is a profound lack of self-esteem
and knowledge of self. They don’t value themselves or each other . . .
Some of these self-esteem issues result because these children don’t
possess even a minimal understanding of their history . . . Imagine if our
children understood the monumental sacriﬁces made by generation upon
generation of their ancestors just so they could have 
the opportunity to
learn—that most slaves were prohibited by law from learning how to read
and that those who chose to do so, or who taught fellow slaves, faced
severe punishment, even death. Getting up and going to school to learn
might not seem so unreasonable. Imagine . . . if they knew about the
courageous boys and girls, their age, who walked through cordons of bricks,
bullets, and hateful diatribes just to walk into the school building, much
less sit down and learn to read or write. Then perhaps behaving in the
classroom or doing homework might be cool. But because our children
don’t know these fundamental facts about their heritage, it is easier to
understand why so many of them accept the lure of the street. It is easier
to understand why so many accept the destructive notion that they can’t
learn; why so many equate intellectual achievement with trying to be
“white.” . . . Why don’t they know the truth . . . and understand the great-
ness that lies within themselves? Because the history being taught in most
of our schools some 50 years after 
Brown v. Board of Education still does
not begin to reﬂect the base of knowledge in the ﬁeld of African-Diasporan
and African-American Studies.
(Dodson, 2004)
Since its founding by the late Dr. Clifford Watson in 1991, I have worked with
teachers and students at the Malcolm X Academy, an African-Centered K–8th
The last barrier to integration? 143


--- PAGE 160 ---
grade Detroit Public School. In those early years of Malcolm X Academy’s
history, the curriculum—before unfortunate major budget cuts in the Detroit
School System—included both Kiswahili and Spanish. I bear witness to the
power of Black youth being in subject position, rather than the object of history
and intellectual inquiry.
While there is monolingualism as a policy in the U.S., in other parts of the
world, multilingualism is not only the policy, it is also the practice. For instance,
throughout Africa, most people, regardless of educational level, speak at least
one language other than their “mother tongue,” and it is not at all unusual to
find everyday Africans who speak three or more languages. The European
Union’s commitment, including that of the U.S.’s long-standing ally, the United
Kingdom, is to a multilingual and multicultural Europe. While the twenty-ﬁrst-
century world is moving in a common direction of multilingualism, the U.S.
remains stagnated in a backward monolingualism. Katz captures the insanity
of the U.S. position most aptly:
Graddol (1999) points out that despite the emergence of English as the
leading international language, “the future of global communication 
is unlikely to be based on a single language—English or any other. Rather
the future will be multilingual. People will need to be proficient in more
languages than ever before” . . . In addition, in 50 years, three other lan-
guages will have the same number of speakers as English: Arabic, Spanish,
and Hindu/Urdu (Graddol, p. 26). For these reasons, among others, English
monolingualism is not sufﬁcient for our young people to function success-
fully in tomorrow’s world.
Yet, the No Child Left Behind Act exclusively emphasizes rapid 
language acquisition and academic achievements in English, eliminating
bilingualism as a goal of instructional programs . . . Thus, the monolingual
orientation of No Child Left Behind puts the U.S. in an extremely isolated
position in the world and places youth growing up in the U.S. at a dis-
advantage . . . Native English-speaking students are given little opportunity
to develop proficiency in a second language since typically they do not
begin “foreign language” study until secondary school—much later than
their European peers.
(2004, p. 146)
A ﬁnal word from the Mother
My extended, rural Tennessee, share-cropping family was part of that twentieth-
century great migration of Black people out of the rural South to the “Promised
Lands” of the American North and West. As the daughter of a Baptist preacher
man, I was early on baptized in the linguistic ﬁre of my people, and I went on
to study and write about that ﬁre as a linguist and cultural studies critic in the
144 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 161 ---
Black Arts and Black Studies Movements. Although I became an academic, I
never stopped talkin that talk of the speech community that gave me birth.
That’s one of the things that has enabled me, as anthropologist Faye Harrison
might say, to hear out of more than one ear. There was a time, though, when
school and society made me feel ashamed of the way I and my family and
friends spoke. We talked too “loud,” “dropped” word endings, “broke” verbs,
and sounded “country”—even those of us who had nevah even live in the
“country.” However, because of the Black Liberation Movement, I learned that
language is a people’s identity, culture, and history, that language is power.
The wisdom of the Elders demands that we stay steady on the case. In
research and pedagogy, linguist Beryl Bailey cautioned us against slavish
devotion to one research methodology or language paradigm. Rather, she
called upon us to “modify the orthodox procedures,” and when necessary, “to
adopt some completely unorthodox ones.” Frantz Fanon taught that those of
us blessed with education and social advancement must continue to speak 
in a way that makes it plain that nothin done change. W.E.B. DuBois taught us
that education is not the same as training, that education must be about 
us and the language that we use and understand, and that the goal of
education is not to make a living, but to make a life. As I have learned from the
Elders and the sacrifices of many thousands gone, the role of the linguist—
indeed the role of all scholars and intellectuals—is not just to understand the
world, but to change it.
The last barrier to integration? 145


--- PAGE 162 ---
Notes
Chapter 2
1 For more on Black semantics, check out Clarence Major’s From Juba to Jive (1994);
Geneva Smitherman, Black Talk: Words and Phrases From The Hood to the Amen
Corner (2000b); Joseph E. Holloway and Winifred K. Vass, The African Heritage of
American English (1993). Older collections worth looking at (some of the words and
phrases in these are still in current use): J.L. Dillard, Lexicon of Black English(1977);
David Claerbaut, Black Jargon in White America (1972); Clarence Major, Dictionary
of Afro-American Slang (1970); Zora Neale Hurston, “Story in Harlem Slang” and
“Glossary of Harlem Slang” (1942); Cab Calloway, Hepster’s Dictionary (1938).
Chapter 3
1 See Delphine Abraham’s essay about what she calls “the N-word petition” in Essence,
March, 1998, p. 156. Both she and Kathryn Williams wanted the word redeﬁned or
dropped from the dictionary altogether. Williams indicated that she had learned that
the deﬁnition of “nigger” was “any ignorant person” (quoted in Emerge, September,
1997, p. 24). The NAACP, then under the leadership of Kwesi Mfume, instituted a
national letter-writing campaign to pressure Merriam Webster to revise its deﬁnition
of “nigger.” The latest editions of Webster reﬂect this revision.
2 The dominant, though not exclusive, terms that Africans in America have used for
naming ourselves, from an insider, Black perspective, have been, in approximate
historical order, dating from 1619: African—Colored—negro—Negro—Black—African
American. For a comprehensive discussion of these racial labels, see Sterling
Stuckey’s “Identity and Ideology: The Names Controversy” (1987) and “‘What is Africa
to Me’” in Smitherman 
Talkin That Talk (Routledge, 2000a).
Chapter 4
1 “Honey” is a term used when talking about or referring to a female. “Playa” is a term
that was used in the 1950s and 1960s to refer to a male who possessed clever
verbal skills and who survived by living off the earnings of women or hustling in
various con games. While the term is still used in this sense, today “playa” can also
refer to: 1) a person who is in control of his/her life, things, events, who is “large and


--- PAGE 163 ---
in charge,” or 2) a person who has multiple relationships. Today’s “playa” can be
male or female although the female “playa” is also called “playette.”
2 If you chose (C) for all four scenarios, you got this Black Language Thang down.
3 The interviews of Sista disc jockeys were part of the Smithsonian Black Radio Project,
now housed in the Archives of African American Music and Culture (AAMC) in the
Department of Afro-American Studies, Indiana University at Bloomington. Props and
thanks to the Director and staff at AAMC, especially to former Assistant Director, Dr.
Stephanie Shonekan, for help with my research there.
4 Percelay, Ivey and Dweck (1994, 1995) published two collections of Snaps they
collected from Black folk all across the U.S. See References for full publishing details.
For a history of The Dozens, see Smitherman, “If I’m Lying, I’m Flying” (1995). See
also Dollard (1939), Herskovits (1941), Dalby (1972), Simmons (1963), Elton (1950),
Schechter (1970), and Holloway and Vass (1993).
Chapter 5
1 Owing to the socio-political, educational, and economic decline in Black and other
historically disenfranchised communities during the 1980s, some historians and
political theorists, such as Walters (e.g., 1993), have dubbed the years of the
Reagan–Bush Presidential administration, from 1980 to 1992, the “Second
Reconstruction.” The “ﬁrst” Reconstruction came to an end in the late 1870s, when
the Federal Government abandoned ex-slaves to Southern governments. These
governments swiftly rolled back the ex-slaves’ political gains, ushered in U.S.-style
apartheid and began an era of lynchings and brutal assaults against Blacks which
would not be redressed until the Black Liberation Movement of the 1960s. As a result
of the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements of the 1960s and 1970s, there were
some social, economic, and educational gains by Blacks. However, by 1980, the
mood of America had moved from change and promise to stagnation and dreams
deferred. Thus, just as it happened in the Reconstruction of the nineteenth century,
in the 1980s, the U.S. shifted to a more conservative climate on the social, economic,
and educational fronts. This shift was solidiﬁed with the election of President Ronald
Reagan, followed by the election of Reagan’s Vice President, George Bush (the ﬁrst
Bush), and the political domination of the Reagan–Bush years in the Presidency,
1980–1992—hence the “Second Reconstruction.”
2 “Black Arts” is the label given to the literature, writings and speeches that came 
out of the Black Liberation Struggle of the 1960s and 1970s, particularly those artists
associated with the Black Power Movement of that period. This creative work
reﬂected the rhythms of Black speech and the Black Musical Tradition and repre-
sented a conscious artistic endeavor to link Black Art with the Freedom Struggle that
was taking place among the masses of Black people. 
In his pioneering essay, literary critic Stephen Henderson brilliantly argued that
what makes Black poetic art 
Black is the use of Black speech and Black music as
“poetic reference.” Writing over three decades ago, Henderson presents a descriptive
analysis that could also be applied to today’s Hip Hop musical productions:
By Black speech, I . . . imply a sensitivity to and an understanding of the entire
range of Black spoken language in America. This includes the techniques and
Notes 147


--- PAGE 164 ---
timbres of the sermon and other forms of oratory, the dozens, the rap, the
signifying, and the oral folktale. By Black music I mean essentially the vast ﬂuid
body of Black song—spirituals, shouts, jubilees, gospel songs, ﬁeld cries, blues,
pop songs by Blacks, and, in addition, jazz . . . and non-jazz music by Black
composers who 
consciously or unconsciously draw upon the Black musical
tradition.
(Henderson, 1972, p. 31)
3 Congressman John Conyers, a Democrat from Detroit, Michigan, first introduced
legislation for a national Martin Luther King, Jr. holiday four days after King’s assas-
sination in 1968. It was unsuccessful. Conyers and late Representative Shirley
Chisholm, a Democrat from New York, who had run for President, resubmitted this
legislation at every subsequent session of the U.S. Congress. There were Civil Rights
marches in 1982 and 1983 demanding the King holiday. In 1983, fifteen years 
after Conyers had introduced the King holiday bill, Congress passed the legislation,
and President Ronald Reagan signed it, establishing the third Monday in January 
as Martin Luther King Day. Initially, several states resisted recognition of the King
holiday. In the home of the Old Confederacy, some states include celebrations for
various Confederate generals on MLK Day. 
By the end of 1992, almost every state in the U.S., the District of Columbia, and
the U.S. territories of Guam, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands all recognized the
King holiday. Two states did not: Arizona and New Hampshire. However, at least New
Hampshire had established and for years celebrated a “Civil Rights Day.” In 1999 it
changed the name of that day to “Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.” Thus, the state of
Arizona can be said to be the last and longest hold-out among the states. Over the
years, the Arizona legislature failed in several attempts to pass the King holiday bill.
Arizona voters rejected the issue when it was placed on the ballot in 1990. This action
by Arizona’s citizens was condemned nationally by a number of groups and orga-
nizations, both Black and White, including the National Football League (NFL) and
the National League of Cities. There emerged the threat of a boycott of the state by
tourists. In 1992, voters ﬁnally approved the King holiday. The ﬁrst commemoration
of Martin Luther King, Jr. in the state of Arizona took place on January 18, 1993,
almost ten years after President Reagan had signed the King holiday bill.
4 Tupac’s mother, Afeni Shakur, was a Black Power activist and a member of the Black
Panther Party. His “aunt” was Assata Shakur, who miraculously managed to escape
from unjust imprisonment and found refuge in Cuba. His godfather was Black Panther
member, Elmer Geronimo Pratt, who was finally freed, after decades of wrongful
imprisonment, through the efforts of late Attorney Johnnie Cochran. All three were
down to ride-or-die for the Black Cause.
At the beginning of the summer of 2005, Afeni announced the opening of 
the Tupac Amaru Shakur Center for the Arts. It is a $4 million dollar facility funded
mostly by royalties from Tupac’s artistic work (albums, films, DVDs). It sits on six 
acres in Stone Mountain, Georgia and has an art gallery, rehearsal area, ofﬁces, gift
shop, and a peace garden. Afeni plans to add a museum, community meeting space
and classrooms. The Center’s purpose is to mentor high-risk youth, ages 12–18.
Afeni said, “Nobody is more infatuated with the energy of young people as me. I’m
looking at them run into a ﬁre and nobody is saying it’s hot” (quoted in AllHipHop.com,
2005). 
148 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 165 ---
5 For a more thorough, comprehensive history of Hip Hop, check out these works: Tricia
Rose, Black Noise (1994); S. H. Fernando, Jr., The New Beats: Exploring the Music,
Culture, and Attitudes of Hip-Hop (1994); David Toop, Rap Attack 2: African Rap to
Global Hip Hop (1991); Cheryl Keyes, Rappin to the Beat (1991); K. Maurice Jones,
Say It Loud!: The Story of Rap Music(1994); Nelson George, hip hop america(1998);
James Spady, “Nation Conscious Rap: The Hip Hop Vision” (2004); James Spady, H.
Samy Alim and Samir Meghelli, Tha Cipha: Hip Hop Culture and Consciousness, (forth-
coming); Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation(2005).
6 Current efforts are not the ﬁrst organizational endeavors that demonstrate Hip Hop’s
socio-political potential. After the crisis caused by the crack epidemic that hit
Chocolate Cities in the 1980s—during the Second Reconstruction—stop the violence
campaigns and gang truces were launched on both East and West Coasts. On the
East Coast, KRS-ONE/Boogie Down Productions led the STOP THE VIOLENCE /SELF
DESTRUCTION MOVEMENTwhich culminated in the song, “Self Destruction.” On the West
Coast, it was led by the late Eazy E (of NWA), and the “Same Gang” Movement
culminated in the song, “We’re All in the Same Gang.”
7 Notwithstanding the significance of Simmons’s get-out-the-vote campaign among
Black youth, there is another perspective on this kind of campaign from some socially
conscious Hip Hop artists. Nas, for example, told an interviewer that he’s not a
registered voter and that he doesn’t “agree with voting because of the examples out
there, the thievery of an election . . .” He goes on to say:
I can’t tell people to stand in line to vote and they’re still going to be found in
jail tomorrow . . . the angles that Hip Hop are using are . . . the tip of the iceberg.
Vote or Die is one way but we have to pull other resources. We need a repre-
sentative in the United Nations that can make it a real issue to deal with, it’s
beyond a vote. The minority vote is not going to get anyone in ofﬁce, it can’t deal
with middle America. Harlem can’t do it alone.
(quoted in “AP Talks to Nas,” Rap News Net, January 4, 2005)
Nas’s argument recalls dead prez, who don’t focus on voting but on agitation for
revolutionary change. It also recalls debates within the Black Liberation Movement
in the 1960s and 1970s about whether working within the System—reform, e.g.,
voting—was the route to freedom and empowerment for Black America.
8 Interested readers can check out the lyrics of “Rapper’s Delight” at any number of
web sites; two particularly good ones are www.ohhla.com and www.bus.miami.edu/
~ldouglas/house/shill/rd.html. The reason I couldn’t quote any of those lyrics here
is due to the exorbitant fees required. When I refer to “exorbitant fees,” I’m not talking
about fees charged by the song writers or performers, but fees charged by those
outside agencies which control the rights to most Hip Hop artists’ songs. In fact, I
wonder if the artists themselves even know about these fees. Reminds me of the
point made by Busta Rhymes on one of the music awards shows when he commented
that Hip Hop provides jobs for people that don’t even love the shit. De La Soul makes
the same observation in “CHURCH,” on their 2004 album, 
The Grind Date. Like we
Old Skool folks been sayin, Hip Hop is a multi-billion-dollar industry. 
9 Also check out dead prez’s 2003 C.D., Get Free or Die Tryin’ (Turn Off The Radio, the
Mixtape, Vol. 2) , Boss Up/Landspeed Records, the title signifyin on 50 cent’s Get
Rich Or Die Tryin’.
Notes 149


--- PAGE 166 ---
10 West appears to be keeping the faith in his second C.D., Late Registration. Although
not released at the time of this writing, I caught the video for one of the songs on
the new C.D. Over the funky git-down beats is a message to worshipers of bling-
bling about the effects of imperialism in Africa—“in Sierra Leone, they die from
diamonds we buy.” And as this book was being prepared for printing, he appeared
on NBC in a live telethon to raise funds for the Gulf Coast victims of Hurricane
Katrina and capitalized on that moment to take both the media and President Bush
to task for their treatment of these victims. Fans and others on the East Coast who
were watching the telethon (his remarks were bleeped out in the later West Coast
replay) were astonished (quite a few, pleasantly so!) to hear Kanye’s comments.
For he is at the top of his game, his sophomore album is heading for platinum, and
a week before the telethon, he had graced the cover of 
Time Magazine which hailed
him the “smartest man” in Hip Hop. Departing from the script that the NBC folk had
prepared for him, Kanye stated that he found it hard to watch news coverage of the
Katrina disaster because those most devastated and harmed by Katrina were Black.
He noted that the media was describing Black victims as “looters” but White victims
as “ﬁnders” of food and basic necessities. Freestylin in the Hip Hop tradition, he
railed against America’s inaction and the Government’s inexplicable delay in
providing aid to the Black and poor victims of Hurricane Katrina. Then he concluded
by droppin this now widely-quoted verbal bomb: “Bush doesn’t care about Black
people!”
Chapter 6
1 From Digital Underground’s 1991 “Same Song,” which featured Tupac, Humpty
Hump, and Shock G.
Chapter 7
1 While some Black Movement leaders—e.g., Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.—emphasized
the moral dimension of the struggle for racial integration, for other visionaries and
activists, integration was conceived as a tactical maneuver. That is, dismantling
the institutionalized and legalized dual structures of racial apartheid would 
pave the way for equality and social justice for Black people. For example, in the
educational domain under U.S. apartheid, books, science labs, facilities, and other
educational resources were inequitably distributed to Black and White school
districts. Thus, a single district with racially integrated schools would provide Blacks
with educational equity—or so it was reasoned at the time.
2 See discussion of 
King v. Ann Arbor in Chapter 1. 
3 See discussion of The Crisis editorial on New York’s SEEK Program in Chapter 1. 
4 If you said “Kamal ain’t be workin,” you’s wrong as the day is long. The correct
answer is “Kamal don’t be workin.”
5 According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s most recent report (June 9, 2005), the
Latino/Hispanic population reached 41.3 million as of July 1, 2004. The African
American population at that point was 39.2 million. The total U.S. population as of
June 9, 2005 was 296,342,189.
150 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 167 ---
References
Abraham, D. (1998), “Changing Webster’s Dictionary,” Essence, March, p. 156.
Adams, C.G. (1992), “Where Are The Men?” Sermon, March 29. 
Adams, M. (1998), “The Server’s Lexicon: Preliminary Inquiries into Current Restaurant
Jargon,”American Speech, 73 (1), Spring, pp. 57–83.
Ahlin, E. (2004), “In San Francisco, a New Twist on a Schoolyard,” The New York Times,
August 16.
Alexander, D. (1997), “Are Black People Cooler Than White People?” Might.
Alim, H.S. (forthcoming), Roc the Mic Right: the Language of Hip Hop Culture, New York
and London: Routledge.
—— (2004a), You Know My Steez: An Ethnographic and Sociolinguistic Study of Style-
shifting in a Black American Speech Community, Durham: Duke University Press.
—— (2004b), “Hip Hop Nation Language,” in Finegan, E. and Rickford, J.R. (eds.),
Language in the USA: Themes for the Twenty-ﬁrst Century , Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 387–409.
—— (2003), “‘We are the streets’: African American Language and the Strategic
Construction of a Street Conscious Identity,” in Makoni, S., Smitherman, G., Ball, A.F.,
and Spears, A.K. (eds.), 
Black Linguistics: Language, Society, and Politics in Africa
and the Americas, London and New York: Routledge, pp. 40–59.
Alim, H.S. and Baugh, J. (eds.) (forthcoming), Black Language, Education, and Social
Change.
Allen, H. (2004), “Poppin’ Tags” (“Ear Street”), The Source, January, pp. 29–30. 
AllHipHop.com (2005), “Afeni Shakur Announces Opening Date for Tupac Amaru Shakur
Center,” May 25, <http://www.AllHipHop.com/hiphopnews> (accessed May 26, 2005).
Ankobia, O.D. (1999), “Calling It Like It Is: Mel Farr’s Running Game,” Michigan Citizen,
21 (44), October 2, p. A9.
Asante, M.K. (1990), “African Elements in African American English,” in Holloway, J.E.
(ed.), Africanisms in American Culture , Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp.
19–33.
Aubry, E.J. (1997), “The Butt: Its Politics, Its Profanity, Its Power,” LA Weekly, 19 (41),
September 5–11.
Bailey, B. (1969), “Language and Communicative Styles of Afro-American Children in
the United States,” Florida Foreign Language Reporter, Spring/Summer, pp. 46, 153.
—— (1968), “Some Aspects of the Impact of Linguistics on Language Teaching in
Disadvantaged Communities,” in Davis, A.L. (ed.), On the Dialects of Children, Urbana:
National Council of Teachers of English.


--- PAGE 168 ---
—— (1965), “Toward a New Perspective in Negro English Dialectology,” American Speech,
40 (3), pp. 171–77.
Bambara, T.C. (1974), “On the Issue of Black English,” Confrontation, 1 (3). 
Baraka, A./Leroi Jones (1969), “Black Art,” Black Magic Poetry 1961–1967, Indianapolis
and New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company.
Barrow, J.L. (2004), “Quiet Storm,” The Source, August, pp. 122–28.
Baugh, J. (2003), “Linguistic Proﬁling,” in Makoni, S., Smitherman, G., Ball, A.F., and
Spears, A.K. (eds.), Black Linguistics: Language, Society, and Politics in Africa 
and the Americas, London and New York: Routledge, pp. 155–68.
—— (2000), Beyond Ebonics: Linguistic Pride and Racial Prejudice , New York: Oxford
University Press.
—— (1999), Out of the Mouths of Slaves: African American Language and Educational
Malpractice, Austin: University of Texas Press.
—— (1983), Black Street Speech: Its History, Structure, and Survival, Austin: University
of Texas Press.
Bennett, J. (1909), “Gullah: A Negro Patois,” South Atlantic Quarterly, 8, pp. 39–52.
Black Commentator (2004), “The Savaging of Black America,” Issue 95, June,
<http://www.blackcommentator.com/95/95_cover_prisons_pf.html> (accessed
June, 2004).
Black Electorate.Com (2003), “Hip-Hop Fridays: Davey D. Interview with Project
Censored,” <http://www.blackelectorate.com> (accessed June 24, 2005).
Black Issues in Higher Education (2004), “Minorities Have ‘50–50’ Chance of
Graduating High School, Study Finds,” March 25.
Blackshire-Belay, C.A. (1996), “The Location of Ebonics Within the Framework of the
Africological Paradigm,” Journal of Black Studies, 27 (1), September, pp. 5–23. 
Boulard, G. (2005), “The Promise of a Better Tomorrow,” Black Issues in Higher
Education, February 24, pp. 34–35.
Bowman, K. (2004), “Turning Rhymes Into Votes: Political Power and the Hip-Hop
Generation,” <hhttp://www.hiphopconvention.org/issues/voting/rap2vote.cfm>
(accessed June, 2004).
Boyd, T. (2003), The New H.N.I.C.: The Death of Civil Rights and the Reign of Hip Hop ,
New York and London: New York University Press.
—— (2002), “There’s No Bridging the Hip-Hop Gap,” Boston Globe, October 2.
Brown, C. (1968), “The Language of Soul,” Esquire Magazine , 69 (4) (April), pp. 88,
160–62.
—— (1965), Manchild in the Promised Land, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Brown, J.C. (1993), “In Defense of the N Word,” Essence, June, p. 138.
Burnett, R. (2003), “Home Lender Bias Against Minorities Still Apparent,” Detroit Free
Press, October 17, p. 1G.
Callahan-Bever, N. (2004), “Balloon Mind State,” Vibe, May, pp. 114–20.
Calloway, C. (1938), Hepster’s Dictionary, New York: New York Public Library.
Caramanica, J. (2004), “Baby Come On,” XXL Magazine, August, pp. 094–098.
Chang, J. (2005), Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation, New York:
St. Martin’s Press.
Claerbaut, D. (1972), Black Jargon in White America, Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans
Publishing Company.
Cohen, R. (2004), “You Name It,” The New York Times Magazine, May 30.
Cooke, B.G. (1972), “Nonverbal Communication Among Afro-Americans: An Initial
152 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 169 ---
Classification,” Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban Black America ,
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, pp. 32–64.
Cosby, B. (2004), “Dr. Bill Cosby Speaks at the 50th Anniversary Commemoration of
the Brown v. Topeka Board of Education Supreme Court Decision, May 22, 2004,”
reprinted in The Black Scholar, 34 (4),Winter.
Crawford, C. (ed.) (2001), Ebonics and Language Education of African Ancestry Students,
New York and London: Sankofa World Publishers.
Crosley, S. (2004), “Butt Seriously,” Village Voice, August 11–17, <www.villagevoice.
com/issues/0432/essay.php> (accessed September, 2004).
Dalby, D. (1972), “The African Element in American English,” in Kochman, T. (ed.),
Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban Black America, Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, pp. 170–86.
Davey D (2004), “Plotting Freedom at the National Hip Hop Political Convention,”
<http://www.sfbayview.com/060904/plottingfreedom> (accessed June, 2004).
Detroit Free Press, June 18, 2004, p. 8A
Dillard, J.L. (1977), Lexicon of Black English, New York: Seabury Press.
—— (1972), Black English: Its History and Usage in the United States, New York: Random
House.
DMX/Earl Simmons (2002), E.A.R.L. (The Autobiography of DMX) , New York: Harper
Collins.
Dodson, H. (2004), Letter to Schomburg Center supporters, September.
Dollard, J. (1939), “The Dozens: Dialectic of Insult,” American Imago , November 1, 
pp. 3–25.
DuBois, W.E.B. (1936), “The Field and Function of the Negro College,” in Herbert
Aptheker (ed.), The Education of Black People, Amherst: University of Massachusetts
Press.
—— (1903), The Souls of Black Folk, New York: Fawcett Edition, 1961.
Dyson, M.E. (2005), Is Bill Cosby Right? (Or Has the Black Middle Class Lost Its Mind?),
New York: Basic Civitas Books.
—— (2001a), Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur, New York: Basic Civitas
Books.
—— (2001b), “Brother, Can You Spare a Nod?” Savoy, March, pp. 93–94.
—— (1999), “Niggas Gotta Stop,” The Source, p. 182.
The Education Trust, Inc. (2002), The Funding Gap: Low-Income and Minority Students
Receive Fewer Dollars, Washington, D.C.: The Education Trust, August.
Elton, W. (1950), “Playing the Dozens,” in “Miscellany,” American Speech, 25 (1).
Etter-Lewis, G. (1993), My Soul is My Own: Oral Narratives of African American Women
in the Professions, New York and London: Routledge.
Fanon, F. (1967), “The Negro and Language,” Black Skin,White Masks, New York: Grove
Press.
Fasold, R.W. (2001a), “Ebonic Need Not Be English,” in James E. Alatis and Ai-Hui Tan
(eds.), Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics 1999 ,
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, pp. 262–80.
—— (2001b), “In Defense of Pan-African Ebonics as a Language,” Paper presented at
New Ways of Analyzing Variation (NWAV), North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
North Carolina, October.
—— (1972), 
Tense Marking in Black English: A Linguistic and Social Analysis, Washington,
D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
References 153


--- PAGE 170 ---
Fasold, R.W. and Shuy, R. (eds.) (1970), Teaching Standard English in the Inner City ,
Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Feagin, J.R. (2002), The Continuing Significance of Racism: U.S. Colleges and
Universities, Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education.
—— (2001), Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations, New York
and London: Routledge.
Fernando, S.H., Jr. (1994), The New Beats: Exploring the Music, Culture, and Attitudes
of Hip-Hop, New York: Doubleday.
Forero, J. (2004), “For Colombia’s Angry Youth, Hip-Hop Helps Keep It Real,” The New
York Times, April 16, p. A4.
Gates, H.L. (2004), “Getting to Average,” The New York Times, September 26, p. 11.
Genocchio, B. (2004), “For Japanese Girls, Black is Beautiful,” The New York Times ,
April 4, p. 36An.
George, L. (2004), “Say What You Mean,” Los Angeles Times, May 21.
George, N. (1998), hip hop america, New York: Viking.
Gere, A.R. and Smith, E. (1979), Attitudes, Language, and Change , Urbana, Illinois:
National Council of Teachers of English.
Giovanni, Nikki (1971), “The True Import of Present Dialogue: Black vs. Negro” and “For
Saundra,” in Randall, D. (ed.), The Black Poets, New York: Bantam Books.
Goffman, E. (1963), Behavior in Public Places, New York: The Free Press.
Goldie (1996), “Dennis II Society,” The Source, February, pp. 80–81.
Golianopoulos, T. (2004), “Soul Survivor,” The Source, April, pp. 96–102.
Gonzales, A. (1922), Black Border, Columbia: The State Company.
Gordon, E.W. (2004), “The State of Education in Black America,” The State of 
Black America, 2004: The Complexity of Black Progress , National Urban League, 
pp. 97–113.
Graddol, D. (1999), “Will English be enough?” Where Are we Going With Languages? ,
Nufﬁeld Inquiry, London: Nufﬁeld Foundation.
Green, G.C. (1963), “Negro Dialect, the Last Barrier to Integration,” Journal of Negro
Education, 32 (1), Winter, pp. 81–83.
Green, L.J. (2002), African American English: A Linguistic Introduction , Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gregory, D. (1964), nigger: An Autobiography, New York: E.P. Dutton & Co.
Hamilton, K. (2005), “The Dialect Dilemma,” Black Issues in Higher Education, April 21.
Harney, K. (2003), “Inequities Spotted in Mortgage Broker Fees,” Detroit Free Press,
July 20, p. 2f. 
Harrison, J.A. (1884), “Negro English,” Anglia, 7, pp. 232–79.
Henderson, S. (1972), Understanding the New Black Poetry, Institute of the Black World,
reprinted, New York: William Morrow and Company.
Henning, Lynn (2004), “Crowds Improve Despite Playoff Competition,” Detroit News,
June 20, p. 5D.
Herskovits, M. (1941), Myth of the Negro Past, Boston: Beacon Press.
Holloway, J.E. and Vass, W.K. (1993), The African Heritage of American English ,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hughes, L. (1961), Ask Your Mama: 12 Moods for Jazz , New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
Inc.
Human Rights Watch Backgrounder (2003), “Incarcerated America,” April, <http://
www.hrw.org/backgrounder/usa/incarceration> (accessed May, 2004).
154 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 171 ---
Hunter, A., Jr. (1997), “N-ything Goes,” Philadelphia Daily News , October 31, 
p. F–16.
Hurston, Z.N. (1942), “Story in Harlem Slang” and “Glossary of Harlem Slang,” reprinted
in Spunk: The Selected Stories of Zora Neale Hurston , New York: Marlowe and
Company, 1985.
—— (1937), Their Eyes Were Watching God(perennial library edition, H.L. Gates, Jr. ed.),
New York: Harper & Row.
—— (1935), Mules & Men, Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
Ice T (1994), The Ice Opinion, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Joiner, C.W. (1979), Memorandum Opinion and Order , 473 F. Supp. 1371 (E.D.Mich.
1979).
—— (1978), 451 F. Supp. 1332 (E.D.Mich.1978).
Joiner, W. (2003), “The Army Be Thugging It,” <http://www.salon.com/mwt/feature/
2003/10/17/army/print.html>, October 17.
Jones, K.M. (1994), Say It Loud!: The Story of Rap Music, Brookﬁeld: Millbook Press.
Jurkowitz, M. (1998), “Uproar Over Headline Dismays Gates; Says Magazine, Critics
Should Talk It Over,” Boston Globe, April 17, p. B1.
Kalam, M. (2003), “Egyptian Like Me,” The New York Times, November 16.
Katz, S.R. (2004), “Does NCLB Leave the U.S. Behind in Bilingual Teacher Education?”,
English Education 36 (2), pp. 141–152.
Kelley, R.D.G. (1997), Yo’ Mama’s DisFUNKtional!: Fighting the Culture Wars in Urban
America, Boston: Beacon Press.
Kennedy, R. (2002), Nigger: The Strange Career of a Troublesome Word , New York:
Pantheon Books.
Keyes, C. (1991), Rappin to the Beat, Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University.
King, Wilma (1995), Stolen Childhood: Slave Youth in Nineteenth-Century America ,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
King, Woody (1972), “The Game,” in Kochman, T. (ed.), Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out:
Communication in Urban Black America , Urbana: University of Illinois Press, pp.
390–98. 
Kirkland, D., Robinson, J., Jackson, A., and Smitherman, G. (2004), “From ‘The Lower
Economic’: Three Young Brothas and an Old School Womanist Respond to Dr. Bill
Cosby,” 
The Black Scholar, 34 (4), Winter, pp. 10–15.
Kitwana, B. (1994), The Rap on Gangsta Rap, Chicago: Third World Press.
—— (2002), The Hip Hop Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African American
Culture, New York: Basic Civitas Books.
Kloss, H. (1967), “Abstand Languages and Ausbau Languages,” Anthropological
Linguistics, 9 (7), pp. 29–41.
Kochman, T. (1972) Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban Black America ,
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
DJ Kool Herc (2005), “Introduction,” Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop, New York: St.
Martin’s Press, pp. xi–xiii. 
KRS-ONE (2003), Ruminations, New York: Welcome Rain Publishers.
Labov, W. (1972), Language in the Inner City, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press. 
—— (1970), The Logic of Non-Standard English , Urbana: National Council of Teachers
of English.
Labov, W., Cohen, P., Robbins, C. and Lewis, J. (1968), A Study of the Non-Standard
References 155


--- PAGE 172 ---
English of Negro and Puerto-Rican Speakers in New York City, Final Report, U.S. Ofﬁce 
of Education, Cooperative Research Project, no. 3288, I and II, Philadelphia: U.S.
Regional Survey.
Lanehart, S.J. (2002), Sista, speak!: Black Women Kinfolk Talk About Language and
Literacy, Austin: University of Texas Press.
—— (ed.) (2001), Sociocultural and Historical Contexts of African American English ,
Philadelphia and Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
LeClair, T. (1981), “A Conversation with Toni Morrison: ‘The Language Must Not Sweat,’”
New Republic, March 21.
Ledbetter, J. (1992), “Imitation of Life,” Vibe, Fall.
Madhubuti, H. (1969), “In a Period of Growth,” Don’t Cry, Scream, Detroit: Broadside
Press.
Mailer, N. (1957), “The White Negro,” Dissent; reprinted, San Francisco: City Lights
Books, 1969.
Major, C. (1994), From Juba to Jive: A Dictionary of African-American Slang, New York:
Penguin Books.
—— (1970), Dictionary of Afro-American Slang, New York: International Publishers.
Malveaux, J. (1998), “Bostonians Squabble Over Headline,” Black Issues in Higher
Education, May 28, p. 28.
Martin, D.R. (2004) “The Music of Murder,” <http://www.axt.org.uk/HateMusic/
Rappin.htm> (accessed July, 2004).
Martin, J. (2003), “Warn Guest Before Tossing Him,” Detroit Free Press, p. 5H.
McDavid, R. (1950), “Review of Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect by Lorenzo Turner,”
Language, 26, pp. 328–30.
Mehren, E. (1998), “Boston Magazine Ignites Racial Uproar,” Los Angeles Times, April
12.
Mencken, H.L. (1936 [1919]), The American Language, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Mitchell-Kernan, C. (1972), “Signifying, Loud-Talking and Marking,” in Kochman, T. (ed.),
Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban Black America, Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, pp. 315–35.
—— (1969), Language Behavior in a Black Urban Community , doctoral dissertation,
University of California-Berkeley.
Monroe, J. (2004), “Self-Conscious,” Vibe, November, pp. 59–60.
Moody, N.M. (2003), “Pimps Become the New ‘Gangstas’ of Rap,” The Record(Stockton,
CA), July 28, p. E1.
Morgan, J. (1999), When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My Life as a Hip-Hop
Feminist, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Morgan, M. (2002), Language, Discourse and Power in African American Culture ,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1989), From Down South to Up South: The Language Behavior of Three Generations
of Black Women Residing in Chicago, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
“Morning Line” (2004), Detroit Free Press, June 29, p. 2D.
Morrell, E. and Duncan-Andrade, J.M.R. (2002), “Promoting Academic Literacy With
Urban Youth Through Engaging Hip-hop Culture,” English Journal, July.
Morrison, T. (1993), Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination, New
York: Vintage Books.
Mos Def (1999), responding to “Does the “N” Word Belong in Hip Hop?,” Blaze, March,
p. 105.
156 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 173 ---
National Urban League (2004a), The State of Black America Executive Summary and
Abstracts, <http://www.nul.org/sobaexec.pdf> (accessed May, 2005).
—— (2004b), The State of Black America: The Complexity of Black Progress.
—— (2005a), The State of Black America: Prescriptions for Change.
—— (2005b), 2005 Equality Index.
Neal, M.A. (2004), “Hip Hop’s Gender Problem,” Black Commentator , June 17,
<http://www.blackcommentator.com> (accessed June, 2004).
—— (2003), Songs in the Key of Black Life: A Rhythm and Blues Nation , New York and
London: Routledge.
Nelson, H. and Gonzales, M.A. (1991), Bring The Noise: A Guide to Rap Music and Hip-
Hop Culture, New York: Harmony Books.
Oakland, California Board of Education (1996), “Resolution of the Board of Education
Adopting the Report and Recommendations of the African American Task Force,”
December 18, reprinted in Perry and Delpit (1998), The Real Ebonics Debate, Boston:
Beacon Press, pp. 143–45.
Ogunnaike, L. (2004), “The Passion of Puff,” Vibe, August, pp. 88–100.
Olivio, W. (2001), “Phat Lines: Spelling Conventions in Rap Music,” Written Language
and Literacy, 4 (1), pp. 67–85.
Orfield, G. (2004), “A Discussion on Race and Resegregation,” Southern Journal of
Teaching and Education, Winter.
—— (2001), Schools More Separate: Consequences of a Decade of Resegregation
(Report of the Civil Rights Project), Cambridge: Harvard University, July 17.
Orfield, G. and Frankenberg, E. (2004), “Where are we now?,” Teaching Tolerance ,
Southern Poverty Law Center, Spring.
Palacas, A.L. (2001), “Liberating American Ebonics from Euro-English,” College English,
63 (3), pp. 326–52.
Percelay, J., Ivey, M., and Dweck, S. (1994), Snaps, New York: William Morrow.
—— (1995), Double Snaps, New York: William Morrow.
Perry, T. and Delpit, L. (1998), The Real Ebonics Debate: Power, Language, and the
Education of African American Children, Boston: Beacon Press.
Platt, L. (2002), Only the Strong Survive: The Odyssey of Allen Iverson, New York: Harper
Collins.
Pough, G.D. (2004), Check It While I Wreck It: Black Womanhood, Hip-Hop Culture, and
the Public Sphere, Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Pratt, C. (2004), “A Test For Farwell Middle School,” Detroit Free Press, June 20, p. 1F.
Project Censored (2003), “Hip-Hop Fridays: Davey D. Interview With Project Censored,”
Black Electorate.Com, October 17, <http://www.blackelectorate.com/articles.asp?
lD=978> (accessed June, 2005).
Rap News Network (2005), “AP Talks to Nas,” January 4, <http://www.rapnews.net/
News/ 2005/01/04/AP.NAS> (accessed June, 2005). 
Reed, I. (1970), 19 Necromancers from Now, New York: Doubleday.
Rickford, J.R. (1999), African American Vernacular English, Malden and Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.
Rickford, J.R., with Angela Rickford (1973), “Cut-Eye and Suck-Teeth,” revised (1999),
in Rickford, J.R., African American Vernacular English, Malden and Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.
Rickford, J.R. and Rickford, R.J. (2000), Spoken Soul: The Story of Black English , New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
References 157


--- PAGE 174 ---
Rickford, J.R., Sweetland, J., and Rickford, A.E. (2004), “African American English and
Other Vernaculars in Education: A Topic-Coded Bibliography,” Journal of English
Linguistics, 32 (3), September, pp. 230–320.
Rickford, J.R., Ball, A., Blake, R., Jackson, R., and Martin, N. (1991), “Rappin on the
Copula Cofﬁn,” Language Variation and Change, 3, pp. 103–32.
Rose, P. (1989), Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker In Her Time, New York: Doubleday.
Rose, T. (1994), Black Noise, Hanover: Wesleyan University Press.
Ross, R.O. (2004), “Gaps, Traps and Lies” (Abstract), State of Black America, 2004: The
Complexity of Black Progress , Executive Summary and Abstracts , National Urban
League, <http://www.nul.org/sobaexec.pdf> (accessed May, 2005).
Saunders, N. (2004), “The Rhythms and the Blues” (Interview of Michael Eric Dyson),
Essence, June, p. 40.
Schechter, W. (1970), The History of Negro Humor in America, New York: Fleet Press.
Simmons, D.C. (1963), “Possible West African Sources for the American Negro
‘Dozens’,” Journal of American Folklore, 76, pp. 339–40.
Sistrunk, W.L. (1998), A Uniﬁed Analysis of Negative Inversion Constructions in African
American English, M.A. thesis, Michigan State University.
Sklar, H., Mykyta, L., and Wefald, S. (2002), Raise the Floor: Wages and Policies that
Work for All of Us, Cambridge: South End Press.
Smith, R.A. (2004), “Saving Black Boys: The Elusive Promises of Public Education,”
American Prospect, 15 (2), February 1.
—— (2003), “Race, Poverty & Special Education: Apprenticeships for Prison Work,”
Poverty & Race, November/December.
Smitherman, G. (forthcoming), Memoirs From A Daughter of the Hood.
Smitherman, G. (2000a), Talkin That Talk: Language, Culture and Education in African
America, New York and London: Routledge.
—— (2000b), Black Talk: Words and Phrases from the Hood to the Amen Corner, Boston
and New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
—— (1997), “‘The Chain Remain the Same’: Communicative Practices in the Hip Hop
Nation,” Journal of Black Studies, September.
—— (1995), “‘If I’m Lyin, I’m Flyin’: An Introduction to the Art of the Snap,” in Percelay,
J., Dweck, S., and Ivey, M., Double Snaps, New York: Morrow and Company.
—— (1994), “‘The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice,’: African American Student
Writers and the National Assessment of Educational Progress,” in Dyson, A.H. and
Genishi, C. (eds.), The Need for Story: Cultural Diversity in Classroom and Community,
Urbana: National Council of Teachers of English. 
—— (1991), “Black English, Diverging or Converging?: The View from the National
Assessment of Educational Progress,” Language and Education, 6 (1).
—— (ed.) (1981a), Black English and the Education of Black Children and Youth:
Proceedings of the National Invitational Symposium on the King Decision , Detroit:
Center for Black Studies, Wayne State University.
—— (1981b), “‘What Go Round Come Round’: King In Perspective,” Harvard Educational
Review, 51 (1), pp. 20–56.
—— (1977), Talkin and Testifyin: The Language of Black America , Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin; paperback, 1986, Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Smitherman, G. and Baugh, J. (2002), “The Shot Heard From Ann Arbor: Language
Research and Public Policy in African America,” Howard Journal of Communication,
13 (1), January–March, pp. 5–24.
158 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 175 ---
Smitherman, G. and Villanueva, V. (eds.) (2003), Language Diversity in the Classroom:
From Intention to Practice, Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Snoop Dogg/Calvin Broadus (1999), Tha Doggfather: The Times, Trials, and Hardcore
Truths of Snoop Dogg, New York: William Morrow and Company.
Spady, J.G. (2004), “Nation Conscious Rap: The Hip Hop Vision,” in Bracey, J.H. and
Sinha, M. (eds.), African American Mosaic: A Documentary History from the Slave
Trade to the Twenty-First Century , Volume Two, From 1865 to the Present , Upper
Saddle River: Pearson/Prentice Hall Textbooks, pp. 473–84.
Spady, J.G., Alim, H.S., and Meghelli, S. (forthcoming), Tha Cipha: Hip Hop Culture and
Consciousness, Philadelphia: Black History Museum Press.
Spears, A.K. (2001), “Directness in the Use of African American English,” in Lanehart,
S.J. (ed.), Sociocultural and Historical Contexts of African American English ,
Philadelphia: John Benjamins, pp. 239–59. 
—— (2000), “Stressed Stay,” Paper presented at the Linguistic Society of America
Convention, Chicago. 
—— (1998), “African American Language Use: Ideology and So-called Obscenity,” African
American English: Structure, History and Use, in Mufwene, S.S., Rickford, J.R., Bailey,
G., and Baugh, J. (eds.), London and New York: Routledge, pp. 226–50.
—— (1982), “The Black English Semi-Auxiliary COME,” Language, 58 (4), pp. 850–72.
Stephens, T. (2004), “Female Dog Gluteus Maximus Negro,” Rolling Out , 4 (6), 
May 22.
Stuckey, S. (1987), “Identity and Ideology: The Names Controversy,” in Stuckey, S., Slave
Culture: Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America, New York: Oxford
University Press, pp. 193–244.
Supreme Court of the United States (1954),Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483,
May 17.
Tate, G. (ed.), (2003), Everything But the Burden: What White People are Taking From
Black Culture, New York: Broadway Books.
The Crisis (1971), “Black Nonsense,” 78 (3), April–May, p. 78
Thompson, C., Schaefer, E., and Brod, H. (eds.) (2003), White Men Challenging Racism:
35 Personal Stories, Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Toop, D. (1991), Rap Attack 2: African Rap to Global Hip Hop , London and New York:
Serpent’s Tail.
Troutman, D. (forthcoming), This Is My Story.
—— (2001), “African American Women: Talking That Talk,” in Lanehart, S.J. (ed.),
Sociocultural and Historical Contexts of African American English, Philadelphia: John
Benjamins, pp. 211–37.
Turner, L.D. (1949), Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect , Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Turner, R.D. (1991), “The High-Five Revolution,” Ebony, August.
Upski (1993), “From the Front Lines of the White Struggle,” The Source, May.
U.S. Census Bureau (2005), “Hispanic Population Passes 40 Million, Census Bureau
Reports,” June 9, <www.census.gov> (accessed June, 2005).
—— (2003) The Black Population in the United States: March 2002, April.
U.S. Justice Department (2002), “Midyear 2002,” Table 14, p. 11, reprinted in Human
Rights Watch Backgrounder , April, 2003, <http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/
usa/incarceration> (accessed May, 2004).
USA Weekend (2004), “The Scrabbler-rouser,” August 13–15, p. 22.
References 159


--- PAGE 176 ---
Walters, R.W. (2003), White Nationalism, Black Interests: Conservative Public Policy
and the Black Community, Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
—— (1993), Pan Africanism in the African Diaspora: The African American Linkage ,
Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Wiley, R. (1992), Why Black People Tend to Shout: Cold Facts and Wry Views From A
Black Man’s World, New York: Penguin Books.
Williams, R.L. (ed.) (1975), Ebonics: The True Language of Black Folks, St. Louis: Institute
of Black Studies; reissued, 1997, by Robert L. Williams and Associates.
Williams, S.W. (1982), “Language Consciousness and Cultural Liberation in Black
America,” Paper presented at the Sixth Annual Conference of the National Council
for Black Studies, Chicago, March.
Wolfram, W. (2004), “Dialect Awareness in Community Perspective,” in Bender, M.C.
(ed.), Linguistic Diversity in the South: Changing Codes, Practices and Ideologies ,
Athens: University of Georgia Press, pp. 15–36.
Wolfram, W. (1969), A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit Negro Speech, Washington,
D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Wolfram, W., Schilling-Estes, N., and Hazen, K. (2000), Dialects and the Ocracoke
Brogue: The Molding of a Dialect , <http://www.ncsu.edu/ linguistics/code/
Research%20Sites/ocracoke/curriculum.htm> (accessed December, 2003).
Woodson, C.G. (1933), Miseducation of the Negro , Washington, D.C.: Associated
Publishers, 1969.
Wright, J.A. (2002), “Demons and Detractors,” Sermon at Detroit’s Hartford Memorial
Baptist Church Revival, October 18.
Yasin, J.A. (2003), “Hip-Hop Culture Meets the Writing Classroom,” in Coreil, C. (ed.),
Multiple Intelligences, Howard Gardner and New Methods in College Teaching, Jersey
City: New Jersey City University Press, pp. 75–82.
160 Word from the mother


--- PAGE 177 ---
Discography
Amir Sulaiman (2004), Dead Man Walking, Goode Stuff Entertainment.
Common (1994), Resurrection, Relativity Records.
The Coup (2001), Party Music, Tommy Boy Records.
De La Soul (2004), The Grind Date, Daisy Age/Sanctuary Records.
dead prez (2000), Let’s Get Free, Loud Records.
—— (2003), Get Free or Die Tryin’, Boss Up Records.
Digital Underground (1991), This is an EP Release, Tommy Boy Records.
Eminem (2002), The Eminem Show, Aftermath Records.
Eric B. & Rakim (1987), Paid in Full, Fourth & Bway/Pgd.
50 cent (2003), Get Rich or Die Tryin’, Shady/Aftermath/Interscope Records.
Jay-Z (2001), The Blueprint, Roc-A-Fella Records.
Talib Kweli (2004), The Beautiful Struggle, Rawkus Records.
Lil’ Jon and the East Side Boyz (2004), Kings of Crunk.
Method Man (1994), Tical, Def Jam Records.
Mos Def (1999), Black on Both Sides, Priority Records.
Nas (2004), Street’s Disciple, Sony Records.
—— (2001), Stillmatic, Sony Records.
—— (1996), It Was Written, Sony Records.
Public Enemy (1994), Apocalypse 91: The Enemy Strikes Black, Def Jam Records.
—— (1989), Fear of A Black Planet, Def Jam Records.
Snoop Doggy Dogg/Snoop Dogg (1993), Doggystyle, Death Row Records.
Terror Squad (2004), True Story, Universal Records.
Toledohiphopdotorg (2005), Reboot: Pass the Message , Cyberchurch/University of
Toledo Africana Studies.
Tupac (1996), Makaveli, Death Row Records.
Kanye West (2004), The College Dropout, Roc-A-Fella Records.


--- PAGE 178 ---
‘A and B’ 20
‘A and B conversation’ 20
‘a hard head make a soft behind’ 20
Abraham, Delphine 53, 146
abstand languages 17
academic achievement 12, 127, 128
‘ace kool’ 20
‘act ugly’ 20
Adams, Charles 66
Adams, Michael 111
Africa 142–3, 144
African American Language (AAL) 1–19;
language v. dialect 15–18; linguistic
push-pull 5–8, 129–35; need to
broaden conception of 136–7;
research on 9–12; rules and patterns
10–11, 134; speakers of 18–19,
136–7
African American women’s language
137–8
African languages 142
‘African People’s Time’ 21
‘Afro’ 21 
AfroAmericanization of youth 109; 
see
also crossover
Ahlin, Elizabeth 109
‘ain a thang’ 21
‘ain studyin you’ 21
Alexander, Donnell 110
Ali, Muhammad 4
Ali, Najee 92
Alim, H. Samy 12, 100–1, 102–3, 135,
136
Alkalimat, Abdul 93
‘all that’ 21
‘all the way live’ 21
‘all up in the Kool-Aid and don’t even
know the ﬂava’ 21
Allen, Harry 89, 90
‘Amen corner’ 21
Americans for Family Values 142–3
Angelou, Maya 130
Ankobia, Omowale Diop 64
Ann Arbor School District Board 12–15,
131
apartheid schools 128
Arizona 85, 148
Arrested Development 52
Asante, M.K. 12
‘ashy’ 3, 21
‘ass’ 22, 109–10
Association of Community 
Organizations for Reform Now
(ACORN) 125
athletes 1, 134
Aubry, Erin J. 110
ausbau languages 17–18
‘baby’ 22, 113–14
‘baby daddy’ (or ‘baby momma’) 22
‘baby girl’ 22
‘back’ 22
‘Back in The Day’ 22
‘bad’ 4, 22
Bailey, Beryl 11, 145
Baker, Josephine 109–10
Baldwin, James 127
Bambara, Toni Cole 2, 135
‘banana’ 3
‘banjo’ 3
Index


--- PAGE 179 ---
Baraka, Amiri (formerly LeRoi Jones) 93,
96–7
Baraka, Ras 91, 106
Barkley, Charles 52, 78
Barrow, J.L. 85
basketball 2, 68; superstar 1
Batson, Brendan 50–1
Baugh, J. 11, 12, 16, 95, 123, 136
Baxter, Milton 6
BDP 89
‘be’ 4, 7, 102–3, 134
‘beat down’ 22
‘beef’ 22
‘bees dat way’ 22
‘befoe God git the news’ 22
‘behind’ 22, 109–10
Benjamin, Floella 51
‘Benjamins/Benjies’ 22
Bennett, J. 9
Bentsen, Cheryl 60–1
Berlitz dictionaries 114
Best Damn Sports Show Period 116
‘betta ask somebody’ 23
‘betta recognize’ 23
‘Bid’ 23
Big Daddy Kane 95
Big Pun 88
Big Syke 86
bi/multilingualism policy 141–4
‘bip bam, thank you mam!’ 23
‘bird’ 23
‘bitch’ 23, 100–1
‘Black’ 55; perceptions of the word 135
Black Arts 82, 147–8
Black Commentator 125, 126
Black Language (BL) see African
American Language (AAL)
Black Liberation Movement 18, 55,
82–3, 114, 145, 147, 149
Black Power Movement 114–15, 147
‘Black thang’ 23
Black Wall Street 91
BlackElectorate.Com 92
Blackploitation ﬁlms 69, 80
Blackshire-Belay, C.A. 12
Blaze 61
‘blind in one eye, can’t see out the other’
23
‘bling-bling’ (or ‘bling’) 7, 23–4, 116
‘blood’ 24
‘blue-eyed soul’ 24
‘bogod’ 24
‘boo’ 24
‘boo-coos’ 24
‘boody’ 24
‘boojee’ 24
‘boom box’ 112
Booty/Bubblegum Rap 97–9
‘born at night but not last night’ 24
Boston 60–2
Boulard, G. 125
‘’bout’ 116
‘boy’ 24
boy/girl verbal play 80–1
Boyd, Todd 104, 140
‘brang ass to git ass’ 24
‘brick house’ 24
brokerage fees 125
Brooklyn College Language Curriculum
Research Group 6–7
‘Brotha’ 24
Brown, Claude 56–7, 113, 129–30
Brown, Foxy 52, 141
Brown, J. Clinton 58
Brown, James 115
Brown v. Board of Education 8, 126
Bubblegum/Booty Rap 97–9
Bush, George 112
Bush, George W. 65, 150
‘busta’ 25
Busta Rhymes 102 , 149
‘bustin rhymes’ 25
Busy Bee Starski 83
butt/rear end 21, 22, 24, 109–10
‘butta’ 25
Bynoe, Yvonne 91
Byrd, Robert 52
‘call somebody out’ 25
‘call somebody outa they name’ 25
‘call yoself/myself/herself/etc.’ 25
Calloway, Cab, 
Hepster’s Dictionary 113,
114
Campbell, C. (D.J. Kool Herc) 83, 90
‘can’t kill nothin, and won’t nothin die’
25
Index 163


--- PAGE 180 ---
‘cat’ 25
‘cave’ 25
‘Cavuto Business Show’ 116
Cedric the Entertainer 134
Cescru Enlace 115
change 141, 145
Chapelle, Dave 134
‘Charlie’ 25
‘check’ 25
Chen Shui-bian 115
‘chicken eater’ 25
‘chicken head’ 25
Chideya, Ferai 92
‘chill’/’chill out’ 112, 116
‘chitlin circuit’ 25–6
‘chitlins’ 26
‘Chocolate city’ 26
Chuck D 92, 105, 106, 117
‘church family’ 26
Civil Rights Movement 18, 74, 121, 147
Claerbaut, David 118–19
class 140
Clemente, Rosa 106
‘clown’ 26
Cohen, Randy (‘The Ethicist’) 119–20
‘cola’ 3
‘cold-blooded’ 26
Colombia 115
‘color struck’ 26
Combs, Sean (P. Diddy) 55, 91
comedians 134
commerce 89–90
Common (formerly Common Sense) 82,
90, 97
community 5
Congressional Black Caucus 130
Conscious Rap 96–8
consumer marketing 116
Conyers, John 148
Cooke, Benjamin G. 112–13
‘cool’ 112
Coolio 50
‘Cop Killer’ (Ice T) 86
Cosby, Bill 8, 9, 130–1, 143
‘co-sign’ 26
‘couldn’t hit him/her/you in the behind
with a red apple’ 26
counter language 3–4
Coup, The 96
‘CPT/CP Time’ 27
‘cracka’ 27
Crawford, C. 12
Creole 11
crime 86–7
Crisis editorial 6, 132
Crosley, Sloane 110
‘cross the burning sands’ 27
crossover, linguistic 108–20
‘crumb snatchers’ 27
‘cut up’ 27
‘cuz’ 27
‘da bomb’ 27
Daddy O 92
Daddy’s House Social Programs 91
‘damn skippy’ 27
Daniels, Ron 65
Davey D 91–2, 105
‘dead’ 27
‘Dead Presidents’ 27, 96
dead prez 68, 92, 96, 149
deep structure 11
Dehn, Mura 109
Delpit, L. 12, 16
Detroit Pistons 2
‘devil’ 27
dialect-language issue 15–18
Diallo, Amadou 90
Diddy, P. (Sean Combs) 55, 91
Dillard, J.L. 11, 18, 108
‘dippin’ 27
divine mission 87–8
D.J. Afrika Bambaataa 83, 92
D.J. Hollywood 83
DMX (Earl Simmons) 51, 87, 88
Dodson, Howard 143
‘dog’ 27
Dollar, Creﬂo 56
Dominoes, the 94
‘don’t go there’ 112
‘don’t hate the playa, hate the Game’ 68
‘don’t leave me hangin’ 27
‘don’t make me none’ 28
‘doofus’ 28
‘do-rag’ 28
double consciousness 5–6
164 Index


--- PAGE 181 ---
‘Double Dutch’ 28, 109
Double Dutchess 109
‘down low’ 28
‘Dozens/playin the Dozens’ 28, 48,
76–8, 94–5
Dre, Dr. 102
‘dreads/dreadlocks’ 28
drop-out rates 127
drugs 44, 68, 125–6
DuBois, W.E.B. 5–6, 55, 142, 145
Duncan-Andrade, J.M.R. 139
‘DWB’ 28
Dyson, Michael Eric 62–3, 86, 93, 118,
130–1, 140
‘eagle ﬂies’ 28
‘edges’ 28
education 8, 145; Black education since
Brown v. Board of Education 126–8;
Hip Hop linguistics and pedagogy
139–41; 
King case 12–15, 131,
133; language awareness programs
138; national ofﬁcial policy of
bi/multilingualism 141–4; Oakland
Ebonics Resolution 8, 12–15, 130
‘e-light’ 28–9
Eminem 69–70, 108, 115
engagements among the unacquainted
80
enslavement 3–4, 55, 71; play children
67–8
Equal Educational Opportunity Act 15
Eric B. 83, 89
‘Ethicist, The’ (Randy Cohen) 119–20
Etter-Lewis, G. 138
European Union 144
Evans, Faith 87
‘every closed eye ain sleep; every
goodbye ain gone’ 29
‘everybody talking bout Heaben ain goin
dere’ 29
‘everythang is everythang’ 29
‘evil’ 29
expressions and words 20–48
‘extensions’ 29
Fanon, Frantz 129, 145
Farr, Mel 64
Farrakhan, Louis 87, 93
Fasold, Ralph W. 11, 16, 17
Fat Joe 88
Feagin, Joe R. 131
‘feel ya’ 29
feminism 104–5, 141
‘ﬁendin’ 29
50 cent 69, 85, 88, 115
‘ﬁfty-leben/ﬁfty-leven’ 29
‘ﬁne’ 29
‘ﬁnna/ﬁnsta’ 29
‘ﬁrst mind’ 29
‘ﬁve’ 29, 112–13
Five Percent Nation 30, 95–6
‘ﬁx yo mouf to say’ 30
‘ﬂava’ 30
‘for days’ 30
‘forty acres and a mule’ 30
‘fox’ 30
Frankenberg, E. 128
Franklin, Aretha 87
Freeman, Morgan 61
‘freestyle’ 30
French culture 132
‘fried, dyed, laid to the side’ 30
‘from Genesis to Revelation’ 30
‘front somebody off’ 30
‘front street’ 30
‘fruit’ 30
‘fuck you and dat horse you rode in on’
30
‘funky’ 30
‘funny’ 31
Furious Five 82
‘G’ 31
‘Game’ 31
‘Game recognize Game’ 31, 68
‘Gangsta’ 31
Gangsta Rap 85–8, 97–9
‘gatas’ 31
Gates, Henry Louis (‘Skip’) 60–2, 124
generational continuity 3, 5, 56–7, 103,
108–9
genetic inferiority 9–10, 133
Genocchio, B. 122
George, Nelson 140
Gere, A.R. 138
Index 165


--- PAGE 182 ---
Geto Boys 89
Getridge, Carolyn 14
‘Ghetto’ 31
‘Ghetto pass’ 31
Giovanni, Nikki 97, 99
‘girl’ 31
‘git back at me’ 31
‘git-go’ 112
‘git happy’ 31–2
‘git up in my/his/her/etc. face’ 32
‘git up on this’ 32
‘give it yo bes shot’ 32
‘give me/her/him/etc. some play’ 32
‘give me some skin’ 32
‘give me/him/her/etc. some sugar’ 32 
Givens, Adele 134
‘giving ﬁve’ 29, 112–13
‘giving honor to God, who is the Head of
my life’ 32
‘go for bad’ 32
‘go off’ 32
‘God don’t like ugly’ 32
Goffman, E. 80
Goldie 49
Gonzales, A. 9
‘good hair’ 32
Gordon, E.W. 127
Gordy, Berry 95
‘got it goin on’ 32
‘got my mojo workin’ 32–3
‘got the butta from the duck’ 33
‘got yo back’ 33
Graddol, D. 144
graduation rates, high school 127
Grandmaster Flash (J. Saddler) 82, 
83–4
Green, Gordon C. 121–2
Green, Lisa J. 12, 134, 136
Gregory, Dick 56
‘grown folk’ 33
Gullah language 9–10
‘H.N.I.C.’ (Head Nigga in Charge) 34,
60–2
‘ha-step’ 33
Hahn, Gregory 114
hairstyles 18, 71
‘handle yo bidness’ 33
Harlem Renaissance 108
Harrison, J.A. 9
Harvey, Steve 134
Hatch, Orrin 116
‘hate/hate on’ 33, 102, 116
‘have church’ 33
‘hawk’ 33
Hayes, Isaac 85
head nod 118
‘heifer’ 33
Henderson, Stephen 147–8
Henning, L. 2
Henry, John 94
‘here go’ 33
Herskovits, Melville 9
‘high ﬁve’ 29, 112–13
Hill, Marlon 134–5
‘hip’ 33, 113, 114
Hip Hop 58, 59–60, 68, 69, 82–107;
linguistics 94–107; linguistics and
pedagogy 139–41
Hip Hop Congresses 92
Hip Hop Political Action Committees 91
‘Hip Hop for Respect’ 90
Hip Hop Summit Action Network 91
history 143
‘hit on’ 111
‘ho’ 34, 100
‘holla’ 34
Holley, Jim 56
Holloway, J.E. 10
‘home’ 34
home mortgage lending practices 125
‘homegoing’ 34
‘honey’ 34
‘honky’ 34
‘hood’ 34
‘hoodoo’ 34
‘hook-up’ 34
‘hot comb and hot curlers’ 35
‘house nigga’ 35
Howard University Choir and Orchestra
131–2
Hughes, Langston 76, 111
Human Rights Watch Backgrounder
125–6
Hurston, Zora Neale 32, 47–8, 71–2,
76, 79, 94
166 Index


--- PAGE 183 ---
‘I ain mad at ya/him/her/etc.’ 35
‘I brought you into this world and I’ll take
you out of it’ 35
‘I can peep through muddy water and
spy dry land’ 35
‘I/you/he/etc. don’t play that’ 35
‘I got this’ 35
‘I has a dream’ ad 132–3
Ice Cube 58, 83, 89
Ice T 83, 86–7, 88
‘I’ll run through Hell with gasoline
drawers on’ 35
‘in the street’ 35
income 124
inequality 123–6
injustice 86–7
integration 121–45, 150
invariant be 102–3
‘ish’ 35
Islam 87
‘jackleg’ 35
Jackson, Austin 91, 95–6, 143
Jackson, Jesse 65, 130
James and Grace Boggs Center, Detroit
93
Jay-Z 85, 94, 97, 105, 131
‘Jimmy hat’ 35
‘jive’ 36
job hunting 119–20
‘jody’ 36
‘Johnson’ 36
Joiner, Charles W. 12, 15
Joiner, W. 88
Jones, LeRoi (
later Amiri Baraka) 93,
96–7
Jones, Quincy 84
JT the Bigga Figga 91
Juan, Bishop Don Magic 101
Jungle Fever 75–6
Jurkowitz, M. 62
Just Ice 95–6
Kaimowitz, Gabe 12, 14–15
Kalam, Murad 117–18
Katrina, Hurricane 150
Katz, S.R. 144
‘keep on keepin on’ 36, 116
‘keepin it real’ 36
Kelley, Robin D.G. 94
Kennedy, Randall 50, 52, 59
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) 111
Ketchum Agency, Pittsburgh 133
‘kick to the curb’ 36, 112
Kids’ Shenanigans 112
King, Martin Luther Jr. 87; national
holiday 85, 148
King, Rodney 49, 73
King, Wilma 67–8
King, Woody 80
King v. Ann Arbor Board 12–15, 131,
133
Kirkland, David 91, 143
‘kitchen’ 3
Kitwana, Bakari 106, 140
Kloss, Heinz 17
KMEL 92
Knight, Etheridge 49
Kochman, Thomas 112
Koke La Rock 84
Kool G Rap 90
Kool Herc (C. Campbell) 83, 90
KRS-ONE 59–60, 84
Kweli, Talib 90, 96, 97
Labov, William 11
Lanehart, S.J. 12, 138
language awareness programs 138
language-dialect issue 15–18
language policy 141–4
Language of Wider Communication
(LWC) 6, 74, 95, 142
‘large and in charge’ 36
Last Poets 58
Latifah, Queen 52
laughter 137–8
Law, Bob 92
‘layin in the cut’ 36
Leahy, Patrick 116
Lean On Me 61
Ledbetter, Huddie (‘Leadbelly’) 77
Ledbetter, James 119
Lee, Spike 75
‘let the door hit you where the good Lord
split you!’ 36
Lewis, Kenneth 12, 14–15
Index 167


--- PAGE 184 ---
Lien Chan 114
‘light, bright and damn near white’ 36
‘light-skinnded’ 3
‘like white on rice’ 36, 111
Lil’ Kim 141
‘lil sum-n sum-n’ 36
linguistic crossover 108–20
linguistic push-pull 5–8, 129–35
Linguistic Society of America (LSA) 16,
133
Liston, Sonny 78–9
‘lizzards’ 36
Loewen, James W. 122–3
‘look for you yesterday, here you come
today’ 36
‘look like death eating a soda cracker’
37
Los Angeles rebellion 73
‘love’ 37
‘love me some . . .’ 37
love play, verbal 80–1
Mac, Bernie 134
Mack, The 69
Mack 69
‘mack/mackin’ 37, 80
‘mad’ 37
Madhubuti, Haki (
formerly Don L. Lee)
135
Mailer, Norman 108, 110, 111
Major, C. 11, 52
Malcolm X 71, 82, 87
Malcolm X Academy 143–4
Malibu’s Most Wanted 116
Malveaux, Julianne 61
‘man, the’ 37
‘Manners, Miss’ (Judith Martin) 54
marketing 116
Martin, Dennis R. 86
Martin, Judith (‘Miss Manners’) 54
Martin Luther King Junior Elementary
School Children, et al. v. Ann Arbor
School District Board 12–15, 131,
133
McBurrows, Hiram 56
McClain, Stephen 91
McDavid, Raven 10
MC Lyte 106
media 116
Melle Mel 84
Memphis Minnie 77
Menand, Louis 134
Mencken, H.L. 9
Menino, Thomas 61
mentoring 91
Merriam-Webster dictionary 53–4, 146
Method Man 94–5, 102
Michigan State University 91
‘midnight hour’ 37
‘mind’s eye’ 37
misogyny 85
‘Miss Thang’ 37
Missy Elliott 88
Mitchell Beckwith, Peggy 74
Mitchell-Kernan, Claudia 70, 137
‘moanuh’s bench’ 37
‘mojo’ 111
money 96
Monique 134
Monroe, Justin 89
Morgan, Joan 104–5, 106–7, 140
Morgan, Marcylienna 11, 93, 136,
137–8
Morrell, E. 139
Morrison, Toni 8, 64, 95, 123
mortgage lending practices 125
Morton, Jelly Roll 94
Mos Def 58, 90, 96, 100
‘mother wit’ 37
Motown Sound 95
Muhammad, Cedric 92
multilingualism policy 141–4
‘muthafucka’ 37
mutual intelligibility 16
‘my bad’ 37
My Brother’s Keeper Program 91
N-words 49–63
names, and job hunting 119–20
‘nappy’ 37
Nas 95–6, 97, 149
Nate Dogg 85
Nation of Islam (NOI) 87, 95
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP) 6, 53, 126, 146
168 Index


--- PAGE 185 ---
National Head Start Organization 132–3
National Hip Hop Political Convention
89, 105–6
national ofﬁcial policy of
bi/multilingualism 141–4
National Urban League 124
nationhood 17–18
Neal, Mark Anthony 85, 104, 140
‘negro’ 49–63
Nelly 102
new White Nationalism movement
123–4
New York City 88
New York Times 132–3
‘nigga’ 49–63, 117–18
‘nigga apple’ 38
nigga metaphor 110
‘nigger’ 49–63, 117–18
Nikki D 100
No Child Left Behind 144
‘none’ 38
‘none-yuh’ 38
North, Oliver 65
Norwegian 16
‘nose open’ 38
Nubian, Bran 95
‘nurse’ 38
NWA (Niggaz Wit Attitude) 49, 98, 115
Oakland School Board Resolution on
Ebonics 8, 12–15, 130
‘ofay’ 38
‘off tha hook/heazy/chain/hinges/
everthang’ 38
‘okay’ 3
‘Old Skool’ 38
Olivio, W. 103–4
Omega 65
‘on the regular’ 38
‘on time’ 38
‘one mo once’ 38
O’Neal, Shaquille (‘Shaq’) 78
‘open the doors of the church’ 38
opening lines 81
‘Oreo’ 38
Orﬁeld, G. 128
‘out the gate’ 38
‘outside kid’ 39
‘overstand’ 39
P.E. (Public Enemy) 82, 84, 85, 89
‘packin chitlins’ 39
‘paid’ 39, 101–2
Palacas, Arthur 5, 16–17
‘paper chasin’ 39
‘pass’ 39
‘pay dues’ 39
‘peace’ 39, 95–6
‘peckawood’ 39
‘peeps’ 39
people 17–18, 54, 132
Perry, T. 12, 16
‘phat’ 7, 39, 95, 111
‘Ph.D’ 40
physiognomy 9, 133
‘picked yo pocket’ 40
Pierce, Stacia 71
‘pimp’ 40, 101
Pimp 69
‘pimp slap’ 40
‘pimpin’ 40
Platt, Larry 140
play, verbal 64–81
play children 67–8
‘play sista/brotha/cousin/aunt/etc.’ 40
‘playa’ 40, 68–9, 146–7
‘playa hate’ 111
‘played’ 40
Players’ Ball 69
‘playin for blood’ 68
political activism 105–6
Political Rap 96–8
‘poontang’ 40
Poor Righteous Teachers 89
Popandpolitics.Com 92
Pough, Gwendolyn 104, 140–1
poverty 124, 128
Powell, Colin 65
Powell, Kevin 106
power 96
Pratt, C. 7, 9
Pratt, Elmer Geronimo 148
preachers 56, 66–7
prison 124, 125–6
‘program’ 40
Project Islamic Hope 92
Index 169


--- PAGE 186 ---
‘props’ 40
push-pull, linguistic 5–8, 129–35
‘put they mouth on you’ 40
‘put yo/my/his/our/etc. bidness in the
street’ 41
‘Q’ 41
Q-Tip 90
‘quiet as it’s kept’ 41
race 5, 140
‘race man/woman’ 41
racial discrimination 124
racial integration 121–45, 150
Rah, Digga 90
Rakim 83, 89, 95–6
‘Rap’ 41; 
see also Hip Hop
Ras Kass 90
‘read’ 41
‘rebellion’ 41
‘red/redbone’ 3
‘red, black and green’ 41
‘red neck’ 41
Reed, Carol 6
Reed, Ishmael 79
religion 87–8
‘represent’ 41
resistance discourse 3–4
restaurant jargon 111
Rice, Condoleezza 65
Rickford, A. 136
Rickford, John R. 7, 11, 12, 102, 131–2,
136
Rickford, R.J. 11, 12, 131–2, 136
‘ride or die’ 41
‘Right Hand of Fellowship’ 41
Robinson, J. 143
Rock, Chris 60
Rodman, Dennis 49
Rodríguez, Andrey 115
Rodríguez, Juan Emilio 115
‘roll/rollin’ 41
romantic trash-talkin 80–1
Roots, The 96
Rose, Judy 114
Rose, Phyllis 109–10
Ross, R.O. 128
‘run a Boston’ 42
‘run and tell that’ 4
Saddler, J. (Grandmaster Flash) 82,
83–4
‘sadiddy’ 42
Salt N Pepa 100
Sanchez, Sonia 93
‘sang the song!’ 42
Saunders, Nicole 93
‘save the drama for yo momma!’ 42
‘say the blessing’ 42
‘scared of you’ 42
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) 128
Second Reconstruction 82, 147
SEEK (Search for Elevation, Education
and Knowledge) 6–7
segregation 121–2, 126, 128
self-esteem 143
‘sell-out’ 42
‘sellin woof tickets’ 47–8, 78–81
Senate hearings 13
‘serious as a heart attack/serious as
cancer’ 42
sexism 140
sexual boasts 94
sexuality, women and 140–1
Shakespeare, William 68
Shakur, Afeni 91, 148
Shakur, Assata 148
Shawnna 65
Sheidlower, Jesse 116
Shine 94
‘shit’ 42–3
‘shorty/shortie’ 43
‘shout’ 43
‘show his/her ass’ 43
‘showboat’ 43
‘sick’ 43
‘signiﬁcation/signifyin’ 43, 69–76, 76
Simmons, Earl (DMX) 51, 87, 88
Simmons, Russell 91
‘Sista’ 43
Sister Souljah 91
Sistrunk, W.L. 17
Sklar, H. 124
‘skin’ (‘ﬁve’) 29, 112–13
Smalls, Biggie (B.I.G.) 69, 100
Smith, E. 138
170 Index


--- PAGE 187 ---
Smith, R.A. 127
Smitherman, Geneva 1, 11, 12, 15, 51,
95, 96, 99–100, 111, 142–3, 144–5
Smyntek, John 111
‘snappin’ 28, 48, 76–8, 94–5
Snoop Dogg 69, 87–8
social responsibility 89–93
‘some’ 43
‘some folk don’t believe fat meat is
greasy’ 43
‘sometimerz’ 43
soulfulness 57
Spady, James G. 93
Spanish 142
speakers of AAL 18–19, 136–7
Spears, Arthur K. 11, 131, 136
special education 127
Speckled Red 77
spelling 103–4
‘Spoken Soul’ 129–30
Stag-O-Lee 94, 98
standard American English (LWC) 6, 74,
95, 142
‘star’ 44
Stein, Joel 114
Steinberg, Martha Jean (‘the Queen’)
74–5
‘step show’ 44
Stephens, Torrance 65–6
‘steppin in high cotton’ 44
Stith, Charles 61
Stockman, Ida 133
stop the violence campaigns 149
‘street pharmaceuticals’ 44
‘struggle, the’ 44
‘stylin and proﬁlin’ 44
Sugar Hill Gang, ‘Rapper’s Delight’ 82,
84, 94
Superﬂy 69
Supreme Team 95
Sutel, Seth 114
Swedish 16
‘System’ 44
Taiwan 114–15
‘take a text’ 44
‘take care of bidness’ 44
‘take low and go’ 44
‘talkin in Tongue’ 44
‘talkin outta the side of yo neck/mouth’
44
‘talkin trash’ 44–5, 78–81
Task Force on Educating African
American Students 14
Tate, Greg 50, 140
Taylor, Orlando 132
TBS 114
‘tear the roof off the sucka!’ 45
‘tender-headed’ 45
‘tenderoni’ 45
‘testifyin’ 45
Texas 125
‘that’s all she wrote’ 45
‘that’s mighty white of you’ 45
‘there go’ 45
Thomas, Clarence 65
Thompson, Ahmir (‘?uestlove’) 101
‘thought like lit’ 45
Thug Life 85
‘tight’ 45
‘tight as Dick’s hatband’ 45
Time magazine 114
‘TLC/tender, loving care’ 45, 112
‘tote’ 3
‘trash-talkin’ 44–5, 78–81
‘triﬂin’ 45
Trina 100–1
‘trippin’ 45
Troutman, D. 136, 138
‘true dat’ 46
‘truth be told’ 46
‘tude’ 46, 49
Tupac Amaru Shakur Center for the Arts
148
Tupac Shakur 51, 69, 84, 85–6, 148
‘turn it out’ 46
Turn off the Radio campaign 92
Turner, Lorenzo Dow 9–10
Turner, Nat 87
‘twenty-four-seven’ 112
unemployment 124
Unger, Craig 62
Universal Zulu Nation 83
‘up on it’ 46
‘upside yo head’ 46, 111
Index 171


--- PAGE 188 ---
Upski 120
Urban Think Tank 91
Vass, W.R. 10
Vaughn-Cooke, Fay 133
verbal play 64–81
‘vibe’ 46
Villanueva, V. 12
violence 86–7
‘voodoo’ 46
voting, promotion of 105–6, 149
‘wack’ 46
Walters, Ronald 123–4
Warren, Earl 126
‘Watch Meeting Night’ 46–7
Watson, Clifford 143
Watt, Toya 133
Weather Channel 114
websites 92
West, Cornel 93, 109
West, Kanye 96, 97, 98, 99, 106, 
150
‘what go round come round’ 47
‘what it be like’ 47
‘what time it is’ 47
‘what you on?’ 47
‘what’s up’ 116
‘when uhm gone’ 47
white ﬂight 128
‘white Negro’ 108
white supremacy 122–3
‘whupped’ 47
Wickham, DeWayne 50
‘wifey’ 47
Wiley, Ralph 118
Wilkins, Roy 6
Williams, Kathryn 53, 146
Williams, R.L. 11
Williams, Selase 142
‘wit the program’ 47
Wolfram, W. 11, 138
‘womanist’ 47
women: African American women’s
language 137–8; identity and
sexuality 140–1; linguistic
conservatism 74; verbal play 74–6
Woodson, Carter G. 142
Woodward, Susan 125
‘wooﬁn/woof tickets’ 47–8, 78–81
‘word is bond!’ 48
words and expressions 20–48
work, and play 67–8
‘wreck’ 48
Wright, Jeremiah A. 67
writing style 104–5
Wu-Tang Clan 95–6
X-Clan 89
Yasin, J.A. 83
‘yella/high yella’ 3, 48
‘yo’ 48, 116
‘yo momma’ 28, 48, 76–8, 94–5
‘you ain know?’ 48
‘you are working my nerves!’ 48
‘you go, girl’ 116
‘you-own know me like that!’ 48
‘young, dumb and full of come’ 48
‘zillions’ 48
Zulu Nation 83
172 Index


--- PAGE 189 ---
Related ttitles ffrom RRoutledge
Talkin tthat TTalk
Language, CCulture aand EEducation iin AAfrican AAmerica
Geneva SSmitherman
‘Dr Smitherman writes with power as well as grace. She provokes and
challenges readers to rethink the complicated relationship between
language and power within society . . .
Talkin that Talk presents her
impressive intellectual vision that examines the issue of language rights
for African-Americans.’
Manning Marable, Director, Institute for Research in 
African-American Studies, Columbia University
Geneva Smitherman, a native speaker of African American Language
and a leading scholar, here presents her take on Ebonics and related
issues. Written in her uniquely accessible style, this highly readable
collection draws together Smitherman’s most important articles and
essays, spanning a period from 1972 to the present day, and includes
an autobiographical piece entitled “From Ghetto Lady to Critical Linguist.”
Hb: 0-415-20864-5
Pb: 0-415-20865-3
Available at all good bookshops
For ordering and further information please visit:
www.routledge.com


--- PAGE 190 ---
Related ttitles ffrom RRoutledge
Black LLinguistics
Language, SSociety aand PPolitics iin AAfrica aand tthe AAmericas
Edited bby SSinfree MMakoni, GGeneva SSmitherman, AArnetha FF. BBall, 
Arthur KK. SSpears
Foreword bby NNgugi wwa TThiong’o
Enslavement, forced migration, war and colonization have led to the global
dispersal of Black communities and to the fragmentation of common
experiences.
The majority of Black language researchers explore the social and linguistic
phenomena of individual Black communities, without looking at Black
experiences outside a given community. This groundbreaking collection 
re-orders the elitist and colonial elements of language studies by drawing
together the multiple perspectives of Black language researchers. In doing
so, the book recognizes and formalizes the existence of a “Black Linguistic
Perspective” and highlights the contributions of Black language researchers
in the ﬁeld.
Written exclusively by Black scholars on behalf of, and in collaboration with
local communities, the book looks at the commonalities and differences
among Black speech communities in Africa and the Diaspora. Topics include:
• the OJ Simpson trial
• language issues in Southern Africa and Francophone West Africa
• the language of Hip Hop
• the language of the Rastafaria in Jamaica
With a foreword by Ngugi wa Thiong’o, this is essential reading for anyone
with an interest in the linguistic implications of colonization.
Hb: 0-415-26137-6
Pb: 0-415-26138-4
Available at all good bookshops
For ordering and further information please visit:
www.routledge.com


--- PAGE 191 ---
Related ttitles ffrom RRoutledge
African-American LLiteracies
Elaine RRichardson
African-American Literaciesis a personal, public and political exploration
of the problems faced by student writers from the African-American
Vernacular English (AAVE) culture.
Drawing on personal experience, Elaine Richardson provides a
compelling account of the language and literacy practices of African-
American students. The book analyses the problems encountered by the
teachers of AAVE speakers, and offers African-American centred theories
and pedagogical methods of addressing these problems. Richardson
builds on recent research to argue that teachers need not only to
recognise the value and importance of African-American culture, but also
to use African-American English when teaching AAVE speakers standard
English.
African-American Literacies offers a holistic and culturally relevant
approach to literacy education, and is essential reading for anyone with
an interest in the literacy practices of African-American students.
Hb: 0-415-26882-6
Pb: 0-415-26883-4
Available at all good bookshops
For ordering and further information please visit:
www.routledge.com


--- PAGE 192 ---
Related ttitles ffrom RRoutledge
The LLanguage, EEthnicity aand RRace RReader
Edited bby RRoxy HHarris aand BBen RRampton
Language, Race and Ethnicity: A Reader is an essential resource for all
students of sociolinguistics, ethnic studies, linguistics, anthropology and
intercultural studies. This accessible Reader collects in one volume the
key readings on language, ethnicity and race.
Harris and Rampton introduce students to the current debates
surrounding issues of language and diversity, colonialism and migration,
identity and appropriation. Invaluable editorial material guides the
student through different sections of the book, which look at how
language is used in different ethnic groups and how such uses are
discussed and reported. Using linguistic and cultural analysis, the 
Reader
explores changing ideas of ethnicity and race around the world, and the
ways in which these ideas shape human communication.
Hb: 0-415-27601-2
Pb: 0-415-27602-0
Available at all good bookshops
For ordering and further information please visit:
www.routledge.com


--- PAGE 193 ---
Related ttitles ffrom RRoutledge
Roc tthe MMic RRight
The llanguage oof HHip HHop cculture
H. SSamy AAlim
Complementing a burgeoning area of interest and academic study, 
Roc the Mic Right explores the central role of language within the Hip
Hop Nation (HHN). With its status convincingly argued as the best means
by which to read Hip Hop culture, H. Samy Alim then focuses on discursive
practices, such as narrative sequencing and ciphers, or lyrical circles of
rhymers. Often a marginalised phenomenon, the complexity and creativity
of Hip Hop lyrical production is emphasised, whilst Alim works towards
the creation of a schema by which to understand its aesthetic.
Using his own ethnographic research, Alim shows how Hip Hop language
could be used in an educational context and presents a new approach
to the study of the language and culture of the Hip Hop Nation:
“Hiphopography”. The final section of the book, which includes real
conversational narratives from Hip Hop artists such as The Wu-Tang Clan
and Chuck D, focuses on direct engagement with the language.
A highly accessible and lively work on the most studied and read about
language variety in the United States, this book will appeal not only to
language and linguistics researchers and students, but also holds a
genuine appeal to anyone interested in Hip Hop or Black African
Language. 
Hb: 0-415-35877-9
Pb: 0-415-35878-7
Available at all good bookshops
For ordering and further information please visit:
www.routledge.com


--- PAGE 194 ---
Annual subscription packages
We now offer special low-cost bulk subscriptions to
packages of eBooks in certain subject areas. These are
available to libraries or to individuals.
For more information please contact
webmaster.ebooks@tandf.co.uk
We’re continually developing the eBook concept, so
keep up to date by visiting the website.
eBooks – at www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk
A library at your fingertips!
eBooks are electronic versions of printed books. You can
store them on your PC/laptop or browse them online.
They have advantages for anyone needing rapid access
to a wide variety of published, copyright information.
eBooks can help your research by enabling you to
bookmark chapters, annotate text and use instant searches
to find specific words or phrases. Several eBook files would
fit on even a small laptop or PDA.
NEW: Save money by eSubscribing: cheap, online access
to any eBook for as long as you need it.
www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk

