=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Genocide-of-Blacks-in-21st-Century-America-and-RBG-Companion-Reader.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 15
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:24:57.379119
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
MAAFA 21-Genocide of Blacks in 21st Century America –RBG Companion Reader 
The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Malthusian Eugenics. Margaret Sanger aligned herself with the eugenicists whose ideology prevailed in the early 20 th 
century. Eugenicists strongly espoused racial supremacy ...http://www.blackgenocide.org/negro.html 
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
9:23  
 
MAAFA 21-Genocide of Blacks in 21st Century America –
Links to Movie Clips and RBG Companion Reader


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
 
Written by Tanya L. Green 
Source: http://www.blackgenocide.org/negro.html 
Artwork and PDF Conversion by RBG Street Scholar 
 
THIS PAPER IS A COMPANION READER TO THE DOCUMENTARY FILM


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
Written by Tanya L. Green 
"…I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing’ 
therefore choose life, that both you and your descendants may live." 
--Deuteronomy 30:19 (NKJV 
On the crisp, sunny, fall Columbus Day in 1999, organizers of the "Say So" march approached 
the steps of the U.S. Supreme Court. The marchers, who were predominantly black pastors and 
lay persons, concluded their three -day protest at the site of two monume ntal cases: the school 
desegregation Brown v. Board of Education (1954) and the pro-abortion Roe v. Wade "rights" in 
t he latter –converged in the declaration of Rev. Johnny M. Hunter, the march’s sponsor and 
national director of Life, Education and Resourc e Network (LEARN), the largest black pro -life 
organization. 
‘"Civil rights’ doesn’t mean anything without a right to life!" declared Hunter. He and the other 
marchers were protesting the disproportionately high number of abortions in the black 
community. The high number is no accident. Many Americans –black and white–are unaware of 
Planned Parenthood founder Margaret Sanger’s Negro Project. Sanger created this program in 
1939, after the organization changed its name from the American Birth Control League (AB CL) 
to the Birth Control Federation of America (BCFA). 
The aim of the program was to restrict –many believe exterminate –the black population. Under 
the pretense of "better health" and "family planning," Sanger cleverly implemented her plan. 
What’s more shoc king is Sanger’s beguilement of black America’s créme de la créme –those 
prominent, well educated and well-to-do–into executing her scheme. Some within the black elite 
saw birth control as a means to attain economic empowerment, elevate the race and garner the 
respect of whites. 
The Negro Project has had lasting repercussions in the black community: "We have become 
victims of genocide by our own hands," cried Hunter at the "Say So" march. 
Malthusian Eugenics 
Margaret Sanger aligned herself with the eugenicis ts whose ideology prevailed in the early 20 th 
century. Eugenicists strongly espoused racial supremacy and "purtiy"," particularly of the 
"Aryan" race. Eugenicists hoped to purify the bloodlines and improve the race by encouraging 
the "fit" to reproduce and  the "unfit" to restrict their reproduction. They sought to contain the 
"inferior" races through segregation, sterilization, birth control and abortion. 
Sanger embraced Malthusian eugenics. Thomas Robert Malthus, a 19 th century cleric and 
professor of political economy, believed a population time bomb threatened the existence of the 
human race. He viewed social problems such as poverty, deprivation and hunger as evidence of 
this "population crisis." According to writer George Grant, Malthus condemned charit ies and 
other forms of benevolence, because he believed they only exacerbated the problems. His 
answer was to restrict population growth of certain groups of people. His theories of population 
growth and economic stability became the basis for national and  international social policy. 
Grant quotes from Malthus’ magnum opus, An Essay on the Principle of Population , published 
in six editions from 1798 to 1826:


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
All children born, beyond what would be required to keep up the population to a desired level, 
must necessarily perish, unless room is made for them by the deaths of grown persons. We 
should facilitate, instead of foolishly and vainly endeavoring to impede, the operations of nature 
in producing this mortality. 
Malthus disciples believed if Western civili zation were to survive, the physically unfit, the 
materially poor, the spiritually diseased, the racially inferior, and the mentally incompetent had 
to be suppressed and isolated –or even, perhaps, eliminated. His disciples felt the subtler and 
more "scientific" approaches of education, contraception, sterilization and abortion were more 
"practical and acceptable ways" to ease the pressures of the alleged overpopulation. 
Critics of Malthusianism said the group "produced a new vocabulary of mumbo-jumbo. It was all 
hard-headed, scientific and relentless." Further, historical facts have proved the Malthusian 
mathematical scheme regarding overpopulation to be inaccurate, though many still believe 
them. 
Despite the falsehoods of Malthus’ overpopulation claims, San ger nonetheless immersed 
herself in Malthusian eugenics. Grant wrote she argued for birth control using the "scientifically 
verified" threat of poverty, sickness, racial tension and overpopulation as its background. 
Sanger’s publication, The Birth Control Review (founded in 1917) regularly published pro -
eugenic articles from eugenicists, such as Ernst Ruin. Although Sanger ceased editing The Birth 
Control Review in 1929, the ABCL continued to use it as a platform for eugenic ideas. 
Sanger built the work of the ABCL, and, ultimately, Planned Parenthood, on the ideas and 
resources of the eugenics movement. Grant reported that "virtually all of the organization’s 
board members were eugenicists." Eugenicists financed the early projects, from the opening of 
birth control clinics to the publishing of "revolutionary" literature. Eugenicists comprised the 
speakers at conferences, authors of literature and the providers of services "almost without the 
exception." And Planned Parenthood’s international work was origina lly housed in the offices of 
the Eugenics Society. The two organizations were intertwined for years. 
The ABCL became a legal entity on April 22, 1922, in New York. Before that, Sanger illegally 
operated a birth control clinic in October 1916, in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, New York, 
which eventually closed. The clinic serviced the poor immigrants who heavily populated the 
area–those deemed "unfit" to reproduce. 
Sanger’s early writings clearly reflected Malthus’ influence. She writes: 
Organized charity itself is the symptom of a malignant social disease. Those vast, complex, 
interrelated organizations aiming to control and to diminish the spread of misery and destitution 
and all the menacing evils that spring out of this sinisterly fertile soil, are the surest sign that our 
civilization has bred, is breeding and perpetuating constantly increasing numbers of defectives, 
delinquents and dependents.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
In another passage, she decries the burden of "human waste" on society: 
It [charity] encourages the  healthier and more normal sections of the world to shoulder the 
burden of unthinking and indiscriminate fecundity of others; which brings with it, as I think the 
reader must agree, a dead weight of human waste. Instead of decreasing and aiming to 
eliminate the stocks that are most detrimental to the future of the race and the world, it tends to 
render them to a menacing degree dominant [emphasis added]. 
She concluded, 
The most serious charge that can be brought against modern "benevolence" is that is 
encourages the perpetuation of defectives, delinquents and dependents. These are the most 
dangerous elements in the world community, the most devastating curse on human progress 
and expression. 
The Review printed an excerpt of an address Sanger gave in 1926. In it she said: 
It now remains for the U.S. government to set a sensible example to the world by offering a 
bonus or yearly pension to all obviously unfit parents who allow themselves to be sterilized by 
harmless and scientific means. In this way the moron a nd the diseased would have no posterity 
to inherit their unhappy condition. The number of the feeble -minded would decrease and a 
heavy burden would be lifted from the shoulders of the fit. 
Sanger said a "bonus" would be "wise and profitable" and "the salva tion of American 
civilization." She presented her ideas to Mr. C. Harold Smith (of the New York Evening World) 
on "the welfare committee" in New York City. She said, "people must be helped to help 
themselves.: Any plan or program that would make them "depe ndent upon doles and charities" 
is "paternalistic" and would not be " of any permanent value." She included an essay (what she 
called a "program of public welfare,") entitled "We Must Breed a Race of Thoroughbreds." 
?In it she argued that birth control cli nics, or bureaus, should be established "in which men and 
women will be taught the science of parenthood and the science of breeding." For this was the 
way "to breed out of the race the scourges of transmissible disease, mental defect, poverty, 
lawlessness, crime … since these classes would be decreasing in number instead of breeding 
like weeds." 
Her program called for women to receive birth control advice in various situations, including 
where: 
 the woman or man had a "transmissible" disease such as insanity, feeble -
mindedness, epilepsy, syphilis, etc.;  
 the children already born were "subnormal or feeble-minded";  
 the father’s wages were "inadequate … to provide for more children."  
Sanger said " such a plan would … reduce the birthrate among the diseased, the sickly, the 
poverty stricken and anti -social classes, elements unable to provide for themselves, and the 
burden of which we are all forced to carry." 
Sanger had openly embraced Malthusian eug enics, and it shaped her actions in the ensuing 
years.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
The Harlem Clinic 
In 1929, 10 years before Sanger created the Negro Project, the ABCL laid the groundwork for a 
clinic in Harlem, a largely black section of New York City. It was the dawn of the Great 
Depression, and for blacks that meant double the misery. Blacks faced harsher conditions of 
desperation and privation because of widespread racial prejudice and discrimination. From the 
ABCL’s perspective, Harlem was the ideal place for this "experimental clinic," which officially 
opened on November 21, 1930. Many blacks looked to escape their adverse circumstances and 
therefore did not recognize the eugenic undercurrent of the clinic. The clinic relied on the 
generosity of private foundations to remain in business. In addition to being thought of as 
"inferior" and disproportionately represented in the underclass, according to the clinic’s own files 
used to justify its "work," blacks in Harlem: 
 were segregated in an over -populated area (224,760 of 330,000 of  greater New 
York’s population lived in Harlem during the late 1920s and 1930s);  
 comprised 12 percent of New York City’s population, but accounted for 18.4 
percent of New York City’s unemployment;  
 had an infant mortality rate of 101 per 1000 births, compared to 56 among 
whites;  
 had a death rate from tuberculosis –237 per 100,000–that was highest in central 
Harlem, out of all of New York City.  
Although the clinic served whites as well as blacks, it "was established for the benefit of the 
colored people." Sanger wrote this in a letter to Dr. W. E. Burghardt DuBois, one of the day’s 
most influential blacks. A sociologist and author, he helped found the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colore d People (NAACP) in 1909 to improve the living conditions of black 
Americans. 
That blacks endured extreme prejudice and discrimination, which contributed greatly to their 
plight, seemed to further justify restricting their numbers. Many believed the soluti on lay in 
reducing reproduction. Sanger suggested the answer to poverty and degradation lay in smaller 
numbers of blacks. She convinced black civic groups in Harlem of the "benefits" of birth control, 
under the cloak of "better health" (i.e., reduction of maternal and infant death; child spacing) and 
"family planning." So with their cooperation, and the endorsement of The Amsterdam News  (a 
prominent black newspaper), Sanger established the Harlem branch of the Birth Control Clinical 
Research Bureau. The ABC L told the community birth control was the answer to their 
predicament. 
Sanger shrewdly used the influence of prominent blacks to reach the masses with this 
message. She invited DuBois and a host of Harlem’s leading blacks, including physicians, social 
workers, ministers and journalists, to form an advisory council to help direct the clinic "so that 
our work in birth control will be a constructive force in the community." She knew the importance 
of having black professionals on the advisory board and in the  clinic; she knew blacks would 
instinctively suspect whites of wanting to decrease their numbers. She would later use this 
knowledge to implement the Negro Project. 
Sanger convinced the community so well that Harlem’s largest black church, the Abyssinian 
Baptist Church, held a mass meeting featuring Sanger as the speaker. But that event received 
criticism. At least one "very prominent minister of a denomination other than Baptist" spoke out 
against Sanger. Dr. Adam Clayton Powell Sr., pastor of Abyssinian B aptist, "received adverse


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
criticism" from the (unnamed) minister who was "surprised that he’d allow that awful woman in 
his church." 
Grace Congregational Church hosted a debate on birth control. Proponents argued birth control 
was necessary to regulate bir ths in proportion to the family’s income; spacing births would help 
mothers recover physically and fathers financially; physically strong and mentally sound babies 
would result; and incidences of communicable diseases would decrease. 
Opponents contended that as a minority group blacks needed to increase rather than decrease 
and that they needed an equal distribution of wealth to improve their status. In the end, the 
debate judges decided the proponents were more persuasive: Birth control would improve the 
status of blacks. Still, there were others who equated birth control with abortion and therefore 
considered it immoral. 
Eventually, the Urban League took control of the clinic, and indication the black community had 
become ensnared in Sanger’s labyrinth. 
Birth Control as a Solution 
The Harlem clinic and ensuing birth control debate opened dialogue among black about how 
best to improve their disadvantageous position. Some viewed birth control as a viable solution: 
High reproduction, the believed, meant prolon ged poverty and degradation. Desperate for 
change, others began to accept the "rationale" of birth control. A few embraced eugenics. The 
June 1932 edition of The Birth Control Review, called "The Negro Number," featured a series of 
articles written by blacks on the "virtues" of birth control. 
The editorial posed this question: "Shall they go in for quantity or quality in children? Shall they 
bring children into the world to enrich the undertakers, the physicians and furnish work for social 
workers and j ailers, or shall they produce children who are going to be an asset to the group 
and American society?" The answer: "Most [blacks], especially women, would choose quality … 
if they only knew how." 
DuBois, in his article "Black Folk and Birth Control, " not ed the "inevitable clash of ideals 
between those Negroes who were striving to improve their economic position and those whose 
religious faith made the limitation of children a sin." He criticized the "mass of ignorant Negroes" 
who bred "carelessly and disa strously so that the increase among [them] … is from that part of 
the population least intelligent and fit, and least able to rear their children properly." 
DuBois called for a "more liberal attitude" among black churches. He said they were open to 
"intelligent propaganda of any sort , and the American Birth Control League and other agencies 
ought to get their speakers before church congregations and their arguments in the Negro 
newspapers [emphasis added]." 
Charles S. Johnson, Fisk University’s first black president, wrote "eugenic discrimination" was 
necessary for blacks. He said the high maternal and infant mortality rates, along with diseases 
like tuberculosis, typhoid, malaria and venereal infection, made it difficult for large families to 
adequately sustain themselves. 
Further, "the status of Negroes as marginal workers, their confinement to the lowest paid 
branches of industry, the necessity for the labors of mothers, as well as children, to balance


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
meager budgets, are factors [that] emphasize the need for lessening the burden not only for 
themselves, but of society, which must provide the supplementary support in the form of relief." 
Johnson later served on the National Advisory Council to the BCFA, becoming integral to the 
Negro Project. 
Writer Walter A. Terpenning described bringing a black child into a hostile world as "pathetic." In 
his article "God’s Chillun," he wrote: 
The birth of a colored child, even to parents who can give it adequate support, is pathetic in 
view of the unchristian and undemocr atic treatment likely to be accorded it at the hands of a 
predominantly white community, and the denial of choice  in propagation to this unfortunate 
class is nothing less than barbarous [emphasis added]. 
Terpenning considered birth control for black as "th e more humane provision" and "more 
eugenic" than among whites. He felt birth control information should have first been 
disseminated among blacks rather than the white upper crust. He failed to look at the 
problematic attitudes and behavior of society and how they suppressed blacks. He offered no 
solutions to the injustice and vile racism that blacks endured. 
Sadly, DuBois’ words of black churches being "open to intelligent propaganda" proved 
prophetic. Black pastors invited Sanger to speak to their congregations. Black publications, like 
The Afro-American and The Chicago Defender, featured her writings. Rather  than attacking the 
root causes of maternal and infant deaths, diseases ,poverty, unemployment and a host of other 
social ills –not the least of which were racism –Sanger pushed birth control. To many, it was 
better for blacks not to be born rather than endure such a harsh existence. 
Against this setting, Sanger charmed the black community’s most distinguished leaders into 
accepting her plan, which was designed to their own detriment. She peddled her wares wrapped 
in pretty packages labeled "better health" and "family planning." No one could deny the benefits 
of better health, being financially ready to raise children, or spacing one’s children. However, the 
solution to the real issues affecting blacks did not lay in reducing their numbers. It lay in 
attacking forces in society that hindered their progress. Most importantly, one had to discern 
Sanger’s motive behind her push for birth control in the community. It was not an altruistic one. 
Web of Deceit 
Prior to 1939, Sanger’s "outreach to the black community was largely limited to her Harlem clinic 
and speaking at black churches." Her vision for "the reproductive practices of black Americans" 
expanded after the January 1939 merger of the Clinical Research Bureau and the American 
Birth Control League to form the Birth Control Federation of America. She selected Dr. Clarence 
J. Gamble, of the soap -manufacturing company Procter and Gamble, to be the BCFA regional 
director of the South. 
Gamble wrote a memorandum in November 1939 entitled "Suggestions for the Negro P roject," 
in which he recognized that "black leaders might regard birth control as an extermination plot." 
He suggested black leaders to be placed in positions where it would appear they were in 
charge. Yet Sanger’s reply reflects Gamble’s ambivalence about  having blacks in authoritative 
positions:


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
I note that you doubt it worthwhile to employ a full -time Negro physician. It seems to me from 
my experience … that, while the colored Negroes have great respect for white doctors, they can 
get closer to their own  members and more or less lay their cards on the table, which means 
their ignorance, superstitions and doubts. They do not do this with white people and if we can 
train the Negro doctor at the clinic, he can go among them with enthusiasm and … knowledge, 
which … will have far-reaching results among the colored people. 
Another project director lamented: 
I wonder if Southern Darkies can ever be entrusted with … a clinic. Our experience causes us to 
doubt their ability to work except under white supervision. 
Sanger knew blacks were religious people –and how useful ministers would be to her project. 
She wrote in the same letter: 
The minister’s work is also important and he should be trained, perhaps by the Federation as to 
our ideals and the goal that we hope to reach. We do not want word to go out that we want 
to exterminate the Negro population, and the minister is the man who can straighten out 
that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members [emphasis added]. 
Sanger’s cohorts within the BCFA  sought to attract black leadership. They succeeded. The list 
of black leaders who made up BCFA’s National Advisory Council reads like a "who’s who" 
among black Americans. To name a few: 
 Claude A. Barnett, director, Associated Negro Press, Chicago  
 Michael J. Bent, M.D., Meharry Medical School, Nashville  
 Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune, president, National Council of Negro Women, Washington, 
D.C., special advisor to President Roosevelt on minority groups, and founder of 
Bethune-Cookman College, Daytona Beach  
 Dr. Dorothy Boulding Ferebee, cum laude graduate of Tufts, president of Alpha Kappa 
Alpha (the nation’s oldest black sorority)k, Washington, D.C.  
 Charles S. Johnson, president, Fisk University, Nashville  
 Eugene Kinckle Jones, executive secretary, National Urban League, New York  
 Rev. Adam Clayton Powell Jr., pastor, Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York  
 Bishop David H. Sims, pastor, African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia  
 Arthur Spingarn, president, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People  
Even with this impressive list, Sanger ran into resistance when she tried to present a birth 
control exhibit at the 1940 American Negro Exposition, a fair that traces the progress blacks 
have made since the Emancipation Proclamation, in Chicago. A fter inviting BCFA to display its 
exhibit, the Exposition’s board later canceled, citing "last minute changes in floor space." 
Sanger did not buy this and issued a statement urging public protest. "This has come as a 
complete surprise," said Sanger, "since  the Federation undertook preparation of the exhibit 
upon an express invitation from a member of the Exposition board." She said the cancellation 
resulted from "concerted action on the part of representatives of the Roman Catholic Church." 
She even accused  the church of threatening officials with the withholding of promised federal 
and state funds needed to hold the Exposition.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
Her statement mentioned BCFA prepared the exhibit in consultation with its National (Negro) 
Advisory Council, and it illustrated "t he need for birth control as a public health measure." She 
said the objective was to demonstrate how birth control would "improve the welfare of the Negro 
population," noting the maternal death rate among black mothers was nearly 50 percent higher, 
and the child death rate was more than one-third greater than the white community. 
At Sanger’s urging, protesters of the cancellation sent letters to Attorney Wendall E. Green, vice 
chairman of the Afra-Merican Emancipation Exposition Commission (sponsor of the Exposition), 
requesting he investigate. Green denied there was any threat or pressure to withhold funds 
needed to finance the Exposition. Further, he said the Exposition commission (of Illinois) 
"unanimously passed a resolution," which read in part: "That in the promotion, conduct and 
accomplishment of the objectives (of the Exposition) there must be an abiding spirit to create 
goodwill toward all people." He added that since the funds for the Exposition " came from 
citizens of all races and creeds, any exh ibit in conflict with the known convictions of any 
religious group contravenes the spirit of the resolution," which seemed to support Catholic 
opposition. The commission upheld the ban on the exhibit. 
"Better Health for 13,000,000" 
The propaganda of the Ne gro Project was that birth control meant better health. So on this 
premise, the BCFA designed two southern Negro Project "demonstration programs" to show 
"how medically -supervised birth control integrated into existing public health services could 
improve the general welfare of Negroes, and to initiate a nationwide educational program." 
The BCFA opened the first clinic at the Bethlehem Center in urban Nashville, Tennessee (where 
blacks constituted only 25 percent of the population), on February 13, 1940. Th ey extended the 
work to the Social Services Center of Fisk University (a historically black college) on July 23, 
1940. This location was especially significant because of its proximity to Meharry Medical 
School, which trained more than 50 percent of black physicians I the United States. 
An analysis of the income of the Nashville group revealed that "no family, regardless of size, 
had an income over $15 a week. The service obviously reached the income group for which it 
was designed," indicating the project’ s tar get. The report claimed to have brought "to light 
serious diseases and making possible their treatment, … [and] that 55 percent [354 of the 638] 
of the patients prescribed birth control methods used it consistently and successfully." However, 
the rep ort presented "no definite figures … to demonstrate the extent of community 
improvement." 
The BCFA opened the second clinic on May 1, 1940, in rural Berkeley County, South Carolina, 
under the supervision of Dr. Robert E. Seibels, chairman of the Committee on Maternal Welfare 
of the South Carolina Medical Association. BCFA chose this site in part "because leaders in the 
state were particularly receptive to the experiment. South Carolina had been the second state to 
make child spacing a part of its state public health program after a survey of the state’s maternal 
deaths showed that 25 percent occurred among mothers known to be physically unfit for 
pregnancy." Again, the message went out: Birth control –not better prenatal care –reduced 
maternal and infant mortality. 
Although Berkeley County’s population was 70 percent black, the clinic received criticism that 
members of this group were "overwhelmingly in the majority." Seibels assured Claude Barnett


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
that this was not the case. "We have … simply given our help to  those who were willing to 
receive it, and these usually are Negroes," he said. 
While religious convictions significantly influenced the Nashville patients’ view of birth control, 
people in Berkeley County had "no religious prejudice against birth control.  But the attitude that 
treatment of any disease was ‘against nature’ was in the air." Comparing the results of the two 
sites, "it is seen that the immediate receptivity to the demonstration was at the outset higher in 
the rural area. " However, "the final total success was lower [in the rural area]." However, in 
Berkeley, "stark poverty was even more in evidence, and bad roads, bad weather and 
ignorance proved powerful counter forces [to the contraceptive programs." After 18 months, the 
Berkeley program closed. 
The report indicated that, contrary to expectations, the lives of black patients serviced by the 
clinics did not improve dramatically from birth control. Two beliefs stood in the way: Some 
blacks likened birth control to abortion and others regarded i t as "inherently immoral." However, 
"when thrown against the total pictures of the awareness on the part of Negro leaders of the 
improved conditions, … and their opportunities to even better conditions under Planned 
Parenthood, … the obstacles to the program are greatly outweighed," said Dr. Dorothy Ferebee. 
A hint of eugenic flavor seasoned Ferebee’s speech: "The future program [of Planned 
Parenthood] should center around more education in the field through the work of a professional 
Negro worker, because those of who believe that the benefits of Planned Parenthood as a vital 
key to the elimination of human waste  must reach the entire population [emphasis added]." 
She peppered her speech with the importance of "Negro professionals, fully integrated into the  
staff, … who could interpret the program and objectives to [other blacks] in the normal course of 
day-to-day contacts; could break down fallacious attitudes and beliefs and elements of distrust; 
could inspire the confidence of the group; and would not be suspect of the intent to eliminate the 
race [emphasis added]." 
Sanger even managed to lure the prominent –but hesitant–black minister J. T. Braun, editor in 
chief of the National Baptist Convention’s Sunday School Publishing Board in Nashville, 
Tennessee, into her deceptive web. Braun confessed to Sanger that "the very idea of such a 
thing [birth control] has always held the greatest hatred and contempt in my mind. … I am 
hesitant to give my full endorsement of this idea, until you send me, perhaps, some mor e 
convincing literature on the subject. Sanger happily complied. She sent Braun the Federal 
Council of Churches’ Marriage and Home Committee pamphlet praised by Bishop Sims 
(another member of the National Advisory Council), assuring him that: "There are so me people 
who believe that birth control is an attempt to dictate to families how many children to have. 
Nothing could be further from the truth." 
Sanger’s assistants gave Braun more pro -birth control literature and a copy of her 
autobiography, which he gave to his wife to read. Sanger’s message of preventing maternal and 
infant mortality stirred Braun’s wife. Now convinced of this need, Braun permitted a group of 
women to use his chapel for a birth -control talk. "[I was] moved by the number of prominent 
[black] Christians backing the proposition," Braun wrote in a letter to Sanger. "At first glance I 
had a horrible shock to the proposition because it seemed to me to be allied to abortion, but 
after thought and prayer, I have concluded that especially among many women, it is necessary 
both to save the lives of mothers and children [emphasis added]."


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
By 1949, Sanger had hoodwinked black America’s best and brightest into believing birth 
control’s "life-saving benefits." In a monumental feat, she bewitched virtu ally an entire network 
of black social, professional and academic organizations into endorsing Planned Parenthood’s 
eugenic program. 
Sanger’s successful duplicity does not in any way suggest blacks were gullible. They certainly 
wanted to decrease maternal and infant mortality and improve the community’s overall health. 
They wholly accepted her message because it seemed to promise prosperity and social 
acceptance. Sanger used their vulnerabilities and their ignorance (of her deliberately hidden 
agenda) to he r advantage. Aside from birth control, she offered no other medical or social 
solutions to their adversity. Surely, blacks would not have been such willing accomplices had 
they perceived her true intentions. Considering the role eugenics played in the early birth control 
movement–and Sanger’s embracing of that ideology–the notion of birth control as seemingly the 
only solution to the problems that plagued blacks should have been much more closely 
scrutinized. 
"Scientific Racism" 
Planned Parenthood has gone to great lengths to repudiate the organization’s eugenic origins. It 
adamantly denies Sanger was a eugenicist or racist, despite evidence to the contrary. Because 
Sanger stopped editing The Birth Control Review in 1929, the organization tries to disassocia te 
her from the eugenic and racist-oriented articles published after that date. However, a summary 
of an address Sanger gave in 1932, which appeared in the Review that year, revealed her 
continuing bent toward eugenics. 
In "A Plan for Peace," Sanger sugges ted Congress set up a special department to study 
population problems and appoint a "Parliament of Population." One of the main objectives of the 
"Population Congress" would be "to raise the level and increase the general intelligence of 
population." This would be accomplished by applying a "stern and rigid policy of sterilization and 
segregation [ in addition to tightening immigration laws] to that grade of population whose 
progeny is already tainted, or whose inheritance is such that objectionable traits may be 
transmitted to offspring." 
It’s reasonable to conclude that as the leader of Planned Parenthood –even after 1929–Sanger 
would not allow publication of ideas she didn’t support. 
Sanger’s defenders argue she only wanted to educate blacks about birth co ntrol’s "health 
benefits." However, she counted the very people she wanted to "educate" among the "unfit," 
whose numbers needed to be restricted. 
Grant presents other arguments Sanger’s supporters use to refute her racist roots: 
 blacks, Jews, Hispanics and other minorities are well represented in the  
 the former, high-profile president of the organization, Faye Wattleton, is a black woman;  
 "aggressive" minority hiring practices have been standard procedure for more than two 
decades;  
 the "vast majority of the nation’s ethnic leadership solidly and actively supports the work" 
of the organization.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
These justifications also fail because of what Grant calls "scientific racism." This form of racism 
is based on genes, rather than skin color or language. "The issue is not ‘color of skin’ or ‘dialect 
of tongue,’" Grant writes, "but ‘ quality of genes  [emphasis added].’" Therefore, "as long as 
blacks, Jews and Hispanics demonstrate ‘a good quality gene pool’ –as long as they ‘act white 
and think white’–then they are esteemed equally with Aryans. As long as they are, as Margaret 
Sanger said, ‘the best of their race,’ then they can be [counted] as valuable citizens [emphasis 
added]." By the same token, "individual whites" who shoe "dysgenic traits" must also have their 
fertility "curbed right along with the other ‘inferiors and undesirables.’" 
In short, writes Grant, "Scientific racism is an equal opportunity discriminator [emphasis added]. 
Anyone with a ‘defective gene pool’ is suspect. And anyone who sh ows promise may be 
admitted to the ranks of the elite." 
The eugenic undertone is hard to miss. As Grant rightly comments, "The bottom line is that 
Planned Parenthood was self -consciously organized, in part, to promote and enforce White 
Supremacy. ... It has been from its inception implicitly and explicitly racist." 
"There is no way to escape the implications," argues William L. Davis, a black financial analyst 
Grant quotes. "When an organization has a history of racism, when its literature is openly racist,  
when it goals are self-consciously racial, and when its programs invariably revolve around race, 
it doesn’t take an expert to realize that the organization is indeed racist." 
Sanger’s Legacy  
Its is impossible to sever Planned Parenthood’s past from its p resent. Its legacy of lies and 
propaganda continues to infiltrate the black community. This poison is even more venomous 
because, in addition to birth control, Planned Parenthood touts abortion as a solution to the 
economic and social problems that plague the community. In its wake is the loss of more than 
12 million lives within the black community alone. Planned Parenthood’s own record reflect this. 
For example, a 1992 report revealed that 23.2 percent of women who obtained abortions at its 
affiliates were black---although blacks represent no more than 13 percent of the total population. 
In 1996, Planned Parenthood’s research arm reported: "Blacks, who make up 14 percent of all 
childbearing women, have 31 percent of all abortions and whites, who account fo r 81 percent of 
women of childbearing age, have 61 percent." 
"Abortion is the number -one killer of blacks in America," says Rev. Hunter of LEARN. "We’re 
losing our people at the rate of 1,452 a day. That’s just pure genocide. There’s no other word for 
it. [Sanger’s] influence and the whole mindset that Planned Parenthood has brought into the 
black community ... say it’s okay to destroy your people. We bought into the lie; we bought into 
the propaganda." 
Some blacks have even made abortion "right" synonymous with civil rights. 
"We’re destroying the destiny and purpose of others who should be here," Hunter laments. 
"Who knows the musicians we’ve lost? Who knows the great leaders the black community has 
really lost? Who knows what great minds of economic power people have lost? What great 
teachers?" He recites an old African proverb: "No one knows whose womb holds the chief." 
Hunter has personally observed the vestiges of Planned Parenthood’s eugenic past in the black 
community today. "When I travel around the c ountry...I can only think of one abortion clinic [I’ve


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
seen] in a predominantly white neighborhood. The majority of clinics are in black 
neighborhoods." 
Hunter noted the controversy that occurred tow years ago in Louisiana involving school -based 
health cli nics. The racist undertone could not have been more evident. In the Baton Rouge 
district, officials were debating placing clinics in the high schools. Black state representative 
Sharon Weston Broome initially supported the idea. She later expressed concern  about clinics 
providing contraceptives and abortion counseling. "Clinics should promote abstinence," she 
said. Upon learning officials wanted to put the clinics in black schools only, Hunter urged her to 
suggest they be placed in white schools as well. At  Broome’s suggestion, however, proposals 
for t he school clinics were "dropped immediately," reported Hunter. 
Grant observed the same game plan 20 years ago. "During the 1980s when Planned 
Parenthood shifted its focus from community -based clinics to school -based clinics, it again 
targeted inner -city minority neighborhoods," he writes. "Of the more than 100 school -based 
clinics that have opened nationwide in the last decade [1980s], none has been at substantially 
all-white schools," he adds. "None has been at suburban middle-class schools. All have been at 
black, minority or ethnic schools." 
In 1987, a group of black ministers, parents and educators filed suit against the Chicago Board 
of Education. They charged the city’s school -based clinics with not only v iolating the state’s 
fornication laws, but also with discrimination against blacks. The clinics were a "calculated, 
pernicious effort to destroy the very fabric of family life [between] black parents and their 
children," the suit alleged. 
One of the parents in the group was "shocked" when her daughter came home from school with 
Planned Parenthood material. "I never realized how racist those people were until I read the 
[information my daughter received] at the school clinic," she said. "[They are worse than ] the 
Klan … because they’re so slick and sophisticated. Their bigotry is all dolled up with statistics 
and surveys, but just beneath the surface it’s as ugly as apartheid." 
A more recent account uncovered a Planned Parenthood affiliate giving condoms to residents of 
a poor black neighborhood in Akron, Ohio. The residents received a "promotional bag" 
containing, among other things: literature on sexually transmitted disease prevention, 
gynecology exams and contraception, a condom -case key chain containing a  bright-green 
condom, and a coupon. The coupon was redeemable at three Ohio county clinics for a dozen 
condoms and a $5 McDonald’s gift certificate. All the items were printed with Planned 
Parenthood phone numbers. 
The affiliate might say they’re targeting  high-pregnancy areas, but their response presumes 
destructive behavior on the part of the targeted group. Planned Parenthood has always been 
reluctant to promote, or encourage, abstinence as the only safeguard against teen pregnancy 
and sexually transmitted diseases, calling it "unrealistic." 
Rev. Richard Welch, president of Human Life International in Front Royal, Virginia, "blasted" the 
affiliate for targeting low -income, minority neighborhoods with the bags. He said the incident 
revealed "the racism inh erent in promoting abortion and contraception in primarily minority 
neighborhoods."


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 15 
 
 The Negro Project: Margaret Sanger's Eugenic Plan for Black Americans  
 
He then criticized Planned Parenthood: "Having sprung from the racist dreams of a woman 
determined to apply abortion and contraception to eugenics and ethnic cleansing, Pla nned 
Parenthood remains true to the same strategy today." 
Untangling the Deceptive Web 
Black leaders have been silent about Margaret Sanger’s evil machination against their 
community far too long. They’ve been silent about abortion’s devastating effects in  their 
community–despite their pro -life inclination. "The majority of [blacks] are more pro -life than 
anything else," said Hunter. "Blacks were never taught to destroy their children; even in slavery 
they tried to hold onto their children." 
"Blacks are not quiet about the issue because they do no care, but rather because the truth has 
been kept from them. The issue is … to educate our people, " said former Planned Parenthood 
board member LaVerne Tolbert. 
Today, a growing number of black pro -lifers are untangling the deceptive web spun by Sanger. 
They are using truth to shed light on the lies. The "Say SO" march is just one example of their 
burgeoning pro -life activism. As the marchers laid 1,452 roses at the courthouse steps –to 
commemorate the number of black babies aborted daily–spokesman Damon Owens said, "This 
calls national attention to the problem [of abortion]. This is an opportunity for blacks to speak to 
other blacks. This doesn’t solve all of our problems. But we will not solve our other problems 
with abortion." 
Black pro-lifers are also linking arms with their white pro -life brethren. Black Americans for Life 
(BAL) is an outreach group of the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC), a Washington, D.C. 
based grassroots organizations. NRLC encourages n etworking between black and white pro -
lifers. "Our goal is to bring people together –from all races, colors, and religions –to work on pro-
life issues," said NRLC Director of Outreach Ernest Ohlhoff. "Black Americans for Life in not a 
parallel group; we want  to help African -Americans integrate communicational and functionally 
into the pro-life movement." 
Mrs. Beverly LaHaye, founder and chairman of Concerned Women for America, echoes the 
sentiment. "Our mission is to protect the right to life of all members o f the human race. CWA 
welcomes like-minded women and men, from all walks of life, to join us in this fight." 
Concerned Women for America has a long history of fighting Planned Parenthood’s evil agenda. 
The Negro Project is an obscure angle, but one that must come to light. Margaret Sanger sold 
black Americans an illusion. Now with the veil of deception removed, they can "choose life … 
that [their] descendants may live."

