=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: George Jackson-Soledad-Brother.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 359
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:59.673536
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Soledad 
Brother 
The Prison Letters 
of George Jackson 
Foreword by JonathanJackson,Jr. 
Lawrence Hill Books


--- PAGE 3 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging.in·Publication Data 
Jackson, George, 1941-1971 
Soledad brother: the prison letters of George Jackson I 
foreword by Jonathan Jackson, Jr. ; introduction by Jean Genet. 
p. cm. 
Originally published: New York: Coward·McCann, [1970]. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 1-55652·230-4 : $14.95 
1. Jackson, George, 1941-1971 Correspondence. 
2. Afro-American prisoners-California-Correspondence. I. Title. 
HV9468.J3A4 1994 
365' .6'092-dc20 
[B] 94·28264 
CIP 
© 1994 by Jonathan Jackson, Jr. 
Letters originally published 1970 
Published by Lawrence Hill Books 
an imprint of Chicago Review Press, Incorporated 
814 North Franklin Street 
Chicago, Illinois 60610 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America


--- PAGE 4 ---
To the Man-Child, 
Tall, evil, graceful, brighteyed, black man-child-Jonathan Peter 
Jackson-who died on August 7, 1970, courage in one hand, assault 
rifle in the other; my brother, comrade, friend-the true revolution­
ary, the black comm\!nist guerrilla in the highest state of development, 
he died on the trigger, scourge of the unrighteous, soldier of the peo­
ple; to this terrible man-child and his. wonderful mother Georgia Bea, 
to Angela Y. Davis,;my tender experience, I dedicate this collection 
of letters; to the destruction of their enemies I dedicate my life.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents 
George L. Jackson 
September 23, 1941-August 21, 1971 ix 
Foreword 
by Jonathan Jackson, Jr. xiii 
Recent Letters and an Autobiography 1 
Appendix: Introduction to the First Edition 
by Jean Genet 331


--- PAGE 6 ---
George L. Jackson 
September 23, 1941-August 21, 1971 
In 1960, at the age of eighteen, George Jackson was accused of 
stealing $70 from a gas station in Los Angeles. Though there was 
evidence of his innocence, his court-appointed lawyer maintained 
that because Jackson had a record (two previous instances of petty 
crime), he should plead guilty in exchange for a light sentence in the 
county jail. He did, and received an indeterminate sentence of one 
year to life. Jackson spent the next ten years ,in Soledad Prison, seven 
and a half of them in solitary confinement. Instead of succumbing to 
the dehumanization of prison existence, he transformed himself into 
the leading theoretician of the prison movement and a brilliant 
writer. Soledad Brother, which contains the letters that he wrote from 
1964 to 1970, is his testament. 
In his twenty-eighth year, Jackson and two other black inmates­
Fleeta Drumgo and John Cluchette-were falsely accused of mur­
dering a white prison guard. The guard was beaten to death on 
IX


--- PAGE 7 ---
January 16, 1969, a few days after another white guard shot and 
killed three black inmates by firing from a tower into the courtyard. 
The accused men were brought in chains and shackles to two secret 
hearings in Salinas County. A third hearing was about to take place 
when John Cluchette managed to smuggle a note to his mother: 
"Help, I'm in trouble." With the aid of a state senator, his mother 
contacted a lawyer, and so commenced one of the most extensive 
legal defenses in U.S. history. According to their attorneys, Jackson, 
Drumgo, and Clutchette were charged with murder not because there 
was any substantial evidence of their guilt, but because they had been 
previously identified as black militants by the prison authorities. If 
convicted, they would face a mandatory death penalty under the 
California penal code. Within weeks, the case of the Soledad Broth­
ers emerged as a political cause celebre for all sorts of people 
demanding change at a time when every American institutiop was 
shaken by Black rebellions in more than one hundred cities and the 
mass movement against the Vietnam War. 
August 7, 1970, just a few days after George Jackson was trans­
ferred to San Quentin, the case was catapulted to the forefront of 
national news when his brother, Jonathan, a seventeen-year-old high 
school student in Pasadena, staged a raid on the Marin County 
courthouse with a satchelful of handguns, an assault rifle, and a 
shotgun hidden under his coat. Educated into a political revolution­
ary by George, Jonathan invaded the court during a hearing for three 
black San Quentin inmates, not including his brother, and handed 
them weapons. As he left with the inmates and five hostages, 
including the judge, Jonathan demanded that the Soledad Brothers 
be released within thirty minutes. In the shootout that ensued, 
Jonathan was gunned down. Of Jonathan, George wrote, "He was 
free for a while. I guess that's more than most of us can expect." 
Soledad Brother, which is dedicated to Jonathan Jackson, was 
released to critical acclaim in France and the United States, with an 
introduction by the renowned French dramatist Jean Genet, in the 
fall of 1970. Less than a year later and just two days before the 
opening of his trial, George Jackson was shot to death by a tower 
guard inside San Quentin Prison in a purported escape attempt. "No 
Black person," wrote James Baldwin, "will ever believe that George 
Jackson died the way they tell us he did." 
x


--- PAGE 8 ---
Soledad Brother went on to become a classic of Black literature 
and political philosophy, selling more than 400,000 copies before it 
went out of print twenty years ago. Lawrence Hill Books is pleased 
to reissue this book and to add to it a Foreword by the author's 
nephew, Jonathan Jackson, Jr., who is a writer living in California. 
Xl


--- PAGE 9 ---
Foreword 
I was born eight and a half months after my father, Jonathan Jackson, 
was shot down on August 7, 1970, at the Marin County Courthouse, 
when he tried to gain the release of the Soledad Brothers by taking 
hostages. Before and especially after that day, Uncle George kept in 
constant contact with my mother by writing from his cell in San 
Quentin. (The Department of Corrections wouldn't put her on the 
visitors' list.) During George's numerous trial appearances for the 
Soledad Brothers case, Mom would lift me above the crowd so he 
could see me. Consistently, we would receive a letter a few days 
later. For a single mother with son, alone and in the middle of both 
controversy and not a little unwarranted trouble with the authorities, 
those messages of strength were no doubt instrumental in helping 
her carry on. No matter how oppressive his situation became, George 
always had time to lend his spirit to the people he cared for. 
A year and two weeks after the revolutionary takeover in Marin, 
George was ruthlessly murdered by prison guards at San Quentin. 
Both he and my father left me a great deal: pride, history, an 
Xlll


--- PAGE 10 ---
unmistakable name. My experience has been at once wonderful and 
incredibly difficult. My life is not consumed by the Jackson legacy, 
but my charge is an accepted and cherished piece of my existence. 
It is out of my responsibility to my legacy that I have come to write 
this Foreword to my uncle's prison writings. 
Today I read my inherited letters often-those written from 
George to my mother with a dull pencil on prison stationery. They 
are things of beauty, my most valuable possessions, passionate 
pieces of writing that have few rivals in the modern era. They will 
remain unpublished. However, the letters of Soledad Brother dem­
onstrate the same insight and eloquence-the way George's writings 
make his personal experience universal is the mainstay of his bril­
liance. 
When this collection of letters was first released in 1969, it brought 
a young revolutionary to the forefront of a tempest, a tempest 
characterized by the Black Power, free speech, and antiwar move­
ments, accompanied by a dissatisfaction with the status quo through­
out the United States. With unflinching directness, George Jackson 
conveyed an intelligent yet accessible message with his trademark 
sty Ie, rational rage. He illuminated previously hidden viewpoints and 
feelings that disenfranchised segments ofthe population were unable 
to articulate: the poor, the victimized, the imprisoned, the disillu­
sioned. George spoke in a revolutionary voice that they had no idea 
existed. He was the prominent figure of true radical thought and 
practice during the period, and when he was assassinated, much of 
the movement died along with him. But George Jackson cannot and 
will not ever leave. His life and thoughts serve as the message­
George himself is the revolution. 
The reissue of Soledad Brother at this point in time is essential. It 
appears that the nineties are going to be a telling decade in U.S. 
history. The signposts of systemic breakdown are as glaringly obvi­
ous as they were in the sixties: unrest manifesting itself in inner-city 
turmoil, widespread rise of violence in the culture, and international 
oppression to legitimize a state in crisis. The fact that imprisonments 
in California have more than tripled over the last decade, supported 
by the public, is merely one sign of societal decomposition. That 
systemic change occurred during the sixties is a myth. The United 
States in the nineties faces strikingly analogous problems. George 
spoke to the issues of his day, but conditions now are so similar that 
xiv


--- PAGE 11 ---
this work could have been written last month. It is imperative that 
George be heard, whether by the angry but unchanneled young or by 
the cynical and worldly mature. The message must be carried farther 
than where he bravely left it in August of 1971. 
Over the past twenty-five years, why has George Jackson not been 
an integral part of mainstream consciousness? He has been and still 
is underexposed, reduced to simplistic terms, and ultimately misun­
derstood. Racial and conspiracy theory aside, there are rational 
reasons for his exclusion. They stem not only from the hard-line 
revolutionary aspects of George's philosophy, but more importantly 
from the nature of the political system that he existed in and under. 
Howard Zinn has pointed out in A People's History of the United 
States that "the history of any country, presented as the history of a 
family, conceals fierce conflicts of interest (sometimes exploding, 
most often repressed) between conquerors and conquered, masters 
and slaves, capitalists and workers, dominators and dominated." 
U.S. history is essentially that type of hidden history. Without 
denying important mitigating factors, the United States of today is 
strongly linked to the values and premises on which it was founded. 
That is, it is a settler colony founded primarily on two basic pillars, 
upheld by the Judeo-Christian tradition: genocide of indigenous 
peoples and slave labor in support of a capitalist infrastructure. 
Although the Bible repeatedly exalts mass slaughter and oppression, 
Judeo-Christian morality is publicly held to be inconsistent with 
them. This dissonance, evident within the nation's structure from the 
beginning, informs the state's first function: to oversimplify and 
minimize immoral events in order to legitimize history and the 
state's very existence simultaneously. 
Ironically, traditional Judeo-Christian morality is a perfect vehicle 
for genocide, slavery, and territorial expansion. As a logical progres­
sion from biblical example, expansion and imperialism culminated 
in the United States with the concept of Manifest Destiny, which 
held that it was the colonists' inherent right to expand and conquer. 
Further it was a duty, the "white man's burden," to save the "na­
tives," to attempt to convert all heathens encountered. Protestant 
Calvinism provided a set of ethics that fit perfectly with the colo­
nists' conquests. Max Weber, in his definitive study on religion, The 
Sociology of Religion, wrote, "Calvinism held that the unsearchable 
xv


--- PAGE 12 ---
God possessed good reasons for having distributed the gifts of 
fortune unevenly"; it "represented as God's will [the Calvinists'] 
domination over the sinful world. Clearly this and other features of 
Protestantism, such as its rationalization of the existence of a lower 
class, * were not only the bases for the formation of the United States, 
but still prominently exist today. "One must go to the ethics of ascetic 
Protestantism," Weber asserts, "to find any ethical sanction for 
economic rationalism and for the entrepreneur." When a nation can't 
admit to the process through which it builds hegemony, how can 
anything but delusion be a reality? "The monopoly of truth, including 
historical truth," stated Daniel Singer in a lecture at Evergreen State 
College (Washington) in 1987, "is implied in the monopoly of 
power." 
Clearly, objective history is an impossibility. This understood, the 
significant problem lies in how the general population defines the 
term; history implies that truth is being told. It is an unfortunate fact 
that history is unfailingly written by the victors, which in the case of 
the United States are not only the original imperialists, but the 
majority of the "founding fathers," dedicated to uniting and strength­
ening the existing mercantile class among disjointed colonies. There 
can be no doubt that from the creation of this young nation, history 
as a created and perceived entity moved further and further away 
from the objective ideal. Genocide, necessary for "the development 
of the modem capitalist economy," according to Howard Zinn, was 
rationalized as a reaction to the fear of Indian savages. Slavery was 
similarly construed. 
The personalization of history, the process by which we construct 
heroes and pariahs, is a consequence of its dialectical nature. Without 
fail, an odd paradox is created around someone who, by virtue of his 
or her actions, becomes prominent enough to warrant the designation 
"historical figure." There is a leap on the part of the general public, 
sparked by the media, to another mindse!. Sensational deeds are 
glorified, horrible acts reviled. A few points are selected as defining 
characteristics. The media, conforming to their restrictions of con-
* Called bootstrap ideology, this tenet holds that all the poor need to do 
is "pull themselves up by their bootstraps" to be materially successful. 
Accordingly, those who do not do so deserve to be in their situation 
and are considered unworthy. 
XVI


--- PAGE 13 ---
cision (which make accuracy nearly impossible to attain), reiterate 
these points over and over. Schools and textbooks not only teach 
these points but drill them into young minds. Howard Zinn com­
ments that "this learned sense of moral proportion, coming from the 
apparent objectivity of the scholar, is accepted more easily than 
when it comes from politicians at press conferences. It is therefore 
more deadly." 
A few tidbits, factual or not, incomplete and selective, are used to 
describe the entirety of a person's existence. They become part of 
mainstream consciousness. We therefore know that Lincoln freed 
the slaves, Malcolm X was a black extremist, and Hitler was solely 
responsible for World War II and the Holocaust. All half-truths go 
unexplained, all fallacies go unchallenged, as they appear to make 
perfect sense to the everyday, noncritically thinking American. The 
paradox has been created: The more famous a person becomes, the 
more misunderstood he or she is. This accepted occurrence is incred­
ibly counterintuitive: the public should know more, not less, about 
a noteworthy individual and the sociopolitical dynamics surrounding 
him or her. 
This historical mythicization is not, for the most part, a con­
sciously created phenomenon. The media don't go out of their way 
to mislead the public by constructing false heroes and emphasizing 
the mundane. Fewer "dimly lit conferences" take place than conspir­
acy theorists believe. It is the existing political system that is respon­
sible for the information that reaches the general public. The state's 
control of information created the system, and it continually re-cre­
ates it. Propagated by schooling and the media, information that 
reaches the public is subject to three chief mechanisms of state 
control: denial, self-censorship, and imprisonment. 
Denial is the easiest control mechanism, and therefore the most 
common. If events do not follow the state's agenda or its ecumenical 
ideology and might bring unrest, they are denied. Examples are 
plentiful: prewar state terrorism against the people of North and 
South Vietnam and later the bombing of Cambodia; government 
funding and military aid to the Nicaraguan Contras; and support of 
UNITA and South Africa in the virtual destruction of Angola, among 
many others. 
Denial goes hand in hand with self-censorship. The media empha­
size certain personal characteristics and events and de-emphasize 
XVll


--- PAGE 14 ---
others, in a pattern that supports U.S. hegemony. The information 
that reached the public after the U.S. invasion of Panama in 1989 is 
telling. It was not until much later, after the heat of controversy, that 
the average citizen had access to the scope of the devastation. The 
effectiveness of self-censorship in this case was maximized, as the 
full details of the Panama invasion were patchwork for years. 
While we may assume that the media have an obligation to 
accurately convey such an event to the public, the media in fact 
perpetuate the government's position by engaging in their own 
self-censorship. Noam Chomsky points out in Deterring Democ­
racy, "With a fringe of exceptions-mostly well after the tasks had 
been accomplished-the media rallied around the flag with due piety 
and enthusiasm, fnnnelling the most absurd White House tales to the 
public while scrupulously refraining from asking the obvious ques­
tions, or seeing the obvious facts." 
Denial and self-censorship create a comfort zone for the U.S. 
citizenry, generally uncritical and willing to accept digestible ver­
sions of historical personalities and world events. The reasoning 
behind denial and self-censorship: do not make the public uncom­
fortable, even if that means diluting, sensationalizing, or lying about 
the truth. 
Ultimately, when denial and self-censorship may not be sufficient 
for control of information, the state resorts to imprisonment. All 
imprisonment is political and as such all imprisonments carry equal 
weight. Society does, however, distinguish two categories of impris­
onment: one for breaking a law, the other for political reasons. A 
difference is clear: American Indian Movement leader Leonard 
Peltier, serving a federal sentence for his supposed role at Wounded 
Knee, is considered a different type of prisoner than an armed robber 
serving a five-to-seven-year sentence. 
State policy reflects institutional needs. When the state as an 
institution cannot tolerate an outside threat, real or perceived, from 
an individual or group, the consequences at its command include 
isolation, persecution, and political imprisonment. All may occur in 
greater or lesser form, depending on the degree of threat. 
Political incarceration removes threats to the political and eco­
nomic hegemony of the United States. Even though in 1959 George 
Jackson initially went to prison as an "everyday lawbreaker" with a 
xviii


--- PAGE 15 ---
one-year-to-life sentence, it was his political consciousness that kept 
him incarcerated for eleven years. In 1970 George wrote: 
International capitalism cannot be destroyed without the ex­
tremes of struggle. The entire colonial world is watching the 
blacks inside the U.S., wondering and waiting for us to come to 
our senses. Their problems and struggles with the Amerikan 
monster are much more difficult than they would be if we actively 
aided them. We are on the inside. We are the only ones (besides 
the very small white minority left) who can get at the monster's 
heart without subjecting the world to nuclear fire. We have a 
momentous historical role to act out if we will. The whole world 
for all time in the future will love us and remember us as the 
righteous people who made it possible for the world to live on. 
ff we fail through fear and lack of aggressive imagination, then 
the slaves of the future will Curse us, as we sometimes curse those 
of yesterday. I don't want to die and leave a few sad songs and a 
hump in the ground as my only monument. I want to leave a world 
that is liberated from trash, pollution, racism, nation-states, na­
tion-state wars and armies, from pomp, bigotry, parochialism, a 
thousand different brands of untruth, and licentious usurious 
economics. 
Nothing is more dangerous to a system that depends on misinfor­
mation than a voice that obeys its own dictates and has the courage 
to speak out. George Jackson's imprisonment and further isolation 
within the prison system were clearly a function of the state's 
response to his outspoken opposition to the capitalist structure. 
Political incarceration is a tangible form of state control. Unlike 
denial and self-censorship, imprisonment is publicly scrutinized. Yet 
public reaction to political incarceration has been minimal. The U.S. 
government claims it holds no political prisoners (denial), while any 
notice given to protests focused on political prisoners invariably 
takes the form of a human interest story (self-censorship). 
The efficacy of political incarceration in the United States cannot 
be denied. Prison serves not only as a physical barrier, but a com­
munication restraint. Prisoners are completely ostracized from soci­
ety, with little or no chance to break through. Those few outside who 
might be sympathetic are always hesitant to communicate or protest 
past a certain point, fearing their own persecution or imprisonment. 
Also, deep down most people believe that all prisoners, regardless 
xix


--- PAGE 16 ---
of their individual situations, really did do something "wrong." 
Added to that prejudice, society lacks a distinction between a pris­
oner's actions and his or her personal worth; a bad act equals a bad 
person. The bottom line is that the majority of people simply will not 
believe that the state openly or covertly oppresses without criminal 
cause. As Daniel Singer asked at the Evergreen conference in 1987, 
"Is it possible for a class which exterminates the native peoples of 
the Americas, replaces them by raping Africa for humans it then 
denigrates and dehumanizes as slaves, while cheapening and degrad­
ing its own working class-is it possible for such a class to create a 
democracy, equality and to advance the cause of human freedom? 
The implicit answer is, 'No, of course not.'" 
How does a person-inside or outside prison�onfront the cul­
tural mindsets, the layers of misinformation propagated by the 
capitalist system? Sooner or later, what can be called the "radical 
dilemma" surfaces for the few wanting to enter into a structural 
attack/analysis of the United States. Culturally, educationally, and 
politically, all of us are similarly limited by these layers of misinfor­
mation; we are all products of the system. None of us functions from 
a clean slate when considering or debating any issue, especially 
history as it pertains to the United States. 
George Jackson struggled against the constraints of denial and 
self-censorship, to say nothing of his physical and communicative 
distance from society. Political prisoners are inherently vulnerable 
to an either/or situation: isolating silence or elimination. For George, 
his vociferous revolutionary attitude was either futile or self-exter­
minating. He was well aware of his situation. In Blood in My Eye, 
his political treatise, he wrote: 
I'm in a unique political position. I have a very nearly closed 
future, and since I have always been inclined to get disturbed over 
organized injustice or terrorist practice against the innocents­
wherever-I can now say just about what I want (I've always 
done just about that), without fear of self-exposure. I can only be 
executed once. 
George was equally aware that revolutionary change happens only 
when an entire society is ready. No amount of action, preaching, or 
teaching will spark revolution if social conditions do not warrant it. 
xx


--- PAGE 17 ---
My father's case, unfortunately, is an appropriate indicator. He 
attempted a revolutionary act during a reactionary time; elimination 
was the only possible consequence. 
The challenge for a radical in today' s world is to balance reformist 
tendencies (political liberalism) and revolutionary action/ideology 
(radicalism). While reformism entails a legitimation of the status quo 
as a search for changes within the system, radicalism posits a change 
of system. Because revolutionaries are particularly vulnerable, a 
certain degree of reformism is necessary to create space, space 
needed to begin the laborious task of making revolution. 
George's statement "Combat Liberalism" and the general reaction 
to it typify the gulf between the two philosophies. George was 
universally misunderstood by the left and the right alike. As is the 
case with most modern political prisoners, nearly all of his support 
came from reformists with liberal leanings. It seems that they acted 
in spite of, rather than because of, the core of his message. 
The left's attitude toward COINTELPRO is a useful illustration. 
COINTELPRO, the covert government program used to dismantle 
the Black Panther Party, and later the American Indian Movement, 
is typically cited by many leftists as a damning example of the 
government's conspiratorial nature. Declassified documents and 
ex-agents' testimonies have shown COINTELPRO to be one of the 
most unlawful, insidious cells of government in the nation's history. 
COINTELPRO, however, was really a symptomatic, expendable 
entity; a small police force within a larger one (FBI), within a branch 
of government (executive), within the government itself (liberal 
democracy), within the economic system (capitalism). Reformists in 
radicals' clothing unknowingly argued against symptoms, rather 
than the roots, of the entrenched system. Doing away with COIN­
TELPRO or even the FBI would not alter the structure that produces 
the surveillance/elimination apparatus. 
In George's day, others who considered themselves left of center, 
or even revolutionary, concerned themselves with inner-city reform 
issues, mostly black ghettos. The problem of and debate about inner 
cities stilI exists. However, recognition of a problem and analysis of 
that problem are two very different challenges. The demand to better 
only predominantly black inner-city conditions is unrealistic at best. 
In the capitalist structure, there must be an upper, middle, and 
especially a lower class. Improving black neighborhoods is the 
xxi


--- PAGE 18 ---
equivalent of ghettoizing some other segment of the population­
poor whites, Hispanics, Asians, etc. Nothing intrinsic to the system 
would change, only superficial alterations that would mollify the 
liberal public. As Chomsky asserts in Turning the Tide: 
Determined opposition to the latest lunacies and atrocities 
must continue, for the sake of the victims as well as our own 
ultimate survival. But it should be understood as a poor substitute 
for a challenge to the deeper causes, a challenge that we are, 
unfortunately, in no position to mount at the present though the 
groundwork can and must be laid. 
Failure to understand the radical, encompassing viewpoint in the 
sixties led to reformism. In effect, the majority of the left completely 
deserted any attempt at the radical balance required of the politically 
conscious, leaving only liberalism and its narrow vision to flourish. 
Nobody comprehended the radical dilemma more fully than 
George Jackson. Indeed, he developed his philosophy not out of mere 
happenstance, but with a very conscious eye upon maintaining his 
revolutionary ideology. He writes in Blood in My Eye: 
Reformism is an old story in Amerika. There have been 
depressions and socio-economic political crises throughout the 
period that marked the formation of the present upper-class ruling 
circle, and their controlling elites. But the parties of the left were 
too committed to reformism to exploit their revolutionary poten­
tial. 
George's involvement with the prison reform movement should 
therefore be seen as a matter of survival. Unlike the reformist left, 
prison oppression was directly affecting him. His balanced reform 
activities-improving prisoners' rights while speaking out against 
prison as an entity-were required to make living conditions toler­
able enough for him to continue on his revolutionary path. Simply, 
he did what he had to do to survive--<:reated space while simulta­
neously pursuing his radical theory. 
The reform George Jackson did accomplish was and still is 
incredible, transforming the prison environment from unlivable to 
livable hell, from encampments that he called reminiscent of Nazi 
Germany to at least a scaled-down version of the like. With his 
xxii


--- PAGE 19 ---
influence, these changes occurred not only in California, but 
throughout the nation. Only now is his influence beginning to slip, 
with reactionary politics bringing about torture and sensory depriva­
tion facilities such as Pelican Bay State Prison in California, as well 
as the reintroduction for adoption of the one-to-life indeterminate 
sentence. This type of sentence is fertile ground for state oppression, 
as it is up to a parole board to decide if an inmate is ever to be let go. 
A prison can easily and effectively create situations that transform 
a one-to-life into a life sentence. (Tellingly, the indeterminate sen­
tence is being promoted not by the right, but by a California senator 
formerly associated with mainstream liberal causes.) 
Politically, George Jackson provided us all with a radical educa­
tion, a viable alternative to viewing not only the United States but 
the world as a political entity. He gave the disenfranchised a lens 
through which they could clearly see their situation and become 
more conscious about it. He wrote in April 1970: 
It all falls into place. I see the whole thing much clearer now, 
how fascism has taken possession of this country, the interlock­
ing dictatorship from county level on up to the Grand Dragon in 
Washington, D.C. 
Crucially, George's treatment is a concrete, undeniable example 
of political oppression. Race is more times than not the easy answer 
to a problem. Among people of color in the United States, the quick 
fIx, "blame it on whitey" mentality has become so prevalent that it 
shortcuts thinking. Conversely, stereotypes of minorities act as 
simple-minded tools of divisiveness and oppression. George ad­
dressed these issues in prison, setting a model for the outside as well: 
"I'm always telling the brothers some of those whites are willing to 
work with us against the pigs. All they got to do is stop talking honky. 
When the races start fIghting, all you have is one maniac group 
against another." On the surface, race has been and is still being put 
forth as an overriding issue that needs to be addressed as a prereq­
uisite for social change. In fact, although it seems to loom as a large 
problem, race as an issue is again a symptom of capitalism. Of 
course, on a paltry level and among the relatively powerless, race 
does play a part in social structure (the racist cop, the bigoted 
landlord, etc.), pitting segments of the population against each other. 
xxiii


--- PAGE 20 ---
But revolutionary change requires class analysis that drives appro­
priate actions and eliminates race as a mitigating factor. Knowing 
these socioeconomic dynamics, George Jackson was first and fore­
most a people's revolutionary, and he acted as such at all times 
without compromise. His writings clearly reflect his belief in class­
based revolutionary change. 
Considering the many structural elements affecting him, it is easy 
to see why George and his message have been misinterpreted. The 
quick takes on him are abundant: it's assumed that he was imprisoned 
and oppressed because he was black, because he had publicized ties 
with the Black Panther Party and was a well-known organizer within 
the prison reform movement. Although George became a "prison 
celebrity," a status that certainly didn't help him in terms of acquittal 
and release, ignorance of the actual forces responsible for his pro­
longed imprisonment is inexcusable. The radical viewpoint is abso­
lutely indispensable when regarding both George's life circumstance 
and philosophy. His life serves not as a mere individual example of 
prison cruelty, but as a scalding indictment of the very nature of 
capitalism. 
In these times, there are two very different ways to be born into 
privilege. First and most obvious in the system of capital is to be 
born into wealth. Second, and not precluding the first, is to have an 
intellectual, politically conscious base from which to grow as a 
person philosophically and spiritually. Radical fIgures in modern 
society-Lenin, Trotsky, Che Guevara, my father, Jonathan Jack­
son, and my uncle George Jackson-have the capability of providing 
this base through their examples and writings. 
Those not born into privilege can achieve a politically conscious 
base in different ways. No veils separate the lower class from the 
realities of everyday life. They have been given the gift of disillusion. 
Bourgeois lifestyle, although perhaps sought after, is in most cases 
not attainable. Daily survival is the primary goal, as it was with 
George. Of course, when it finally becomes more attractive for one 
to fight, and perhaps die, than to live in a survival mode, revolution 
starts to become a possibility. Not a riot, not a government takeover 
by one or another group, but a people's revolution led by the 
politically conscious. 
xxiv


--- PAGE 21 ---
This consciousness doesn't simply appear. Individuals must grow 
and work into it, but it's an invaluable gift to have insight into and 
access to an alternative to the frustration, a goal on the horizon. 
The nineties are an unconscious era. The unimportant is all-im­
portant, the essential neglected. What system than capitalism, what 
time period than now, is better suited to naturally create the scape­
goat, the seldom-heard political prisoner, misunderstood in his cult­
of-personality status, held back in a choke hold from society? It is 
not only our right, but our duty, to listen to and comprehend George 
Jackson's message. To not do so is to tum our backs on one of the 
brilliant minds of the twentieth century, an individual passionately 
involved with liberating not only himself, but all of us. 
Settle your quarrels, come together, understand the reality of 
our situation, understand that fascism is already here, that people 
are dying who could be saved, that generations more will die or 
live poor butchered half-lives if you fail to act. Do what must be 
done, discover your humanity and your love in revolution. Pass 
on the torch. Join us, give up your life for the people. 
-George lackson 
Jonathan Jackson, Jr. 
San Francisco 
June 1994 
xxv


--- PAGE 22 ---
Recent Letters and 
an Autobiog raphy


--- PAGE 23 ---
JU NE, 19 70 
10 
Dear Greg, * 
I probably didn't work hard enough on this but 
I'm pressed for time-all the time. 
I could play the criminal aspects of my life down some but 
then it wouldn't be me. That was the pertinent part, the thing 
at school and home I was constantly rejecting in process. 
All my life I pretended with my folks, it was the thing in 
the street that was real. I was certainly just pretending with 
the nuns and priests, I served mass so that I could be in a 
position to steal altar wine, sang in the choir because they 
made me. When we went on tour of the rich white catholic 
schools we were always treated very well-fed-rewarded with 
*The editor who asked for the author's autobiography. 
3


--- PAGE 24 ---
gifts. Old Father Brown hated me but always put me down 
front when we were on display. I can't say exactly why, I was 
the ugliest, skinniest little misfit in the group. 
Blackmen born in the U.S. and fortunate enough to live 
past the age of eighteen are conditioned to accept the 
inevitability of prison. For most of us, it simply looms as the 
next phase in a sequence of humiliations. Being born a slave in 
a captive society and never experiencing any objective basis for 
expectation had the effect of preparing me for the progres­
sively traumatic misfortunes that lead so many blackmen to 
the prison gate. I was prepared for prison. It required only 
minor psychic adjustments. 
It always starts with Mama, mine loved me. As testimuny 
of her love, and her fear for the fate of the man-child all slave 
mothers hold, she attempted to press, hide, push, capture me 
in the womb. The conflicts and contradictions that will follow 
me to the tomb started right there in the womb. The feeling of 
being captured .. . this slave can never adjust to it, it's a thing 
that I just don't favor, then, now, never. 
rve been asked to explain myself, "briefly," before the 
world has done with me. It is difficult because I don't 
recognize uniqueness, not as it's applied to individualism, 
because it is too tightly tied into decadent capitalist culture. 
Rather I've always strained to see the indivisible thing cutting 
across the artificial barricades which have been erected to an 
older section of our brains, back to the mind of the primitive 
commune that exists in all blacks. But then how can I explain 
the runaway slave in terms that do not imply uniqueness? 
I was captured and brought to prison when I was 18 years 
old because I couldn't adjust. The record that the state has 
compiled on my activities reads like the record of ten men. It 
labels me brigand, thief, burglar, gambler, hobo, drug addict, 
gunman, escape artist, Communist revolutionary, and murder­
er. 
I was born as the Great Depression was ending. It was 
ending because the second great war for colonial markets was 
4


--- PAGE 25 ---
beginning in the U.S. 1 pushed out of the womb against my 
mother's strength September 23, 1941-1 felt free. 
My mother was a country girl from Harrisburg, Illinois. My 
father was borh in East St. Louis, Illinois. They met in 
Chicago, and were living on Lake Street near Racine when 1 
was born. It was in one of the oldest sections of Chicago, part 
ghetto residential, part factory. The el train passed a few yards 
from our front windows (the only windows really). There were 
factories across the street and garage shops on the bottom level 
of our flat. 1 felt right in the middle of things. 
Our first move up the social scale was around the corner to 
211 North Racine Street, away from the el train. 1 remember 
every detail of preschool days. 1 have a sister IS months older 
than myself, Delora, a beautiful child and now a beautiful 
woman. We were sometimes allowed to venture out into the 
world, which at the time meant no further than fenced-off 
roof area adjoining our little three-room apartment built over a 
tavern. We were allowed out there only after the city made its 
irregular garbage pickups. The roof area was behind the tavern 
and over an area where prople deposited their garbage. But, of 
course, 1 went out when 1 pleased. 
Superman was several years old about then, 1 didn't really 
confuse myself with him but 1 did develop a deep suspicion 
that 1 might be Suppernigger (twenty-three years aJJead of my 
time). I tied a tablecloth around my neck, climbed the roofs 
fence, and against my sister's tears would have leaped to my 
death, down among the garbage barrels, had she not grabbed 
me, tablecloth and all, and kicked my little ass. 
Seeing the white boys up close in kindergarten was a 
traumatic event. 1 must have seen some before in magazines or 
books but never in the flesh. I approached one, felt his har, 
scratched at his cheek, he hit me in the head with a baseball 
bat. They found me crumpled in a heap just outside the 
school-yard fence. 
After that, my mother sent me to St. Malachy catholic 
mission school. It was sitting right in the heart of the ghetto 
5


--- PAGE 26 ---
area, Washington and Oakley streets. All of the nuns were 
white; of the priests (there were five in the parish) I think one 
was near black, or near white whichever you prefer. The 
school ran from kindergarten to 12 th grade. I attended for 
nine years (ten counting kindergarten). This small group of 
missionaries with their silly costumes and barbaric rituals 
offered the full range of Western propaganda. to all ages and all 
comers. Sex was never mentioned except with whispers or 
grimaces to convey something nasty. You could get away with 
anything (they were anxious to make saints) but getting 
caught with your hand up a dress. Holy ghosts, confessions, 
and racism. 
St. Malachy's was really two schools. There was another 
school across the street that was more private than ours. "We" 
played and fought on the, corner sidewalks bordering the 
school. "They" had a large grass-and-tree-studded garden with 
an eight-foot wrought-iron fence bordering it (to keep us out, 
since it never seemed to keep any of them in when they chose 
to leave). "They" were all white. "They" were driven to and 
from school in large private buses or their parents' cars. "We" 
on the black side walked, or when we could afford it used the 
public buses or streetcars. The white students' yard was 
equipped with picnic tables for spring lunches, swings, slides, 
and other more sophisticated gadgets,intended to please older 
children. For years we had only the very crowded sidewalks 
and alley behind the school. Years later a small gym was built 
but it just stood there, locked. It was only allowed to be used 
for an occasional basketball game between our school and one 
of the others like it from across the city's various ghetto areas. 
Delora and I took the Lake Street streetcar to school each 
morning, and also on Sundays when we were forced to attend 
a religious function. I must have fallen from that thing a 
hundred times while it was in motion. Each time Delora would 
hang on to me, trying to save me, but I was just too 
determined and we would roll down Lake Street, books and 
all, miraculously avoiding the passing cars. The other black 
6


--- PAGE 27 ---
children who went to public school laughed at us. The girls 
had to wear a uniform, the boys wore white shirts. I imagined 
that the nuns and priests were laughing too every time they 
told one of those fantastic lies. I know now that the most 
damaging thing a people in a colonial situation can do is to 
allow their children to attend any educational facility organ­
ized by the dominant enemy culture. 
Before the winter of my first-grade year, my father, Lester, 
prepared a fifty-gallon steel drum to store oil for our little 
stove. As I watched, he cleaned the inside with gasoline. When 
he retreated from his work temporarily for a cigarette he 
explained to me about the danger of the gas fumes. Later 
when he had completed work on the barrel, I sneaked back 
out to the roof with my sister Delora trailing me like a St. 
Bernard. I had matches and the idea of an explosion was 
irresistable. As soon as my sister realized what I was going to 
do, she turned her big sad eyes on me and started crying. I lit a 
match as I moved closer and closer to the barrel. The I lit the 
whole book of matches. By now Delora was convinced that 
death was imminent for us both. She made a last brave effort 
to stop me but I was too determined. I threw the matches 
across the last few feet. Delora shielded my eyes with her hand 
as the explosion went off. She still carries her burns from that 
day's experiences. I was injured around the lower face but 
carry no sign of it. Our clothes were burned and ripped away. I 
would probably be blind if not for this sister. 
My parents had two more children while we were hanging 
on there at North Racine, Frances and Penelope. Six of us in 
the little walk-up. The only thing that I can think of that was 
even slightly pleasant about the place was the light. We had 
plenty of windows and nothing higher about us to block off 
the sun. In '49 we moved to a place in the rear on Warren near 
Western that was the end of the sun. We had no windows that 
opened directly on the street, even the one that faced the alley 
was blocked by a garage. It was a larger place but the 
neighborhood around the place was so vicious that my mother 
7


--- PAGE 28 ---
never, never allowed me to go out of the house or the small 
yard except to get something from one of the supermarkets or 
stores on Madison and return immediately. When I wanted to 
leave I would either go by a window, or throw my coat out the 
window and volunteer to take out the garbage. There was only 
one door. It was in the kitchen and always well guarded. 
I spent most of the summers of those school years in 
southern Illinois with my grandmother and aunt, Irene and 
Juanita. My mother, Georgia, called it removing me from 
harm's way. This was where my mother grew up and she 
trusted her sister Juanita, whose care Icameunder, completely. 
I was the only man-child and I was the only one to get special 
protection from my mother. The trips to the country were 
good for me in spite of the motive. I learned how to shoot 
rifles, shotguns, pistols. I learned about fishing. I learned to 
identify some of the food plants that grow wild in most areas 
of the U.S. I could leave the house, the yard, the town, 
without having to sneak out of a window. 
Almost everyone in the black sector of Harrisburg is a 
relative of mine. A loyal, righteous people; I could raise a small 
army from their numbers. I had use qf any type of rifle or 
pistol on those trips downstate arid everyone owned a 
weapon. My disposition toward guns and explosions is 
responsible for my first theft. Poverty made ammunition 
scarce and so ... I confess with some guilt that I liked to 
shoot small animals, birds rabbits, squirrels, anything that 
offered itself as a target. ' I was a little skinny guy; scourge of 
the woods, predatory man. After the summer I went back up 
north for school and snowball (sometimes ice-block) fights 
with the white kids across the street. 
I don't remember exactly when I met Joe Adams, it was 
during the early years, but I do recall the circumstances. Three 
or four of the brothers were in the process of taking my lunch 
when Joe joined them. The bag was torn, and the contents 
spilled onto the sidewalk. Joe scrambled for the food and got 
all of it. But after the others left laughing, he returned and 
8


--- PAGE 29 ---
stuffed it all into my pockets. We were great friends from then 
on in that childish way. He was older by a couple of years 
(two or three years means a lot at that tender age), and could 
beat me doing everything. I watched him and listened with 
John and Kenny Fox, Junior, Sonny, and others sometimes. 
We almost put the block's businessmen into bankruptcy. My 
mother and father will never admit it now, I'm sure, but I was 
hungry and so were we all. Our activities went from stolen 
food to other things I wanted, gloves for my hands (which 
were always cold), which I was always wearing out, marbles 
for the slingshots, games and gadgets for outdoorsmen from 
the dime store. Downtown, we plundered at will. The city was 
helpless to defend against us. But I couldn't keep up with Joe. 
Jonathan, my older brother, was born about this time. 
My grandfather, George "Papa" Davis, stands out of those 
early years more than any other figure in my total en­
vironment. He was separated from his wife by the system. 
Work for men was impossible to find in Harrisburg. He was 
living and working in Chicago-sending his wage back to the 
people downstate. He was an extremely aggressive man, and 
since aggression on the part of the slave means crime, he was in 
jail now and then. I loved him. He tried to direct my great 
energy into the proper form of protest. He invented long 
simple allegories that always pictured the white politicians as 
animals (jackasses, toads, goats, vermin in general). He scorned 
the police with special enmity. He and my mother went to 
great pains to impress on me that it was the worst form of 
niggerism to hook and jab, cut and stab at other blacks. 
Papa took me to his little place on Lake and fed me, 
walked me through the wildest of the nation's jungles, 
pointing up the foibles of black response to crisis existence. I 
loved him. He died alone in southern Illinois the fifth year that 
I was in San Quentin, on a pension that after rent allowed for 
a diet of little more than sardines and crackers. 
After Racine Street we moved into the Troop Street 
projects, which in 1958 were the scenes of the city's worst 
9


--- PAGE 30 ---
riots. (The cats in those projects fell out against the pig with 
heavy machine guns, 30s and SOs that were equipped with 
tracer ammunition.) 
My troubles began when we were in the projects. I was 
caught once or twice for mugging but the pig never went much 
further than to pop me behind the ear with the "oak stick" 
several times and send for my mortified father to carry me 
home. 
My family knew very little of my real life. In effect, I lived 
two lives, the one with my mama and sisters, and the thing on 
the street. Now and then I'd get caught at something, or with 
something that I wasn't supposed to have and my mama would 
fall ail over me. I left home a thousand times, never to return. 
We hoboed up and down the state. I did what I wanted (all my 
life I've done just that). When it came time to explain, I lied. 
I had a girl from Arkansas, finest at the mission, but the 
nuns had convinced her that love-touching fingertips, mouths, 
bellies, legs-was nasty. Most of my time and money went to 
the other very loose and lovely girls I met on the stairwells of 
the projects' IS -story, buildings. That was our hangout, and 
most of the time that's where we acted out the ritual. 
Jonathan, my new COnirade, just a baby then, was the only 
real reason that I would come home at all; a brother to help 
me plunder the white world, a father to be proud of the 
deed-I was a fanciful little cat. But my brother was too young 
of course. He's only seventeen now while I'm twenty-nine 
this year. Any my father, he was always mortified. I stopped 
attending school regularly, and started getting "picked up" by 
the pigs more often. The pig station, a lecture, and oak-stick 
therapeutics. These pickups were mainly for "suspicion of' or 
because I was in the wrong part of town. Except for once or 
twice I was never actually caught breaking any laws. There just 
wasn't any possibility of a policeman beating me in a footrace. 
A target that's really moving with evasive tactics is almost 
impossible to hit with a short-barreled revolver. Through a 
gangway with a gate that only a few can operate with speed 
10


--- PAGE 31 ---
(it's dark even in the day) up a stairway through a door. 
Across roofs with seven- to ten-foot jumps in between (the pig 
is working mainly for money, bear in mind, I am running for 
my life). There wasn't a pig in the city who could "follow the 
leader" of even the most timid ghetto gang. 
My father sensed a need to remove me from the Chicago 
environment so in 1956 he transferred his post-office job to 
the Los Angeles area. He bought an old '49 Hudson, threw me 
into it, and the two of us cameWest with plans to send for the 
rest of the family later that year. I knew nothing of cars. It 
was the first car our family had ever owned. I watched my 
father with great interest as he pushed the Hudson across the 
two thousand miles from Chicago to Los Angeles in two days. 
I was certain that I could handle the standard gearshift and 
pedals. I asked him to let me try upon our arrival in Los 
Angeles that first day. He dismissed me with an "Ah-crazy 
nigger lay dead" look. We were to stay with his cousin Johnny 
Jones in Watts until the rest of the family could be sent for. 
He went off with Johnny to visit other relatives, I stayed 
behind with the keys and the car. I made one corner, down 
one street, waited for a traffic light, firmed my jaw, 
dry-swallowed-took off around the next corner, and ended 
the turn inside the plate-glass window and front door of the 
neighborhood barbershop. Those cats in the shop (Watts) had 
become so immune to excitement that no one hardly looked 
up. I tried to apologize. The brother that owned the shop 
allowed my father to do the repair work himself. No pigs were 
called to settle this affair between brothers. One showed up by 
chance, however. I had to answer a court summons later that 
year. But the brother sensed that my father was poor, like 
himself, with a terribly mindless, displaced, irresponsible child 
on his hands, probably like his own, and didn't insist upon 
having the gun-slinging pig from the outside enemy culture 
arbitrate the problems we must handle ourselves. 
My father fixed the brother's shop with his own hands, 
after buying the materials. No charges were brought against me 
11


--- PAGE 32 ---
for the damages. My father straightened out the motor bed, 
plugged the holes in the radiator, hammered out some of the 
dents and folds from the fender, bought a new light, and taped 
it into place on the fender. He drove that car to and from 
work, to the supermarkets with my mother, to church with 
my sisters, for four years! It was all he could afford and he 
wasn't the least bit ashamed of the fact. And he never said a 
word to me about it. I guess he was convinced by then that 
words wouldn't help me. I've been a fool-often. 
Serious things started to happen after our settling in L.A. 
but this guy never abandoned me. He felt shame in having to 
bail me out of encounters with the law but he would always be 
there. I did several months in Paso Robles for allegedly 
breaki.ng into a large department store (Gold's on Central) and 
attempting a hijack. I was 15, and full grown (I haven't grown 
an inch since then). A cop shot me six times point-blank on 
that job, as I was standing with my hands in the air. After the 
second shot, when I was certain that he was trying to murder 
me, I charged him. His gun was empty and he had only hit me 
twice by the time I had closed with him-"Oh, get this wild 
nigger off me." My mother fell away from the phone in a dead 
faint when they informed her that I had been shot by the 
police in a hijack attempt. I had two comrades with me on 
that job. They both got away because of the exchange 
between the pigs and me. 
Since all black are thought of as rats, the third degree 
started before I was taken to the hospital. Medical treatment 
was offered as a reward for cooperation. At first they didn't 
know I had been hit, but as soon as they saw the blood 
running from my sleeve, the questions began. A bullet had 
passed through my forearm, another had sliced my leg, I sat in 
the back of the pig car and bled for two hours before they 
were convinced that lockjaw must have set in already. They 
took me to that little clinic at the Maxwell Street Station. A 
black nurse or doctor attended. She was young, full of 
sympathy and advice. She suggested, since I had strong-looking 
12


--- PAGE 33 ---
legs, that instead of warring with the enemy culture I should 
get interested in football or sports. I told her that if she could 
manage to turn the pig in the hall for a second I could escape 
and perhaps make a new start somewhere with a football. A 
month before this thing happened a guy had sold me a 
motorcycle and provided a pink slip that proved to be forged 
or changed around in some way. The bike was hot ann I was 
caught with it. Taken together these two things were enough 
to send me to what California calls Youth Authority Cor­
rections. I went to Paso Robles. 
The very first time, it was like dying. Just to exist at all in 
the cage calls for some heavy psychic readjustments. Being 
captured was the first of my fears. It may have been inborn. It 
may have been an acquired characteristic built up over the 
centuries of black bondage. It is the thing I've been running 
from all my life. When it caught up to me in 1957 I was fifteen 
years old and not very well'equipped to deal with sudden 
changes. The Youth Authority joints are places that demand 
complete capitulation; one must cease to resist altogether or 
else ... 
The employees are the same general types found lounging 
at all prison facilities. They need a job-any job; the state 
needs goons. Chino was almost new at the time. The regular 
housing units were arranged so that at all times om, could see 
the lockup unit. It think they called it "X". We existed from 
day to day to avoid it. How much we ate was strictly 
controlled, so was the amount of rest. After lights went out, 
no one could move from his bed without a flash of the pigs' 
handlight. During the day the bed couldn't be touched. There 
were so many compulsories that very few of us could manage 
to stay out of trouble even with our best efforts. Everything 
was programmed right down to the precise spoonful. We were 
made to march in military fashion everywhere we went-to the 
gym, to the mess hall, to compulsory prayer meetings. And 
then we just marched. I pretended that I couldn't hear well or 
understand anything but the simplest directions so I was never 
13


--- PAGE 34 ---
given anything but the simplest work. I was lucky; always 
when my mind failed me I've had great luck to carry me 
through. 
All my life I've done exactly what I wanted to do just when 
I wanted, no more, perhaps less sometimes, but never any 
more, which explains why I had to be jailed. "Man was born 
free. But everywhere he is in chains." I never adjusted. I 
haven't adjusted even yet, with half my life already spent in 
prison. I can't truthfully say prison is any less painful now 
than during that first experience. 
In my early prison years I read all of Rafael Sabatini, 
particularly The Lion '8 Skin. "There once was a man who sold 
the lion's skin, while the b.east still lived, and was killed while 
hunting him" This story fascinated me. It made me smile even 
under the lash. The hunter bested, the hunted stalking the 
hunter. The most predatory animal on earth turning on its 
oppressor and killing it. At the time, this ideal existed in me 
just above the conscious level. It helped me to define myself, 
bu t it would take me several more years to isolate my real 
enemy. I read Jack London's, "raw and naked, wild and free' 
military novels and dreamed of smashing my enemies entirely, 
overwhelming, vanquishing, crushing them completely, sinking 
my fangs into the hunter's neck and never, never letting go. 
Capture, imprisonment, is the closest to being dead that one 
is likely to experience in this life. There were no beatings (for 
me at least) in this youth joint and the food wasn't too bad. I 
came through it. When told to do something I simply played 
the idiot, and spent my time reading. The absentminded 
bookworm, I was in full revolt by the time seven months were 
up. 
I went to school in Paso Robles and covered the work 
required for 10 th-year students in the California school 
system, and entered Manual Arts for the II th year upon my 
release. After I got out I stopped in Bakersfield, where I 
planned to stay no more than a week or two. I met a woman 
who felt almost as unimpressed with life as I did. We sinned, I 
14


--- PAGE 35 ---
stayed. I was 16 then, just starting to get my heft, but this 
wonderful sister, so round and wild, firm and supple, 
mature ... in one month she reduced my health so that I had 
to take to the bed permanently. I was ill for eleven days with 
fevers and chest pains (something in the lungs). When I pulled 
out of it I was broke. I'd collected a few friends by that time. 
Two of them would try anything. Mat and Obe. We talked, 
borrowed a car, and went off. 
A few days later we were all three in county jail (Kern 
County) on suspicion of committing a number of robberies.· 
Since the opposition cleans up the books when they find the 
right type of victim, they accused us of a number of robberies 
we knew nothing about. Since they had already identified me 
for one, I copped out to another and cleared Mat and Obe on 
that count. They "allowed" Obe to plead guilty to one· 
robbery instead of the three others they threatened him with. 
They cleared Mat altogether. Two months after our arrest Mat 
left the county jail free of charges. 
I was in the "time tank" instead of the felony tank because 
they had only two felony tanks (that was the old county jail) 
and they wanted to keep the three of us separated. After Mat 
left, a brother came into the time tank to serve 2 days. The 
morning he was scheduled to leave I went back to his cell with 
a couple of sheets and asked him if he would aid me in an 
escape attempt. He dismissed me with one of those looks and a 
wave of the hand. I started tearing the sheet in stripes, he 
watched. When I was finished he asked me, "What are you 
doin' with that sheet?" I replied, "I'm tearing it into these 
strips." "Why you doin' that?" "I'm making a rope." 
"What-chew gonna do with ah rope?" "Oh-I'm going to tie 
you up with it." 
When they called him to be released that morning, I went 
out in his place. I've learned one very significant thing for our 
struggle here in the U.S.: all blacks do look alike to certain 
types of white people. White people tend to grossly under­
estimate all blacks, out of habit. Blacks have been over-
15


--- PAGE 36 ---
estimating whites in a conditioned reflex. 
Later, when I was accused of robbing a gas station of 
seventy dollars, I accepted a deal-I agreed to confess and 
spare the county court costs in return for a light county jail 
sentence. I confessed but when time came for sentencing, they 
tossed me into the penitentiary with one to life. That was in 
19 60. I was 18 years old. I've been here ever since. I met Marx, 
Lenin, Trotsky, Engels, and Mao when I entered prison and 
they redeemed me. For the first four years I studied nothing 
but economics and military ideas. I met black guerrillas, 
George "Big Jake"Lewis, and James Carr, W.L. Nolen, Bill 
Christmas, Torry Gibson and many, many others. We at­
tempted to transform the black criminal mentality into a black 
revolutionary mentality. As a result, each of us has been 
subjected to years of the most vicious reactionary violence by 
the state. Our mortality rate is almost what you would expect 
to find in a history of Dachau. Three of us were murdered 
several months ago by a pig shooting from 30 feet above their 
heads with a military rifle. 
I am being tried in court right now with two other 
brothers, John Clutchette and Fleeta Drumgo, for the alleged 
slaying of a prison guard. This charge carries an automatic 
death penalty for me. I can't get life. I already have it. 
When I returned to San Quentin Prison last week from a 
year in Soledad Prison where the crime I am charged with took 
place, a brother who had resisted the logic of proletarian­
people's revolutionary socialism for the blackman in America 
sent me these lines in a note: 
"Without the cold and desolation of winter there 
could not be the warmth and splendor of spring! 
Calamity has hardened my mind, and turned it to steel!! 
Power to the People" 
George 
16


--- PAGE 37 ---
APR IL, 19 70 
Dear Fay, * 
On the occasion of your and Senator Dymally's 
tour and investigation into the affairs here at Soledad, I 
detected in the questions posed by your team a desire to 
isolate some rationale that would explain why racism exists at 
the prison with "particular prominence." Of course the subject 
was really too large to be dealt with in one tour and in the 
short time they allowed you, but it was a brave scene. My 
small but mighty mouthpiece, and the black establishment 
senator and his team, invading the state's maximum security 
row in the worst of its concentration camps. I think you are 
the first woman to be allowed to inspect these facilities. 
Thanks from all. The question was too large, however. It's tied 
into the question of why all these California prisons vary in 
character and flavor in general. It's tied into the larger 
question of why racism exists in this whole society with 
"particular prominence," tied into history. Out of it comes 
another questiou. Why do California joints produce more 
Bunchy Carters and Eldridge Cleavers than those over the rest 
of the country? 
I understand your attempt to isolate the set of localized 
circumstances that give to this particular prison's problems of 
race is based on a desire to aid us right now, in the present 
crisis. There are some changes that could be made right now 
that would alleviate some of the pressures inside this and other 
*Mrs. Fay Stender, the author's lawyer. 
17


--- PAGE 38 ---
prisons. But to get at the causes, you know, one would be 
forced to deal with questions at the very center of Amerikan 
political and economic life, at the core of the Amerikan 
historical experience. This prison didn't come to exist where it 
does just by happenstance. Those who inhabit it and feed off 
its existence are historical products. The great majority of 
Soledad pigs are southern migrants who do not want to work 
in the fields and farms of the area, who couldn't sell cars or 
insurance, and who couldn't tolerate the discipline of the 
army. And of course prisons attract sadists. After one 
concedes that racism is stamped unalterably into the present 
nat1.lre of Amerikan sociopolitical and economic life in general 
(the definition of fascism is: a police state wherein the 
political ascendancy is tied into and protects the interests of 
the upper class-characterized by militarism, racism, and 
imperialism), and concedes further that criminals and crime 
arise from material, economic, sociopolitical causes, we can 
then bum all of the criminology and penology libraries and 
direct our attention where it will do some good. 
The logical place to begin any investigation into the 
problems of California prisons is with our "pigs are beautiful" 
Governor Reagan, radical reformer turned reactionary. For a 
real understanding of the failure of prison policies, it is 
senseless to continue to study the criminal. All of those who 
can afford to be honest know that the real victim, that poor, 
uneducated, disorganized man who finds himself a convicted 
criminal, is simply the end result of a long chain of corruption 
and mismanagement that starts with people like Reagan and 
his political appointees in Sacramento. After one investigates 
Reagan's character (what makes a turncoat) the next logical 
step in the inquiry would be a look into the biggest political 
prize of the state-the directorship of the Department of 
Correction. 
All other lines of inquiry would be like walking backward. 
You'll never see where you're going. You must begin with 
directors, assistant directors, adult authority boards, roving 
18


--- PAGE 39 ---
boards, supervisors, wardens, captains, and guards. You have 
to examine these people from director down to guard before 
you can logically examine their product. Add to this some 
concrete and steel, barbed wire, rifles, pistols, clubs, the tear 
gas that killed Brother Billingslea in San Quentin in February 
19 70, while he was locked in his cell and the pick handles of 
Folsom, San Quentin, and Soledad. 
To determine how men will behave once they enter the 
prison it is of first importance to know that prison. Men are 
brutalized by their environment-not the reverse. 
I gave you a good example of this when I saw you last. 
Where I am presently being held, they never allow us to leave 
our cell without first handcuffing us and belting or chaining 
the cuffs to our waists. This is preceded always by a very 
thorough skin search. A force of a dozen or more pigs can be 
expected to invade the row at any time searching and 
destroying personal effects. The attitude of the staff toward 
the convicts is both de"fensive and hostile. Until the convict 
gives in completely it will continue to be so. By giving in, I 
mean prostrating oneself at their feet. Only then does their 
attitude alter itself to one of paternalistic condescension. Most 
convicts don't dig this kind of relationship (though there are 
some who do love it) with a group of individuals demonstrably 
inferior to the rest of the society in regard to education, 
culture, and sensitivity. Our cells are so far from the regular 
dining area that our food is always cold before we get it. Some 
days there is only one meal that can be called cooked. We 
never get anything but cold-cut sandwiches for lunch. There is 
no variety to the menu. The same things week after week. One 
is confined to his cell 23% hours a day. Overt racism exists 
unchecked. It is not a case of the pigs trying to stop the many 
racist attacks; they actively encourage them. 
They are fighting upstairs right now. It's II : 10 A.M., June 
II . No black is supposed to be on the tier upstairs with 
anyone but other blacks but-mistakes take place-and one or 
two blacks end up on the tier with 9 or 10 white convicts 
19


--- PAGE 40 ---
frustrated by the living conditions or openly working with the 
pigs. The whole ceiling is trembling. In hand-to-hand combat 
we always win; we 'lose sometimes if the pigs give them knives 
or zip guns. Lunch will be delayed today, the tear gas or 
whatever it is drifts down to sting my nose and eyes. Someone 
is hurt bad. I hear the meat wagon from the hospital being 
brought up. Pigs probably gave them some weapons. But I 
must be fair. Sometimes (not more often than necessary) 
they'll set up one of the Mexican or white convicts. He'll be 
one who has not been sufficiently racist in his attitudes. After 
the brothers (enraged by previous attacks) kick on this white 
convict whom the officials have set up, he'll fall right into line 
with the rest. 
I was saying that the great majority of the people who live 
in this area of the state and seek their employment from this 
institution have overt racism as a traditional aspect of their 
characters. The only stops that regulate how far they will carry 
this thing come from the fear of losing employment here as a 
result of the outside pressures to control the violence. That is 
o Wing, Max (Maximum Security) Row Soledad-in part 
anyway. 
Take an individual who has been in the general prison 
population for a time. Picture him as an average convict with 
the average twelve-year-old mentality, the nation's norm. He 
wants out, he wants a woman and a beer. Let's say this average 
convict is white and has just been caught attempting to escape. 
They may put him on Max Row. This is the worst thing that 
will ever happen to him. In the general population facility 
there are no chains and cuffs. TV s, radios, record players, 
civilian sweaters, keys to his own cell for daytime use, serve to 
keep his mind off his real problems. There is also a recreation 
yard with all sorts of balls and instruments to strike or thrust 
at. There is a gym. There are movies and a library well stocked 
with light fiction. And of course there is work, where for 2 or 
3 cents an hour convicts here at Soledad make paper products, 
furniture, and clothing. Some people actually like this work 
20


--- PAGE 41 ---
since it does provide some money for the small things and 
helps them to get through their day-without thinking about 
their real problems. 
Take an innocent con out of this general population setting 
(because a pig "thought" he may have seen him attempting a 
lock). Bring him to any part of 0 Wing (the worst part of the 
adjustment center of which Max Row is a part). He will be 
cuffed, chained, belted, pressured by the police who think that 
every convict should be an informer. He will be pressured by 
the white cons to join their racist brand of politics (they all go 
under the nickname "Hitler's Helpers"). If he is presidposed to 
help black he will be pushed away-by black. Three weeks is 
enough. The strongest hold out no more than a couple of 
weeks. There has been one white many only to go through this 
o Wing experience without losing his balance, without 
allowing himself to succumb to the madness of ribald, 
protrusive racism. 
It destroys the logical processes of the mind, a man's 
thoughts become completely disorganized. The noise, madness 
streaming from every throat, frustrated sounds from the bars, 
metallic sounds from the walls, the steel trays, the iron beds 
bolted to the wall, the hollow sounds from a cast-iron sink or 
toilet. 
The smells, the human waste thrown at us, unwashed 
bodies, the rotten food. When a white con leaves here he's 
ruined for life. No black leaves Max Row walking. Either he 
leaves on the meat wagon or he leaves crawling licking at the 
pig's feet. 
Ironic, because one cannot get a parole to the outside 
prison directly from 0 Wing, Max Row. It's positively not 
done. The parole board won't even consider the Max Row 
case. So a man licks at the feet of the pig not for a release to 
the outside world but for the privilege of going upstairs to 0 
Wing ad justment center. There the licking process must 
continue if a parole is the object. You can count on one hand 
the number of people who have been paroled to the streets 
21


--- PAGE 42 ---
from 0 Wing proper in all the years that the prison has existed. 
No one goes from 0 Wing, Max Row straight to the general 
prison population. To go from here to the outside world is 
unthinkable. A man must go from Max Row to the regular 
adjustment center facility upstairs. Then from there to the 
general prison population. Only then can he entertain 
throughts of eventual release to the outside world. 
One can understand the depression felt by an inmate on 
Max Row. He's fallen as far as he can into the social trap, relief 
is so distant that is very easy for him to lose his holds. In two 
weeks that little average man who may have ended up on Max 
Row for suspicion of attempted escape is so brutalized, so 
completely without holds, that he will never heal again. It's 
worse than Vietnam. 
He's dodging lead. He may be forced to fight a duel to the 
death with knives. If he doesn't sound and act more zealous 
than everyone else he will be challenged for not being loyal to 
his race and its politics, fascism. Some of these cons support 
the pigs' racism without shame, the others support it inad­
vertently by their own racism. The former are white, the latter 
black. But in here as on the street black racism is a forced 
reaction. A survival adaptation. 
The picture that I have painted of Soledad's general 
population facility may have made it sound not too bad at all. 
That mistaken impression would result from the absence in my 
description of one more very important feature of the main 
line-terrorism. A frightening, petrifying diffusion of violence 
and intimidation is emitted from the offices of the warden and 
captain. How else could a small group of armed men be 
expected to hold and rule another much larger group except 
through fear? 
We have a gym (inducement to throw away our energies 
with a ball instead of revolution). But if you walk into this 
gym with a cigarette burning, you're probably in trouble. 
There is a pig waiting to trap you. There's a sign "No 
Smoking." If you miss the sign, trouble. If you drop the 
22


--- PAGE 43 ---
cigarette to comply, trouble. The tloor is regarded as some­
thing of a fire hazard (I'm not certain what the pretext is). 
There are no receptacles. The pig will pounce. You'll be told in 
no uncertain terms to scrape the cigarette from the floor with 
your hands. It builds from there. You have a gym but only 
certain things may be done and in specified ways. Since the 
rules change with the pigs' mood, it is really safer for a man to 
stay in his cell. 
You have work with emoluments that range from nothing 
to three cents an hour! But once you accept the pay job in the 
prison's industrial sector you cannot get out without going 
through the bad conduct process. When workers are needed, it 
isn't a case of accepting a job in this area. You take the job or 
you're automatically refusing to work, even if you clearly 
stated that you would cooperate in other employment. The 
same atmosphere prevails on the recreation yard where any 
type of minor mistake could result not in merely a bad 
conduct report and placement in adjustment center, but death. 
A fistfight, a temporary, trivial loss of temper will bring a 
fusillade of bullets down on the darker of the two men 
fighting. 
You can't begin to measure the bad feeling caused by the 
existence of one TV set shared by 140 men. Think! One TV, 
14 0 men. If there is more than one channel, what's going to 
occur? In Soledad's TV rooms there has been murder, 
mayhem, and destruction of many TV sets. 
The blacks occupy one side of the room and the whites and 
Mexicans the other. (Isn't it significant in some way that our 
numbers in prison are sufficient to justify the claiming of half 
of all these facilities?) 
We have a side, they have a side. What does your 
imagination envisage out of a hypothetical situation where 
Nina Simone sings, Angela Davis speaks, and Jim Brown 
"splits" on one channel, while Merle Haggard yodels and begs 
for an ass kicking on another. The fight will follow immediate­
ly after some brother, who is less democratic than he is starved 
23


--- PAGE 44 ---
for beauty (we did vote but they're 60 to our 40), turns the 
station to see Angela Davis. What lines do you think the 
fighting will be along? Won't it be Angela and me against Merle 
Haggard? 
But this situation is tolerable at least up to a point. It was 
worse. When I entered the joint on this offense, they had half 
and we had half, but out half was in the back. 
In a case like the one just mentioned, the white convicts 
will start passing the word among themselves that all whites 
should be in the TV room to vote in the "Cadillac cowboy." 
The two groups polarize out of a situation created by whom? 
It's just like the outside. Nothing at all complicated about it. 
When people walk on each other, when disharmony is the 
norm, when organisms start falling apart it is the fault of these 
whose responsibility it is to govern. They're doing something 
wrong. They shouldn't have been trusted with the .responsi­
bility. And long-range political activity isn't going to help that 
man who will die tomorrow or tonight. The apologists 
recognize that these places are controlled by absolute terror, 
but they justify the pig's excesses with the argument that we 
exist outside the practice of any civilized codes of conduct. 
Since we are convicts rather than men, a bullet through the 
heat, summary execution for fistfighting or stepping across a 
line is not extreme or unsound .at all. An official is allowed full 
range in violent means because a convict can be handled no 
other way. 
Fay, have you ever considered what type of man is capable 
of handling absolute power. I mean how many would not 
abuse it? Is there any way of isolating or classifying generally 
who can be trusted with a gun and absolute discretion as to 
who he will kill? I've already mentioned that most of them are 
KKK types. The rest, all the rest, in general, are so stupid that 
they shouldn't be allowed to run their own bath. A responsible 
state government would have found a means of weeding out 
most of the savage types that are drawn to gunslinger jobs long 
ago. How did all these pigs get through?! Men who can barely 
24


--- PAGE 45 ---
read, write, or reason. How did they get through!!? You may 
as well give a baboon a gun and set him loose on us!! It's the 
same in here as on the streets out there. Who has loosed this 
thing on an already suffering people? The Reagans, Nixons, 
the men who have, who own. Investigate them!! There are no 
qualifications asked, no experience necessary. Any fool who 
falls in here and can sign his name might shoot me tomorrow 
from a position 30 feet above my head with an automatic 
military rifle!! He could be dead drunk. It could really be an 
accident (a million to one it won't be, however), but he'll be 
protected still. He won't even miss a day's wages. 
The textbooks on criminology like to advance the idea that 
prisoners are mentally defective. There is only the merest 
suggestion that the system itself is at fault. Penologists regard 
prisons as asylums. Most policy is formulated in a bureau that 
operates under the heading Department of Corrections. But 
what can we say about these asylums since none of the 
inmates are ever cured. Since in every instance they are sent 
out of the prison more damaged physically and mentally than 
when they entered. Because that is the reality. Do you 
continue to investigate the inmate? Where does administrative 
responsibility begin? Perhaps the administration of the prison 
cannot be held accountable for every individual act of their 
charges, but when things fly apart along racial lines, when the 
breakdown can be traced so clearly to circumstances even 
beyond the control of the guards and administration, investi­
gation of anything outside the tenets of the fascist system 
itself is futile. 
Nothing has improved, nothing has changed in the weeks 
since your team was here. We're on the same course, the blacks 
are fast losing the last of their restraints. Growing numbers of 
blacks are openly passed over when paroles are considered. 
They have become aware that their only hope lies in 
resistence. They have learned that resistence is actually 
possible. The holds are beginning to slip away. Very few men 
imprisoned for economic crimes or even crimes of passion 
25


--- PAGE 46 ---
against the oppressor feel that they are really guilty. Most of 
today's black convicts have come to understand that they are 
the most abused victims of an unrighteous order. Up until 
now, the prospect of parole has kept us from confronting our 
captors with any real determination. But now with the living 
conditions of these places deteriorating, and with the sure 
knowledge that we are slated for destruction, we have been 
transformed into an implacable army of liberation. The shift 
to the revolutionary antiestablishment position that Huey 
Newton, Eldridge Cleaver,. and Bobby Seale projected as a 
solution to the problems of Amerika's black colonies has taken 
firm hold of these brothers' minds. They are now showing 
great interest in the thoughts of Mao Tse-tung, Nkrumah, 
Lenin, Marx, and the achievements of men like Che Guevara, 
Giap, and Uncle Ho. 
Some people are going to get killed out of this situation 
that is growing. That is not a warning (or wishful thinking). I 
see it as an "unavoidable consequence" of placing and leaving 
control of our lives in the hands of men like Reagan. 
These prisons have always borne a certain resemblance to 
Dachau and Buchenwald, places for the bad niggers, Mexicans, 
and poor whites. But the last ten years have brought an 
increase in the percentage of blacks for crimes that can clearly 
be traced to political-economic causes. There are still some 
blacks here who consider themselves criminals-but not many. 
Believe me, my friend, with the time and incentive that these 
brothers have to read, study, and think, you will find no class 
or category more aware, more embittered, desperate, or 
dedicated to the ultimate remedy-revolution. The most 
dedicated, the best of our kind-you'll find them in the 
Folsoms, San Quentins, and Soledads. They live like there was 
no tomorrow. And for most of them there isn't. Somewhere 
along the line they sensed this. Life on the installment plan, 
three years of prison, three months on parole; then back to 
start all over again, sometimes in the same cell. Parole officers 
have sent brothers back to the joint for selling newspapers (the 
26


--- PAGE 47 ---
Panther paper). Their official reason is "Failure to 
M"inl:ain Gainful Employment," etc. 
We're something like 40 to 42 percent of the prison 
�opulation. Perhaps more, since I'm relying on material 
published by the media. The leadership of the black prison 
population now definitely identifies with Huey, Bobby, 
Angela, Eldridge, and antifascism. The savage repression of 
blacks which can be estimated by reading the obituary 
columns of the nation's dailies, Fred Hampton, etc., has not 
failed to register on the black inmates. The holds are fast being 
broken. Men who read Lenin, Fanon, and Che don't riot, 
"they mass," "they rage," they dig graves. 
When John Clutchette was first accused of this murder he 
was proud, conscious, aware of his own worth but uncom­
mitted to any specific remedial action. Review the process that 
they are sending this beautiful brother through now. It comes 
at the end of a long train of similar incidents in his prison life. 
Add to this all of the things he has witnessed happening to 
others of our group here. Comrade Fleeta spent eleven months 
here in 0 Wing for possessing photography taken from a 
newsweekly. It is such things that explain why California 
prisons produce more than their share of Bunchy Carters and 
Eldridge Cleavers. 
Fay, there are only two types of blacks ever released from 
these places, the Carters and the bro.ken men. 
The broken men are so damaged that they will never again 
be suitable members of any sort of social unit. Everything that 
was still good when they entered the joint, anything inside of 
them that may have escaped the ruinous effects of black 
colonial existence, anything that may have been redeemable 
when they first entered the joint-is gone when they leave. 
This camp brings out the very best in brothers or destroys 
them entirely. But none are unaffected. None who leave here 
are normal. If I leave here alive, I'll leave nothing behind. 
They'll never count me among the broken men, but I can't say 
that I am normal either. I've been hungry too long. I've gotten 
27


--- PAGE 48 ---
angry too often. I've been lied to and insulted too many times. 
They've pushed me over the line from which there can be no 
retreat. I know that they will not be satisfied until they've 
pushed me out of this existence altogether. I've been the 
victim of so many racist attacks that I could never relax again. 
My reflexes will never be normal again. I'm like a dog that has 
gone through the K-9 process. 
This is not the first attempt the institution (camp) has 
made to murder me. It is the most determined attempt, but 
not the first. 
I look into myself at the close of every one of these pretrial 
days for any changes that may have taken place. I can still 
smile now, after ten years of blocking knife thrusts and pick 
handles; of anticipating and faceless sadistic pigs, reacting for 
ten years, seven of them in Solitary. I can still smile 
sometimes, but by the time this thing is over I may not be a 
nice person. And I just lit my seventy-seventh cigarette of this 
21- hour day. I'm going to lay down for two or three hours, 
perhaps I'll sleep ... 
Seize the Time. 
JUNE, 19 70 
12 
You know I had a visit yesterday from an old 
friend, Joan. They told her she couldn't come back again, an 
economy move. It costs the state too much to supervise my 
half-hour visits, so I'll be held incommunicado it seems. They 
turned my sister away today. Someone is going to have to 
come up with some guts. These fools must be stopped. 
28


--- PAGE 49 ---
Absolute power in the hands of idiots! It makes me think of 
Rome and England. Do you know where the barbarians and 
guerrillas are going to come from to destroy Imperial Amerika, 
from the black colonies and these concentration camps. The 
three of us are the only convicts in this joint who have to 
accept half-hour visits, with a special guard, handcuffed and 
chained. Now it seems we won't even get that. My sister, my 
brother can't visit me in what could be the last days of my 
life! Well, one good thing comes from this experience; no 
question remains in the minds of any member of my family as 
to where their energies would best be spent. My father will 
have a whole den of Panthers there to feed. 
With each attempt the pigs made on my life in San 
Quentin, I would send an SOS out to my family. They would 
always respond by listening and writing letters to the joint pigs 
and Sacramento rats, but they didn't entirely accept that I was 
telling them the truth about the pig mentality. I would get 
dubious stares when I told them the lieutenants and the others 
who propositioned some of the most vicious white convicts in 
the state: "Kill Jackson, we'll do you some good." You 
understand, my father wanted to know why. And all I could 
tell him was that I related to Mao and couldn't kowtow. His 
mind couldn't deal with it. I would use every device, every 
historical and current example I could reach to explain to him 
that there were no-good pigs. But the task was too big, I was 
fighting his mind first, and his fear of admitting the existence 
of an identifiable enemy element that was oppressing us 
because that would either commit him to attack that enemy or 
force him to admit his cowardice. I was also fighting the 
establishment's public relations and propaganda machine. The 
prisons all use the clean, straight faces, or the old, harmless­
looking pigs to work in areas where they must come in contact 
with free people. And these pigs are never allowed to use their 
tusks. Regarding the racism, my father would remind me that 
there were black pigs too. But, of course, that means nothing 
at all. They simply work around the blacks when necessary. 
29


--- PAGE 50 ---
One guard or two guards working together is all that's needed 
to murder any con in the joint. But it isn't really necessary to 
work around the black pigs. They'll all cooperate or turn their 
heads. 
The black cop could be a large factor in preventing our 
genocide. But no help can be expected from that quarter. The 
same stupidity and desperation that brought him to the gates 
prevents him from interceding. The job, the wage means too 
much to him. Often he feels compelled to prove himself, prove 
that he is loyal to the force, prove that he is not prejudiced in 
favor of us, prove that he is honest. His honesty prevents him 
from dealing in contraband as every white pig does. Look, I 
was in San Quentin for seven straight years. I knew everything 
that was brought in and by whom. The white pig actually 
considers it his privilege to supplement his income by bringing 
in and selling narcotics, weapons, and, of course, pornography. 
The black pig is afraid, too unsure of his position to be 
dishonest. 
This same fear will cause him to show more zeal in the 
"club therapy" sessions than even the whites manage. If the 
victim is black, he's going to get so mad that the white pigs 
will have to stand back and let him swing. If they don't have 
murder planned for that session, they'll have to pull that 
nigger off of you. A pig-is a pig. 
It all falls into place. I see the whole thing much clearer 
now, how fascism has taken possession of this country. the 
interlocking dictatorship from country level on up to the 
Grand Dragon in Washington, D.C. 
The solidarity between the prison here and the court in 
Salinas, between the judge and grand jury, the judge and the 
D.A. and other city officials. The institution has effectively 
cut me off from any relief. The un meek have taken over this 
whole county, the state, the entire country. They work 
together, to the same end, effective control. 
I knew of these links before this, long before this, but 
30


--- PAGE 51 ---
seeing it in operation is pretty frightening. What force binds 
them together? I'm referring to the intermediary, the physical 
thing, not the ideal. What is it that really ties that fat rat with 
a chain of department stores to a uniformed pig? The fat rat 
wants the country and world policed, made safe for his 
business to expand. But how does he sell the ideal to the man 
who must do the policing? Money is the bond I think. They're 
in it for the money, these pigs and skinny rats. The fascist 
ideal doesn't really take hold until one gets into the upper 
levels of the power pyramid. Then any ideal that preserves 
becomes attractive. 
People's government would decentralize this power that 
they hold over us-these men must be stopped. 
Power to the People. 
George 
JU NE. 19 70 
13 
Dear Fay. 
No one here knows about the scheduled court 
hearing. They say we're not going. The prison doesn't like 
moving us, so somehow they have managed to arrange with the 
judge to leave us out of our own trial! Or pretrial. Can they try 
us in absentia (is that the term??)? Some bull (pig I mean) just 
31


--- PAGE 52 ---
said that the judge under no circumstances wants us in his 
court. In that case they shouldn't mind dropping the whole 
thing or sending us to another county for trial. Berkeley 
perhaps. But as you've said more than likely it'll be Orange 
County. 
Why do we accept this sort of thing? We have numerical 
superiority-but they have guns and money. And then the 
righteous don't like to cut throats, so we languish in misery. 
When you finally get me out of this mess, you'll have to 
send me away somewhere for a while, somewhere like Cuba or 
China or Tanzania, so that I can reorient myself. My 
understanding had been strained to the utmost. 
JUNE, 19 70 
14 
I don't think we can afford to be nice much longer, the 
very last of our protection is eroding from under us. There will 
be no means of detecting when that last right is gone. You'll 
only know when they start shooting you. The process must be' 
checked somewhere between now and then, or we'll be 
fighting from a position of weakness with our backs against 
the wall. (I think we still have the advantage now.) We of the 
black colony know about that kind of action, fighting off of 
the wall. It's not the best way to get down. 
It's getting tighter here, they're taking our visits. It looks as 
32


--- PAGE 53 ---
if they're stopping our court appearances. They also made a 
mistake concerning our "money draw" this month. This means 
we'll be without the little things even. 
You may never read this letter either, our mail is being held 
back, returned, thrown away somewhere. Nice people aren't 
they? They richly deserve anything we can do to them. This 
man who just passed my cell counting, he'll never listen to 
reason. His mind isn't constructed that way. While we reason 
with him in ideals and ideas, he isn't listening. He is thinking 
about which rule he'll quote to dismiss us. When he walks 
away, you'll see the little code book protruding from his ass 
pocket. That's where he carries his mind, in his ass pocket. 
When we attack the problem with intellectualism we give away 
the advantage we have in numbers. 
I'm with Bobby! We are going to have to kick him where he 
keeps his brain, in the region of the ass. 
Power. 
George 
33


--- PAGE 54 ---
� 
Le tter s 
19 64- 1 97 0


--- PAGE 55 ---
JUNE, 19 64 * 
Dear Mother, 
Are you well? I think of you often and would 
write more regularlY than I do if I could but find the time. The 
things that I am working on demand a great deal of time. I 
guess this is so because it is my lot to have no one to help me. 
Mama, and I mention this without vanity, I have made 
some giant steps toward acquiring the things that I personally 
will need if I am to be successful in my plans; aside from the 
factual material acquired from books and observations there is, 
as you know, a certain quality of character needed to perform 
the thing that I have in mind. I have completely repressed all 
* All previous letters were accidentally destroyed. They 
were described by the author as "extremely bitter." 
37


--- PAGE 56 ---
emotion; have learned to see myself in perspective, in true 
relation with other men and the world. I have enlarged my 
vision so that I may be able to think on a basis encompassing 
not just myself, my family, my neighborhood, but the world. 1 
have completely arrested the susceptibility to think in 
theoretical terms, or give credence to religious, supernatural, 
or other shallow unnecessary things of this nature that lock 
the mind and hinder thinking. 
When a man does something or possesses something that is 
complementary to his character, it is virtually impossible for 
him to hide this thing, keep it to himself, keep from telling it 
to those he wishes to impress; this is natural egoism, the need 
for attention and flattery asserting itself. I have quietly 
removed this need ; neglect and loneliness have no effect 
whatever on me anymore. I feel no pain of mind or body, and 
the harder it gets the better I like it. I must rid myself of all 
sentiment and remove all possibility of love. Though l owe 
allegiance to no one other than myself I clearly understand 
that my future rests with the black people of the world. I am 
trying in every way possible to adjust my thinking habits so 
that their ways of life won't seem as strange and alien to me as 
these people over here would have it. After I am finished with 
myself, an observer who could read my thoughts and watch 
my actions would never believe that I was raised in the United 
States, and much less would he believe that I came from the 
lowest class, the black stratum of slave mentality.* 
I have been meaning to ask you how Delora was doing with 
her husband in jail. I sincerely hope she is not finding it too 
hard, but life on the treadmill can be expected to be hard; if 
*During his early years in prison, the author explained to 
the editor that he had completely lost faith in American blacks 
and their ability to become a truly revolutionary force. The 
only thing he wanted was to get out of prison and fight for 
Roberto in Angola or Lumumba in the Congo. 
38


--- PAGE 57 ---
you will send me her address and ask her if she wants to write 
me, I will send the necessary forms to her. 
Hang on, I'm going to make everything all right. 
Your son, 
SE PT EM BER, 196 4 
Dear Mother, 
George 
I went up yesterday and I'll have to say that it does 
not look too hopeful. I think my black brother crossed me, 
the one you met when you were here last. They made mention 
of my going to school. One of them told me in so many words 
to bring back a diploma. Maybe this was his meaning, maybe 
not. I will not know for sure until my official results come in 
on Friday of this week. I'll write you again then. 
Lavera* came to see me this weekend, and said she will 
come again next weekend. I will tell her Saturday what I got at 
the board; she can contact you. But there is no need for that 
much disquiet; if I should get an immediate release there 
would still be weeks of formalities to go through. 
We have birthdays this week. Though I have lost all of my 
sentimentality, I know you people still cling to the old, so I'll 
observe the social amenities by wishing you health on your 
*The author's mother's niece. 
39


--- PAGE 58 ---
birthday. Really though, is it not silly, the little pat phrases, 
Merry Christmas, Happy New Year, etc.? They (the 
Europeans) have reduced all life to a very dull formula. All 
natural feelings have been lost. 
I have work here in my cell to do, see you soon. 
Love, 
DECE MBER, 196 4 
Dear Father, 
George 
I guess you are right in what you say about 
Mother's position. If she wishes to occupy the comer set aside 
for us in this society and be happy with such then let it be. I 
merely speak of better and different things in a society greater 
(in my humble opinion) and more conducive to advancement 
for people of my kind. Always bear in mind that though I may 
sound intolerant and pressing at times, all I say is by way of 
discourse and nothing by way of advice. You see I understand 
you people clearly . You are afflicted by the same set of 
principles that has always governed black people's ideas and 
habits here in the U.S. I know also how we arrived at this 
appalling state of decadence. You see, my father, we have been 
"educated" into an acceptance of our positions as national 
scapegraces. Our acceptance of the lie is consciously based on 
the supposition that peace can and must be preserved at any 
price. Blacks here in the U.S. apparently do not care how well 
they live, but are only concerned with how long they are able 
to live. This is odd indeed when considering that it is possible 
40


--- PAGE 59 ---
for us all to live well, but within the reach of no man to live 
long! My deepest and most sincerely felt sympathies go out to 
all of you who are not able to resolve your problems because 
of this fundamental lack of spir it. The morass of illusionment 
has claimed your souls completely. I do not care about the 
other millions of blacks here in the land of tears, their fate is 
of their own choosing; but because you and the others of our 
family have always been close to me whatever successes I 
wring from the eternal foe you will share. Until I do this I 
know it is expecting too much for you to be impressed with 
the ideals I put forward. It's always been this way I imagine. 
One has to be shown the fruits and feel the rewards of a new 
or different thing before perceiving its merits. 
In the airmail letter you sent it is not altogether clear to me 
what you were trying to say, so I won't leap to any 
conclusions but let me state that I have a singular incapability, 
which is my strongest point, my first principle. I could never 
in this existence betray my kind. Love of self and kind is the 
first law of nature, my father. What N. did to me in 19 58 I can 
never forgive. * I can understand why she betrayed me to the 
whites and can even explain why she thought herself right in 
doing so, but I can't forgive her because she has not made any 
effort to change her completely backward sympathies. It is the 
same thing today with her as it was yesterday. She would 
betray me a second time if I allowed it. You know that I love 
*"In 19 58 I escaped from Kern County Jail and fought the 
pigs, all the way back to the midwestern area of my birth, '.45 
smokeless' in hand. I lost them altogether in Chicago. The pigs 
gave up on me after about three months. I ended up in 
Harrisburg to await the return of my mother's half-brother, 
Amide Walker. I was hoping that he would help me get out of 
the country. While I was waiting for him, my aunt discovered 
through my family in California that I was on the run from the 
law. She turned in my name and I was recaptured." 
41


--- PAGE 60 ---
my mother dearly for many reasons, she always (through your 
labor of course) provided for me materially the best she knew 
how, but she failed me bitterly in matters of the mind and 
spirit. My education she put in the hands of the arch-foes of 
my kind. This is a betrayal of the worst kind, because of this 
I've had to learn everything I now know on my own by trial 
and error. I have almost arrived but look at the cost. I would 
not be in prison now if she hadn't been reading life through 
those rose-colored glasses of hers, or if you would have had 
time and the wisdom to tell me of my enemies, and how to get 
the things I needed without falling into their traps. She kept 
telling me how wrong I was and making me feel guilty. All of 
this I now understand, but again cannot forgive because she is 
still doing this same sort of thing!! 
I got the nuts and cake today thanks, socks and handker­
chiefs also. Take care. 
Son 
DE CEM BE R , 196 4 
Dear Father, 
Everything was in order, concerning the package 
that is. They brought it right in front of the cell and opened it. 
Mama sent me a card with a picture of some white people 
on the front of it. I guess she just can't perceive that I don't 
want anything to do with her white god. 
I am still confined to this cell. It is nine by four. I have left 
it only twice in the month I've been here for ten minutes each 
42


--- PAGE 61 ---
time, in which I was allowed to shower. Did I tell you? They 
have assured me that I have not been given a bad-conduct 
report. It is just that they felt I was about to do some wrong. 
It's always suspicions. What I was supposed to have done or 
was about to do, never, never what they caught me doing as it 
should be. The last time I was in a cell like this three months, 
from February to May (1 964) for reasons that are not 
altogether clear yet! I have had no serious infraction in almost 
three years now. You know I had at least $12 5 on me when I 
was arrested in 19 60 and they took it. I assume it was to cover 
the $70 that was missing as the result of the robbery. So I'm 
thinking that I shouldn't owe them too much more. You know 
in fact I'm fast awakening to the idea that I may not owe 
anyone anything and that they even might owe me. I have 
given four-and-a-half years of life, during which I have had to 
accept the unacceptable, for $70 that I didn't take-I protest. I 
protest. 
If you knew how much I protested, how seriously I felt 
about the matter, you and Mother and anyone who has a 
natural affinity with me would surely be trying to convince me 
that you were on my side. 
The events of the Congo, Vietnam, Malaya, Korea, and here 
in the U.S. are taking place all for the same reason. The 
commotion, the violence, the struggles in all these areas and 
many more spring from one source, the evil and malign, 
possessive and greedy Europeans. Their abstract theories, 
developed over centuries of long usage, concerning economics 
and sociology take the form that they do because they suffer 
under the mistaken belief that a man can secure himself in this 
insecure world best by ownership of great personal, private 
wealth. They attempt to impose their theories on the world 
for obvious reasons of self-gain. Their philosophy concerning 
government and economics has an underlying tone of selfish­
ness, possessiveness, and greediness because their character is 
made up of these things. They can't see the merit in socialism 
and communism because they do not possess the qualities of 
43


--- PAGE 62 ---
rational thought, generosity, and magnanimity necessary to be 
part of the human race, part of a social order, part of a system. 
They can not understand that "From each according to his 
abilities, to each according to his needs" is the only way men 
can live together without chaos. There is a species of fly that 
lives only four hours. If one of these flies (June fly I believe 
they are called), if one of these flies was born at twelve o'clock 
midnight in darkness and gloom, there would be no way 
possible for him in his lifetime to ever understand the concept 
of day and light. This is the case with the Europeans. 
They are small men with their petty intrigues and pre­
jUdices. "In shallow men the fish of small thoughts cause much 
commotion, in magnanimous oceanic minds the whales of 
inspiration cause hardly a ruffle" (Mao Tse-tung). 
George 
FEBRUA RY, 1965 
Dear Mother, 
I promised myself that I wouldn't write you again 
from here. I only take pen in hand when feeling moves me to 
do so. My feeling seems to be wasted on you. You know 
beyond question what my feelings are, I never think of 
anything trite or inconsequential anymore. I've forgotten the 
feeling of joy. I've long since had my last smile wrung 
unceremoniously from my hollow soul. I write home to you 
people, my people, the closest of my kind for understanding 
and advice. I attempt to advise you in areas of which 
experience has made me better informed. I get no under­
standing. If I followed the advice I receive it would only serve 
44


--- PAGE 63 ---
to enslave me further to this madness of our times. My advice 
falls upon deaf ears! 
This is my reason for not wanting to write. What can I say 
further? It is clear you don't love me when you refuse to aid 
me the only way you can, the only way I expect! By telling 
me I am right and that I have your blessings. You see I am 
being frank: though I care about your feelings, I care more for 
your well-being. There are things brewing now that could ruin 
you completely if, when they break, you are in sympathy with 
wrong. Robert is the same way, he pretends or he may 
earnestly not .feel the effects of the circumstances I attempt to 
explain. He is sympathetic to wrong. But I can overlook him 
more readily because of his almost complete lack of mental 
training. His past experiences have been very limited regarding 
the stimulus of academic learning, he is innoc�nt. But not so 
with you, though your exposure was not all that it should have 
been, you are equipped with the basic fundamentals needed to 
guide one to the truth, should it be truth one favors. When I 
consider my own experience bought at the cost of these 
terrible years, supplemented in love and concern by your own 
experience and learning, what am I to think but that 
something is radically wrong, that I am being betrayed and 
have been betrayed. The question is one of grave proportions 
to me. I cannot stress this point too clearly. I mean to make 
sure this doesn't happen to me again or to my seed. If a person 
doesn't stand with me, he stands against me to my way of 
thinking. I feel that you have failed me Mama. I know that 
you have failed me. I also know that Robert has never held an 
opinion of his own. You have influenced his every thought 
ever since you have known him. You have always had the 
running of things. You have done him a disservice. You are 
doing Jon a disservice now. You are a woman, you think like a 
bourgeois woman. This is a predatory man's world. The real 
world calls for a predatory man's brand of thinking. Your way 
of viewing the world is necessarily bourgeois and feminine. 
How could I, Robert, Jon, or any of the men of our kind 
45


--- PAGE 64 ---
accomplish what we must as men if we think like bourgeois 
women, or let our women think for us. This is what's 
happening all over this part of the world! Robert should have 
been stronger, should have had more time and freedom of 
movement. So should Grandfather, and Great-Grandfather. 
But they didn't and it isn't their fault. The cruelest and most 
suppressive treatment has always fallen to the males because 
they have not that tender defense the woman is born with. So 
understand me once and for all. I speak no further on the 
matter. You conceived and Robert sired a man. Nothing can 
turn me from my resolve. Make no further attempts. I am 
going to give my all to this thing, and if the victory is to fall to 
me, you and people like you must stand beside me, not lean or 
lie on me. 
Robert tells me you are sick. I am writing to ask about the 
nature of your illness. I know a hope will not aid you any, but 
by whatever gods there be I hope and wish you well. There is 
much sickness and tears to come, some will fall to me also I 
guess, but my condition can only improve from where I stand 
now. 
Fare you well. 
Son 
46


--- PAGE 65 ---
FE BR UARY , 1965 
25 
Dear Mother, 
Your letter reached me late for some unknown 
reason. Has your health improved? I think you should relax; 
all has not been said or done yet. You are a little confused 
now for understandable reasons; things will be made clear 
before long. I should be out of here this year. I have complied 
with all of their demands: group counseling, school, clean 
conduct record. I go to board next time they meet. You could 
start writing letters to the Adult Authority now, the more the 
better. You know what to say: that I was young then and you 
see a vast change in my character now. Also say that you can 
and will help me with a place to stay. 
I asked Robert to send me some shoes. Check with him on 
it. They have to be sent from Sears by the salesman, cost no 
more than $25, have the price or sales slip in the box, and in 
the way of type and size I want some old folks' comforts with 
high tops, 9-B. Nothing else, my feet need therapy in the 
worst way. Soon as you can on this, I want to get rid of these 
corns and sores before I get out. 
I'm glad you weren't a singer or dancer. Pop was wise in 
that. The image held of the blacks in this part of the world is 
that we are proficient in but one or two areas only, the service 
trades or the physical entertainment fields (singers, dancers, 
boxers, baseball players). 
47


--- PAGE 66 ---
Would you like to support the theory that we are good for 
nothing but to serve or entertain our captors? 
In the society of our fathers and in the civilized world 
today, women feel it their obligation to be ever yielding and 
obedient to their men. Life is purposely made simple for them 
because of their nature, and they are happy. When the women 
outnumber the men in the black societies, the men take as 
many wives as they can afford, and care for them all equally. 
In the white for some nebulous reason the men can take only 
one ... the rest are left to become prostitutes, nuns, or 
lesbians. In the civilized societies the women do light work, 
bear children, and lend purpose to the man's existence. They 
train children in the ways of wisdom that history has shown to 
be correct. Their job is to train the children in their early life 
to be men or women, not confused psychotics! This is a big 
job, to train and propagate the race!! Is this not enough? The 
rest is left to the men: government administration, the 
providing of means of subsistence, and defense, or mainte­
nance of life and property against any who would deprive us 
of it, as the barbarian has and is still attempting to do. The 
white theory of "the emancipated woman" is a false idea. You 
will find it, as they are finding it, the factor in the breakdown 
of the family unit. Mama, all this struggle is unnecessary. Let's 
not create an atmosphere of competition among ourselves as 
they have done. Life is too short. There is too much for us to 
restore to its proper order and we are too wise. What do you 
think made the whlte guy write that life is "a tale told by an 
idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing" -he felt 
frustrated and stupid. 
Son 
48


--- PAGE 67 ---
MA RCH, 1965 
12 
Dear Mama, 
The things you speak of are uppennost in my mind 
and my heart. I am not too manly or sophisticated to say that 
I love you and all the rest with a devotion and dedication that 
will continue to grow until I pass from this existence. 
Anything that will please you, and that falls within human 
accomplishment, I will carry out. I say this with confidence 
because of my certainty that you would never ask me to please 
you by surrendering my mental liberty and self-respect; I 
wouldn't want to live were these, my last two real possessions, 
to be lost. 
Any confidence you put in me, Mama, will be well placed. 
This is not mere talk, my ego is nowhere involved. If we are to 
surmount these barriers standing between us, and finally work 
things around to our advantage, on a few points we must be 
agreed. You must listen to me. I've been trying to say 
something. Stop closing my voice off from your mind! My hair 
has started to turn gray and I'm beginning to look like an old 
man. My best efforts up to now have all fallen far short of 
their intended goals. I know, however, just as sure as day 
follows night that I will win the last round. That is the one I 
always win, the important one. 
I feel that you understand the situation better .than most 
who live on your level. From your last letter, I know you are 
49


--- PAGE 68 ---
intelligent enough to understand. I have it before me now and 
I glean much to indicate that this is so. But there is much that 
has escaped your understanding, and it is quite reasonable that 
this be true. You have no way of learning and bettering. 
However, if you will honor my humble voice, I would very 
much like to pass on to you just a thought or two I have had. 
All that I ask is that you hear me, and think about what I say. 
Do not just read over the lines. Think of what I say in relation 
to things past, and the vague possibility that is our future. I'm 
not just another convict or "Negro." I'm one who really loves 
you and who has been observing with a practiced eye and an 
almost photographic memory. But first let me clear up one 
other incidental thing. Robert has never said anything unat­
tractive or belittling about you. Each of his letters expresses 
almost total grief for the condition of your health. He blames 
me even, then himself, but never the right people. He feels he 
has failed you, me, and all the others, and he keeps trying to 
learn if I also blame him. Of course I do not blame him or you, 
or myself. I place the blame for the social ills that have caused 
us discomfort and unhappiness squarely upon the shoulders of 
those responsible: the people in control!! 
It is mainly on this subject that I am going to speak now. 
To get it across I am going to write two letters, this one and 
another sheet also tonight. This should be read first for the 
idea to follow in logical order. * 
I am going to do exactly as you say concerning the show of 
good conduct here. I have never raised my hand against any 
man, since I've been an adult that is, except in self-defense, 
but there has been an element of aggressiveness in the way that 
I have handled these incidents. I'll have to always defend my 
person, but I promise you that unless there is a direct threat to 
my existence I will never have another bit of trouble here. 
Understand though that you do not live in the real rip-and-tear 
'California prison regulations limit the length of convict 
letters to both sides of one standard 8!6 by I I ruled sheet. 
50


--- PAGE 69 ---
world. You have escaped it by surrendering your self-determin­
ation and freedom of thought in a tranquilizing conformity to 
the wishes of whoever may hold the strings. Consequently you 
do not know how hard it is to live in peace even for a short 
period with people who defy violence, and vilify peace and 
harmony. 
George 
MAR CH, 196 5 
12 
Dear Mama, 
I will try what you advised. I know it to be the 
best way at this point in the little game. But should I fail you 
are not to say, "George is no good." You must try to 
understand that now, just as in the past, there are other 
considerations and influences that enter into the course of 
events that turn our lives one way or the other. 
Have you ever wondered how you and I and all our kind 
lost their identity so fast? The last blacks were brought into 
this country only 75 to 80 years ago, three generations at 
most. This is too short a time for us to have lost as much as we 
have. No other people have completely been divorced from 
their own as we have in such a short period. I don't even know 
my name. Have you ever wondered about this? The answer is 
found in the fact that we lost control of the circumstances 
surrounding our lives. We were alienated from our sources, 
51


--- PAGE 70 ---
isolated, and remolded to fit in certain forms, to fill a specific 
purpose. No consideration was or has ever been given to our 
being anything other than what we were originally intended to 
be (I ask for electronics or drafting and I'm told to be 
practical). You must realize, understand fully, that we have 
little or no control over our lives. You must then stop giving 
yourself pain by feeling that you failed somewhere. You have 
not failed. You have been failed, by history and events, and 
people over whom you had no control. Only after you 
understand this can you then go on to make the necessary 
alterations that will bring some purpose and value to your life; 
you must gain some control! I have said this to Robert a 
hundred times but it makes no impression at all. He writes 
back in the same vein as he did the time before I said anything. 
He just doesn't have the mental equipment. Will you look 
deeper and think on the matter and then explain to him? I was 
born knowing exactly nothing. I had no one, no one, to teach 
me the things of real value. The school systems are gauged to 
teach youth what to think, not how to think. Robert never 
had the time to say even hello, and neither of you really knew 
anything to give my anyway, because your parents knew 
nothing. Do you see where the cycle brings us, to the real 
source of the trouble, the alientation and the abandonment, 
the pressure from without, the system and its supporters? ! 
didn't know either. So we must look to the people whose 
responsibility it is to see to it that the benefits of society pass 
down to all concerned for an answer. If a good god exists then 
they are the ones who must make an appeal to him for 
forgiveness: forgiveness for relinquishment and dereliction of 
duty! I don't need god, religion, belief, etc. I need control, 
control of the determining factors relating to the unquestion­
ing support and loyalty of my mother, father, brothers, 
sisters. You need Robert and I need him and he needs you. We 
all need each other. The standards and emotions we have used 
in the past to regulate our relations defy all nature and run 
contrary to all known precedent. When did blood cease to be 
52


--- PAGE 71 ---
thicker than and more binding than all else? We must look to 
each other and destroy the barriers placed between us with 
trust, and love. I am committed and I will do all that I have to. 
I am equal to anything that is required. Help me when you 
can, the only way you can, by trying to understand. 
I don't want a package this year; save the money; save all 
you can. I am living very badly now and just to stay alive is an 
ordeal, but I see something better. It is vague, and is a 
possibility at best, but I know a place, a refuge where people 
love and live. 
George 
MA RCH, 19 65 
16 
Dear Father. 
I've been going through final examinations at 
school. Had to use all of my available time in study and have 
not been able to write like I should, but forgive me. They are 
over now and I did well. 
I go before the board next week. 
I didn't know about L.'s husband. That is too bad. She 
seems to be extremely unlucky in that area. She told me that 
the last husband she had was worse. Since that is the case I can 
feel nothing against her, but as you said, she should have 
explained. People are odd indeed, about money that is. The 
best method of testing a person's character is through money. 
The shocks and strains of this money-mad society are enough 
53


--- PAGE 72 ---
to ruin the purest of minds. Men are so deeply engaged in 
making a living that their very existence is shaped and 
dominated by the system of production. I'm thoroughly tired 
already, Pop. When I obtain what I need to work with, nothing 
could stop me from going home. That is where I will invest my 
money, resources, and talents. My labor shall be expanded 
where it will be appreciated. My taxes will go to an order and 
system of government that will in turn protect me and my 
interests. I shall not, as long as I call myself a man, 
compromise with tyranny. There are a few things that mean 
more to me than life. Though I must think of and plan for 
tomorrow, I cannot, I must not surrender for tomorrow all 
that I possess today. I can repair this loss, this morbid 
depression that owns a little more of my mind each day that 
passes. The pale and almost indistinguish?ble glow of the 
future may yet materialize to disperse the gloomy stupor that 
has encompassed me completely. I have been purposely kept 
ignorant, I have been taught what to think, instead of how to 
think. I have been subjected to the ordeal of hunger, thirst, 
name-calling, and other uncountable indignities. Danger comes 
even from those of !11y own kind. Their lack of response and 
unyielding adherence to ineffectual thought and action is an 
obstacle to my plans. I may yet surmount it, but only if I 
follow my call. I must obey the dictates of my mind. 
Give my regards to all. 
Son 
54


--- PAGE 73 ---
MA RCH, 1965 
30 
Dear Father, 
I haven't read anything or studied in a week now. I 
have been devoting all my time to thought. I trust you are all 
in health. I think of my personal past quite often. This is 
uncomfortable sometimes but necessary. I try not to let my 
past mistakes bother me too much, though some seem almost 
unpardonable. If it were not for the few intermixed little 
victories, my confidence in my ability would be irreparably 
shaken. 
Though I know I am a victim of social injustice and 
economic pressure and though I understand the forces that 
work to drive so many of our kind to places like this and to 
mental institutions, I can't help but know that I proceeded 
wrong somewhere. I could have done a lot worse. You know 
our people react in different ways to this neoslavery, some just 
give in completely and join the other side. They join some 
christian cult and cry out for integration. These are the ones 
who doubt themselves most. They are the weakest and hardest 
to reach with the new doctrine. Some become inveterate 
drinkers and narcotic users in an attempt to gain some mental 
solace for the physical depravity they suffer. I've heard them 
say, "There's no hope without dope." Some hire on as a 
janitor, bellboy, redcap, cook, elevator boy, singer, boxer, 
baseball player, or maybe a freak at some sideshow and 
55


--- PAGE 74 ---
pretend that all is as well as is possible. They think since it's 
always been this way it must always remain this way; these are 
the fatalists, they serve and entertain and rationalize. 
Then there are those who resist and rebel but do not know 
what, who, why, or how exactly they should go about this. 
They are aware but confused. They are the least fortunate, for 
they end where I have ended. By using half measures and 
failing dismally to effect any real improvement in their 
condition, they fall victim to the full fury and might of the 
system's repressive agencies. Believe me, every dirty trick of 
deception and brutality is employed without shame, without 
honor, without humanity, without reservation to either 
convert or destroy a rebellious arm. Believe me, when I say 
that I begin to weary of the sun. I am by nature a gentle man, 
I love the simple things of life, good food, good wine, an 
expressive book, music, pretty black women. I used to find 
enjoyment in a walk in the rain, summer evenings in a place 
like Harrisburg. Remember how I used to love Harrisburg. All 
of this is gone from me, all the gentle, shy characteristics of 
the black men have been wrung unceremoniously from my 
soul. The buffets and blows of this have and have:not society 
have engendered in me a flame that will live, will live to grow, 
until it either destroys my tormentor or myself. You don't 
understand this but I must say it. Maybe when you remember 
this ten or twenty years from now you'll comprehend. I don't 
think of life in the same sense that you or most black men of 
your generation think of it, it is not important to me how long 
I live, I think only of how I live, how well, how nobly. We 
think if we are to be men again we must stop working for 
nothing, competing against each other for the little they allow 
us to possess, stop selling our women or allowing them to be 
used and handled against their will, stop letting our children be 
educated by the barbarian, using their language, dress, and 
customs, and most assuredly stop turning our cheeks. 
George 
56


--- PAGE 75 ---
APR IL, 19 65 
18 
Dear Father, 
Did you get my letter of April ll ; last Sunday? I 
fear you may not have gotten that letter since therein I set 
down some important matters in an almost too direct manner* 
I did so thinking that if it was allowed to go through, you 
would have in your possession knowledge of the singular 
events that seem to rush upon me menacing and evil from all 
directions at once. You would have this information in as 
complete a form as the space of that single page allows, or if 
they had sent it back or destroyed it, nothing. This was logical 
in that I wanted you to know immediately. It is best to have 
such matters done, and related, and over with. Here in my 
position you know I'm not supposed to be critical, nor am I 
supposed to attempt to convey what goes on in here. So please 
acknowledge my letter. I have from you only the letters you 
wrote on April I and April 2. Have you sent others? 
They are sending me to Folsom soon, so they told me. The 
assault charge was referred to the district attorney. He will in 
tum refer it to the grand jury, which will then bring what they 
call legal proceedings against me. Let me say here that all of 
* All of Jackson's correspondence had to pass through the 
rigors of prison censorship. Much of it was completely 
destroyed or mutilated. Only his last letters to his lawyer 
passed through uncensored. 
57


--- PAGE 76 ---
this is a well-thought-out effort to frighten me and maybe even 
do me whatever harm they can without alarming or shocking 
those around me, you included, too much. I guess they want 
to show me and those around me here how powerless I am in 
their hands. But they must do this without giving rise to 
feelings of total insecurity on the part of the little people 
which could serve as stimulus to some act which would lead 
toward changing conditions or circumstances that threaten not 
just our well-being but our very existence. Thus if I or any of 
my kind should suffer the final hurt, it would be by accident, 
heart attack instead of poisoning, malnutrition instead of 
beating, suicide by hanging instead of being shot, or legal 
proceedings instead of foul play. 
But I have much to say about any matter that concerns me 
in spite of their wishes. Fear, the emotion that stiffens and 
inhibits the minds of most men, causing them to be incapable 
of acting in their defense at the moment of trial, is totally 
lacking in me. I could look upon my total ruin with as 
detached an unconcern as I look upon theirs. The payment for 
life is death. I have written many-a page in the book of life in 
spite of my limited years, and I intend to write many more. I'll 
come out of this as I have everything else. I'll see Ghana yet. 
Folsom is a better prison than this. There will be found 
many older inmates who are more stable and less inclined to 
mind others' business. I can also obtain a parole faster there or 
a transfer to some minimum security camp. On the assault 
charge I don't think they will convict me. Maybe won't even 
try me. The D.A. has to accept the case, and then the grand 
jury must be convinced to accept what evidence they may 
concoct against me. 
Give Mother my regards. 
Fare you well. 
58 
Son


--- PAGE 77 ---
MA Y , 1965 
2 
Dear Mother and Father, 
I am still in isolation. Nothing has changed since I 
wrote you last, Robert. * You have a remarkable method for 
relieving yourself of unpleasant or weighty problems that can 
almost be admired, were it just a little less chancy and not so 
slow. You seem to just ignore the matter or pretend it doesn't 
exist, hoping maybe others with more time or brains or 
perhaps more to lose will work something out. I have tried 
several times over the last few years to adopt this means of 
rationalization for my own relief. I tried it at the start of this 
last attack upon my well-being. Like you, I go to bed each 
night hoping that the morrow will bring about the needed 
change. I simply force all my awareness, all my many and 
monumental problems, from my remembrance. Without plans 
or forethought, without a hint of uneasiness, I go to bed each 
night, hoping, trying to avert the storm that is now coming on. 
I find each morning, as I found this one, freighted with 
possibilities of my own disaster. I still see the poverty among 
plenty, feel the curse of total insecurity. I still feel cramped 
within this cloud of ignorance which has been placed about me 
*The author's father's name is Robert Lester Jackson. The 
author addresses him either as Robert or Lester depending on 
mood or circumstance. 
59


--- PAGE 78 ---
purposely to make me act against my interests. My bed is just 
as hard as it was when I went to sleep, my clothing just as 
coarse and inadequate. Here in the isolation cell the pitifully 
light breakfasts are just the same. I went supperless to bed the 
night before. Each morning if I can find or beg a piece of soap 
I wash myself. This is indeed counted as good fortune. But I 
mustn't complain. It is un-American to do so. Like the rest of 
you I should be completely lacking in feeling for myself. I 
should smile and sing. Perhaps I should thank the lord in spite 
of the fact that I have had not one moment's mental 
gratification in all my twenty-three years. I find no relief in 
baseball and basketball games on the TV. The charges they 
bring against me now could cost me my life, the last of my 
possessions, the only thing they have heretofore left me with. 
But now that I think of it, I have always been forced to fear 
for my life, so this is nothing new. It merely more direct. 
One of you send me twenty-five dollars as soon as you can 
after reading this. I will get out of isolation next week and be 
locked up in segregation (slightly better than this because we 
can draw money or articles from the prison store). I want to 
buy some envelopes, and books that I will be needing. 
Important because I have nothing. Have lost everything. If you 
can get it here soon enough I will be allowed to draw it this 
month. 
Well, I've heard it said that the darkest hour falls just 
before dawn, so I brace myself to my tasks, never doubting in 
my ability to struggle on. I feel no defeat could overcome me, 
and fear no evil but fear itself perhaps. I have removed this 
emotion from my mind completely, and I languish in misery, 
waiting. This is a big part of the battle: waiting for the correct 
moment and then having the courage and wit to move when 
the time is right. The living condition, though bad, have no 
effect upon me physically. But how much longer will this last 
for me in and out of prison, for you in and out of debt, for the 
others of our kind who suffer jail, mental institutions, and the 
like. How long will we be forced to live this life, where every 
60


--- PAGE 79 ---
meal is an accomplishment, where every movie or pair of shoes 
is a fulfillment, where circumstance never allows our children 
to develop past a mental age of sixteen. I've been patient, but 
where I'm concerned patience has its limits. Take it too far, 
and it's cowardice. 
George 
JUNE, 19 65 
9 
Dear Father, 
We can spend twenty-five dollars a month here at 
the canteen for toilet articles, a few dry goods, and food. But 
we can spend any amount through the mail on such things as 
books, typewriters, correspondence courses in all the liberal 
arts. I spend what you have sent me on books. Many that are 
of interest and value to me cannot be obtained here in the 
library. 
Anything that you send me in the way of finances is a good 
investment, the returns will be forthcoming after the success­
ful conclusion of the wars. 
Mao Tse-tung, leader of the Chinese Communist party, has 
written many works on politics and war. Please ascertain the 
exact titles of his works and who they are published by and 
how much each costs. Also the price of the Encyclopedia 
Africana by William Du Bois. How many volumes are there in 
the set? Who publishes them? It is very important that I have 
the publisher's name and address, because if I come by the 
61


--- PAGE 80 ---
money to purchase these books I need the exact titles and 
publishers. To read and study the major works of these two 
authors would be the climax of my education, and education 
in itself. Du Bois was a mere fool in his earlier days; but 
right at the close of his eventful life he gave up this life of toil, 
deprivation, and tears to join his own kind. He left the United 
States, went to Ghana, and wrote the Encyclopedia Africana. 
It is difficult, very difficult to get any facts concerning our 
history and our way of life. The lies, half-truths, and 
propaganda have won total sway over the facts. We have no 
knowledge of our heritage. Our economic status has reduced 
our minds to a state of complete oblivion. The young black 
who comes out of college or the university is as ignorant and 
unlearned as the white laborer. For all practical purposes he is 
worse off than when he went in, for he has learned only the 
attitudes and ways of the snake, and a few well-worded lies. 
The ruling culture refuses to let us know how much we did to 
advance civilization in our lands long ago. It refuses to 
recognize and appreciate our craft and strength and allow us 
some of the fruits of our labor. All this has left an emptiness in 
our lives, a void, a vacuum that must soon be filled by 
hostilities. I am most certainly committed, until the day I'm 
sent to the warrior's rest. By the ruling culture's acts of greed 
and barbarism the uncommitted will soon learn that compro­
mise with such an enemy is impossible. Our two fortunes move 
along a collision course. I'm prepared in every aspect, I have 
nothing, I can lose nothing! 
George 
62


--- PAGE 81 ---
JUNE, 1965 
Dear Mother, 
Even though I have plenty of time now, I don't 
write more regularly because of my studies, I get involved in 
some aspect of the subjects that interest me and before I can 
extract myself the lights are going off and it is twelve o'clock. 
You know the last thing we discussed just before you people 
left me when you were up here last, well I've decided to go 
into it-now. 
My life here is slowly becoming one of complete alienation. 
I talk to fewer convicts every day. Just one lieutenant here has 
tried to do anything for me. He got me out of segregation 
twice last year. The die is cast now though, I guess, thumbs 
down on me. My future is about as sound as a three-dollar bill. 
I thank whatever forces there are working for me that I'm still 
able to write you. I'm joking of course, it isn't that serious. 
Nothing will help me now though but patience and I have 
developed plenty. There is nothing left to me now but to await 
whatever may come. I go back to the board October or is it 
December. Nine months from March would be December. Yes! 
Perhaps the fog will lift and I will see some ray of hope by 
then. You know the thing which they have locked me up for 
now could mean spending my next few years in confinement 
here. It would be merely a flight from reality to think that I 
could get a date this year. I would be happy though to just 
know how long I will be held, even if it was 10 years. I'd feel 
better knowing. 
Take care of yourself. 
Son 
63


--- PAGE 82 ---
JU NE. 1965 
Dear Father. 
One of those tall ultra bright electrical fixtures used 
to illuminate the walls and surrounding area at night casts a 
direct beam of light in my cell at night. (I moved to a different 
cell last week). Consequently I have enough light, even after 
the usual twelve o'clock lights-out, to read or study by. I don't 
really have to sleep now if I choose not to. The early hours of 
morning are the only time of the day that one can find any 
respite from the pandemonium caused by these the most 
uncultured of San Quentin inmates. I don't let the noise 
bother me even in the evenings when it rises to maddening 
intensity, because I try to understand my surroundings. I've 
asked myself, as I do about all the other aspects of life, 
why-why do white cons act and react as-if they were animals 
of a lower order than we black men (some blacks get foolish 
also but we don't refer to them as "men")? Why just because 
they look like shaved monkeys must they also act like them? 
It's frayed nerves, caused by the harsh terms that defeat 
brought when they went against the system, the same system 
that runs this place. I must ask myself why did they go against 
the system and why are the terms so harsh? Could it be that a 
man will most always pursue his interests, system or no? But 
why should so many people's interests lie outside the system? 
Why doesn't the system encompass the needs and require­
ments of all or, to be realistic, the majority. We now come to 
the part of the question around which the whole contention 
pivots: Why are the terms so harsh, the price of defeat so high? 
64


--- PAGE 83 ---
What is it that causes a man to become power-mad, to deify 
exploitation and mendacity and vilify the compatible, harmon­
ious things of nature, how many times have you heard that 
"everyone should help fight the evils of communism," etc.? 
George 
JUL Y, 1965 
Lester, 
I write this letter to inform you that the people 
who hold me here read that letter sent them. They read it and 
smiled with satisfaction and triumph. You are under a grave 
illusion, I must now admit. You didn't think they would 
inform me of it, did you? But you are in serious error. They 
let me read it. Apparently every petty official in the prison has 
read it, all to my embarrassment. For it sounded like 
something out of Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin. 
It didn't just cause me embarrassment. It also has caused 
me to be put in a cell that has the lock welded closed. Can it 
possibly be? Is it within the scope of feasibility that you did 
not know that to tell these people I was "bent on self-destruc­
tion" (to use your reference) would cause me harm? Are you 
so feeble of mind as to "report," after a visit with me, that I 
am bent on violent self-destruction and think it would cause 
me no harm! 
I have always respected and loved you people, and hated 
myself, cried bitter tears of remorse, when, because of 
circumstances and conditions, which I didn't understand, I let 
you down. Even after I discovered the true cause of my ills, 
when I found that this social order had created, through its 
inadequacies and its abandonment of our interest, the basis for 
65


--- PAGE 84 ---
JU NE, 1965 
Dear Father, 
One of those tall ultrabright electrical fixtures used 
to illuminate the walls and surrounding area at night casts a 
direct beam of light in my cell at night. (I moved to a different 
cell last week). Consequently I have enough light, even after 
the usual twelve o'clock lights-out, to read or study by. I don't 
really have to sleep now if I choose not to. The early hours of 
morning are the only time of the day that one can find any 
respite from the pandemonium caused by these the most 
uncultured of San Quentin inmates. I don't let the noise 
bother me even in the evenings when it rises to maddening 
intensity, because I try to understand my surroundings. I've 
asked myself, as I do about all the other aspects of life, 
why-why do white cons act and react a&-if they were animals 
of a lower order than we black men (some blacks get foolish 
also but we don't refer to them as "men")? Why just because 
they look like shaved monkeys must they also act like them? 
It's frayed nerves, caused by the harsh terms that defeat 
brought when they went against the system, the same system 
that runs this place. I must ask myself why did they go against 
the system and why are the terms so harsh? Could it be that a 
man will most always pursue his interests, system or no? But 
why should so many people's interests lie outside the system? 
Why doesn't the system encompass the needs and require­
ments of all or, to be realistic, the majority. We now come to 
the part of the question around which the whole contention 
pivots: Why are the terms so harsh, the price of defeat so high? 
64


--- PAGE 85 ---
What is it that causes a man to become power-mad, to deify 
exploitation and mendacity and vilify the compatible, harmon­
ious things of nature, how many times have you heard that 
"everyone should help fight the evils of communism," etc.? 
George 
JUL Y, 1965 
Lester, 
I write this letter to inform you that the people 
who hold me here read that letter sent them. They read it and 
smiled with satisfaction and triumph. You are under a grave 
illusion, I must now admit. You didn't think they would 
inform me of it, did you? But you are in serious error. They 
let me read it. Apparently every petty official in the prison has 
read it, alI to my embarrassment. For it sounded like 
something out of Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin. 
It didn't just cause me embarrassment. It also has caused 
me to be put in a celI that has the lock welded closed. Can it 
possibly be? Is it within the scope of feasibility that you did 
not know that to telI these people I was "bent on self-destruc­
tion" (to use your reference) would cause me harm? Are you 
so feeble of mind as to "report," after a visit with me, that I 
am bent on violent self-destruction and think it would cause 
me no harm! 
I have always respected and loved you people, and hated 
myself, cried bitter tears of remorse, when, because of 
circumstances and conditions, which I didn't understand, I let 
you down. Even after I discovered the true cause of my iIls, 
when I found that this social order had created, through its 
inadequacies and its abandonment of our interest, the basis for 
65


--- PAGE 86 ---
my frustrations, I forgave you for not preparing me; for not 
warning me, for pretending that this was the best of all 
possible worlds. I forgave you for misleading me. I forgave that 
catholic school thing. I tried to understand your defeat 
complex and your loyalty to institutions contrary to the 
blacks' interest. 
I've traveled widely over this country and some in Mexico. 
I've met and have had exchanges with hundreds of thousands 
of people. I've read extensively in the fields of social-economic 
and political theory and development, all of this done against 
serious resistance from all sides. But because I knew one day 
that I would find what I'm after, and answer some of the 
questions that beset my mind with confusion and unrest and 
fear, I pushed ahead in spite of the foolish conformity that I 
saw in you people. Now I have arrived at a state of awareness 
that (because of the education system) few Negroes reach in 
the U.S. In my concern for you, I try to share the benefits of 
my experience and my observations, but am rewarded by 
being called madman. Thank you for the vote of confidence 
you displayed in that letter to the warden. I'll never forget it! 
All my younger life you betrayed me. Like I said, I could 
forgive. At first you may not have known any better, but over 
the last two years I've infornled you of many things. I've given 
you my best and you have rejected me for my enemies. With 
this last act, you have betrayed my bosom interest, even 
though I warned you not to say anything at all. I will never 
forgive you this. Should we live forever I'll never trust you 
again. Your mind has failed you completely. To take sides 
against your son! You did it in '58 and now again. There will 
not be a third time. The cost to me is too great. Father against 
son, and brother against brother. This is truly detestable. You 
are a sick man. 
George 
66


--- PAGE 87 ---
JUL Y, 1965 
Dear Father, 
I am perplexed and hard pressed in finding a 
solution or reason that will adequately explain why we are so 
eager to follow Charlie. Why we are so impressed with his 
apparent know-how. A glance at his history shows that it has 
been one long continuous war. At no time in European history 
has there been a period of peace and harmony. Every moment 
of his past has been spent in the breakdown of civilization by 
causing war, disruption, disease, and artificial famine. You 
send me a date from the moment he emerged from his 
cave-dwelling days and I'll tell you which of his tribes were at 
war, either on us or on themselves. The whole of the Western 
European's existence here in the U.S. has been the same one 
long war with different peoples. This is the only thing they 
understand, the only thing they respect-the only thing they 
can do with any dexterity. Do you accept this miscreant as the 
architect of the patterns that must guide your future life! If 
so, we must part company, and it is best we do so now, before 
the trouble begins. But please stop and think so that you can 
turn yourself around in time, so that the developments to 
come won't shock you so badly. I have not wasted my time 
these last three or four years. I speak with some authority and 
people are listening. People like me are going to be shaping 
your tomorrows. So just sit back, open your mind, and watch, 
since you can't marshal the fundamentals to help me. 
Yes, my friend, I remember everything, the reason that 
Delara and I had to spend that summer and winter in 
67


--- PAGE 88 ---
Harrisburg is known and remembered by me. I remember the 
garbage right under the side and back of our place on Racine. 
Mama having to wash and wring clothes by hand, carrying 
Penny and J on while some fat redheaded mama sat on her 
behind. I remember how strange people looked to me when I 
finally had to be sent to Skinner School. You never knew why 
I was almost killed the first day I went, but I do. I remember 
how the rent and clothes for us children kept you broke and 
ragged. All of us hungry, if not for food-the other things that 
make life bearable. After you and Mama settled down you had 
no recreational outlets whatever. And everyone on Warren 
Blvd. knows how you would beat me all the way home from 
our baseball games in the alley. Robert, can you see how 
absurd you sound to me when you speak on "the good life," 
or something about being a free adult? I know you have never 
been free. I know that few blacks over here have ever been 
free. The forms of slavery merely changed at the signing of the 
Emancipation Proclamation from chattel slavery to economic 
slavery. If you could see and talk to some of the blacks I meet 
in here you would immediately understand what I mean, and 
see that I'm right. They are all average, all with the same 
backgrounds, and in for the same thing, some form of food 
getting. About 70 to 80 percent of all crime in the U.S. is 
perpetrated by blacks, "the sole reason for this is that 98 
percent of our number live below the poverty level in bitter 
and abject misery"! You must take off your rose-colored 
glasses and stop pretending. We have suffered an unmitigated 
wrong! How do you think I felt when I saw you come home 
each day a little more depressed than the day before? How do 
you think I felt when I looked in your face and saw the clouds 
forming, when I saw you look around and see your best efforts 
go for nothing-nothing. I can count the times on my hands 
that you managed to work up a smile. 
George 
68


--- PAGE 89 ---
JU LY, 1965 
Dear Father, 
Well I guess you know that I'm aware that this is 
not the best of all possible lives. You also know that I thank 
you for trying to cushion the shocks and strains that history 
has made it our lot to have to endure. But the make-believe 
game has ended now. I don't think it necessary for me to 
burden myself with listing strains we've endured. You are 
intelligent enough to know. At each phase of this long train of 
tyrannies, we have conducted ourselves in a very meek and 
civilized manner, with only polite please for justice and 
moderation, all to no avaiL We have shown a noble indisposi­
tion to react with the passion that each new oppression 
engenders. But any fool should be able to see that this cannot 
be allowed to continue. Any fool should be able to see that 
nature allows no such imbalances as this to exist for long. We 
have petitioned for judicial redress. We have remonstrated, 
supplicated, demonstrated, and prostrated ourselves before the 
feet of our self-appointed administrators. We have done all 
that we can do to circumvent the eruption that now comes on 
apace. The point of no return in our relationship has long been 
passed. I know what must and will take place so I follow my 
ends through to their most glorious conclusion. Don't make 
me waste my time and energy winning you to a position that 
you should already support with all your sympathies. The 
same forces that have made your life miserable, the same 
forces that have made your life senseless and unrewarding, 
threaten me and all our posterity. I know the way out. If you 
69


--- PAGE 90 ---
cannot help, sit back and listen, watch. You are charged with 
the responsibility of acknowledging the truth, my friend, and 
supporting it with whatever means, no matter how humble, are 
in your power. I am charged to right the wrong, lift the burden 
from the backs of future generations. I will not shrink from 
my duties. I will never falter or waver before the task, but we 
will go forward-to resolve this conflict once and forever. Of 
ail the twenty thousand known years of advanced civilization, 
the years that are now coming on will be the most momen-
tous. 
George 
AUGUS T, 1965 
Dear Father, 
Although I'm still between the life-death cycle, I 
feel a lot better. How is the teeth situation with you? 
I know you stay pretty busy and have a very bad memory, 
but try to remember to answer this question in your next 
letter. You told me once when I was at home there never to 
sleep more than six hours a day. You said that four was really 
enough. Why did you say this? On what authority? Experience 
or just something you read? What would be the effects of 
getting too much sleep? 
I've been carrying out some very interesting experiments 
with myself in here. I quite definitely do not believe in a strict 
regimen. By strict I mean absolute patterns for thinking and 
living. But I cannot help feeling there is a judicious mean 
somewhere. I have been forced to seek the judicious mean, due 
to the circumstances that history has thrown me into 
70


--- PAGE 91 ---
here-now. You see it isn't as simple as you implied. "Thinking 
and reading" won't fill a twenty-four-hour day. I have 
something real deep running through me, a burning thing of 
the mind. I have observed myself pass into a state of anger 
over something that happened as far away as Rhodesia or the 
Union of South Africa: And I didn't sleep for two days when 
those children and women were being murdered down there in 
your part of the world last week. I've told myself uncountable 
times that anger is an emotion, a degenerative emotion, 
unnecessary and controllable, but I couldn't control it until a 
few days ago when I observed myself being consumed by the 
force of my own weight. So, my friend, I started conducting 
these experiments with myself. Why can't I rid myself of the 
sorrow and emotion that awareness has brought me? I get rid 
of the self-destructive force of error and ignorance only to be 
torn and miserable by what I discover. It happened that I 
knew all along that some imbalance did exist, or I'll say a few 
imbalances existed, that disallowed me from progressing 
further in my development. I put my head in my hands and 
wondered why do I make myself sick, why can't I overcome 
this, maybe I'm just human after all? I believe that is what got 
it! I am what I am, and that's all I am. I knew this morbid 
depression must have some human explainable cause, an 
imbalance somewhere. The mind and body cannot be sepa­
rated, a physical imbalance can precipitate effects that could 
eventually lead to some mental imbalance. Too much sleep, 
too little, the wrong kind of food, too much, too little, too 
much reading in the wrong position, too much study, or too 
long an application to one subject, results in imbalances, 
conflicts, struggles. I was looking for a solution from one 
direction only, when no event, no effect in nature, has a single 
cause. It's a collection of causes! So I look at myself and I 
discover new ways of knowing myself, seeing and placing 
myself in the vast scheme. The struggle is almost over, my 
friend, complete and harmonious development can be mine, 
everyone's. Only one-fourth of the sorrow in each man's life is 
71


--- PAGE 92 ---
caused by outside uncontrollable elements, the rest is self-im­
posed by failing to analyze and act with calmness. 
George 
AUGUS T, 1965 
Dear Father, 
I've been on five hours sleep a day and one-and­
one-half hours exercise. The rest of my time is divided 
proportionally between my work and what little pleasure I can 
make for myself in here. This isn't too much to speak of, a 
little light fiction, or the radio. The experiment seems to be 
bringing me some benefits; the tenseness that brings about 
emotional unrest has left. 
I hope you are not too uncomfortable with your teeth 
being worked on. I will have to have mine worked on also . 
when I leave here. The longer I wear these shoes you sent me 
the more comfortable they become. You should try some. Of 
courSe I haven't too far to walk in here, but I make the best of 
what I have. I do my best thinking on my feet, so I walk this 
little ten feet I have rather diligently sometimes. 
I was just thinking yesterday how far I have fallen from 
glory, how very much of my "physical" freedom they have 
taken from me (I still have mental freedom). I realized how 
few of the pleasures of life I have tasted. Trouble, difficulties, 
and sorrow have pervaded these twenty-four years. Twenty­
four years without one moment's mental gratification. For us 
it is always tomorrow; tomorrow we'll have enough money to 
eat better; tomorrow we'll be able to buy this necessary article 
72


--- PAGE 93 ---
of ·clothing, to pay that debt. Tomorrow, it never really gets 
here. "To every one who has will more be given ... but from 
him who has not, even what he has will be taken away." I 
like this life, I can never reconcile myself to it, or rationalize 
the fact that I have been basely used, hated, and repressed as if 
it were the natural order of things. Life is at best a nebulous 
shadow, a vague contingency, the merest of possibilities to 
begin with. But men in general (myself most emphatically 
included), being at best complete and abject fools, have 
rendered even what small possibilities there were to love and 
learn null and void ! But I refuse to excite myself about my 
past, or our future. I have simply taken up a task and I am 
preparing myself for its execution. I absolutely refuse to give 
way to emotional involvement or any undisciplined or 
dogmatic beliefs. Life is too uncertain, and dogmas and beliefs 
are the product of this sick man who now transgresses against 
us and the world. If I can bend circumstances to my will I 
succeed. If not-I'm off the cycle. 
You know that the U.S. power elite, the 7 percent who 
own and run this country and influence the policies of the rest 
of the European world, want to attack and destroy China in 
the next four or five years. China has become too strong and it 
is influencing the rest of the Afro-Asian world too heavily with 
anti-Western philosophy (self-determination and economic 
independence). All that stands in the way of the power elite is 
a few dissenting factions which are daily being won over, and 
having their opinions molded for them by the communications 
media, and, second, the domestic unrest and near-revolu­
tionary atmosphere in the black slums of all the large U.S. 
cities. Do you add well? Can you see what may be in the 
making? They cannot attack China unless the blacks here in 
the U.S. support their war effort. What if some black voice 
denounced the war? Many blacks would go for this. What 
would happen if large numbers of blacks refused to fight or 
make weapons, or even say attempted to subvert the U.S. war 
effort? Remember the Jews of Germany! From what I observe 
73


--- PAGE 94 ---
in here, where they don't have to hide their contempt, we're 
moving toward this eventuality. 
SEP T E M B E R, 1965 
6 
Dear Father. 
George 
This is about six letters I've written in two weeks. 
Did you get my answer to your last one? In the future I will 
put the exact date on them and double-check with you on 
them. You say you got none of these recent letters? When 
they stop them, they usually send them back to me. I can't say 
exactly what happened, but I guess these things are to be 
expected. 
I mentioned in one of those other letters that I went before 
one of these committees last month made up of the top 
officials here. They informed me that I "can forget about the 
board transfer or the main population facilities here in the 
prison." These were their words. So, my friend, I'll be in this 
little cell for a while yet. I hope you note that all this is done 
without any proof, and without allowing me to face my 
accuser. But I guess these things are to be expected. 
I want you to send me a portable typewriter and of course 
the carrying case. We can have them here, and I can use one to 
build my spelling and vocabulary. It will give me something to 
74


--- PAGE 95 ---
do in here. Send a lesson book also. A used one will be all 
right. Although they sell ribbons here you will have to send a 
couple of rolls because I have no way of buying any. I've had 
to secure permission to send out for the typewriter, of course. 
It took over a month to have it approved, so send it as soon as 
you are able. 
They just turned the lights out. It's 12: 15 (A.M., Tuesday). 
Take it easy. 
George 
SE PT EMBER , 1965 
12 
Dear Mama, 
Robert tells me that you are not well. I'm sorry to 
hear this, but I guess we're all lucky to have lived as long as we 
have. The many years you spent without proper clothing for 
the cold wet weather back East, with improper food, not 
enough food, and lack of expert medical attention, is enough 
misfortune to leave the strongest person ill. 
You need to see a specialist. If we were not blacks and 
consequently poor, you would be able to enjoy the benefits of 
science. But you are probably seeing some disinteres ted, 
half-trained parasite who knows no more about your ailment 
or the curing of it than I do. Robert doesn't make enough in 
75


--- PAGE 96 ---
two years to allow you to get the best attention (that is, here 
in our present surroundings). His scope doesn't extend any 
farther than the boundaries of the U.S. Those lies and the 
propaganda he reads in L'fe, Reader' s Digest, and Look, have 
completely undressed his mind. I feel very sorry for all of you. 
I'm locked in a cell 24 hours a day, but I still know my 
potential, I still feel my strength, I still thumb my nose at the 
caveman. Because my mind is still my own, no one can lie to 
me anymore. I know where my interest lies. 
For now though, I'm going to be a good boy, as Robert 
and most of the blacks we see around us are all good boys. I'm 
going to smile, and I'm going to pretend to accept the small 
compensations they hand out in return for our soul and our 
freedom. I'm going to be a good boy and eat what is put 
before me. I'm going to do this so that I'll stay alive long 
enough to take care of you. You deserve a lot better than you 
have had and more than you will have. You don't know it but 
there is a better life, regardless of what the Reader' s Digest 
says. Believe me there is a better life. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
76


--- PAGE 97 ---
Dear Robert, 
OC T 0 BE R, 1965 
3 
I have the typewriter in my possession here, so all 
is welL They didn't, however, produce the instruction book or 
paper. They let me have the two extra ribbons. I can get an 
instruction book. Paper isn't too much of a problem. All 
things considered, it turned out very well. 
You can take a chance if you care to on the shorthand 
book. Put it in an envelope like you say, but also write a letter 
stating right in the front, in the first lines, that it is a 
shorthand book. Mail the letter and the book together. If they 
don't think it's some kind of cryptogram we have going, it 
may be allowed or overlooked, but you can't just leave it up to 
them to figure out what it is. That would be asking for too 
much. 
Just read in the Monitor that ".6 parts of insecticide to one 
billion parts of water will kill most all marine animals in salt 
water or fresh"! 
Be sure to look into the course on speed reading. It costs 
sixty cents. I know it is a great help. I would be nice for me to 
have someone to talk to. 
Take care, and keep your eyes open, 
George 
77


--- PAGE 98 ---
NO VEMBER, 1965 
7 
Dear Robert, 
Nothing has changed. I'm still losing. I'm alive 
though, so there's still the possibility .... 
How is Georgia? Don't tell her anything abou( my 
condition. * It isn't necessary for you to reveal to her all that I 
tell you. She doesn't need to know. It can only worry her 
needlessly. 
I hope you are well. 
George 
*The author had been put in isolation after being charged 
by the prison authorities with assault with a deadly weapon. 
78


--- PAGE 99 ---
NOVEMBER, 19 65 
13 
Dear Mother, 
I am alive and well, and am at present working my 
way through the adjustment center here. It is an overall 
improvement in my condition. The prospects of getting out or 
getting a transfer to a more habitable prison are now better. 
I will relish the transfer part. All of the officers here have 
preconceived notions about my patterns of behavior now. 
Consequently it is somewhat hard for me to avoid falling 
under suspicion for almost every misdeed perpetrated by a 
black. But no matter, if ! do have to stay here I am determined 
to circumvent the little traps. 
I sincerely hope your health is improving, or at least 
becoming no worse. I feel awful disconcerted that I am unable 
to render any assistance. However, I feel this inability is only 
temporary. I intend to surge back with a tenacity uncontain­
able in its relentlessness. 
Fortune must soon smile on me because sincere effort is 
always rewarded. Nature allows no such imbalances as this. I 
am assured and completely self-possessed in the knowledge 
that all contradictions and conflicts must one day be resolved. 
Give my love to all the women there, please take care of 
yourself. 
Love, 
George 
79


--- PAGE 100 ---
DE CEM BER , 1965 
23 
Dear Mother, 
I got the food you sent me today; it was very nice, 
and fills a real need. I almost didn't get it though. You see we 
are supposed to send out a slip to the correspondent when we 
wish someone to send us something and you are supposed to 
send the package with this slip you get from me as proof that 
you are an authorized correspondent. I didn't send a slip out 
this year because of the trouble it might involve for you, and 
the money could possibly have been better placed. 
I hope your health is improving. I am doing quite well in 
that respect, all things considered. You may not know me 
when you next see me. I find a few new gray hairs every time I 
look in the mirror. If I live to be thirty, I guess it will be all 
white. 
I'll start writing Jon a couple of letters a week. If you 
would like me to, let me know. I would tell him as much of 
the truth as is advisable in one of these letters, but if you don't 
feel that what I represent is correct for him, then I'll refrain. 
How old is he now? 
I guess I'll be getting a transfer, or going out to the main 
population soon. A couple of months more of this and I think 
they wi11 let up on me. About parole, I can't say, but I am not 
alone. I don't feel so distressed when I look around me and see 
others like myself experiencing the same thing. The uniformity 
80


--- PAGE 101 ---
of our condition seems to lend support to each of us. I don't 
think the administrators fully understand. I have the strangest 
feeling that they may not understand how this atmosphere 
they foster nurtures a mindless, hopeless mass. It is suicidal 
incompetence. The strong can afford to be incompetent or 
wrong sometimes without loss of face. Even the mightiest and 
most capable of men are only human. But he who attributes to 
himself omnipotence must never be wrong. For once a 
weakness is found, no matter how small, in one who claims 
omnipotence he is completely exposed. The fall from omnipo­
tence ends only with insignificance. 
May this New Year coming be your year, our year. 
Take care, 
Love, 
George 
DEC EMBER, 1965 
29 
Dear Robert, 
The photographs were nice. Penny sent me one of 
her baby also. I thought him very beautiful. Send me her 
address, also send Delora's. Delora looks well. Tell her I love 
her and that the baby looks just like her. She has two babies 
now hasn't she? I'm an uncle three times. 
Jon should be the main concern now. By now you should 
have seen enough to know how to proceed with his develop­
ment. He doesn't look too healthy to me. He looks thin, pale, 
81


--- PAGE 102 ---
and soft. Those weights would improve his circulation and 
make his veins stand out. If he works out in the backyard in 
the sun every evening in a year, he could be a paragon. He 
needs that and he needs to be told the truth. He can get these 
things only from you. That school won't teach him anything 
except possibly a few Latin prayers, but if you haven't caught 
on yet, nothing I can say in this letter will help. Don't forget 
I've been over the road he is straining on now. Maybe it is a 
little different now with him. You can afford to give him bikes 
and baseball gloves, but the loose-living thing is going to seem 
awfully exciting to him in a few years when he compares it 
against the artificial world of those catholics. 
I'm doing all right here I guess. You take it easy. 
JAN U AR Y, 1966 
1 
Dear Robert, 
George 
I received your gratifying letter. Was it an expres­
sion of your love, an indication of your gracious sympathy for 
the position we were both born into, and that I am presently 
feeling the cramping convulsions of? I got the money. If I feel 
like a burden to you, it is best that we suspend exchanges until 
I've struggled on back to my feet. You probably don't feel 
that you owe me anything, and I guess you don't since you 
have accepted the values and customs of these people we live 
among. In that light, l owe to you the unquestionable honor 
82


--- PAGE 103 ---
of my struggle within this American dream. 
What can I say to you, my friend? I've been wondering if it 
would be best to lie to you and hide myself, say only what I 
know so well that you like to hear. I hesitate to do this 
because you have been lied to so much already. To add to this 
may be my last and greatest and most unpardonable crime 
against you. You are the older of the two of us. You are a man 
in your way and there is much merit in the manner you have 
conducted yourself these last 25 years. To have lived through 
the period of your early youth is in itself a qualifier for 
respect. The following shocks and strains were surely enough 
to drive the strongest man to distraction. All the honor that 
you are due I freely give. However, we, the humble representa­
tives of the future generations, have at our disposal all the 
accumulated knowledge and experiences of all past generations 
to build our thoughts. I have made no mark as yet to be sure, 
but why is it that we cannot communicate? What is it that bars 
our efforts to exchange thoughts and ideas? The fault could lie 
in my presentation. If so, I will make every effort to correct 
my deficiency because it is to the interest of us both that we 
meet on the same level. Can you understand that a meeting of 
the minds will have to precede any advancement of our 
combined fortunes? The question is whether we will be able to 
overcome the macilious efforts and forces that divide us and 
be able to put group interests before personal petty prejudice 
and preconceived notions. Or will we all end by turning our 
backs on each other and going our way in anger? 
I'm tired, my friend, real tired. I've got a pain deep in my 
stomach and I'm tired pretending that the obvious doesn't 
'exist and that this is the best of all possible lives. It is not, and 
if a concentrated effort isn't made to finally learn and use the 
lessons set forth in history, unthinkable chaos will result! 
I know that it probably will not come true, but may this be 
your year, our year to realize the promise that being born a 
man brings. 
George 
83


--- PAGE 104 ---
FEBR UARY, 1966 
23 
Dear Mama, 
I have been hoping that you would write and 
acknowledge my last letter. I hope it doesn't worry you too 
much that I will not be considered for release for some time 
yet. It worries me enough. I hope your health gets no worse at 
least. I'll be with you as soon as I can. I've got some clean time 
in now already and plan to do as well for the rest of this year 
so that in December they will let me go. They have promised 
me this anyway. I don't put any confidence whatever in what 
they say, but the hope remains. 
I am in the main population now. I was released from the 
adjustment center lockup today (because of good conduct) 
and have a good program set up for me, one conducive to 
parole consideration. I have learned something by the experi­
ence: never again to look for mercy, never again to expect or 
hope for justice, never to look for quarter without strings 
being attached. The last illusion has been shattered; I know the · 
way from here; ask no quarter of fate and give none. 
That thing you mentioned concerning Frances has had me 
perturbed for a week. Some just are not going to make it, 
some of us have just slipped too far to ever get back. This guy, 
I promise you, will be sorry a long, long time. Right here at 
this juncture of time we as a people have nothing, absolutely 
nothing but each other, some fresh air, the blue and gold of 
84


--- PAGE 105 ---
day and silver at night, a clean conscience, and the promise of 
cloudless days to come. But some do not enjoy these things 
enough, don't understand the nature of our circumstances and 
commit unpardonable crimes, unnatural crimes that must in 
the end bar them from partaking in the benefits of the 
liberation that is planned for tomorrow. In the end a requiem 
will be sung over the whole vast complex of disorder. 
Please inform me of any new developments there. Help Jon 
to become a man. Fare you well. 
George 
MARCH, 1966 
3 
Dear Mama. 
Always good to hear from you, though it makes 
me sad to know that you are not well. Just hold on though 
and circumstances will take a definite turn for the better, no 
ifs or ands about this. The way lies open for us. I'm not just 
talking or hoping. I know there is a better life for us. I know 
what there is to be had and of all there is to be had I plan to 
claim for us the lion's share. 
You are right of course in what you contend. The black 
woman has in the past few hundred years been the only force 
holding us together and holding us up. She has absorbed the 
8S


--- PAGE 106 ---
biggest part of the many shocks and strains of existence under 
a slave order. The men can think of nothing more effective 
than pimping, gambling, or petty theft. I've heard men brag 
about being pimps of black women and taking money from 
black women who are on relief. Things like this I find odious, 
disgusting-you are right, the black men have proven them­
selves to be utterly detestable and repulsive in the past. Before 
I would succumb to such subterfuge I would scratch my living 
from the ground on hands and knees, or die in a hail of 
bullets! My hat goes off to every one of you, you have my 
profoundest respect. I have surrendered all hope of happiness 
for myself in this life to the prospect of effecting some 
improvement in our circumstances as a whole. I have a plan, I 
will give, and give, and give of myself until it proves our 
making or my end. The men of our group have developed as a 
result of living under a ruthless system a set of mannerisms 
that numb the soul. We have been made the floor mat of the 
world, but the world has yet to see what can be done by men 
of our nature, by men who have walked the path of disparity, 
of regression, of abortion, and yet come out whole. There will 
be a special page in the book of life for the men who have 
crawled back from the grave. This page will tell of utter defeat, 
ruin, passivity, and subjection in one breath, and in the next, 
overwhelming victory and fulfillment. 
So take care of yourself, and hold on. 
Love, 
86 
George


--- PAGE 107 ---
MA RC H, 1966 
20 
Dear Mama, 
We have to order books from a bookstore owned 
by one of the staff here. It is contrary to institution policy for 
someone to send us books from outside. This is the rule, the 
law, so I guess it cannot be helped. Situations of this type are 
what this country is built on, the wonderful system that made 
it great. 
I've read as much St, Augustine as I could stomach. If you 
don't know about him and Jerome, Leibniz, and the rest of 
that lunatic fringe yet, my love, you are hurting. Why do you 
say things like that to me? You know how I feel about those 
people. You know that I am completely aware of all of them. I 
can never be deceived again by them. I know their awesome 
capacity for evil, I'm victim of it now. That Pope Pius XII, the 
guy you let us pray for, gave Mussolini his blessing as he was 
about to embark upon his misadventure in Ethiopia. I could 
give you thousands of examples of this type. I have explained 
my feeling to you many, many times, so I won't go any 
further with this. If children being blown out of this existence 
while attending church services, men being lynched for a 
gesture, colonialism, the inquisition, and H-bombs haven't 
affected you, nothing I say here can help you. If you could 
live my life one week and see the things I see, feel the pain I 
feel, and die a little bit each day as I do, all your illusions and 
87


--- PAGE 108 ---
apparitions would vanish. You talk to me like I was born 
yesterday, like I was still a little boy. All my life now you have 
told me about European gods and European christians who 
were supposed to be knowledgeable. When do you plan to say 
something that will help me? You may not know any better. If 
not, I am wrong in saying what I have, but I find it hard to 
admit that my mother could be so insensitive to the truth! 
You disrespect me, Mama, when you talk to me like that. It's 
like you saying to me, "George, you're a fool. You do not have 
eyes to see, ears to hear, and a brain to interpret, so I'll tell 
you any kind of outrageous story." Ordinary people, the 
mediocre, need to feel or believe in something greater than 
themselves. It gives them false security and it makes them feel 
that help may be forthcoming. This is self-delusion in the 
extreme. I cannot partake in any foolishness. Do you want me 
to be mediocre like the rest of the herd! When I need strength, 
Mama, I reach down within myself. I draw out of the reserves 
I've built-the necessary endurance to face down my opposi­
tion. I call on myself, I have faith in myself. This is where it 
must always come from in the end-yourself. I place no one 
and nothing above myself. What any man has done before me I 
can do. If there is a god, Mama, he hates me and I'll have to 
resist what he or it is doing to us. All my life, Mama, I've had 
to work things out for myself. I've had help from no quarter. 
I've been alone now for a long time. This is why I've had so 
much pain and trouble. Robert gave me nothing. You gave me 
god and that horrible church. Even god managed to take 
something away from me. I have nothing left but myself. 
Love, 
George 
88


--- PAGE 109 ---
APR IL, 1966 
17 
Dear MamIJ, 
I received, your card, nice of you to think of me 
on Easter. Getting that card sure made me feel a lot better. 
You know how important Easter is to me. 
Are you any better? Have you resolved the insurance 
problem? Don't worry too much about these things; solutions 
cause new and sometimes even worse problems to spring up. 
All of our difficulties will never be worked out. I guess perhaps 
this existence is merely a constant choosing of the lesser evil. 
Penny came to see me last week; I recall a time when all she 
wanted was to get away from the family group, but now that 
she's on her own, she didn't want to talk about anything else 
but you and the past. She is devoted to you. She is a sweet, 
well-balanced, and wonderful woman, deserving of much more 
than this life here offers us. 
But the weather is fine here, plenty of sun lately. I exercise 
in the sun an hour every day, I'm getting very big and very 
black. 
Fare you well, 
George 
89


--- PAGE 110 ---
MA Y, 1966 
8 
Dear Mama, 
All is well here, I'm going to night school again, 
and have encountered no trouble of late. 
Are you well? They say that today is Mother's Day. I can't 
make much sense out of it, though. I love mine every day. But 
these guys around me here seem to like being told when to 
celebrate this and that, so should you also feel this way, let me 
acknowledge the custom and wish you as pleasant a Mother's 
Day as is possible under our circumstances. 
Take care of yourself .... 
Love, 
90 
George


--- PAGE 111 ---
SE PTEM BER, 1966 
9 
Dear Mama, 
Hope you are better; the typewriter is being 
repaired so this comes by hand. 
We are in agreement on many things, All is as well as it is 
possible to be between two who are human and subject to 
human error, You have done much for me and I am sincerely 
in your debt; your returns will be soon forthcoming. That 
which you didn't do I never expected, for you are after all a 
woman and think as a woman should. 
The attitudes and methods that I have developed on my 
own have no reflection on you, but on the nature of our life 
circumstances and situational pressures. 
Is Jon in health? I have some pictures of you on your trip 
back East. You surely look well and unchanged. 
I go to the board in December and as I have stated before I 
have met all of their terms. My release is almost assured. 
What is Penny's new address? I will send her a letter on her 
birthday and discuss things as they are said to be, and as they 
really are. She must be having a pretty bad time; that guy 
seems to be pretty Anglo-Americanized. 
Take care of yourself. 
Love, 
91 
George


--- PAGE 112 ---
SEP TEM BER, 1966 
16 
Dear Mama, 
I wish you many happy returns in the birthday 
department. It sounds pretty empty I know but that's all I 
have to offer right now, a wish; I have broad plans for the 
future though. A large villa for you in the Maldive Islands, 
with an extra-deep bomb shelter. 
All is the same here. Each day that corpes and goes is like 
the one before; being a good boy, going to church, reading 
about the saints, and getting good ratings on my job . for the 
proper attitudes. 
Are you well, are you getting any of the pleasant things 
that life in these United States offers? That reminds me of a 
thing I read recently concerning China. One of the top 
political leaders came to an elementary school to lecture (they 
take education pretty seriously). He told the children to put 
their heads on the desk and pray to god for ice cream. After 
fifteen minutes of serious and sincere effort all the children 
lost interest and grew restive. He then told them to pray to 
him and the party for ice cream, whereupon a few minutes 
later they raised their heads from their desks and found, guess 
what, ice cream. Isn't that disgusting, Mama, to distort the 
thinking of children like that .... Now how is Jon? How much 
does he weigh? 
92


--- PAGE 113 ---
You don't say much about the folks in the Midwest, are 
they well? Take care of yourself. 
Love, 
George 
SEP TEM BER, 1966 
25 
Dear Robert, 
What has happened to Penny? Is she having 
troubles with her man? You were going to send me her 
address, have you forgotten? 
I have been trimming down my weight some, more exercise 
and less food, I'm getting ready for December. I don't want to 
stand out. I must fit in with the rest of the herd and look as 
ordinary as possible. I want my system to grow accustomed to 
little or no food at all without it causing me the normal 
distress that it causes others. You would be surprised how 
little food an adult really needs. I went for two weeks on 
nothing but three slices of bread and "one" tumbler of water a 
day without noticeable loss mentally or physically. 
Are you well, my friend? Glad to hear you are becoming 
interested in things of the mind. The school idea is truly out of 
93


--- PAGE 114 ---
the ordinary. Most others of your caste and peer group have 
given up. There are two or three things that I would like to 
take, but cannot take them here in prison: language (Chinese 
and Arabic), electronics, and chemicals. Maybe I'll get out 
next year and if I still feel the inclination I'll buy a few 
courses. Take care of yourself. 
George 
OC TO BER. 1966 
20 
Dear Robert. 
Just received your letter of October 15 , good to 
hear that Jon is well, and that your studies are corning along. 
I wanted to exhaust the possibilities of getting that free 
course in drafting here. I wanted to know if I was going to 
remain here in this prison at least until board before I asked 
you to put yourself out in sending it. Well it is conclusive that 
I will not be able to take it here. The school is carrying the 
course but there is no room for folks like me, just right now, 
maybe next year. I have found conclusively that I will not be 
transferred either. So, my friend, if you will, and whenever 
you can, send the course from LaSalle. I will be able to finish 
much sooner than you think. My math is excellent and I have 
nothing but time. I'll suspend my other endeavors in deference 
94


--- PAGE 115 ---
to the speedy and satisfactory completion of this course. Upon 
closer examination of all the facts involved in my doing 
something like this in here I also find that plastic tools are not 
necessary. I can have and use anything necessary for the 
course. LaSalle sends all of these tools right along with the 
course, so things are not as complicated as I thought them at 
first to be. 
Very likely I will be given a parole date this year. If so, or 
perhaps to increase the possibility, I should have a job offer 
here on record. You could correspond with some machine 
shops or the like right now and tell them that I have 
completed or am just about to complete an accredited course 
in drafting, and I need a statement from them on record here 
to be released. Don't worry about me not being prepared by 
then. I have thought everything out. But any offer from 
almost any area will suffice to get me out. If you are not able 
to get someone to send me in a job offer then there should be 
a lengthy statement here on record th�t you are willing to 
support me while I go to school. I hope you understand what I 
am saying. I have to have something on record for the board to 
gain the impression all is secure financially for my release. It 
may be less difficult just to state officially that I am going to 
school and that you plan to pay my way completely through it 
upon my release. We must decide now what will be said for 
their benefit upon this matter now. Let me know in your next 
letter which will be easier for you to do. Get me a job offer or 
state that our plans include school with your full backing. 
Send it to the Department of Corrections in Sacramento. 
Take care of yourself, 
George 
95


--- PAGE 116 ---
DEC EMBER, 1966 
2 
Dear Robert, 
The typewriter is being repaired again. Never buy a 
plastic typewriter. Though good for some things, plastic is too 
flexible for that type of machinery. It keeps the parts out of 
trim. 
I received your letter and nothing that develops from this 
mess will surprise me. I have taken all possibilities into 
account, in advance. I have nothing going for me and any good 
or favorable turn of event will be only luck, good fortune. You 
don't really think that I mind not being liked by them, do 
you? I sincerely feel that it is a tribute to my character that 
they do not. I said what I did only to help you understand my 
position, and in turn understand any future action I may 
undertake. But I don't want you to trouble your mind, or lose 
any sleep about the seriousness of my position either. When 
things become too hard for everyone else, that's when I start 
enjoying myself. Just understand in the light of future events 
that I· am guided by necessity and that my needs are different 
than yours. 
The board meets during the last few days of the month. 
Take care of yourself, my friend, 
George 
96


--- PAGE 117 ---
DECEM BER, 1966 
3 
Dear Robert, 
I am worried about Penny. Does she still write 
you? Have you let her know that should she need a refuge or a 
strong arm she can find them in her father. Women need to 
know these things. It is tormenting to them to know that they 
are alone, can look to no quarter for string-free aid. If Penny 
felt that she had no choice in the matter, no help, she would 
accept ill treatment forever. But then an offer of help must 
seem freely and honestly given to be of value. 
Are you well, my friend? The climate here is terrible, and I 
am not talking about the weather, each day is a trial. I stay 
close to my cell these days, reading, working on my book. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
97


--- PAGE 118 ---
JANUA RY , 196 7 
3 
Dear Mama, 
I have at least another fourteen or eighteen months 
to do. Of course I could do the rest of my life here, not taking 
into account a possible change in the system of government 
and economics, a change of hands, that is. 
They gave me no consideration at the board, the same 
people that gave me their promise last year. I was not 
surprised, I was completely prepared for this. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
98


--- PAGE 119 ---
JA NUARY, 196 7 
12 
Dear Mama, 
Your letter was well received; it left me feeling 
better than I have felt for years. I have never felt as close to 
any human as I do to you now. Your thoughts mirror mine 
exactly. Why have you left me alone to my struggle so long? I 
know the answer to this must be that we hesitate to reveal or 
acknowledge the existence of ugliness to the ones we love, 
even though the knowledge of such may better equip them to 
resist the effects of evil. 
I am going into my seventh year here. I have learned as 
much as I possibly could in this time; I have studied myself 
closely, I have studied people, human and inhuman, wanting 
to know and understand. I am given to understand that it is the 
strong who rule the weak but, in tum, the wise rule over the 
strong. So you see that I recognize the value of what you have 
stated concerning faith and wisdom. What is happening to me 
here, what has happened, what will happen, can never surprise 
or upset me again. My nerves have been fractured, my 
sensibilities outraged, for the last time. It's all a matter of 
course to me now. My outlook is clear and the future holds no 
more terrors for me. Just existing, life without joy, without 
real meaning does not appeal to me at all. I am very tired of 
waking up each morning wondering if I will be worked for 
nothing again today, or wondering if I will be insulted, 
99


--- PAGE 120 ---
humiliated, injured, or even done to death today. There are a 
few things that I must be decisive about, a few things that I 
know to be so, then there are things which my faith tells me 
could possibly be so. I have faith in the fact that we, the 
majority of peoples (5 to I) on earth, can live with and 
complement each other's existence if we rid the earth of the 
barbarous influence spread by this inhuman, unnatural minor­
ity! My faith in life holds still to the principle that we men of 
color will soon make a harmonious world out of this chaotic 
travesty of fact. But first we must destroy the malefactor and 
root out all of his ideals, moralities, and institutions. It is to 
this end that I have long since dedicated myself, to extinguish 
forever the lights of a perverted science in any way that I can, 
by any and all means. To accomplish this we can no longer 
woo false gods or invoke half measures. Please understand that 
though I would miss you and all the others, though I love you 
dearly, I do not want to live in this world as it is. I do not 
think of myself as one small person among so many. I know 
what I can do, I know I can build and can cause things to 
happen, but I also can be hurt. 
L. is my closest consort, a true friend, the most trustwor­
thy man I have ever met. This is saying a lot, believe me, trust 
is a difficult thing to build between men brought up under 
Anglo-American or Western cultures. I learned much from 
him. He is also tired of seeing himself through the eyes of 
others on Amos 'n' Andy and I Spy. This individual comes to 
you with my highest recommendation. He will help me. You 
help him to help me. His intelligence and character are 
unquestionable. 
George 
10 0


--- PAGE 121 ---
JANU ARY, 19 67 
23 
Dear Robert, 
I tried to write several times these last couple of 
weeks but my letters all came back with a note attached 
explaining what I can and 'cannot say. 
Have you been well? How old are you now, pop? Where 
were you and what were you doing when you were my age, 
twenty-five? I'll bet you were not doing too much better than 
I am now. You probably were not in prison. Well, I know you 
were not, but was your standing socially and economically 
speaking any better than mine? I guess it was, since you at 
least had limited freedom of movement. I have none here. 
Although I would very much like to get out of here in 
order to develop a few ideas that have occurred to me-al­
though I would not like to leave my bones here on the hill if it 
is a choice between that and surrendering the things that make 
me a man, the things that allow me to hold my head erect and 
unbowed, then the hill can have my bones. Many times in the 
history of our past-I speak of the African here in the 
U.S.-m any times we were presented with this choice, too 
many times, too many of us choose to live the crippled 
existence of the near-man, the half-man. Well, I don't care how 
long I live. Over this I have no control, but I do care about 
what kind of life I live, and I can control this. I may not live 
101


--- PAGE 122 ---
but another five minutes, but it will be five minutes definitely 
on my terms. 
George 
JANUA RY , 196 7 
31 
Dear Frances, 
Sorry to have neglected you for so long; things are 
very complicated for me here. I stay very busy, all of the time. 
I never have enough time to do the things that I must. 
I have made inroads into political economy, geography, 
forms of government, anthropology, archaeology and the 
basics of three languages, and when I can get hold of them 
some of the works on urban guerrilla warfare. 
I can use some assistance on the language aspect, though. 
Next time you pass a bookstore ask about a book dealing with 
Swahili, a self-teaching Swahili book. Get the proper title and 
the publisher's name and also a good self-teaching book on 
Arabic. 
Last year Mama suggested that a lawyer could possibly help 
me get out of here, by sitting in and representing me at the 
board. I wish I had gone along with it. A couple of people have 
gotten out like that. There is a lady lawyer UP here in San 
Francisco who specializes in that. She says a grand in her hand, 
several months before the board, is all that is required to get a 
date, if a person has his minimum in. My minimum is one year, 
so I've got seven times more than necessary. Talk to Robert 
10 2


--- PAGE 123 ---
about this. If she doesn't get a client out, she returns his 
money. If Robert borrowed it and got me out I would of 
course return it. 
If I don't get a new sentence for the stuff I am locked up 
for now, that is what we must do. Just discuss it with Robert 
for now. I'll let you know in a few months if you should take 
definite steps in that direction. First I must ascertain whether 
or not they plan to fix me with the blame for these recent 
events. 
I must now start doing all that is humanly possible to get 
out of prison. I can see great ill forecast for me if I don't find 
some way to extract myself from these people's control. "If 
we must die let it not be like hogs, hunted and pinned in an 
inglorious spot, while around us bark the mad and hungry dogs 
making their mock at our accursed lot; if we must die then let 
us nobly die, so that our precious blood may not be shed in 
vain. Then even the monsters we defy shall be constrained to 
honor us though dead. We kinsmen must meet the common 
foe, though far outnumbered, let us show us brave, and for 
their thousand blows, deal one death blow. What though 
before us lies the open grave, like men we'll face the 
murderous pack, pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting 
back." I don't mind dying but I'd like to have the opportunity 
to fight back. Take care. 
George 
103


--- PAGE 124 ---
FEBR UA RY, 196 7 
1 
Dear Mother, 
Things are normal here, the usual turmoil. I hope 
you are well. I hope you are .doing enough light exercise each 
day to work up some perspiration and not eating the wrong 
things-pork, sugar, white bread, etc. I'm very careful in this 
respect and enjoy almost perfect health and great reserves of 
energy and strength in spite of my circumstances. But I do 
heavy exercises, maybe two hours worth a day, every day. In 
close confinement where I cannot get to any workout 
facilities, as now, I work out somewhat differently. I take neat 
piles of books and magazines tied together and exercise with 
them. For you I imagine some deep knee bends, touch your 
toes, and say some push-ups would be fine. You would do five 
sets of ten of each exercise. For example, start by doing ten 
push-ups, rest a minute or two, do ten more, rest a few 
minutes, etc., until you get to five sets, then go to the next 
exercise. Stay young and firm that way. Resistance to bodily 
disorders stays high, or builds up. 
You know when they locked me up this time all my 
personal property came up missing. I'll have to replace 
everything-two personal chess sets, toilet articles, the black 
sweat shirts. I had four of these but saved only the one I had 
on. Even the plastic tumblers I used to drink with in the cell, 
everything is gone. I'm not sure about the typewriter, I can't 
10 4


--- PAGE 125 ---
get any information on it. I know that I don't have it here; 
whether it is safe somewhere else I don't know. Then, too, 
several of us blacks were locked up at the same time for just 
about the same thing. They go to the small adjustment center 
yard each day for two hours; I am forced to remain in my cell, 
no fresh air, no sun, twenty·four hours a day in here. It 
doesn't bother me, though. I've trained myself not to be 
disorganized by any measure they take against me. 
I exercise in here, and pursue my studies. That fills my day out 
nicely. Since I know that I am the original man and will soon 
inherit this earth, I am content to just prepare myself and 
wait, nothing can stop me now! But I do sometimes wonder 
just exactly how they got the way they are. I know beyond 
question the extent of the evil that lurks in their hearts; I see 
the insane passion, inherent in their characters, to dominate all 
that they come in contact with. What aggressive psychosis 
impells a man to want his dessert and mine too, to want to 
feast at every table, to want to cast his shadow over every 
land? I don't know what they are; some folks call them devils 
(doers of evil). I don't know if this is an adequate description. 
It goes much deeper. From their footprints I see that they are 
descendants of Pithecanthropus erectus like ourselves, but here 
the similarity ends. I refuse to compare myself with a man 
who for one truth will tell ninety-nine lies; with a vampire who 
cannot stand in the sun and do a day's work; and with 
someone who thrives upon the blood, sweat, and tears of any 
who fall within his power. But doomsday is dawning; on this 
most awesome day all imbalances and contradictions must be 
resolved, and it will be some of us who will be left to rebuild 
this world and people these lands with civil men. 
George 
105


--- PAGE 126 ---
MA RCH, 1967 
Dear Mother, 
I guess Robert told you what happened to me here. 
My comrades have prevailed upon me to desist for a time, but 
I must decide for myself. In any event I won't lose my head. 
This is a terrible price to pay just to stay alive, or I should say 
just to exist; I have never really lived. 
You know I have grown very, very tired of talking, and 
listening to talk. King and his kind have betrayed our bosom 
interests with their demagogic delirium. The poor fool knows 
nothing of the antagonist's true nature and has not the 
perception to read and learn by history and past events. In a 
nonviolent movement there must be a latent threat of 
eruption, a dormant possibility of sudden and violent action if 
concessions are to be won, respect gained, and the established 
order altered. That nonviolent theory is practicable in civilized 
lands among civilized people, the Asians and Africans, but a 
look at European history shows that anything of great value 
that ever changed hands was taken by force of arms. 
I cannot let my feelings become involved. I must not fall 
victim to a play of emotions, because it would limit my ability 
to act in my defense. 
You know the world. The depressed peoples of the world 
are very shortly going to grow tired of being wooed and lulled 
into passivity and quiet endurance by chromium and neon 
lights. The soft music from the many well-placed public-ad­
dress loudspeakers and car radios will no longer serve as balm 
to the thwarted hopes, defeated aims, and brutal suppression 
10 6


--- PAGE 127 ---
of needed change. They'll come out of their coma with a 
bloodlust and justified indignation for social injustice that will 
sweep the asphalt right from under the empire builders. This is 
the only reason I hang on. I want to be in the vanguard. 
My cell partner puts it this way: "Every sickness ain't 
death, every good-bye ain't gone, and every big man ain't 
strong. " 
I say: "Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch of the 
ranged empire fall" and "The jungle is still the jungle be it 
composed of trees or skyscrapers, and the law of the jungle is 
bite or be bitten." 
Take care. 
Son 
MA RCH, 196 7 
26 
Dear Mama, 
Papa* has had the "true release, and at last the 
clasp of peace." For him to have received this at such a great 
age and without violence is no small consolation. I loved him 
dearly and thought of him as one of our most practical and 
level-headed kin. You probably don't remember the long walks 
and talks Papa and I used to take, or the long visits when he 
lived on Lake Street and we lived on Warren. But I remember. 
He used to say things, probably just thinking aloud, sure that I 
wasn't listening or would not comprehend. But I did, and I 
*George Davis, the author's grandfather. 
107


--- PAGE 128 ---
think I knew him better than most. Do you remember how I 
used to answer "What" to every question put to me, and how 
Papa would deride me for this? He later in the course of our 
exchanges taught me to answer questions with "Why" instead 
of "What." 
Another of our games helped me greatly with my powers of 
observation. When we would walk, he told me to always look 
at the large signboards as deeply as possible and after we had 
passed one, he would make me recite all that was on it. I 
would never remember as much detail as he, but I did win a 
kind word or two on occasion. We played this same game at 
his house with pictures and objects spread out on the table or 
bed. 
I wish he could have survived to see and enjoy the new 
world we. plan to create from this chaos. If I could have gotten 
out of here last year he would never have gone out on sardines 
and crackers. I don't know how anyone else views the matter 
and don't care, but now for me his is one more voice added to 
the already thunderous chorus that cry from their unmarked 
and unhallowed graves for vindication. 
Don't wait for me to change or modify my attitudes in the 
least. I cannot understand, as you put it, or as you would have 
me understand. I am a man, you are a woman. Being a woman, 
you may expect to be and enjoy being tyrannized. Perhaps 
you actually like walking at the heel of another, or otherwise 
placing yourself beneath another, but for me this is despicable. 
I refuse to even attempt to understand why I should debase 
myself or concede or compromise any part, the smallest part, 
of anything on earth to anyone who is not of my kind in 
thought and form. I love you, Mama, but I must be frank. Why 
did Papa die alone and hungry? Why did you think me insane 
for wanting a new bicycle instead of the old one I stole piece 
by piece and put together? Why did you allow us to worship at 
a white altar? Why even now, following tragedy after tragedy, 
crisis after crisis, do you still send Jon to that school where he 
is taught to feel inferior, and why do you continue to send me 
108


--- PAGE 129 ---
Easter cards? This is the height of disrespect you show me. 
You never wanted me to be a man nor Jon either. You don't 
want us to resist and defeat our enemies. What is wrong with 
you, Mama? No other mama in history has acted the way you 
act under stress situations. 
I won't be a good boy ever. 
Love, 
MA RCH, 19 67 
26 
Dear Robert, 
George 
Why, my friend, did Papa go out alone and hungry. 
Did Frances and Mama ever talk to you of his condition when 
they returned from Illinois last year. Was it ever put to him 
that he could stay with you people and eat when you ate and 
fast when you fasted, I wonder? "When poverty comes in at 
the door, love flies out of the window." 
Can you see the division among us and its effect? This is 
our greatest obstacle. I sometimes wonder how this will turn 
out. Before we can ever effectively face down the foe, we must 
have had long since learned to share, trust, communicate, and 
live harmoniously with each other. 
Our new state governor has decreed that the daily food 
109


--- PAGE 130 ---
allowance for each convict be cut exactly in half. We get 
almost no "grade one" protein now. 
Stuff like eggs, meat, and milk products is seldom seen 
now. So my experiments in self-discipline are now paying off. 
Everyone else is hungry now, while I feel nothing. And this is 
just the beginning: the reactionary, repressive forces presently 
at work will bring things to such a crisis soon that Baldwin's 
warning of "The fire next time" must soon be borne out with 
all its sinister accompaniments. 
Take care of yourself, Pop. Comfort Mom as well as you 
can and tell her I'm all right, healthy, happy, content. Of 
course, this is a lie, but she likes to be lied to. 
George 
MARCH , 19 67 
27 
Dear Mama, 
Please don't take what I expressed in my last letter 
too seriously. I was feeling extremely bad. Try to relax; the 
mental depression you are presently gripped by comes from a 
very common cause, particularly among us blacks here in the 
U.S. As a defense, we look at life through our rose-colored 
glasses, rationalizing and pretending that things are not so bad 
after all, but then day after day-tragedy after tragedy strikes 
and confuses us, and our pretense fails to aid or dispel the 
nagging feeling that we cannot have security in an insecure 
society, especially when one belongs to an insecure caste 
ll O


--- PAGE 131 ---
within this larger society. I believe sincerely that you will be a 
very unhappy and perplexed woman for as long as you try to 
pretent that you have anything in common with this culture, 
or better, that this culture has anything in common with you, 
and as long as you pretend that there is no difference between 
men, and as long as you try to be more English than the 
English, while the English ignore your attempts and use your 
humility to their advantage. 
I suggest no action, no physical action that is, for I know 
you have never been a woman of action, but I do suggest that 
you purge your mind little by little of some of your Western 
notions. Direct your nervous animosity at the right people and 
their system, and stop, for your own sake please stop blaming 
yourself. If you were, right now, walking toward your kitchen 
with the whole family's life savings in your hand, let's say, and 
I sneaked up behind you and pulled the rug from under you 
and you fell and broke your arm, leg, nose, and the money 
flew into the burning fireplace, would you getu p blaming me 
for pulling the rug, or would you just lay there and blame 
yourself and pretend that you didn't really fall, or that the 
whole thing made no difference anyway? The analogy is 
perfect. 
Do you know who I blame for what has happened to me 
the last 25 years, and before to my ancestors? I would be 
narrow-minded indeed if I blamed any of you, my folks. I 
don't blame you for not teaching me how to get what I 
wanted without getting put in jail, nor do I blame myself. I 
was born knowing nothing and am a product of my total 
surroundings. I blame the capitalistic dog, the imperialistic, 
cave-dwelling brute that kidnapped us, pulled the rug from 
under us, made us a caste within his society with no vertical 
economic mobility. As soon as all this became clear to me and 
I developed the nerve to admit it to myself, that we were 
defeated in war and are now captives, slaves or actually that 
we inherited a neoslave existence, I immediately became 
relaxed, always expecting the worst, and started working on 
III


--- PAGE 132 ---
the remedy. Can you play chess? It relaxes, builds foresight, 
al�rtness, concentration, and judgment. Learn, so we can play 
next year. 
George 
MA Y , 19 67 
9 
Dear Robert, 
That's great about the classes. You passed the 
exams pretty easy, didn't you? It's wonderful to have a pop 
with brains. 
I was approved for a transfer, but it is not official yet. 
When it is I'll inform you of the details. 
I've been getting a lot of work done lately. My mind is fast 
becoming clear and I am slowly harnessing my emotions, I can 
go days without speaking a word. With the pursuit of food and 
shelter relegated to the state, I have been able to channel all 
my thoughts to important things, significant things, So I 
attempt to bend this experience to our benefit rather than let 
them weaken and destroy me, as they would like. You are 
aware that these places, this one in particular, will either bring 
out the best in an individual or ruin him entirely. 
Wherever they send me, Robert, I will try as hard as my 
character will allow to avoid all involvement in those situations 
that lead to trouble. But I can promise nothing, the future 
holds no surprises for me. I expect anything, including trouble, 
especially trouble, considering the times. I have adopted, these 
112


--- PAGE 133 ---
last several months, a new attitude, however, that will limit the 
scope of my troubles. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
MA Y, 196 7 
16 
Dear Robert, 
That is good reasoning concerning the school issue. 
It was a wise decision in every way you look at it. The other 
way (catholic school) you pay more for less education, plus 
they make emotional pansies of the boys with that sanctimoni­
ous dogma. Dear Pop, I'm not just talking for the sake of 
talking. I am deeply concerned for Jon and you all. Much 
thought goes into all I attempt to convey. Whenever a man 
builds an image of himself and of his surroundings that he 
cannot live up to and that does not conform to the de facto 
situation, the end result must be confusion and emotional 
breakdown. If my instructor tells me that the world and its 
affairs are run as well as they possibly can be, that I am 
governed by wise and judicious men, that I am free and should 
be happy, and if when I leave the instructor's presence and 
encounter the exact opposite, if I actually sense or see 
confusion, war, inflation, recession, depression, death, and 
decay, is it not reasonable that I should become perplexed? If 
my instructor tells me that sex is evil, bad, base, and I happen 
to like sex, is it not reasonable to assume that I will develop 
11 3


--- PAGE 134 ---
mixed emotions concerning sex? If this instructor relates to 
me that sex is bad, thinking of it is lustful, and lust is a sign of 
my moral decay, what opinion will I have of myself? This is 
what they will do to Jon at that catholic schooL But that is 
just part of it. He will also learn that J .C. was white, which is a 
lie. That the Egyptians were white, which is a lie. That the 
people of India are white under theIr black skin. That Chinese 
are yellow, when they range from brown to the blackest black. 
He will get a lot of this misinformation in public school too, 
but not nearly as much. With a little effort after school from 
you this can be corrected. Tell him that these men don't 
always tell the truth. Make him read histories by Ronald Segal, 
Du Bois, etc. Make him read the pro-Eastern writers, so that he 
will have a good cross section of all there is to be heard. Show 
him how to masturbate, and explain to him that making love 
with a woman is the most natural thing on earth. Explain how 
he can do so without getting the girl pregnant. Tell him that 
"there is no hell, no heaven, and no immortality, and that all 
things are permissible," as long as the next man's feelings are 
considered. 
None of those at home who contest you in your judgment 
know nearly as much about life as you. So you must be firm 
and decisive. None of the Western European cultures know 
anything about philosophy (love of knowledge). They know 
nothing of the proper way that men should carry on their 
relations with other men. Proof of this-who originated the 
passport laws, tariff laws, atom bomb, competitive enterprise, 
etc., etc. They only excel in one area, technology. So let Jon 
learn chemistry at schooL You give him his economics, 
history, and philosophy at home!! 
George 
114


--- PAGE 135 ---
MA Y, 19 67 
21 
Dear Robert, 
Penny was here again last week She has taught the 
little guy how to say Uncle George, So "Uncle George" was 
ringing the length of the visiting hall for a couple of hours, 
However, I was less than pleased, I tried to get him to change 
it to "Comrade George," but he didn't seem to understand. 
Uncle George is too much like Uncle Tom and Uncle Ben (of 
rice-box fame) for comfort! 
I trust you are well. I am holding off the ill effects of the 
concentration camp as best I can. It seems a losing battIe, 
however. I've had to take to wearing glasses of considerable 
strength due to failure of my eyesight. Living in this constant 
half-light, I guess. 
When you told me a while back of Frances' serious eye 
problem, I resolved upon my release to have one of mine 
transplanted into her head. But this will no longer be any 
bargain for her. 
I have been having trouble with my eyes for a year. When I 
finally was able to maneuver an eye test, I was surprised at the 
amount of money they took from my account (money that 
you have sent me that I have not used yet). I was even more 
surprised when I finally got the glasses two months later with 
their strength and how much they improved my vision. 
Speaking of money and accounts, Pop, I'm flush for now, 
lIS


--- PAGE 136 ---
by flush I mean I have stocked up on envelopes and 
toothpaste, I've come to realize that I don't need much to eat 
to stay alive and I don't smoke. I can get fat on what the 
average man may starve on. So the money you have been 
sending me can be put to use at home there, your books, or 
perhaps something for Jon, he also needs supplementry 
reading material. I am sorry that you and Mama don't make 
each other happy. European-Anglo-American brainwashing is 
at the bottom of it. Those empty pseudo-middle-class ideas 
that we have adopted from the opposition make us unhappy in 
the same way the middle class itself is unhappy. Then too 
when poverty comes in at the door, loves leaves by the 
window. We all know who has caused our poverty. I have 
experienced the same thing with women and men. All the 
women I've had tried to use me, tried to secure through me a 
soft spot in this cutthroat system for themselves. All they ever 
wanted was clothes and money and to be taken out to flash 
these things. I no longer have time for such small ideas or small 
people. Blacks that I've met here who exhibit such character­
istics I disdain and ignore. The same with any woman I may 
have when I get out. She must let me retrain her mind or no 
deal. 
George 
11 6


--- PAGE 137 ---
MA Y, 19 67 
28 
Dear Robert, 
I've been a good boy lately, kind, polite, forgiving. 
Don't know if it will do any good though since people 
invariably mistake kindness for weakness. I really cannot 
imagine how anyone can stay detached and complacent for 
any period of time and still maintain social contacts on any 
level. It no longer surprises me, but I still find the general 
acceptance and widespread practice of the more deranged 
products of Western culture disturbing. Prying, nosy, schizo­
phrenic, domineering, psychoneurotkpeoplepress you from all 
sides. They remain in a continual state of agitation, always on 
the brink of doing something maniacal! Capitalism, I believe, 
the capitalizing on the next man's labor, on the next man's 
weakness, has contributed greatly to the development of the 
anomalous "Western man"; capitalism, competitive enterprise, 
man competing against man for the necessary things, for status 
symbols, for power to repress his competitors and secure his 
personal well-being to exercise his ego, his fancy. I just cannot 
get used of the idea of some petty, stereotyped, bureaucratic 
official, patently suffering from some mental disorder, asking 
me questions, calling on me to explain myself. It is odd, and 
ironical, the trickery and turnabout that has gone down these 
last few generations. 
Chew on this a few moments: a colonizer, a usurer, the 
11 7


--- PAGE 138 ---
original thief, a murderer for personal gain, a kidnapper-slaver, 
a maker of cannon, bombs, and poison gas, an egocentric 
parasite, the original fork tongue, the odd man is trying to 
convey to us that we must adjust ourselves to his warp, that 
we must learn to be more like him, that because we're not 
we're backward, underdeveloped, unsophisticated! This is 
strange and contradictory. 
I am deeply sorry that I ever told a lie, stole anything 
robbed and cheated at anything - mainly because it is so 
much like conforming to Western ways. 
To all appearances they are upset with me for doing these 
things. That privilege is supposed to be reserved for them I 
guess. So what do they mean by saying that we must get in 
with them, be like them, adopt capitalism, clothe ourselves in 
Western ways? This is a strange and contradictory thing. If we 
the colored and black of the world adopt capitalism where 
would we have to seek our colonies, Europe, the U.S.?! Who 
would we capitalize on if we used their history as a pattern? 
Them I should say!! Who would we kidnap, murder, lynch, 
enslave, and then neglect!! So what do they mean by saying, 
"Do as I do"? I don't think, well I know that they are not 
serious, not sincere. I think they are employing another trick, 
a ploy to further confuse us and use us, I think what they 
mean is not "Do as I do" but "Do as I say"! In the 17 70s the 
Europeans over here wanted to pull away from the Europeans 
of England. They caIled it a freedom fight. Now we men of 
color here in the U.S. want to pull away from these Europeans 
and they call it subversion, irresponsibility, etc. I don't even 
speak to them anymore. I go my way and hope to be left 
alone. 
George 
11 8


--- PAGE 139 ---
JUL Y, 196 7 
13 
Dear Robert, 
I'm in regular adjustment center-segregation again, 
They have let me have my personal property, books, toilet 
articles, envelopes, that is minus 90 percent of it. It happens 
every time I transfer from one part of the prison to another or 
go to isolation, my stuff gets ripped off. I get robbed, I'm sure 
it wasn't the officials. They are such nice, efficient people, so I 
won't complain here with my pencil. I'll need a few dollars to 
replace the necessary things (envelopes, dictionary, etc.), when 
you can afford it. 
Your physical appearance hasn't changed at all over the 
years, Pop. Clean living has preserved you marvelously. Do you 
ever drink any alcoholic beverages? I have never known you 
to, but that doesn't mean that you don't. How much sleep do 
you average a day? Perhaps I won't live to be as old as you are, 
but if I do I won't look as good. The loose skin on my face is 
already starting to wrinkle, and strange as it seems, r tend 
toward obesity if I eat certain foods. I must have picked that 
up from Mama. 
How is she? Tell her I'm going to be a good boy from now 
until I can get out of here. 
I worry about Penny, does she know that she can come 
home if the circumstance make it necessary? She respects you 
for what you have done for us and accepts you as you are. So 
11 9


--- PAGE 140 ---
do I, Pop. I recall that you never had more than one suit or 
two pairs of shoes all throughout the early years. I never 
remember you having a moment's personal gratification during 
those years. No one believes me when I tell them you never 
went to a nightclub or finger·poppers' party during the twenty 
years that I remember. I don't think any other man in the U.S. 
would have reacted as you did concerning that incident with 
the Hudson car, fixing it with your hands and driving it for 
five years in that condition. False pride would have forced 
anyone else into radical and uneconomic acts. I felt real bad 
about that, but I didn't understand life then as I do now. I'm 
deeply sorry for the weak, silly transgressions of my past, and 
I'm sorry that I won't be able to conduct my relations with 
the world as you would have me conduct them. I see the big 
picture where you may never have. I think I see the larger 
historical concept in its full detail. The obligation you felt 
toward us, I feel toward history. I must follow my call. It is of 
great importance to me that you understand this and give me 
your blessings. I don't care about anyone else. I don't feel I 
must explain myself or be understood by anyone else on earth. 
George 
12 0


--- PAGE 141 ---
JUL Y, 19 67 
15 
My Friend, 
I got your letter of June 5. I have it here before 
me. I told Les to cooperate with your efforts for me. I sure do 
need some of the benefits of togetherness now. As I explained 
I am in adjustment center here for an undefined amount of 
time. 
Les speaks of me coming home with optimism, but I would 
benefit largely from a transfer. No one, among the officials 
that is, ever calls me out of my cell anymore to speak with me 
of my progress or my future. I'm just locked down and 
forgotten. Can a lawyer do anything about getting me a 
transfer? He would have to go through Sacramento. The 
justification for such action is obvious: I cannot adjust here, 
the officials have preconceived notions about my behavioral 
patterns and consequently look for the worst in me. The 
atmosphere here is aggressive, and I'm too far away from 
home. I cannot get regular visits and thus miss the beneficial 
influence of you and my parents. 
My friend, my thinking has changed somewhat since I saw 
you last. That fellow who sent pictures of his Cadillac auto up 
here can explain some of the workings and progress of my 
thoughts. I hope he doesn't betray himself with that fast living 
I hear he is doing. Seems he has learned nothing from bitter 
experience!! I have trained away, pressed out forever the last 
121


--- PAGE 142 ---
of my Western habits. You remember I never got intoxicated 
or spent any money or time on trifles, but in the passing of 
these last couple of years, I have completely retrained myself 
and my thinking to the point now that I think and dream of 
one thing only, 24 hours of each day. I have no habits, no ego, 
no name, no face. I feel no love, no tenderness, for anyone 
who does not think as I do. There can be no ties of blood or 
kinship strong enough to move me from my course. I'll never, 
never trade my self-determination for a car, cheap mass-pro­
duced clothes, clapboard house, or a couple of nights a week 
at the go-go. Control over the circumstances that surround my 
existence is of the first importance to me. Without this 
control, or with control in someone else's hands, I am forever 
insecure, subject at all times to the whim and caprice of the 
man in control, and you and I know how whimiscal some men 
can be. Well, Pop, I'll be going outside to court the seventh of 
August to testify for a friend. I'll get a glimpse of the world at 
large, if you can call San Rafael the world at large. 
I hope you are doing well. I would have written before now 
but I was in isolation up until the eleventh of this month, as 
you know. 
Do you have time to read? I'll suggest some books if so, 
next letter. Take care. 
George 
12 2


--- PAGE 143 ---
JUL Y, 19 67 
19 
Dear Robert. 
I wrote you a letter about two weeks ago. It was 
returned to me today. It never got out of the institution. 
Received your letter of the 15 th today, no change here. 
I have that address I asked you for. I got it through other 
channels. I was spelling and pronouncing the name wrong. 
Tell A.A. to get busy and make my woman start writing. A 
visit every now and then would be nice also. Tell him to send 
me her new address that I may send her a correspondence 
form. You don't know her, but he will. 
Penny has not been up to see me since you came, no letter 
either, hope she is all right. 
Locked up 24 hours a day now. It's all right, though-gives 
me plenty of time at my work. My cell faces north, and there 
is a window in front of it. Plenty of fresh air comes into my 
cell. 
George 
12 3


--- PAGE 144 ---
JUL Y, 19 67 
23 
Dear Robert, 
I feel relieved to know that you are taking Jon out 
of catholic school. Man, falling under the conservative influ­
ence of those admen and fakes was the worst thing that ever 
happened to me. How could you have ever allowed it. It was 
Mama's idea but you should never have let her sell it to you. 
I remember Chicago all right, in fact I remember too much. 
I was very much confused and dissatisfied during those years. 
They had much to do with the development of my character. 
I've had to unlearn and reexamine all that I experienced in 
those years. But what you were really referring to was how it 
stayed hot all night, with people sleeping on the beaches and 
such. 
I remember the garage roof where I was virtually held 
prisoner sometimes, there at North Racine Street. It is criminal 
to do that to a child. And no parks near enough to go to, no 
yard front or back to play with the neighbors' kids, no 
neighbors really except the ones on Lake Street. I remember 
glimpses of our place over there on Lake also. This is a dog's 
life, Pop, you had nothing then. You have worked hard, hard, 
and obeyed the laws of our masters but you still have nothing. 
Is it idle dreaming for me to want an end to something like 
this? 
I wrote Mama three letters three months ago. She didn't 
12 4 
"j 
i


--- PAGE 145 ---
answer or acknowledge any. l owe her loyalty just for being 
my mother, but she is adult and I never baby adults. She 
resents me because I won't accept her views on method and 
means of getting by in this rat race. She once told me that I 
had a complex that made me view the world as I do. In so 
many words she was telling me that I shouldn't be complexed 
about being of the lowest social class or in our case caste. She 
was saying that I should be indifferent about being used and 
abused like a goat or milk cow or something. I understand her 
and all black women over here. Women like to be dominated, 
love being strong-armed, need an overseer to supplement their 
weakness. So how could she really understand my feelings on 
self-determination. For this reason we should never allow 
women to express any opinions on the subject, but just to sit, 
listen to us, and attempt to understand. It is for them to obey 
and aid us, not to attempt to think. 
George 
12 5


--- PAGE 146 ---
JUL Y, 196 7 
28 
Dear Georgia, 
For me, the word "soul" has yet to be properly 
defined. I have seen or felt no evidence of its existence. I have 
heard the word and listened to the theory connected with it, 
but it is abstract and academic at best. 
The theory of an existing and benevolent god simply 
doesn't make sense to anyone who is rational. A benevolent 
and omnipotent god would never allow such imbalances as I 
see to exist for one second. If by chance I am wrong, however, 
I must then assume that being born black called for some 
automatic punishment for sins I know nothing about, and 
being innocent it behooves me to defy god. 
I seriously fail to understand when someone speaks of my 
soul, but I do know what my body needs. I know what my 
mind incessantly craves. Gratification of these is what I must 
pursue. As a woman I can understand your being naturally 
disposed to servitude. I can understand your feelings but what 
I can't understand is why you would have me feel the same, 
considering that I am a man. Why have you always attempted 
to implant womanly ideas into my character. Of course it is 
your option to do as you please, but please don't feel that I 
love you less simply because I fail to respond, or feel that I 
love you any less because I do not have time to explain myself. 
Love has never turned aside the boot, blade, or bullet. 
12 6


--- PAGE 147 ---
Neither has it ever satisfied my hunger of body or mind. The 
author of my hunger, the architect of the circumstantial 
pressures which are the sole cause of my ills will find no peace, 
in this existence or the next, or the one following that; never, 
never. I'll dog his trail to infinity. I hope I never will feel I've 
love for the thing that causes insufferable pain. What I do feel 
is the urge to resist, resist, and never stop resisting or even 
think of stopping my resistance until victory falls to me. 
Extreme, perhaps, but involved is my self-determination, 
and control of the environment upon which my existence 
depends, and the existence of my father, mother, Delora's and 
Penny's sons, and all that I feel tied to. We are in an extreme 
situation. 
I didn't create this impasse. I had nothing to do with the 
arrival of matters at this destructive end, as you infer. Did I 
colonize, kidnap, make war on myself, destroy my own 
institutions, enslave myself, use myself, and neglect myself, 
steal my identity and then, being reduced to nothing, invent a 
competitive economy knowing that I cannot compete? Sounds 
very foolish, but this is what you propose when you place the 
blame on me or on "us." It was a fool who created this 
monster, one unaccustomed to power and its use, a foolish 
man grown heady with power and made drunk, dizzy drunk 
from the hot air that inflates his ego. I am his victim, born 
innocent, a total product of my surroundings. Everything that 
I am, I developed into because of circumstantial and 
situational pressures. I was born knowing nothing; necessity 
and environment formed me, and everyone like me. Please 
accord me at least the social morality that springs from its 
contorted brain center. I'm through with weakness and 
cowardice. I've trained it out. Let come what comes. I can 
never delude myself into thinking that I love my enemies. I 
can hardly do any worse than I am doing now; if worst comes 
to worst that's all right, I'll just continue the fight in hell. 
George 
12 7


--- PAGE 148 ---
AU GUS T, 1967 
10 
Dear Robert, 
Things are looking up, I have a promise on my 
injured leg, should be seeing about it anytime now. I'm in 
pretty good shape and it won't kill me. Good move you made 
on your way out. I could never say anything like that for 
myself. No one would believe me. 
Doing good, minding my business, won't let you down. 
Delora is quite handsome, you know that was the first time 
I'd seen her in seven years. 
There are three ways to enforce and build discipline in a 
child: through terror, through guilt, and through shame. The 
first principle is the worst and involves keeping the child in 
constant fear of beating or harsh reprimand. This is -not 
conducive to all-round adjustment. Either the child becomes a 
confirmed coward or at best unstable and erratic. A child with 
feelings of insecurity (lack of confidence) may later on try to 
prove himself by deliberately doing things against what he has 
been taught is right. Think on that a moment! 
Then the guilt concept: it finds expression in convincing 
the child that he will suffer god's wrath (religion) or be looked 
upon as a fool, knucklehead, buffoon, or evil and maligned 
person by the rest of mankind. This is not good in that it 
causes the child to be too dependent. He cannot develop or 
become creative for fear of disapproval from on high. Then, 
12 8


--- PAGE 149 ---
what man can live up to the expectations of god. Then there 
are those among us who cannot live up to the expectations of 
other men, society. What happens to the child who cannot live 
up to god's or man's expectations, the child trained or 
disciplined through guilt feelings. His confidence is forever 
destroyed and he becomes the ubiquitous temporizer, the 
listless apathetic. 
The last principle is the only one worthy of intelligent 
parents: shame. If a child does not react in the proper way and 
carry out his duties toward parents and peers he should be 
taught to feel shame or lose face as the Eastern people call it. 
The child feels that he has let himself down when he fails to 
do the proper thing. Only constant and calm, rational reproof 
can cause this feeling in a kid. In other words, it takes brains 
and persistence on the part of the parent to shape the child's 
thinking. It should be clear that becoming frantic and beside 
onself, beating and cussing is going to give the child a new 
experience and leave an impression that may not be whole­
some. Felix Greene wrote that in all the time he spent in a 
certain country in the East he never saw a child throw a 
tantrum. He asked one of the social workers there about it, 
describing the features of a childish tantrum. The Eastern 
social worker's shocked expression and complete ignorance of 
any such things happening to the children caused Greene to 
investigate further and deduce that they don't go through 
emotional breakdowns "because they have no precedents from 
their parents." Take care. 
George 
12 9


--- PAGE 150 ---
AU GUS T, 196 7 
26 
Dear Robert, 
The paper started one week ago, Saturday. Every­
thing is all right. I'll do as you say about the patience. Perhaps 
I expect too much from people. Hospital and X rays any day 
now. 
I expect help from certain people only, but I'll take your 
advice and look no more. Of course this doesn't mean that I 
am going to stop helping others as much as I can. I'll continue 
to give as good an example of how we should treat each other 
as I can, but as you indicate I shouldn't expect this to 
influence anyone else to treat me similarly. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
130


--- PAGE 151 ---
SEP T E M BE R, 196 7 
1 
Dear Robert, 
Jon is about the same age as I was when we first 
moved out here. I remember well my attitudes and confusion 
at that time. He can't be too much different since our 
development was forced along similar lines. Of course he has 
had a slightly better chance or atmosphere to build the things 
necessary for the changeover from man-child to man. That 
school Mama was sending him to did him great harm but not 
irreparable harm since in his case you were on the job after 
school sowing pride and knowledge of self and kind, and 
explaining the promise and problems in acquiring self­
determination and control over all the circumstances surround­
ing our existence. Of course you have been explaining that this 
control must never be allowed to remain in the hands of 
strangers or incompetents, etc. So I hope he is not as awed and 
confused as I was then. Give him my regards. Tell him I said he 
is charged to take good care of his mother and sisters, that 
since he has grown so big and strong so soon, he should brace 
himself to his duties early. Tell him that I said that life is 
serious and we must be careful, one misstep can cause us 
"years of regret and grief, and sorrow without relief." 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
131


--- PAGE 152 ---
SE PT EM BER, 196 7 
12 
Dear Robert, 
I am doing well, no new problems. Please say 
nothing else about the leg to anyone. You could cause me 
trouble. I'll live. I stay in reasonably good condition just for 
occasions like this. I can see about it if I get out next year. 
You should know about protesting with the mouth. It never 
avails us anything but grief. I no longer do so in any form, for 
it indicates naivete. It means that subconsciously one may still 
be looking for justice or humanity from places that we have 
ample proof of it not existing. 
I worry about Penny and I would like to see her there with 
you. I have not seen or heard from her since you were here 
last. Perhaps she feels she doesn't need or want any of us. Have 
you heard from her? Perhaps it's my fault. I push people away 
by expecting too much of them. I probably used the wrong 
presentation with her and frightened her. Or she may not care 
to hear about clean living and high ideals. People tend to run 
like hell at the mention of sacrifice and responsibility. 
Give everyone my regards and take care of yourself. 
George 
13 2


--- PAGE 153 ---
SEP TEM BER. 196 7 
14 
Dear Mama, 
I hope this year's birthday finds you well. I would 
like to be able to give you things, and take you places, but I've 
been unfortunate, and slow learning. But I have learned well. 
Perhaps next year I'll be able to give you a villa in Tanzania. 
I'm fine; my work progresses well. Seems that all I've 
predicted is now coming true, though, much sooner than I 
thought, I must admit. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
13 3


--- PAGE 154 ---
SE PT EM BE R, 19 67 
24 
Dear Robert, 
Received your letter. All is well here. You have 
everyone back there with you except Delora now. That is good 
in a way. You have another chance to teach them how.to live, 
arrange their values and attitudes so that they correspond with 
our situation, our aspirations, our newly reestablished identity. 
Penny expressed the thought to me that since you do not 
have much to say around there, you don't care much about 
them and their little problems. She expressed the feelings of all 
those there who do not understand you in saying this. Women 
and children enjoy and need a strong hand poised above them. 
They need direction and someone to show concern for them 
and you may have to make your presence felt there, a little 
anyway. Of course I'm not talking about being a tyrant, but 
just some rational, moderate, but persistent pressure to the 
left. 
I imagine I'll really be able to get down to fighting weight 
now. I told you what happened to the noon meal. I really 
don't miss it though. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
134


--- PAGE 155 ---
5 E PT E M BE R, 19 67 
30 
Dear Robert, 
Getting plenty of work done. How is your scholas­
tic project going? Are you still attending the night classes? I 
thought that was a wonderful idea. 
Speed reading and vocabulary power are foremost in 
elevating the mind. They can be worked on in spare time, ten 
or twenty minutes a day. I consistently work on both: 
especially vocabulary, out of small paperback pocketbooks 
sold in the canteen and in the prison bookstore. But since I 
have much more study time than you, I go one hour or so on 
each daily. There are dozens of these little books published 
today. Every time I see a different one I try to make it part of 
my collection. 
Are you well, my friend? I am getting thin as a rail, feel all 
right, however. Give my regards to Jon and Penny. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
135


--- PAGE 156 ---
OC T OB ER . 196 7 
3 
Dear Georgia, 
A thank-you note for money and letter. I can 
always use money, but discharge your obligations at home 
first. I can do without. If I were you, I would treat Pop a little 
better. He has been pretty good to us all, when one considers 
the shocks and strains he has had to live with. 
As a woman, you just do not (and I guess never will) 
understand what it means to be a man in this particular 
situation here in the U.S. Women just don't suffer the mental 
mortification of defeat and emasculation that we me en do. 
Robert has lived with it for many years, trying to rationalize 
it, justify it, pretend that it does not affect him, but it has 
affected him very deeply. Imagine how he must feel when his 
woman won't even let him run the house. For you to just 
outright countermand his wishes on a matter concerning the 
education of his son must be a bitter dose for him to swallow 
indeed. After what he must accept from the outside world 
everyday of his life, to come to his home and also be made to 
carry water and cut wood and take orders is adding insult to 
injury. 
Though you may not see much evidence of it, Robert still 
harbors the desire to be a man and assert himself. He is not 
completely dead inside. The years and years of regret and 
grief, discomfort, and defeat he has endured since the 
136


--- PAGE 157 ---
depression years of his childhood, all the forgetting and 
pretending and cheekturning he has had to do, cannot be 
denied. It lives with him, still jammed back in the dark corners 
of his mind. I've seen it, Georgia, believe me, I've seen it in 
him and in many others of his generation. One day in the near 
future these feelings of mass discontent must break their 
bounds. It's just as natural and predictable as the sunrise. I am 
ready now. When they are ready, nothing, nothing will be able 
to countervail our march to victory. 
In Jon's case it is simply a matter of what we need most 
and how can he be best equipped to survive the crisis that now 
grips us. I think we need tough, well-informed, and loyal 
additions to the tribe. Can he develop these characteristics at 
this terrible place you advocate? You have been living in the 
big city now for 25 years. It is almost unbelievable that you 
have not discovered that the guys who will be training him 
there are 90 percent sex deviates (homosexuals, etc.) and 10 
percent free-loading incompetents who couldn't get food and 
shelter any other way. I would never make a charge like this 
unless I had firsthand evidence. I hope that you were merely 
ignorant of these things. I hope that you have not inten­
tionally sold out Jon's bosom interests. Robert has sheltered 
you from the world to some extent. You have not come in 
contact with things he sees daily, so let him have some say. 
George 
137


--- PAGE 158 ---
OC TO BE R, 196 7 
11 
Dear Robert, 
I received the letter with the money in it all right, 
thank you. I'm going pretty good here, no problems, no new 
ones anyway. 
I went before a formal two-man review committee here 
recently. They gave me at least four more months to do here 
in the adjustment center. I guess we can call this improvement 
of a sort since I'm usually told nothing. 
You say Jon is having trouble with math. And that you feel 
it's just a matter of his settling down to his work. I wondered 
when you mentioned this just what it was that is keeping him 
from his studies. How does he spend his time? Is there anyone 
there to help him with his studies? Of course, you are right 
that all he has to do is apply himself to his work. At this stage 
of the schooling structure, nothing is really difficult. Math is 
never difficult, since its laws are positive. All that needs to be 
done is take the necessary time and learn the formulas and 
principles. Of course, if too much time is spent in class on 
religious matters, the teacher is at fault, not the student. In 
fact if any time is spent on religious matters during the school 
hours the student is being cheated. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
13 8


--- PAGE 159 ---
OC T OBER, 19 67 
17 
Dear Robert, 
The time slips away from me. I'm surrounded here 
by fools, degenerates, and phonies. I suffer a constant 
bombardment of nonsense from all sides. 
There is no rest from it even at night. Twenty-four hours a 
day all my senses must endure the shock of this attack from 
the lunatic fringe. So I insert my earplugs, and bury myself in 
my thoughts and my work. The days, even the weeks lapse one 
into the other, endlessly into one another. Each day that 
comes and goes is exactly like the one that went before. If I 
am lax in my duties toward you, forgive me. I am living under 
strain. 
I am sorry to hear about your friend. The same has 
happened to some of mine here. I think I know how you feel; 
however, I try to think of those things as releases. 
How was my letter to Jon received? Mama may have torn it 
up. If Jon wants to go to the trouble of framing those parts 
that trouble him into a letter, I have a fair understanding of 
math. 
No new problems here. Just waiting it out. Time is on my 
side. I'm twenty-six now, and I'll be twenty-six when I leave 
here. Be it 40 years from today. 
Take care. 
George 
139


--- PAGE 160 ---
OC T OBER, 19 67 
18 
Dear Robert, 
How is Penny and the little guy? I guess I miss 
them quite a bit. What a difference their presence makes here. 
My language studies are coming along well. I guess if I don't 
get out before January-and it's not very likely that I will-I'll 
go into Arabic next. With four languages plus English I'll be 
able to communicate with three-fourths of the people on 
earth. I am presently working on Spanish and Swahili. Spanish 
is spoken by most peoples from Mexico to Chile in what is the 
fastest-growing population area in the world. Swahili is spoken 
by all of eastern Africa. I may find communication with these' 
peoples important in my work. All that remains is for me to 
learn Arabic and Chinese. 
Perhaps I'll start on these two next year, I've done well 
with the Spanish. 
I trust you are well. Don't work yourself too hard. You 
cannot get rich on wages. I have had no response from Jon to 
my last two letters. What's happening? Has he forgotten his 
brother; it has been a long time. He was just a baby when first 
I came here to the concentration camp. It's been seven years, 
one month now. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
140


--- PAGE 161 ---
OC TO BE R, 196 7 
24 
Dear Robert, 
I'll be considered for transfer again this week, 
they'll probably approve Folsom for me this time. It is a 
maximum security prison like this, so there will be no change 
in my fortunes. One prison is like the other, except perhaps 
the minimum security places in the southern part of the state 
where they have a less aggressive atmosphere where if one can 
get around the local constabulary, the chances for parole are 
greater. That is part of the reason that the guy who was 
arrested with me went home four years ago and I am still here. 
Right before I was forced into that situation in Soledad and 
sent here, he was sent to Chino. But his folks had money to 
pass around. 
No new problems here, the same old things. I'm getting 
plenty of work done with my time. 
I am not trying to lose weight, I'm not eating as I should, 
but we discussed that before. You forget things too fast. But 
maybe that is good. I'm not sure. Perhaps if I could forget, I 
could have some peace of mind. But I don't forget anything, 
wounds scar my mind much worse than they scar my body. 
But I don't let such things as food, warmth, comfort, and lack 
of material things cause me any great distress. I'm doing as 
141


--- PAGE 162 ---
well as I can expect to, because I don't expect anything. 
Anything good, that is. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
OC TO BER , 196 7 
26 
Dear Robert, 
Jon tells me they have him studying Latin. I find 
this very depressing. No one has spoken Latin in fifteen 
hundred years! They are teaching the poor kid a dead 
language! Wasting his precious time! His precious talent! A 
great blunder is again being made regarding your offspring, 
Robert. 
People only learn Latin these days so that they can read 
that thing they call the bible in the Latin and sound 
mysterious. It's a lot of European ritual, a lot of hocus-pocus 
from the dark ages of Europe. The time he puts into that 
totally useless pursuit could be spent on math or science! 
Take care. 
George 
14 2


--- PAGE 163 ---
NOVE M BER, 196 7 
2 
Dear Robert, 
I received both your letters today dated the 
twenty-ninth and thirtieth. True I may forget myself some­
times and I'll have to redouble my efforts to control this. I 
know it is wrong and I know the proper method. It is the 
application of method that sometimes causes me trouble. But 
I'll redouble my effort to get over this. Emotion has much to 
do with it. All of my past life has been victimized by my 
emotions. I have struggled mightily with myself these last 
couple of years in an attempt to erase all emotion. The only 
method that can succeed is the clinical approach, the 
analytical technique of treating our problems. It is said and 
with some justification that the greatest battle is with oneself, 
so if I can gain a victory here the real work shouldn't be too 
hard. 
On the subject of injury, there is the real and the imagined. 
You have made several references to the subject in the last 
month or two and I have let them pass. By telling me that Jon 
has no chip on his shoulder, you attempted to make me feel 
alone and isolated in my attitudes. But you are wrong in trying 
to second-guess me, because I have no chip on my shoulder. I 
know the simplest way to handle an injury whether real or 
fancied is to forget it. I bear no one on earth any ill will. I have 
felt the sting of the knout and I live in the shadow of the 
143


--- PAGE 164 ---
ovens. I am the object of the severest ridicule (coon, monkey, 
shoe, a shoe is something to be walked on incidentally, buck, 
savage, and child), but even in the face of all this I have not 
one chip on my shoulder. Aren't I a truly marvelous and 
forgiving person? Almost every day I have something to forgive 
and forget. Perhaps most of this is fanciful and illusionary, but 
every day I have the opportunity to practice this almost 
godlike facility I have built into myself. But then to be honest 
with myself, it is not merely or solely due to strength of 
character that I am able to call up just a little more 
forgiveness, I also have this thing going with myself about not 
wanting to get kille d. I don't know about that getting-killed 
thing. Now it would be a great loss to me, but I feel that I 
could forgive that too. Now I say this at the risk of seeming 
immodest but to further illustrate my healthy outlook on the 
matter in question, let me remind you that in spite of all I am 
human and I have myself done things that require forgiveness 
from others-I have transgressed against my fellows in 
moments of weakness and madness. 
It's hard, my friend. Because of my temperament it's even 
harder. I hope I can make it. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
144


--- PAGE 165 ---
NO VEM BER, 196 7 
6 
Dear Robert, 
Are you well? The changes are as slow as ever here. 
No new problems, however, except perhaps with my health. It 
may be failing. Headaches all the time and a skin condition 
that started some time back. Look at that picture I sent you of 
me taken upon my graduation. You may be able to see the 
discolored spots in my face. Well, the condition is growing 
worse-it is all over my face now, huge discolored spots. I look 
like a leper. If you have a connection who is a dermatologist 
perhaps you could pass me on some information on it. It is 
only on my face now, but it is progressive. It is spreading. I'd 
like to know what to do about it and what may be the cause. 
The cause, 'however, may be most important. I've been 
thinking that it is probably the food. Quality and quantity. My 
knee has gone down some and is not too sore anymore. 
I hope everyone there is well. Give my special regards to 
Penny and Jon. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
145


--- PAGE 166 ---
NO VEMBER, 196 7 
Dear Robert, 
This last word from you in Jon's presence con­
vinces me that we can never reconcile our differences. I never 
realized that I was a source of embarrassment to you, I 
thought most blacks, especially those of our economic level, 
understood, vaguely at least, that these places were built with 
us in mind, just as were the project houses, unemployment 
offices, and bible schools. 
Perhaps later if we both live to see the outcome of all this, I 
will be able to explain myself better, but for now you surely 
don't need me and I have never needed anyone. Life has failed 
me. People I have had a right to expect something of, in the 
past, have failed me. And I fail myself almost every day. But I 
suffer no lasting effects from any of this because I derive my 
force and energy from no outside quarter. Your inability to 
understand and support me puts me at a loss, but I cannot 
allow this to influence my course. I must follow my mind. 
There is no turning back from awareness. If I were to alter my 
step now I would always hate myself. I would grow old feeling 
that I had failed in the obligatory duty that is ours once we 
become aware. I would die as most of us blacks have died over 
the last few centuries, without having lived. 
You have mis judged the depth of my feelings on these 
matters. They mean everything to me. If we could have found 
grounds for compatibility within the framework of my ideals 
the purely mental aspect of my job could have been less 
difficult. I anticipated failure in this from the start, so I am 
146


--- PAGE 167 ---
not shocked or surprised now that the last has been said and 
we find ourselves poles apart. 
I'll be all right from here, Robert. I have the nervous 
equipment and I'll spend my remaining time here checking my 
emotions and developing the clinical approach. 
You owe me nothing. Anything you may think you owe 
me I absolve you of entirely. 
Because we look a lot alike, because the same blood flows 
in our veins, I thought we could perhaps pool our resources, 
plan great things, produce some remarkable changes and 
conclusions, and write a few pages of history. But I cannot see 
myself as well as other people see me and perhaps you are 
justified in feeling ashamed of me. The most important 
abutment of our relation has disappeared; perhaps it never 
existed. This is certainly my loss, but I cannot see any reason 
for us to communicate with each other again from this day 
until such time as I can demonstrate the usefulness of my 
ideals and methods. 
Please take care of yourself. 
Respectfully, 
147 
George


--- PAGE 168 ---
DECEM BER. 19 67 
1 
Dear Robert, 
I guess there is something to be said for a person 
who does as he is told, lives by the routine set up by his 
self-appointed bosses, etc. And of course we must learn to 
fight our own battles. This way we can die alone, one at a time. 
This is a very old and proven idea. It has worked wonderfully 
up to now and that is why 19 67 finds us all so secure and well 
placed. 
My trouble is that I have expected too much of you. 
You're already doing your best: what you feel is right. How 
can I expect more? 
George 
148


--- PAGE 169 ---
DEC EM BER, 196 7 
Dear Robert, 
I'm all right; no change here. They gave me a little 
job in here where I am locked up but took it back right away, 
I think to get a reaction. 
It has started to rain almost every day up here now and it is 
rather cool. It is strange but I think I prefer cool weather to 
warm. 
Have you heard anything from my friend? I don't trust 
many people very far but I have very strong feelings that this 
guy will not abandon me or our ideas. 
Things must be very difficult for him or he would have had 
a lawyer up here for me by now, or done something along that 
line. Of course, we never really get to know anyone to an 
absolute degree, but I saw this guy in many different situations 
and he never showed the slightest weakness or reservation or 
self-interest. We need people like that. When we cannot even 
put confidence in them we're through. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
149


--- PAGE 170 ---
DECEMBER, 196 7 
13 
Dear Robert. 
Hope you are well. I received your note and all is 
normal here. 
No new problems. I've got six months clean now, since 
June 8. That is not much and surely not enough to satisfy my 
warders but by June of next year it will be twelve months 
clean. True! 
How is Penny doing on the job? Post office isn't it? Tell her 
I miss her and the child. Is that guy she married honoring his 
financial commitment. 
And Frances, are you keeping up with the movements of 
the guy she tied up with. I'll be wanting to see him first thing 
upon my arrival there. 
It's cold up here this year but since I don't go out directly 
in it too very often it doesn't bother me much. 
Frances is supposed to be angry with me because I 
wouldn't let her get in any of her silly cliches last time you 
brought her up here. I didn't make things any better either 
when she wrote two months later decrying my supposed 
rudeness. When I explained to her that she was not supposed 
to hold any opinions other than those of her menfolk, she 
stopped writing. Tell her that I feel no ill will toward her, but 
when she hears us debating method and policy, she is supposed 
to be silent, listen, and try to learn something. Penny will sit 
15 0


--- PAGE 171 ---
and listen and try to understand. When she doesn't understand 
she asks intelligent questions. I've bummed across this country 
three times, seen everything eight times, now what am I \loing 
to do with some advice from a twenty-three-year-old girl who 
has been sheltered from the real world all her life. 
It is terrible that we have all been so divided. The social 
order is set up so as to encourage this, the powers that 
be don't want any loyal loving groups forming up. So they 
discourage it in a thousand subtle ways. And as it is said, when 
poverty comes in the door, love leaves by the window! Too 
bad! I give up! Blood is not thicker than water. I was wrong 
ever to let my thoughts pass my lips. From now on you 
people's reactionary ideals are your own. I never want to 
discuss anything serious with you again, and if you don't hear 
from me here too regularly it is because I have nothing to say. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
151


--- PAGE 172 ---
DEC EMBER, 196 7 
19 
Dear Robert, 
I went to the board yesterday; they told me that if 
I kept this next year clean and clear of disciplinary infractions 
I would have eighteen months clean next time I saw them. Of 
course I have not seen the official results yet (maybe Friday I 
will) but it was pretty clear that I got another year to do. I'll 
write again when I get the final word. 
Penelope wrote me a letter last week stating that you and 
Mama sent a box of stuff up here to me after all, in spite of 
my asking you not to bother. I appreciate the sentiment but 
you should not have done it. I probably will not be allowed to 
have it. You should know that I have to send a formal request 
from here, etc. They won't send it back either-they will keep 
it. Things will be much better between us when you start 
taking me seriously. 
Take care of yourself. You'll be able to retire when I get 
out in '69. 
George 
152


--- PAGE 173 ---
DEC EMBER, 196 7 
23 
Dear Robert, 
This is Saturday: there is so much noise on the tier 
that even my earplugs are useless. Grown men are acting like 
high-school girls. The guards have some kind of sports on the 
radio. Everyone is happy, emotion-filled cries of joy come 
from every cell. They're trying to forget their problems or 
pretend that they have none. It is easier that way, easier than 
grabbing the bull by the horns. Music and sports. Their whole 
life, perhaps a little pimping or gambling. I got my official 
notice on the board meeting. 
They denied me another year, I go back next December. It 
will be eight years then. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
153


--- PAGE 174 ---
JANUA RY, 19 68 
1 
Dear Robert, 
It's 5:4 0 A.M. All the noisemakers are asleep; 
they've worn themselves out through the night making merry, 
laughing, singing, pretending. It is strange indeed that a man 
can find anything to laugh about in here. But everyone in here 
is locked up 24 hours a day. They have no past, no future, no 
goal other than the next meaL They're afraid, confused and 
confounded by a world they know that they did not make, 
that they feel they cannot change, so they make these loud 
noises so they won't hear what their mind is trying to tell 
them. They laugh to assure themselves and those around them 
that they are not afraid, sort of like the superstitious 
individual who will whistle or sing a happy number as he 
passes the graveyard. 
Confinement in this small area all day causes a buildup of 
tension. The unavoidable consequence is stupidity, a return to 
childish behavior, overreaction. 
I refuse to let myself be punished with stuff like this. 
Locked in jail, within a jail, my mind is still free. I refuse ever 
to allow myself to be forced by living conditions into a 
response that is not commensurate with intelligence and my 
final objectIve. 
This will apply even more on the other side of the wall, out 
there where you are. What if there was nothing on earth that 
15 4


--- PAGE 175 ---
could be taken from me which would result in my discomfort. 
What if a person was so oriented that the loss of no material 
thing could cause him mental disorganization? This is the free 
agent. He is nameless, faceless, emotionless, loveless. He is 
without habit, without the weaknesses of the flesh. He travels 
light and only in the company of those who like himself prize 
self-determination above baseball and beer. Only the free agent 
can win for us the necessary control over the direction of our 
unrewarding lives. 
You should know that I only do what I think is best, and 
most appropriate. I'm a man with few alternatives. 
George 
JANUARY, 1968 
6 
Dear Robert, 
I hope you are in health. Have you been bothered 
by the sickness, flu, Asian flu they call it. Everyone on the 
tier, everyone in the building really, has had it, or still has it, 
except me. I have been lucky. I hope I do not catch it. We 
have no medicines. 
I have both of your letters here; I did not send the forms 
requesting a package because I didn't want you spending any 
money on unnecessary things. If I had money I would never 
155


--- PAGE 176 ---
buy anything like that for myself. I am completely indifferent 
about pleasure, temporary amenities: "a crust of bread and a 
corner to sleep in, a moment to laugh and an hour to weep 
in"-welI, I don't even want the moment. If that is all that I 
have coming I don't want it. 
I don't know who you have been talking to about my 
condition here. Whoever they are, stop wasting your time. 
They are only leading you on. I hope you have lost no money, 
but I warned you about this before. It is clear that I must 
handle this thing myself the best way that I can. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
JANUA RY, 196 8 
16 
Dear Robert, 
Nothing new to report, same situation here. No 
progress. Went before a couple of persons responsible for the 
administration of this unit last week. They changed the rules 
to justify keeping me locked up another six months until June 
at least. 
There is a rule that reads: "If an inmate is involved in an 
assault upon another inmate and a weapon is associated in the 
incident the inmate responsible must do at least one year 
156


--- PAGE 177 ---
locked up in close confinement." Well, I've done my year for 
the thing that happened in January '67. Now I must do 
another for the affair in June '67 . where the only weapons 
involved were those used against me! 
I think perhaps the time has come to get legal help for me. 
We can discuss it when you come up next time. These things 
are not being handled properly. Or fairly. I am the only one 
still suffering the effects of those two occurrences. Everyone 
else has been transferred to other institutions and is in the 
main population there. And I'm the only one who didn't write 
a writ at the time the thing took place. I tried to just shrug it 
off, but I see that that does not work. They have accused me 
of leading something when all the evidence points to the 
contrary. I was the only one to cross the picket line during the 
strike or one of the few. In June I never raised my hand 
against an official. In fact, in all the seven years I've been in 
the prison here I have never attacked an official. I have 
difficulty leading myself, directing my own affairs. At the very 
least I need a transfer. I cannot get fair treatment otherwise. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
\5 7


--- PAGE 178 ---
JANUARY , 1968 
31 
Dear Robert, 
I seriously believe that you have incurable middle­
class attitudes, but nonetheless you may be right. Regarding 
the blacks "not letting me, that is," I'll have to wait and take 
the situation in for myself, though. 
If you happen to be correct about that, I'm buying me a 
little sailboat and heading for the Indian Ocean area; be a bum, 
no wife, no kids, no competition, bananas, coconuts, pine­
apples, fish, and sunshine. I could never bear what you have 
borne. 
I hope you arrived home without incident. I heard the 
weather was pretty bad. 
I almost got sucked into some more foolishness yesterday. 
All the blacks tilting at windmills again. Mindless, emotional, 
childish abandon, without a thought of winning. Just an 
attempt to prove their manhood to themselves, to any who 
may be watching. The result, further humiliation and a month 
in a dark hole. I'm still in my cell. I had to turn my back on 
them when they wouldn't listen. Never, never will I take part 
in any foolishness. They have me locked up with a bunch of 
20-year-old cretins who don't know anything about the ways 
of the world, hate books, can't think, and won't listen. Things 
are not getting any better. They are, if anything, getting worse. 
15 8


--- PAGE 179 ---
Bitter experience seems to be bringing out the worst in us 
instead of our best. Instead of growing thoughtful and 
determined, they get more emotional and mindless. You 
swallow a camel and gag on a nut; you accept a certain 
condition and treatment with apparent ease, but balk at the 
suggestion of returning the same. 
It doesn't matter a great deal to me either way. On an 
individual basis, I will always make out. I see this world just as 
it is, the whole thing, and most important I see myself in 
relation to it. So I will be able to spring in any direction in 
which my mind tells me the rewards are greater. 
I'm going to frame a letter soon to you discussing the social 
contract, and where the individual stands in relation to the 
state. None of it will be original. It will be the accepted 
dialectics of all those past and present who are in a position to 
know. You don't seem to know why you pay taxes and what 
you should expect in the way of returns. It should be clear 
that when one contributes to any enterprise, he has a return 
coming, and it is equally clear that when I place or allow an 
individual or group of individuals to administrate and regulate 
affairs that involve my bosom interest, these affairs must be 
handled in a judicious manner. When they are not, it is my 
right to replace these individuals any way that I can. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
1,59


--- PAGE 180 ---
FEB RUARY, 1968 
8 
Dear Robert, 
I think you have gotten stuck in the mud some­
where down the road. There has never been any question as to 
whether or not we will be allowed to work. There has never 
been any question in my mind about the folly of one of us 
attempting to make himself acceptable to the established 
standard so that he will be tolerated. 
Am I for sale and at such .a price? Can true self-determina­
tion be won working for wages and salaries? What are the 
chances of the employee one day owning the manufacturing 
plant?!! What do I lose by allowing myself to be programmed, 
regimented, and assimilated. Has any people ever been 
independent that owned neither land nor tool? Isn't what you 
are calling for, you and the people who wrote the article, more 
of the same, the hewing of wood and the carrying of water?! 
Do I want to identify with a loser and a fool? Can I help 
myself by helping one who is looked upon as the wretched of 
the earth? This is the question. Don't get sidetracked by 
specious argument. 
I know the answer to all the above questions, but I plan to 
keep it to myself for now. And of course we are talking about 
groups of people, our masses (not to be confused in any way 
160


--- PAGE 181 ---
with my personal chances for success. I know how to look out 
for me as an individual). 
I agree with what you say about brains, nothing could be 
clearer. Every mass movement in history has been led by one 
person or a small group of people. Although everyone is born 
with a brain only a few choose to use it. The difference 
between successful and unsuccessful mass movements is in the 
people who lead them. Successful ones are led by persons 
gifted with a delicate balance of both mental . and physical 
forcefulness. Brains are useless without the nervous equipment 
and the muscle required to execute their orders. 
I also. agree with what you say about the Chinese. They are 
poor. They went through the same thing we went through for 
the same reason (a skin problem), and they suffered it at the 
hands of the same wretched force. It may be a while yet 
before they get over the last hundred years, but, and I know 
you agree, they are wonderful and aggressive, industrious 
people. They will make out. What I like most about them is 
their willingness to always help their brothers in Africa and 
Asia. They understand the need and power of ethnic solidar� 
ity. When they look in the mirror they see themselves, when 
they look at us they see their fathers and brothers. Brother, 
brother, is the way we'll call it. 
J on is well, I hope. Can you imagine how foolish a stranger 
would be trying to turn me against Jon? I have no love for 
strangers, regardless of the fact that they own the sweatshop I 
am forced to labor in. 
George 
161


--- PAGE 182 ---
FEB RU ARY, 1968 
12 
Dear Robert, 
Congratulations on the birthday. I may not be so 
lucky, but my values are a little different from yours. I am 
concerned with living fully, living well, rather than living long. 
And since I have a measure of control over the former, and 
none whatever over the latter, this makes sense to me. 
I've been to Mexico. I have also been all over the U.S. I've 
spent several days in the neighborhood where you were 
born .... That neighborhood is far poorer than anything I saw 
in Mexico. But since Mexico is a colOllY of the U.S. also (just 
as our communities are), all I can make of this fact that blacks 
here are worse off than Mexican nationals in that the U.S. 
colonial masters think more of Mexicans. 
So your taxes do all the things you say including some you 
omitted, such as school-educational matters, prisons, police 
wages, armies, H-bombs, spy ships, gas chambers, Tucker's 
farms, etc. But it is very curious to note who benefits by it all. 
Which streets get lighted best? Which child goes to school half 
a day in a trailer, or to a school that is so crowded and 
understaffed that he might as well not go for all the attention 
he gets? The police stopped me 5 times (5 different cars) in 
16 2


--- PAGE 183 ---
the space of 3 blocks in Los Angeles once. All the brush wars 
the U.S. has fought in the last 20 years were against men of 
color around the world!! I could go on all week about how 
your tax money is being used, but let it suffice for me to say it 
is not being used to help you or yours. You are getting no 
return on your investment. This is what taxes are supposed to 
be all about, an investment in the community, the society, a 
pooling of each individual's resources so that the administra­
tion can be financed, so that the administration can perform 
the jobs which must be done to ensure public welfare, and the 
jobs which no individual can do well alone. Now it follows 
that if everyone pays, everyone should get proper returns. The 
streetlights should be the same in Watts and Bel Air. It seems 
that some dereliction of duty has indeed taken place. 
George 
FEBR UARY, 1968 
19 
Dear Robert. 
Too bad about Jon; I suggested upon your last visit 
that he may be getting too much TV. Anyway, you are 
absolutely correct in that these are his crisis years. You had 
better give him something good in the way of purpose, 
identity, and method. It should be taken for granted that he is 
163


--- PAGE 184 ---
getting nothing along this line in school; if anything, these 
things are being trained out ... so that he will be a good 
Negro, an individual, a nonperson, an intellectual dependent. 
If you do not know the definition of "purpose," "identity," 
and "method," it is already too late for Jon. 
I do not want to be addressed as George any longer. You 
will please respect my wishes enough to use my middle name 
from this day on. I won't respond to any other. 
My work goes well here. I am in health. I hope you are 
well. 
Take care of yourself. 
Lester 
MAR CH, 1968 
6 
Dear Robert. 
I received the money today. Thanks. I got the 
forms off too. I hope you told them about the life thing. If 
not, please do it right away. I hope also my age was passed 
along as a reminder. People would look at you and think that I 
would have to be in my teens. 
Africa is a most wonderful continent. They have everything 
in the way of human and natural resources. Oil in Egypt, 
Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Nigeria. Copper, diamonds, cobalt, 
and gold in Zambia. There are large deposits of iron ore in 
Liberia, a whole mountain of it in fact. You name it, and it is 
16 4


--- PAGE 185 ---
found in some part of Africa. In the savanna area south of the 
Sahara Desert and all the way south to the Cape, you find the 
most fertile farmland in the world. Uganda, Kenya, and 
Tanzania are all just like a big park. The temperature never 
fluctuates more than 5 degrees the whole year around. Every 
evening during the winter months there is a light rain to settle 
the dust. Eighty to 85 the whole year. The five oldest cities in 
the world are located in Africa. The oldest language is one 
spoken in Africa: Mande. The oldest relic of man's prehistoric 
existence was found in Africa, 25 million years old. You find 
all kinds of black types: with wide noses, thin noses, aquiline 
noses; all types of hair; all shades of skin from the lightest 
ivory to blue black. You should be more specific about what 
you want to know because it would take a month, and a letter 
the size of a telephone book, to delineate all the resources of 
Africa. 
Speaking just for me I would like Tanzania on the East 
coast if I had to choose a spot to settle. Julius Nyerere is an 
enlightened and intelligent leader who identifies with the 
Eastern world. The country is developing fast, and has 
unlimited potential in mining, agriculture, and light industry. 
Its problem, as with all the African states, is the absence of 
capital to expand the economy at a rate which will realize the 
rising expectations of the people and close the gap with the 
Western world. Tanzania has invited the Eastern societies to 
help them instead of the U.S. and Western Europe, so they will 
be better off. China charges no interest on loans. When the 
Chinese set up a factory, they hire Africans and train African 
managers and leave. The U.S. is motivated by the profit-and­
loss thing. They leave U.S. managers and claim 90 percent of 
the gross as their just share of the profits. They say it's their 
reward for helping to develop the country. Some African 
leaders go for this; Julius does not. Does it seem stupid of 
China to lend without interest, and build without taking over 
or capitalizing? Must be love. 
Lester 
16 5


--- PAGE 186 ---
MARCH, 196 8 
28 
Dear Robert. 
I stay very busy these days. I have accepted a job 
on the tier (our floor) passing out food and cleaning up. Good 
for my record and keeps me active. 
What do you think of Jomo? He was on his job during 
those years. He ranks among the top three or four guerrilla 
tacticians in the world. I speak of this new face that war has 
taken on, the war of the poor man. He was in the vanguard of 
the Afro-Asian liberation effort once. It is regrettable, how­
ever, that today we have to report that he no longer 
cooperates with the general movement to which he owes his 
success. He has gone on record as saying he wants no part of 
any more revolutions. What can we think of a man who 
withdraws before the battle is fully won? This man has 
abandoned his old comrades and left the less fortunate to fend 
for themselves. The peoples of southern Africa, Southeast 
Asia, and Latin America could use his cooperation, his 
support, just as he once was in need of support. Faint hearts 
never win decisive battles. Take care of yourself. 
Lester 
166


--- PAGE 187 ---
AP RIL , 1968 
11 
Dear Robert, 
M.LK. organized his thoughts much in the same 
manner as you have organized yours. If you really knew and 
fully understood his platform you would never have expressed 
such sentiments as you did in your last letter. I am sure you 
are acquainted with the fact that he was opposed to violence 
and war; he was indeed a devout pacifist. It is very odd, almost 
unbelievable, that so violent and tumultuous a setting as this 
can still produce such men. He was out of place, out of season, 
too naive, too innocent, too cultured, too civil for these times. 
That is why his end was so predictable. 
Violence in its various forms he opposed, but this does not 
mean that he was passive. He knew that nature allows no such 
imbalances to exist for long. He was perceptive enough to see 
that the men of color across the world were on the march and 
their example would soon influence those in the U.S. to also 
stand up and stop trembling. So he attempted to direct the 
emotions and the movement in general along lines that he 
thought best suited to our unique situation: nonviolent civil 
disobedience, political and economic in character. I was 
beginning to warm somewhat to him because of his new ideas 
16 7


--- PAGE 188 ---
concerning U.S. foreign wars against colored peoples. I am 
certain that he was sincere in his stated purpose to "feed the 
hungry, clothe the naked, comfort those in prisons, and trying 
to love somebody." I really never disliked him as a man. As a 
man I accorded him the respect that his sincerity deserved. 
It is just as a leader of black thought that I disagreed with 
him. The concept of nonviolence is a false ideal. It presupposes 
the existence of compassion and a sense of justice on the part 
of one's adversary. When this adversary has everything to lose 
and nothing to gain by exercising justice and compassion, his 
reaction can only be negative. 
The symbol of the male here in North America has always 
been the gun, the knife, the club. Violence is extolled at every 
exchange: the TV, the motion pictures, the best-seller lists. 
The newspapers that sell best are those that carry the boldest, 
bloodiest headlines and most sports coverage. To die for king 
and country is to die a hero. 
The Kings, Wilkinses, and Youngs exhort us in King's words 
to "put away your knives, put away your arms and clothe 
yourselves in the breastplate of righteousness" and "turn the 
other cheek to prove our capacity to endure, to love." Well, 
that is good for them perhaps but I most certainly need both 
sides of my head. 
George 
16 8


--- PAGE 189 ---
APRI L, 1968 
22 
Dear Robert, 
It was good seeing you, a bit exasperating, but still 
good to see you. 
Reexamine this point: if a government truly reflected the 
wishes of the people, if it truly represented a fair cross section 
of the populace, it would follow that if the means of 
production and distribution were placed in the hands of the 
government they would be controlled by the people. The 
central point is that the government must be truly representa­
tive. All important positions must be elective, and a man's 
position within the governing body must be solely dependent 
upon meritorious conduct of the state's business. 
Nationalization is the only answer to the problems of the 
modern industrial state. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
16 9


--- PAGE 190 ---
APR IL, 1968 
26 
Dear Mother, 
I was looking for you last weekend; Robert had 
said he was going to bring you. I hope you are well. 
Robert indicates that you two very seldom see anything in 
the same light anymore. He also indicates that he doesn't 
understand why. 
He comes here thinking to give me solace and purpose 
(purpose I have, solace I don't require), but appears to be 
more upset with the state of his domestic affairs than I am 
with my problems here. This is not to say that I do not enjoy 
his visits-it is good to 'have a little relief from this cell-but it 
seems to me that Rdbett may be coming apart and I hate to 
witness it. He has attempted a breakout recently from long 
years of repression and backwardness, but the combination of 
noncooperation from you and his daughters, and the plain fact 
that he doesn't understand the changes that are taking place 
around him, has placed a strain on his nervous equipment that 
may soon prove to be too much for him. 
He doesn't have much confidence in himself or in us as a 
people yet. His whole mentality, all of his attitudes are built 
around the transparent little platitudes and trite cliches that 
170


--- PAGE 191 ---
one reads and hears on the mass news media and other 
thought-control facilities. 
He stated in the presence of some of his black coworkers 
that "he was glad that troublemaker King got killed." He 
almost had to fight the guys. Now what black would say 
something like that? It sounds like something that one of the 
white knights of the KKK would say. Years ago Robert would 
have said nothing and had no opinion whatever to offer. But 
now that he has broken out and is trying to get into the 
mainstream with an opinion, he is all mixed up. I can 
understand that after such an experience on the job with his 
peers he would certainly not want to get bullied by his women 
when he got home. I didn't agree with any of King's tactics 
but he certainly caused no one any trouble, other than a few 
whites perhaps, and I don't think I mind that too much. 
Robert will change, adapt, in time, if we help him along, 
and are subtle with our criticism and advice and respect his 
wish to be the dominant male. He has that coming: it's hard 
working for those folks. 
I heard about your work on the kitchen. That's heavy 
work. Take care that you don't strain or break yourself. Why 
isn't Jon doing that for you? 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
171


--- PAGE 192 ---
APR IL , 19 68 
30 
Dear Robert, 
Everything is normal here, so far. The transfer is 
off. I'll be here for a while yet. They wanted to send me to 
Soledad Adjustment Center but I asked them not to. There are 
more aimless adolescent types there than here. 
I wouldn't mind going to California Men's Colony, or 
someplace like that, but I have never been offered anything 
that would be an improvement over this place. Well, anything 
would be an improvement but not enough to matter. 
All reading material is coming right on time except 
Ramparts and Avant Garde. No Ramparts for April yet. I 
believe the government may have smashed them. 
May end up on that little boat after all. I feel myself 
becoming impatient with people in general. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
172


--- PAGE 193 ---
MA Y, 1968 
4 
Dear Mother, 
You are correct in all that you say about the 
problem of men and responsibility, and about the hangers-on, 
and the foot draggers, the failures and the failing, the myopic 
tendencies to squander time and energy in counterproductive 
efforts. At times I become so depressed seeing it that I feel 
justified deciding to release myself from my responsibility and 
just take off (when I get home) with you people in tow to 
some other part of the world where blacks have already come 
into their own, with an ocean or two between us and this 
place. 
But this feeling never lasts long, mainly because I under­
stand why many of us react as we do, and I said react. Our 
responses to the social stimuli (and in our case in this country, 
they assert themselves as a challenge) must necessarily be 
negative when we consider that blacks in the U.S. have been 
subjected to the most thorough brainwashing of any people in 
history. Isolated as we were, or are, from our land, our roots 
and our institutions, no group of men have been so thoroughly 
terrorized, dehumanized, and divested of those things that 
from birth make men strong. 
17 3


--- PAGE 194 ---
Regarding this domestic issue, I must be the first to admit 
that I see that the black family unit is in ruins. It is our first 
and basic weakness. This fact may contribute much to our 
difficulty in uniting as a people. But for every effect there is a 
cause. If we are to understand and heal these effects we must 
understand the causes. To say that the black family unit is 
slowly eroding because of pressures from without (poverty and 
social injustice), and from within (negative response to crisis 
situation) is to completely mistake the depth of the issue. 
There are three historical factors that have produced the 
present state of chaos on the family level of our black society. 
First, the family unit was destroyed during chattel slavery. Men 
had the sense of family responsibility trained out of them. 
Second, our culture institutions, and customs, upon which 
unity depends and without which cohesiveness can never exist, 
were destroyed and never replaced. The best we could do was 
ape the ofay, and cling to a kind of subculture that manifests 
itself today in the hideous notion that if we educate ourselves 
properly, think the right thoughts, read the right books, say 
the right things, and do exactly that which is expected of 
us-we can then be as good as white people. Third, our change 
in status from im article of movable property to untrained 
misfits on the labor market was not as most think a change to 
freedom from slavery but merely to a different kind of slavery. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
17 4


--- PAGE 195 ---
MA Y, 1968 
15 
Dear Robert, 
It is good that you can afford a new car. Since you 
have taken up the responsibility of managing the household 
expenditures, I see you have a little more to spend on what 
yankees call "discretionary spending," money above what is 
needed to provide the basic survival materials. 
I am doing well and wish the same for you. 
You sound like a high-school civics textbook with that 
thing about free speech and free press. You couldn't believe 
stuff like that. "Freedom of the press is for those who own 
one." Even they are kept in line by economic pressure from 
above. Very little of the repression is done overtly, my friend. 
You cannot see a tree's roots all the time, but because one 
cannot see them does not mean that they do not exist. The 
tree couldn't stand without them. Take care of yourself. 
George 
17 5


--- PAGE 196 ---
MA Y, 1968 
16 
Dear Robert, 
The silent treatment is counterproductive. Guile, 
craft, and gentle persuasion are what's happening. When guile 
fails, then force must be used. Guile only fails when the person 
one is dealing with is smarter. Men must either be cajoled or 
crushed depending 01) the circumstances. But with women I 
can't see any reason why craft shouldn't always suffice. 
These institutional committees are strictly local and incon, 
sequential. They have no fixed number of seats, no fixed 
personnel. They are governed by caprice, all decisions are 
arbitrary. I have never received the benefit of the doubt. I 
never get a break as you well know from the fact of these 8 
years. But don't let me start complaining. As a defense I never 
expect anything, never form attachments for material things, 
and refuse to be punished or allow my thoughts to be 
disorganized by anything that happens to me here. So you can 
uncross your fingers and put your fears for me on that score to 
rest. Nothing can upset the logical processes of my mind, no 
amount of hunger, neglect, cold, pain, discomfort, or terror­
ism. 
Well, take care of yourself. 
George 
17 6


--- PAGE 197 ---
JU NE, 1968 
6 
Dear Robert, 
It was good to see you folks. I hope you got back 
safely, You know they cut our visiting time short ... I 
snapped to it when I got back to my cellblock and noted how 
early it was, It was not crowded in there either, from what I 
can recall, 
It seems at first sight that Georgia has adjusted her 
attitudes to conform somewhat more closely with reality; that 
is wonderful. It is surely past time for all of us to stand up and 
stop trembling, grab the bull by the horns, and ride him till his 
neck snaps. The events of the last two days have left me in a 
most exuberant frame of mind, I haven't felt so good since the 
first of the year, and the time of the Tet offensive. 
Jon is an admirable man-child. You sired a man without 
question. I just know that you are training him to be a benefit 
and a credit to his kind, and to act out his historical, 
obligatory duty. I know you are teaching him to love just us, 
and protecting him from this alien ideology. I am certain that 
you are doing this since you remember clearly the failure of 
your father, and his father, and so on as far back as it goes. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
17 7


--- PAGE 198 ---
JUNE, 1968 
14 
Dear Mother, 
Try to remember how you felt at the most 
depressing moment of your life, the moment of your deepest 
dejection. You no doubt have had many. That is how I feel all 
the time, no matter what my level of consciousness may be, 
asleep, awake, in between. The thing is there and it keeps me 
moving, pins my eye to the ball, up tight twenty-four hours a 
day. Our general situation and mine at present especially the 
inadequate response, the absence of genuine remedial thought 
and action, these are why I am as I am. 
I had a letter from Robert this morning professing a 
heartfelt sorrow at the passing of one of our strongest enemies, 
a slick-tongued, opportunistic, demagogic falsifier. What a 
prodigal waste of affection! Especially when we consider that 
Robert felt only relief at the time of the last political kill 
(M.L. King). I can't reach Robert, he has a natural slave 
mentality like so many other black men of his generation. I 
understand why the mindless pursue the favor and affection of 
an insensitive and implacable opponent, but I cannot under­
stand why they insist on planting those ideals in the minds of 
their sons. They go through life discovering that this enemy 
17 8


--- PAGE 199 ---
cannot be appeased, that he is relentless, calloused beyond 
repair, dedicated to personal financial success, heedless to its 
cost in human suffering. Yet when the son comes along, 
instead of acting upon these discoveries in a positive way, they 
lie, pretend, defend their inaction and collaboration, head 
down, shoulders bent, nose stained brown. 1 tolerate Robert 
because he stuck with us or you pretty faithfully (no small 
qualifier when one looks around at other families in the black 
community), but he has to go through many a change before 1 
can really accept him. It may be too late for us to establish a 
relationship conducive to the remedying of our physical and 
material problems. 1 hope not. As 1 have stated before you can 
help us both. Just as those regressive ideals were sneaked into 
his consciousness so we can sneak some progressive ones in. 
Propaganda works both ways, but one must be subtle. He is 
sensitive about being bossed (by blacks anyway). 
1 have wanted to write this letter for two weeks now, but 1 
have been preoccupied. 1 wanted to enlarge upon some of the 
things we discussed when you were here. First, all men want to 
own things, to possess material goods to make themselves 
comfortable today, and to secure themselves against the 
unpredictable tomorrows. This is self-preservation, a natural 
thing found in all animals. It is only latent in some men but it 
is still there all the same. When this instinct works on a man 
without his full understanding, he does radical things. Now 
read carefully, Georgia. When the peasant revolts, the student 
demonstrates, the slum dweller riots, the robber robs, he is 
reacting to a feeling of insecurity, an atavistic throwback to 
the territorial imperative, a reaction to the fact that he has lost 
control of the circumstances surrounding his life. Whether he 
knows it or not, it is all the same. This system, its economics, 
its politics, was formed around an age that is past. It was 
inadequate even then. Men can no longer stake out land or 
section off a part of the earth and say to themselves, "I will 
use this as a guarantee," mainly because of the monopolistic 
stranglehold of those who have already established themselves 
17 9


--- PAGE 200 ---
and who pretend to know what is best for the rest of the 
world. Wealth is land. By having only labor without land and 
its potential products, we lose independence. We must sell our 
labor. Then because of today's specialization and complicated 
division of labor, it follows that the only way man's natural 
urges and the modern industrial society can be brought into 
agreement is by all people possessing everything in common 
through a representative government. Only in this way can all 
men satisfy the ungovernable urge to secure things and control 
their existence. 
George 
JUNE, 1968 
29 
Dear Georgia, 
I'll be out of here soon, perhaps in eight or nine 
months. I'll have eighteen months clean when I go to the 
board in December. You know that I have my time in. That's 
what they want, time and clean conduct. 
It is always a job getting along with our friends and 
relatives. Establishing lasting and mutually rewarding relation­
ships always calls for delicacy, sensitivity, and, mainly, 
suppression of the ego. One simply cannot say the first thing 
that comes to mind with no regard for the next person's ego 
18 0


--- PAGE 201 ---
problem. If I constantly say or do things that make the next 
person feel as if I am challenging his person, his capacity to 
reason, his standing as an individual, how can I ever hope to 
relate to him. 
People the world over are not the same but those that we 
meet here in the U.S. are generally of a single type. By and 
large they are all fools, intellectual nonpersons, emotional 
half-wits. Status symbols, supervisory positions, and petty 
power motivate their every act. Personal, individual, financial 
success at any price is their social ethic, the only real standard 
upon which their conduct is built. 
For us blacks in particular this is a nightmare proposition. 
When this standard, this criterion for the measurement of 
individual merit and worth in this society is applied to us, 
measured against our standing or holdings, we cannot help but 
come out with a very low opinion of ourselves. From the 
womb to the tomb this plays in our minds. We are not worth 
more than the amoun t of capital we can raise. That is why you 
see blacks pretending to be doing all right. That is why a black 
man will buy a new car (status symbol) before he will buy 
food for his child or clothes for his wife. 
And again with blacks this whole thing goes even deeper. 
No man or group of men have been more denuded of their 
self-respect, none in history have been more terrorized, 
suppressed, repressed, and denied male expression than the 
U.S. black. This is what you are up against in relating to 
Robert. As I said before, he is going through a breakout. He is 
trying to get back. He wants to express himself after years of 
being a vegetable. As with most of the men of our community, 
he is just starting to feel his strength now. But soon this will 
build into a rage, " and when I rage I rage unbounding." Don't 
interfere with that thing. You should have never objected to 
the social club! You caused him to transfer just a bit more of 
the subconscious disregard he has for our enemies onto you. 
Jon's real problems can be solved only through community 
action: a massive, total, mutual affort. We are not surviving 
181


--- PAGE 202 ---
and cannot survive as individuals or as family units; we must 
get together. And then too, what can Robert give Jon in his 
present state of mental development? · He can only benefit 
from contact with people he might learn from. He must first 
learn what to give and how to give it to Jon before he can help 
him. Just spending some time with him is nothing. I don't 
think you handled that right, you should have offered to help 
his organization, perhaps even participate to some extent. 
Don't be backward. 
George 
AU GUS T, 1968 
9 
Dear Mother, 
It was good for me to see you again. I also have 
your letter here before me. I commented to Robert last week 
that you seem to have gone through many changes these last 
few years. That's what life is all about, growth and change. 
You will at least listen. Few people are so endowed. 
I feel much better as the result of your visit. Please try to 
come more often, or at least when Robert comes. I understand 
that you people have never had any exposure to these things 
that interest me and I know that everyone cannot be alike, but 
I also know that if we are to relate to each other, work 
18 2


--- PAGE 203 ---
together, build together on the basic things we must agree. I 
agree with many of the things you say. I concur with any 
rational and constructive judgment or assessment you may 
make, as long as it is intended to forward "our thing." 
No transfer for me; they turned it down. No relief in my 
ordeal, 24 hours a day in this cell. I've been in here for over 18 
months now; in prison 8 years next month. I've forgotten 
what it was that earned me this. 
George 
AU GUS T, 1968 
17 
Dear Mother, 
It can all be reduced to the simple fact that we 
want you to be yourself, secure within your reality. Why 
should my woman have to follow someone else's criterion of 
right and wrong, beauty and ugliness? Please believe me, 
Mama, the truly ugly thing is the pretending, faking it, 
imitating-monkey see, monkey do-adoration of the repul­
sive. 
On close examination, what you are saying is that black 
women standing naked and natural are ugly or less than 
beautiful. From this nakedness and natural posture the only 
way for her to remotely resemble anything beautiful is to 
18 3


--- PAGE 204 ---
bleach and straighten her hair, and hang her limbs with 
clothing designed in Paris, London, the U.S., and other parts 
of the barbarian world. For you there is only this one standard 
of beauty, the Western standard. I revolt against this absurdity. 
I understand that this is all you have ever known, I allow for 
this, but you must be able to see by now that this model of 
perfection you have subscribed to in the past is no longer the 
fad. Black is back. I'm going to fulfill my role as the man, even 
if it kills me. I will provide the material goods and protect my 
family with every ounce of energy and resource that I can call 
up. The woman's role though will go unfulfilled because you 
folks don't seem to be able to change, or reestablish the values 
and cultural entities of our antecedents. 
Reality is the key. In order for you to be intelligent, as you 
state it, you must like Western music, clothes, food, architec­
ture, Western education, religious superstition, pseudophilos­
ophy, and Western ideals. St. Augustine!! What kind of 
example is that? 
The reality is that we are a caste at the bottom of a class 
society, the only group that has built-in factors (physical 
characteristics) that prohibit any form of socioeconomic 
mobility. We are the totally disenfranchised, the whipping 
boy, the scapegoat, the floor mat of the nation. I am not so 
foolish that I cannot detect the fact that I am hated, especially 
when it is obvious. At least the obvious does not escape me. 
To clarify, however, let me state that some blacks are liked. 
I see that every day, but I am not of this kith. They hate me. I 
don't find this at all uncomfortable because I have some 
prerogatives. I would be doing something wrong if they liked 
me. Do you understand? I don't want anyone to accept me. As 
an individual, I don't worry about my future. I know my 
ideals will prevail, so I don't worry about that. They can't 
harm me, because the reality is that I have nothing to lose but 
my chains! 
It is clear that they are not going to give me a chance. You 
were right, that is exactly what they fear. Just because I want 
18 4


--- PAGE 205 ---
to be my black self, mentally healthy, and because I look 
anyone who addresses me in the eye, they feel that I may start 
a riot anytime. I've stopped more trouble here than any other 
black in the system. 
George 
DEC EMBE R, 1968 
3 
Dear Mother, 
I'm supposed to be going to Soledad again anytime 
now. It is a much better place than this. Remember when you 
came to see me while I was there before; we sat around a table 
in easy chairs by ourselves. 
How have you been? Healthy and wise, I hope. 
No noticeable change here, except for the prospect of my 
transfer and a cold that has me doubled over all day coughing. 
Penelope asked me to send her my package approval form 
so she could take care of me. I sent it and told her that she 
must send the stuff right away so that I will get it on the very 
first day packages are allowed, to avoid any possible mix-up 
due to the transfer. Remember in 19 62 when I transferred 
here in December? There was such a mix-up that I got nothing 
you sent. 
18 5


--- PAGE 206 ---
I can't say just what the problem is. We all seem to be in 
the grip of some terrible quandary . Our enemies have so 
confused us that we seem to have been rendered incapable of 
the smallest responsibility. I see this same irresponsibility in 
every exchange with my kinsmen here, irresponsibility, or 
mediocrity at best, disloyalty, self-hatred, cowardice, competi­
tion between themselves, resentment of any who may have 
excelled in anything, heads bowed, knees bent to some man or 
some stupid idea of a god. I've stopped saying anything at all. I 
haven't uttered a word in two months, refuse to even 
acknowledge a greeting with anything larger or longer than a 
raising of the head. One step forward and three backward. 
Where are we going? 
George 
DE CEMBER, 1968 
22 
Dear Mother, 
I probably won't leave here until next month. 
They are sending me to the board here. It meets the thirtieth 
and thirtY-lIrst of December and the third of January. 
I'm doing all right, and have some very eflIcient earplugs to 
help me preserve my sanity. Have you any theories why blacks 
talk so much and so loud? A Chinaman told me once that 
18 6


--- PAGE 207 ---
blacks were the oldest and finest people on earth "but one 
thing wrong, talkie-talkie-talkie .... " 
Wish the best for you, the best of everything this year. May 
be in a position to help work something out before this one's 
gone. 
Take care. 
George 
AP RIL , 1969 
14 
Dear Jon, 
Black culture is a monumental subject that covers 
countless years. The first man and consequently the first 
culture was black. You can't expect much coverage of so large 
a subject in nine thousand words. I will however write an essay 
that starts with the beginnings and touches on all that is 
important, with a brief resume on the black subculture of the 
present-day United States. 
You can make your own bench cheap. Buy or find or take 
from someone a 6' x IS " board, rather thick and heavy, say 2" 
at least. Tack on some old surplus army blankets and that's it. 
You then simply lay your board on top of three wooden 
horses, old wooden milk crates, or any strong or reinforced 
wood boxes, or stretch it between two chairs. Leave it 
187


--- PAGE 208 ---
unattached, however, because that way you can use it for 
incline presses by leaning it against the wall, or letting it rest 
one end on the ground, one on your box or chair. 
I'll get started on the other thing now. Why did Georgia 
take your books? Sounds pretty bad for her. I gather she 
wasn't serious about the things she said when she was here last. 
George 
JUNE, 1969 
12 
Dear Mother, 
Final results: Denied, one year, go back to board 
next June 197 0. 
George 
188


--- PAGE 209 ---
JUNE, 1969 
28 
Dear Jon, 
It's good in many ways that you will now be able 
to drive. Perhaps you'll be able to get up here to see me more 
often. 
I am well, and working hard; four hours a day on exercises. 
Mix your theoretical reading with some practical technol­
ogy. That aspect of chemistry that will be useful to us. Perhaps 
electronics as well. 
Be careful and learn fast, how to handle the automobile. 
Robert is most impressed if you remain calm. If you don't let 
him think you are excitable under the strain of heavy traffic 
you will be able to convince him that you are ready to go out 
on your own sooner. Driving that '69 should be easy. 
Take it easy. 
George 
18 9


--- PAGE 210 ---
AUGUS T, 1969 
17 
Dear Jon, 
The usual here. Each day comes and goes like the 
one before. This little joke isn't funny any longer. 
I add five words to my vocabulary each day, five new ones, 
right after breakfast each morning when I have forty-five 
minutes to kill. It's not enough time for anything else and 
since I don't want to waste any time, I work on words. It is by 
words that we convey our thoughts, and bend people to our 
will. 
If you must have aj ob, though I can't see why you want to 
work for someone if you don't absolutely have to, try this. Go 
to some business concern where the guy who runs it doesn't 
employ too many people and watches all of them closely. 
Then just start working for nothing. Don't say anything to 
anyone but the boss. Tell him what your name is and that you 
need a job. Then start working in spite of his reply. Of course 
you work hard. Do you get it? In two days, three at the most, 
you'll have bent him to your will. You may have to work for 
nothing the first day or two. In fact, it is best to refuse the 
19 0


--- PAGE 211 ---
fIrst day's offering if he breaks that soon. You have to be sure, 
sure of yourself I mean. In order to pressure a man you must 
be a better man that he. You can't let embarrassment or 
shyness stand in your way. These two things must be 
thoroughly and completely removed from your character. 
Loading trucks in a junkyard where the work is hard, garages, 
warehouses, etc.-these are places to consider. Don't try 
anything that requires skilled labor. You'll mess up someone's 
stock. 
How are your eyes? Have you had them checked? We all 
have bad eyes ... mine seem to be getting worse. I hope not. I 
can see very well at a distance, but cannot focus well on close 
objects without the glasses. 
Find out for me if Georgia sent the shoes and other stuff. If 
she did I didn't get them for some reason and will investigate. 
Give her my love. 
Send me a sexy picture of the lady that you met like I told 
you last week. Let her oldest kid take the picture with you 
and her in it. I want visual proof that you did take care of 
business. When I was sixteen I had one that was twenty-eight 
and a mother four times. I was good to her; no beatings like 
her other men had done. I wouldn't accept any money from 
her or eat her kid's food. I took her to places where she could 
show me off, most of the time to places that cost nothing. I 
had money but I looked so young that I couldn't get into 
places that adults went into. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
191


--- PAGE 212 ---
SEP T EMBER, 1969 
9 
Dear Jon, 
Doing no good here. It is looking no better, but at 
least I have developed no new problems. 
What do you think of your old man? Were you listening 
when he told me that the guys (those guys) on his job call him 
everything under the sun! He pretends that he is proud of his 
self·control. I believe he actually has twisted his thinking to 
consider himself a better man, "Now that he can take it." A 
lot of us colored folk are like that, in fact he is the majority. 
That is why we are the floor mat of the world, because we can 
take it. 
Robert is a good brother on an individual, personal, 
brother-to-brother basis, but you must reject his philosophy: 
the credo of the slave, the self-destructive, self-perpetuating 
doctrine of the menial, the wooductter, the waterboy, the 
groom, the employee, the flunky's flunky, the abased. 
However, the rejection should be a silent one. There is no 
chance of changing Robert, so he must be accepted as is, and 
protected as much as is possible. There are those among us, we 
must admit, who cannot take any sizable amount of freedom. 
They are in the majority! You cannot relate to them with 
19 2


--- PAGE 213 ---
ideals. They have fallen beyond caring about ideals. The only 
thing that will make them move is a push, no explanation, just 
a shove. 
You are concerned about working, having money, living 
better, etc. I have given you several leads but it seems that 
none fit your character and disposition. I hope that you at 
least tried. That last thing I mentioned to you last Monday 
may be just the ticket. See a brother named E. He can help 
you get that kind of work. You have your driver's license now, 
so there should be no problems. But if there are you should be 
old enough and prepared to handle them now. If I am wrong 
then you will never be ready. 
Well take care of yourself, and write me like I asked you to. 
Dear Jon, 
SE PT E M BE R, 1969 
15 
Got your letter today. 
George 
On the job thing, it is up to you. I think you made a wise 
choice, however, if you can stick with it. There will be plenty 
of lures at the school, soft, warm, smooth lures. When do you 
start back, and what year are you in? This should be your last 
year, isn't it? 
19 3


--- PAGE 214 ---
I'm just drifting now, doing a lot of reading, waiting for my 
shoulder to get together. It is a little better. 
Things are awful tight here, everyone tense, I'm just 
watching them and waiting. 
Take care. 
Dear Jon, 
SEP T E M B E R, 1969 
25 
George 
Robert told me that you were driving the new 
automobile to school. If that's right, you're not doing too bad. 
Do you use it at school and drive home too? But he also 
mentioned that if you didn't show improvements in things of a 
scholastic nature, he would be very disappointed. 
I am thinking that he feels a lot for you. He really does, I 
know/He simply doesn't know how to relate to you. When I 
was young, I felt that Robert didn't care for me very much 
because he wouldn't take me anywhere or even talk to me in 
anything less than a shout. Mama used to talk him into beating 
me up just for leaving the house to play baIl or talk with my 
peers. I mean real beating, belts, table legs, fists, etc. But what 
I didn't notice was that he was feeding me and that whenever I 
got into a bind with the local representatives of the oppressors 
19 4


--- PAGE 215 ---
(police), he would always be there to help me. Always, no 
matter what I had done or how much he hated what I'd done. 
Life has been one long string of disappointments for 
Robert. It wouldn't be good to just take lightly his wishes to 
see you become more aggressive in your development. It isn't 
necessary to disappoint him. You can satisfy him, help 
yourself, and serve the cause of black self-determination by 
picking yourself up and taking Chairman Mao's Great Leap 
Forward. 
I hope you are involved in the academic program at your 
school, but knowing what I know about this country's 
schooling methods, they are not really directing you to any 
specialized line of study. They have not tried to ascertain what 
fits your character and disposition and to direct you accord­
ingly. So you must do this yourself. Decide now what you 
would like to specialize in, one thing that you will drive at. Do 
you get it? Decide now. There are several things that we as a 
group, a revolutionary group, need badly: chemists, electronic 
engineers, surgeons, etc. Choose one and give it special 
attention at a certain time each day. Establish a certain time to 
give over to your specialty and let Robert know indirectly 
what you are doing. Then it only remains for you to get your 
A's on the little simple unnecessary subjects that the school 
requires. This is no real problem. It can be accomplished with 
just a little attention and study. But you must now start on 
your specialty, the thing that you plan to carry through ,this 
war of life. You must specialize in something. Just let it be 
something that will help the war effort. 
George 
195


--- PAGE 216 ---
OC TO BER, 1969 
17 
Dear Mother, 
I hope that all is normal there with you. Jon told 
me about the h-- deal. I didn't know it was that bad. How 
will we ever make it back from here? We all seem to have 
fallen from glory in the uttermost way. I'm sure we will simply 
have to redouble our efforts to forgive, understand, to rebuild 
the bridges between us; we must attempt to comprehend fully 
just how these bridges came to be destroyed. There is no other 
recourse. We must, of ourselves, by ourselves, recognize the 
roots of our illness, and do all that we can to extricate 
ourselves from this mess. 
Tell Penny that I love her no matter what. We'll agree on 
the essentials anyway. Tell her that I may not be able to write 
for a while. Explain this to Robert too. A little trouble here 
for me, and this may be the last envelope and the last time 
that I'll be able to borrow a pencil, for a while anyway. But I'll 
attempt to stay in touch. I've done nothing. It may work out 
all right but then I have no way of knowing for sure. They 
sweep in and sweep me away to a little closed cell in a closed 
wing of the prison without any explanation. I don't have any 
of my personal property. 
19 6


--- PAGE 217 ---
Forget the phonograph and records. I won't be allowed to 
have them. I didn't really want them anyway. I'm going to 
send the typewriter hOme first chance I get also. 
What's happening now is what I tried to explain to you 
several months ago. They know that in a year, the year 
between board appearances, anything can be made to happen. 
But at least I am alone in here. I don't have to be bothered 
with anyone, and someone who knew me before somewhere 
else has sent me something to read. I have books and toilet 
paper, I'll be all right. 
I'll write again when I can. Relay to Penny that no effort 
toward self-determination is futile: it is one of the things that 
men just cannot do without. Without it life loses its value. 
Love, 
George 
NOVE M BER, 196 9 
7 
Dear Jon, 
I know what happened concerning your letter. It 
was too thick. You sent too much. That is all right, however. I 
get what I want one way or the other and do what I want in 
the end. The fools are awfully presumptuous to think they can 
dictate my every action. 
19 7


--- PAGE 218 ---
That is good about the chemistry. I can't report too much 
progress. I'm holding on, however. 
How are the honeymooners getting along these days? You 
know that they are much too old to relate the way they do. 
Take care. 
George 
NO VEM BER, 1969 
13 
Dear Jon, 
I'm sending you these two package slips because 
you can explain to the folks there and see that it is taken care 
of better than anyone else. 
First I want them sent the very first day of December. 
They are special Christmas packages, the only kind I can 
receive, and I don't want to wait for them until Christmas. 
You understand. 
So that means that you must explain to them to get the 
stuff together now and put it into two packages and use the 
reverse side of the slip as an address form. It should be glued 
to the outside of the package and addressed to me here, as 
soon as December 1 gets here. 
The important items are: cigarettes-I want three cartons in 
each box; four pounds of nuts in each box, walnuts and Brazil 
19 8


--- PAGE 219 ---
nuts only; the full quota of cigars-IS O in each box; and 
finally the salami-two pounds, one in each box. It must be 
the type that will keep without refrigeration for a while, the 
rest of that stuff is unimportant. 
Impress upon them now not to delay past Demember I. It 
should be mailed; you understand, I hope. 
Give everyone my regards, take care. 
George 
NO VEM BER, 1969 
27 
Dear Jon, 
I'm doing all right here, I guess, hanging on. 
Heard you were going to medical school. What happened to 
the chemistry? They called me up to classification last week. 
Said they were considering sending me back to San Quentin. 
They are supposed to need the space here for something, and I 
wasn't doing well enough. They said if I improved a great deal, 
it is possible that in four or five years I might be considered 
for Chino-the prison for honor inmates. 
Let me know now and then how you are. Take care. 
George 
19 9


--- PAGE 220 ---
DE CEM BER, 1969 
5 
Dear Mother, 
The packages came in all right. They were opened 
in my presence so there was no chance for foul play. Thanks, 
you're a good girl, couldn't possibly get along without you 
folks. I hope I can justify your faith in me in some big way 
before long. 
J on is a wonderful man-child, you should be quite content 
with him. The apathy is not permanent. I love him, love him, 
love him. He is a great deal ahead of the average black his age, 
a lot smarter than I was. I hope he can avoid the many traps 
they have set up for him. 
Send me some photos of everyone-you know, when you 
get together over the holidays. 
Take care. 
Love, 
200 
George


--- PAGE 221 ---
DE CEM BER, 1969 
21 
Dear Jon, 
Marcia is a sweet sensitive sister. I want you to see 
her and represent me in my absence. 
You know what that means: show no weakness of any 
kind, present the strong, unapproachable, serious, intelligent, 
big·brother side of your character, the new black man, in his 
highest revolutionary form. 
You know, look out for her. Try to stabilize her. She is 
confused. She is the sister of one of my best friends. So bust 
your heart for her. If she has personal enemies, smash them. 
Call her in the evening and read to her from Mao or Fanon. 
George 
201


--- PAGE 222 ---
DECEM BER, 196 9 
21 
Dear Jon, 
Just got your letter. Good to hear from you, and 
hope you are still alive. For the 357th time let me advise you 
to take all threats seriously. If you would firmly grasp the 
depth of the sickness caused in some men's minds by this 
environment, I would never have to relate this to you but 
once. When a sucker gets so foolish as to warn you in advance 
that he is going to kill you, the next sound he utters should 
come through swollen lips. 
Two people I want you to see for me. It is important. See 
Guy and fmd out if he got a regular institution correspondence 
form to fill out and return with the letter I sent him. I have 
reason to believe that these people did not send him the form 
so that he can become a regular on my mailing list. Also dress 
yourself up and see MarCia, one evening or weekend. She 
works in the daytime. Also ask her if she got the form to fill 
out and return when she got my letter. Ask her if she returned 
it yet, and explain that we will not be allowed to exchange 
letters if she has not returned the form. I think these people 
neglected to even send one, since they want to keep me 
isolated. Tell Marcia that I got her letter of December 15 and I 
will try to answer. If she doesn't hear from me, it will be due 
202


--- PAGE 223 ---
to the hang-up in getting those forms out of here to her and 
back from her. Tell her that Tony is doing well. You can 
phone first to tell her you are coming or make an appoint­
ment, but I'd rather you see her in person to relate the 
messages. Do this right away and let me know what's 
happening. 
I don't know what to tell you about that school thing. I 
know it is boring, listening to those idiots and falsifiers seven 
or eight hours a day, but it's best to stay with it until you are 
ready to revolt. Just don't mistake any of the lies for the 
truth. Robert will lie to you if he thinks it will help you to 
survive. He has been surviving on one for half a century. 
Take care. 
George 
DEC EM BER . 1969 
25 
Dear Mother, 
I'm well, warm, fed, get plenty of rest, plenty of 
exercise. I really can't complain, especially since I don't expect 
any more. 
Everyone got packages from home and we shared every­
thing. It was just like down on the commune. I have gained ten 
pounds at least. 
203


--- PAGE 224 ---
Hope you are feeling better, and I hope also that this next 
year will bring you some solace. I wish you the best, Mama. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
DECEM BE R , 1969 
28 
Dear Jon, 
Received your letter. You said nothing about 
Marcia. See if you can do anything for her-when I was your 
age, boy, I had a couple of women her age, and with two and 
three children each. But you treat her good. You're supposed 
to be representing me, meaning that you are to be strong, 
intellectual, watchful, serious, unapproachable. 
I like her and she is the sister of one of my best friends. I'm 
supposed to be getting out anytime now, she thinks. 
I wanted her to see you, the man-child, so that she would 
have a better idea of what the "man" is like. 
Forget that Westernized backward stuff about god. I curse 
god, the whole idea of a benevolent supreme being is the 
product of a tortured, demented mind. It is a labored, 
mindless attempt to explain away ignorance, a tool to keep 
people of low mentality and no means of production in line. 
How could there be a benevolent superman controlling a world 
204


--- PAGE 225 ---
like this. He would have to be malevolent, not benevolent. 
Look around you, evil rules supreme. God would be my 
enemy. The theory of a good, just god is a false idea, a thing 
for imbeciles and old women and, of course, Negroes. It's a 
relic of the past when men made words and mindless defenses 
for such things as sea serpents, magic, and flat earths. 
Strength comes from knowledge, knowing who you are, 
where you want to go, what you want, knowing and accepting 
that you are alone on this spinning, tumbling world. No one 
can crawl into your mind and help you out. I'm your brother 
and I'm with you, come what may, and against anything or 
anybody in the universe that is against you. You'll meet 
women and they will say they are with you, but you'll still be 
alone, with your pain, discomfort, illness, elation, courage, 
pride, death. You don't want anyone to crawl into your head 
with you, do you? If there were a god or anyone else reading 
some of my thoughts I would be uncomfortable in the 
extreme. 
Strength is being able to control yourself and your total 
environment-yourself first, however. 
Take care of yourself. 
George 
205


--- PAGE 226 ---
FEB RU ARY, 19 70 
13 
Mrs. Fay Stender 
Attorney at Law 
Dear Mrs. Stender, 
This is to confmn your letter of February II . I had 
just heard of Judge Wollenberg's move. The next time you 
come to see me, push the idea of removing my restraints. It 
will be interesting to note their reaction. You know those 
things are placed upon me whenever I leave my cell area. He 
reaches through the bars to place them upon me. The animal 
farm effect is complete. 
Sunday, the day after tomorrow, I am supposed to be 
released from isolation. No one is supposed to do more than 
twenty-nine days down here. I'll then be able to read my 
newspapers and weekly periodicals, smoke, and sleep in a bed. 
However I will remain separated from the general population 
(in jail, within the jail), probably on maximum security. This 
does not bother me any longer. Of the ten years I have done, 
seven of them have been in close confinement; I read, exercise, 
and write. Sometimes I'll daydream. 
I said that it doesn't bother me any longer-but what I 
206


--- PAGE 227 ---
meant is that since I am in jail, which part of the jail I'm in 
doesn't matter. Your wishes of cheer and hope are well 
received. Hope and I are old friends. Thanks, and let me know 
if you can do anything with the novel idea. 
Dear Fay, 
Sincerely, 
George L. Jackson 
FEBRUA RY, 19 70 
26 
You are aware that I want to read the transcript of 
grand-jury testimony. All three of us would like to go over it. 
Since we are living so close together down here, one copy 
would be enough for all three of us. I had a chance to read 
only parts of it on the twenty-fourth. 
Do you have any trouble. reading my writing? It is the best 
I can do. If you are having tronble, however, I'll print. 
I'm warm, I never have liked to eat too much, so all is well 
with me here. I won't complain. I've never had much of a 
problem with the purely physical things, the weaknesses of the 
flesh. I get fat on what the average individual would starve on. 
207


--- PAGE 228 ---
Clothing? I prefer something dry and clean if it is readily 
available. I feel guilty when I sleep more than three hours a 
day. Where I am presently the night-light in front of my cell 
allows me to read or write as late as I wish. 
The cruelest aspect in the loss of one's freedom of 
movement is of course the necessity to repress the sex urge, 
but after ten years I have even learned to control my response 
to that stimulus (one thousand fingertip push-ups a day). I 
probably have the world's record on push-ups completed. So, 
if they would reach me now, across my many barricades, it 
must be with a bullet and it must be final. 
The lash affects me for sure. If it failed to affect me at all I 
would be guilty of using the tortured logic of my father's 
twisted mind, i.e., that this is the best of all possible worlds, or 
that this is the only country that provides flush toilets for all. 
It affects me, but not my physical parts. It shocks me 
somewhere behind the eyes, strains my instinct to survive .... 
I know you are a busy woman and it probably isn't proper 
for me to steal your attention with my ramblings. Take care, 
You have my regard. 
Sincerely, 
George L. Jackson 
208


--- PAGE 229 ---
MARCH , 19 70 
2 
Dear Fay, 
We received a copy of the transcipt today through 
the mail. It was John Clutchette who actually received it. 
I also had a letter from my father. It was a long letter, 
considering that he normally writes only a few lines. It seems 
that he is now prepared to accept the validity of the many 
charges I have long made against certain forms of organization 
and specifically certain dements within the forms. I suspect 
that Georgia may have had something to do with it. Just to 
make me feel better. Either way, it denotes the effects that 
trauma has on people, especially people who are affected by 
little else. I am convinced that black people can never be 
influenced by ideology alone. The men have been too 
conditioned against it by violence and they are afraid. The 
women think of themselves as too practical, they can be 
moved by one thing only: "Money honey." However, I love 
them all just the same. I reason that with a continuous stream 
of shocks and the promise of spoils they can eventually be 
induced to reach beyond their immediate surroundings. A 
guard said something nasty to one of my sisters last Tuesday, 
this may have been the catalyst with my father. He's a stranger 
209


--- PAGE 230 ---
to me, almost. 
I just got the letter and the book you want me to read. I 
see that you posted it on the twenty-sixth. Thanks, I'll get 
right on it. 
You have my regard, please give my further regards to our 
friends. 
Sincerely, 
George L. Jackson 
MARCH , 19 70 
5 
Dear Friend, Fay, 
I have started this three times. This first is in the 
way of an apology. For I feel one is due you. At the close of 
today's proceedings, I left without as much as a look in your 
and John's direction. I am afraid that you may mistake such 
behavior as the unfeeling and calloused disregard of the slave. I 
hope I have trained all of the slave out of me. Neither would I 
have you feel for even a second that I could make any (any at 
all) mental associations between you and your people, and 
those who stand in my way, simply because of the external 
resemblance or let me say any external resemblance. I never 
have, even in the really bad moments, lost the ability to 
evaluate people one at a time and never will. The only way I 
210


--- PAGE 231 ---
can explain the little thing that occurred this evening is with 
an explanation of that pain or shock that strikes me at times 
just behind the eyes. I don't understand it entirely myself. 
From early this morning I carry the metal around. That vehicle 
they transport us in and in which we ate lunch (hands to side) 
is very cramped, and then and most important the attitude of 
the pig in the jury room when he came to take me back. I 
believe it first started bothering me then, the thing in my head, 
Campbell* again, ruling on ... You see, someone failed before 
me, trembled and failed, my father, his father, leaving 
Camp bell in a position to rule me out. I have very bad 
moments when I think of that, and of course it follows that I 
must think of my own failings-can you understand that being 
a helpless type affects me deeply. You are a very intelligent, 
sensitive, and wonderful person and the image you form, 
wedged between me and who knows what fate, elates me in 
one sense and infuriates me in another. Why should I have to 
relate and exchange from such a position of weakness. It 
comes down on me at times. I am tortured by the vision of 
someone like myself standing at the bars of his cell two 
hundred years from now cursing me-dereliction!! So let me 
apologize for today, because it bothers me. Let me take this 
occasion to apologize in advance for the seemingly crude 
responses you may detect from time to time. My sensibilities 
may be somewhat damaged. You can help me with this over 
the years to come. The tapet left me feeling better than I have 
felt for ten, perhaps fifteen years. 
I got the transcript and your letter upon my ,return this 
evening. When will I see you again? 
George 
*The first judge assigned to the case. He later withdrew 
after the defense accused him of blatant expressions of racial 
prejudice. 
t A personal message from Huey P. Newton. 
211


--- PAGE 232 ---
MA RCH, 19 70 
9 
Dear Fay, 
Just heard something of Campbell's imminent 
retirement. It could occur at any time. Did you, by the way, 
take note of his statement in court the other day to the effect 
that he "was also once an attorney and had defended-unpop­
ular-causes." His words exactly! 
I don't know if it means anything or not but the court 
reporter stated on his page that he recorded 1-48 pages of 
testimony, and we have only 1-46 pages. 
I guess you have learned by now that my mother loves to 
talk. She also at times will say what she is thinking without 
considering the effect it may have on the listener. She gets so 
carried away at times that I have been led to suspect that she 
may be affected with-well she may be a mild hysteric, not the 
sexual type but the simple nervous type. She is, however, a 
sweet woman with plenty of guts. We have always related well. 
I am still among the living, so I guess I'm doing all right. The 
dentist denied me medical attention for the tenth time today, 
this morning that is. We may have to discipline him soon. He 
apparently hasn't heard of my small but mighty mouthpiece. 
Please take care of yourself, you have my regard. 
George 
P.S. I would like to know in advance when I will see you 
again. 
212


--- PAGE 233 ---
MA RCH, 19 70 
12 
Dear Fay, 
I received the copies of the motions, I think day 
before yesterday, the tenth. I have been slow to confmn. 
Sorry, it may seem strange but I find my time (twenty-one 
hours awake) inadequate to meet all the needs. 
My metabolism is such that I need four hours of exercise to 
feel normal (relaxed). This may just be the result of years of 
being in places like this, repressing things. You know we aren't 
even allowed to get angry. They took away my showering 
action (the half hour on the tier we were getting each day) on 
Monday as a result of that contact with the dentist. No 
problem, however. There is a sink in my cell. 
Then I have my vocational work to do. I'll get lost in that 
for hours sometimes. Old slave trying to deal with his 
environment. In this connection you may have to help me as 
you said you did with my friend. They are purposely making it 
difficult for me to get what I require. We cart discuss it when I 
see you. 
Georgia was up to see me yesterday. The three mothers and 
one aunt all came together on the bus. 
I have your letter of the tenth here before me now, thanks. 
You have my sincere regard. 
George 
213


--- PAGE 234 ---
MAR CH , 19 70 
22 
My Friend, 
The thought just occurred to me that you could 
challenge that guy B-- on his theory or statements concern­
ing the possibilities of his secret witnesses being done in, if he 
allows discovery*. You see every time a rat does get put away, 
the prison authorities always release a different reason for the 
attack, never that he was an informer. Their purpose for 
always withholding the truth is that they don't want to 
discourage other potential rats and the truth would aid the 
convict in the psychological war-con against cop. For it is 
their purpose to always keep us divided and fearful of trusting 
the next con. You are aware that it's always the goal of 
oppressive authority (those who govern without the consent of 
the governed) to keep their wards divided. They can maintain 
their control in no other way. 
Divide and rule in its simplest form is standard police 
procedure. They must always display their rats, boast of 
* At the prosecution's request, the judge initially denied the 
defense the right of discovery on the grounds that it would 
jeopardize the lives of the inmate witnesses. 
214


--- PAGE 235 ---
', Ime,wing all that goes on among us. When it's more than one 
pe:rso>n on some crime, they will be split up and each told that 
the other has confessed and implicated him, etc. You know 
the line. Inside the joint it is the same only much more 
intense. A sense of terror, betrayal and insecurity prevails at all 
times. It flows outward from the captain's office-divide and 
rule, divide and rule. An Italian in the Syndicate at one time 
killed a Mexican in Folsom because the Mex suddenly started 
telling everyone not to trust someone, who was supposed to be 
a rat. The pigs wanted to put him out of business (importing 
dope into the joint) and wanted to get the Mex killed. So they 
called the Mex into their office and showed him some phony 
papers indicating that the guy was a rat. The Mex went for it 
and got killed. The guy was out of business in 4A for four 
years (4A is Folsom's adjustment center). 
Terrible conflict going on all the time. At issue is who will 
run the joint, cops or cons. So it is never released that a police 
informer was killed for his mistake. I'm thinking that B. will 
be at a loss to cite some cases in support of his fears that his 
witnesses will be harmed. We could state that he is playing on 
some concept of prison conditions that existed in 19 20 but 
that do not exist today. 
Monday, March 23, 19 70 
I'm looking forward to a good Friday. Never had 
one. 
I don't think Los Angeles is a good pl�ce for the trial. 
Fifteen floors above the ground. One million pigs! ! 
I was pushing you, rushing you, encircling you-recall-it 
occasioned the remark from you that "I don't know you that 
well." Look, I do plead guilty but with this explanation, that I 
hope you'll accept the past months as, say, the equivalent of 
five or more years' acquaintance. I encircle the people that I 
dig, there are only two types of people inhabiting my closet, 
friends and foes, the ones I accept, the ones I reject. I accepted 
you from the onset, and in spite of the bitter experience of 
these years I still fmd it easy to trust people. I sensed from the 
215


--- PAGE 236 ---
start that we were of kindred spirits. I rejected others as you 
recall, because there was no kinship of spirit there. To me 
length of acquaintance matters very little. I've been living in 
the trenches where it's understood that it's us against them, 
hide and seek. They're always it and getting caught means 
getting dusted. There never are many of us, so when I've met 
one in the past it's been my method to encircle and push. But 
"push" isn't a good term. It implies that I've put someone in 
front of me and there can never be any room in front of me. 
Let me say encircle and pull. 
You can never fully understand. It is an existential 
impossibility for you to know how it's been with me. My 
character and disposition are such that my response to a crisis 
situation always leads to a situation more desperate than the 
one which provoked it. But that's the way I like it, and 
believe me, Fay, I probably wouldn't be alive now if it weren't 
my habit to overreact, and look forward for the trouble that I 
know is coming. 
It probably didn't have to be this way for me. Other blacks 
have faced the same situations and have not been hurt too 
badly. I couldn't take it. I'll never be able to take it, a knife in 
the back, the nightstick, the gas chamber, death over a slow 
fire notwithstanding. 
And things just keep escalating from one desperate situa­
tion to a situation more desperate, and I seize the bull by the 
horns. I'll ride him till his neck breaks or until he pins me to 
the wall-conflict, struggle, and preparation for more struggle. 
You can't understand how it is to have to watch everyone who 
gets within arm's reach, or when under the gun to have to stay 
close to something to crawl under. When you came to see me 
in February my heart was cold as Antarctica. 
Tuesday, March 24, 19 70 (early morning) 
I'm convinced that it is the psychopathic per­
sonality that searches out a uniform. There's little doubt of 
216


--- PAGE 237 ---
what's going on in that man's head who will voluntarily don 
any uniform. 
Did you know that in these prisons there is a very fierce 
competition between the pig who wears a uniform and the pig 
who works in civilian dress? The uniformed pigs call them­
selves the Custody Department, while the others go under the 
heading of Care and Treatment. 
It is the function of the uniform to hold a man here. This 
means they do the key work, the searching, beating, killing. 
The individual with the tie and white shirt (really just another 
type of uniform) determines what we'll eat, what bullshit 
academic and make·work programs we'll have. He presides 
over the silly group therapy games that always end in fights or 
snitch contests. Oh, and he also makes out board reports. 
These two types of cops have been vying for control of the 
joints ever since the counselor breed came on the grounds. 
It was intended of course that these two groups of cops 
work together against the con, the rationale being, the more 
cons broken, the fewer will have to be killed, consequently less 
bad publicity for Department of Corrections political ap­
pointees and the political machine that appointed them. 
We killed that off by playing them against one another. If a 
uniform denied some small request, we would take it to the 
counselor. If he granted it, well you can take it from there, but 
we would purposely ask the uniform (and in a way that made 
it certain he would refuse) for things we were sure the 
counselor would approve. Everyone connected with the power 
complex has made the outcome reasonably predictable, chaos. 
You have a picture of them trying to divide us, manage us, 
denude us of individuality. When this maneuver fails, they 
arrange for one unmanageable to murder another unmanage· 
able. At the same time they can't agree among themselves on 
anything. Cretins with guns. You couldn't count the person· 
a1ity conflicts between cop + cop, cop + con, con + con 
(usually fomented by some cop or some unnecessarily harsh 
living condition). You couldn't count these conflicts with an 
217


--- PAGE 238 ---
IBM. And I mean the ones that transpire openly in, say, one 
hour's time. 
To be certain that you dig what I'm saying, I'll here admit 
that most of the people who come through these places are 
genuinely sick in one way or the other, monsters, totally 
disorganized, twisted, disgusting epitomes of the parent 
monster. Those who aren't so upon their arrival will surely be 
so when they leave. No one escapes unscathed. An individual 
leaves his individuality and any pride he may have had behind 
these walls. When you first enter Chino you're required to 
write a confession that will be placed right in the front of your 
jacket* under your picture and number. Failure to write this 
confession means you go to the board. It means that you 
haven't taken the first step toward rehabilitation. All this is 
carefully explained to you in Chino. "No confession, no 
parole." No one walks into the board room with his head up. 
This just isn't done! Guys lie to each other, but if a man gets a 
parole from these prisons, Fay, it means that he crawled into 
that room. Plus it means that he adopted the philosophical 
attitude toward shit in the face several times since his last 
board. Of the billions of conflicts and negative exchanges that 
take place in a year, the pigs choose which ones to pass over. 
The guy who earns a parole surrendered some face in the 
course of his stay here prior to board. He walked away from 
some situation to save his body-at the cost of some part of his 
face (read mind, or pride, or principle). No black will leave this 
place if he has any violence in his past, until they see that 
thing in his eyes. And you can't fake it-resignation, defeat-it 
must be stamped clearly across the face. 
I've seen it, eyes in black heads, on the yard in San 
Quentin, Tracy, here. When I hit the yard in December '62 the 
brothers were lining up in the rain, outside the protection of 
the shed that covers half of the upper yard. The Mexicans and 
*Convict's record folder, log of all observations made by 
prison authorities. 
218


--- PAGE 239 ---
whites had occupied all the lines under the shed. They would 
save long stretches of space for friends who never showed. So I 
had a picture on my first day there of the old slave, wet and 
trembling while these other people relaxed with plenty of 
room under the shed. The brothers were mainly concerned 
with avoiding any trouble, since the pig invaribly will shoot at 
the black face in a black and white altercation. Then it seems 
that blacks are much more concerned with establishing records 
that will lead to parole than whites or browns. I can't 
understand this, since they have so much less to go home to. 
Earlier that same year, right here in Soledad, a white 
(nameless and faceless now) stabbed a brother with my 
surname because another brother called Butch beat him in one 
of those childish hand-to-hand disputes in the third-tier shower 
(the place for settling all disputes). The white inmate ran to his 
cell and asked for police protection. Two hundred blacks went 
after him with the intention of taking him from the police. 
Before it was over there were only four of us against all the 
police in the county. A--. A. was there with me then, and 
two others, all the others-well, it started with a trembling of 
the lips, then a flaring of the nose, then that thing in the 
eyes .... 
They sent us to San Quentin lockup for a month. Then J.C. 
and I wer<l sent to Tracy, being the youngest of the four. In 
Tracy I did six months in adjustment center and was released 
to J Unit, the unitior unmanageables. Actually they put me in 
this unit so that I would be close to some old enemies. A 
Mexican got killed in Soledad the year before. J .C. was picked 
up for it but later released. No one was ever convicted. In an 
honest case of mistaken identity, the Mexicans were supposed 
to be out to get me for it. 
I don't know where you got the tale of me attempting to 
integrate a movie area. It is a bit off, but it could have come 
from the events of that week I spent in J Unit. The blacks had 
to sit in the rear of the TV room on hard, armless, backless 
benches while the Mexicans and whites sat up front on 
219


--- PAGE 240 ---
cushioned chairs and benches with backrests!!! Now check 
this, if one of those punks was in his cell or the shower, no one 
could sit in his seat and certainly no black dared sit there, I'm 
serious! !! All of this taking place in front of a uniform and a 
large, bold-print sign in English and Spanish that read "No 
Saving of Seats Allowed"! !! 
The first three nights I went in to catch the news I stood in 
the front, looking down the room at the old slave for some 
sign of support. Old slave ignored me, eyes darting. He wants 
to go horne, so do I, but I don't want to leave anything 
behind. Since my father didn't bequeath me much to begin 
with, any further losses leave me with nothing. I sat right in the 
front the fourth night but I couldn't watch TV. I had to watch 
my back. The cop walked up and looked at me like I had lost 
my mind. The cons tolerated me (2 15 pounds and apparently 
a lunatic) for three days. On the fourth (or seventh day out) 
night of sitting, they attacked me. They locked me up 
afterward, and sent me back to San Quentin to stay. The li S" 
was so clearly racist that I think they removed it in San 
Quentin. If you ever get the chance, see what reason they have 
in my jacket for the 19 62 transfer to San QUentin from Tracy. 
So most of these inmates are sick, my friend, but who 
created the monster in them? They all stand right now as 
products of their environment. But in my humble opinion the 
inmates of these places are not quite as-well they aren't 
nearly as psychologically disturbed as the guy who calls 
himself a guard. They really could change roles without 
noticeable alteration in the qualitative factor of administra­
tions. Any alteration would be positive. 
United States prisons are the last refuge of the brainless. If 
the inmates are failures, at least they were reaching-most in 
very small ways, but some reach is certainly prefereable to no 
reach at all. The cop, as I've stated before, is a guy who can do 
*Bad conduct report form. 
220


--- PAGE 241 ---
no other type of work, who can feed himself only by feeding 
upon this garbage dump. 
What am I doing here, Fay? I fell into this garbage can 
in a narcotic stupor and they just closed the lid for good. 
Someone is going to be hurt, my friend, when it's over 
someone's going to be hurting, bad, and it won't be us. It 
won't be you. Be assured that your safety will always enter 
any defense move I make, your safety first, always. I was 
supposed to be gone from this place years ago, free, wrecking 
worlds, destroying the unrighteous, dying on my feet. 
Pigs come here to feed on the garbage heap for two reasons 
really, the first half because they can do no other work, 
frustrated men soon to develop sadistic mannerisms; and the 
second half, sadists out front, suffering under the restraints 
placed upon them by an equally sadistic-vindictive society. 
The sadist knows that to practice his religion upon the society 
at large will bring down upon his head their sadistic reaction. 
Killing is great fun, but not at the risk of getting killed (note 
how they squeak and pull out their hair over losing even one). 
But the restraints come off when they walk through the 
compound gates. Their whole posture goes through a total 
metamorphosis. Inflict pain, satisfy the power complex, and 
get a check. 
How can the sick administer to the sick. 
In the well-ordered society prisons would not exist as such. 
If a man is ill he should be placed in a hospital, staffed by the 
very best of technicians. Men would never be separated from 
women. These places would be surfeited with equipment and 
meaningful programs, even if it meant diverting funds from 
another, or even from all other sectors of the economy. It's 
socially self-destructive to create a monster and loose him 
upon the world. 
But we can't cure with diagnoses, Comrade Stender-and I 
dig speaking with you like this. You can only listen, no back 
talk. 
Breakfast is here. Power to the People. 
22 1


--- PAGE 242 ---
Tuesday, March 24, 19 70 (evening) 
This monster-the monster they've engendered in 
me will return to torment its maker, from the grave, the pit, 
the profoundest pit. Hurl me into the next existence, the 
descent into hell won't turn me. I'll crawl back to dog his trail 
forever. They won't defeat my revenge, never, never. I'm part 
of a righteous people who anger slowly, but rage undammed. 
We'll gather at his door in such a number that the rumbling of 
our feet will make the earth tremble. I'm going to charge them 
for this, twenty-eight years without gratification. I'm going to 
charge them reparations in blood. I'm going to charge them 
like a maddened, wounded, rogue male elephant, ears flared, 
trunk raised, trumpet blaring. I'll do my dance in his chest, 
and the only thing he'll ever see in my eyes is a dagger to 
pierce his cruel heart. This is one nigger who is positively 
displeased. I'll never forgive, I'll never forget, and if I'm guilty 
of anything at all it's of not leaning on them hard enough. War 
without terms. 
Wednesday, March 25, 19 70 (early morning) 
I just reread the above paragraph, foul mood last 
night. It's not light out yet, so I guess I can say tonight, but 
I've been asleep. There's a Hawaiian on the tier who wants a 
transfer to Vacaville. He is playing crazy. His dementia takes 
the form of "nigger baiting," especially when the bull is on the 
tier (who by the way enjoys the shit out of it)-none of the 
brothers say a word, however. This little boy blows the whole 
line. The other little boys laugh, the pig grins. I don't get too 
upset at the little boy. He is a minnow-the upsetting point is 
that this Hawaiian has very large purple lips, skin tones darker 
than mine, and a very large wide nose. His hair is very nearly 
like my sisters'. This clown is talking about killing all the 
niggers. The pitiful jackass would die right beside me. I think 
what may be most bitter in a thing like that is the knowledge 
222


--- PAGE 243 ---
that my enemies have turned the entire world against me. The 
shibboleths that defame me are now universal. Anyone who 
learns them is in (or out-depending). 
How do you deal with the perverted, disease-bearing, 
voracious bastard who wants to cast his image over all things, 
eat from every plate at every table, police the world with racist 
shibboleths and a dying doctrine of marketplaces peopled by 
monopolies, top-heavy bureaus, and scum-swilling pigs to gun 
down any who would object? 
The concept of nonviolent protest, whatever political 
forms it may take, presumes two things about the imperialist 
establishment that are so obviously historically unrealistic, so 
logically unsound, that the espousal of any purely nonviolent 
anti-establishment moan reduces one automatically to the 
absurd, and any strong espousal of the purely nonviolent 
anti-establishment policy reduces one automatically to a 
corpse. 
The first presumption is mercy. It presumes the possible 
existence of mercy on the part of a breed whose heart is as 
cold as the snows. It presumes existence of a restraint 
mechanism that in other breeds and other animals precludes 
the harming of one's kind unless placed under the most 
extreme compulsions of self-preservation. But history shows 
no justification for so wild a presupposition. I refer you to 
Leopold II's Congo, the Indian wars of the last century, the 
Union of South Africa, Sharpsville, the Philippines at the turn 
of the century. I refer you to Germany during the depression 
and war years. I refer you to Vietnam! Just a cursory reading 
of history and just a glance about me now would show-that I 
could expect more mercy from a pack of Bengal tigers. Any 
claims that nonviolent, purely nonviolent political agitation 
has served to force back the legions of capitalist expansion are 
false. The! theory of nonviolence is a false ideal. The Hindus 
failed because of this moral aspect in their characters 
precluding any large-scale organized violence. The forms of 
slavery merely changed for them. Of what value is quasi-politi-
223


--- PAGE 244 ---
cal control if the capitalists are allowed to hold on to the 
people's whole means of subsistence?! And in the case of India 
and foreign capitalists, have any of the people's needs been 
met? Do they still have race riots, do they still sleep in the 
streets? These people were betrayed by false leaders with false 
ideals. Compare India with China. They were both supposedly 
liberated at the same time, India may have had a year or more 
of what is loosely termed "political self-determination". 
China's problems in the late forties were ten times more 
severe, but today there is no one hungry in China. For the first 
time its population is united and organized under a govern­
ment as decentralized and representative as a huge modern 
industrial based society can be. China, land of the coolie, slave 
labor, open-door policies, floor mat of the West-they're vying 
for first place in every important economic sector today. 
Remember the 18 39 Opium War, the Boxer Rebellion. A trial 
of combat with China today would be Russian roulette with a 
fully loaded .45 automatic, self-destruction, suicide. 
All of the third world political movements that are forcing 
the retreat of colonialism have learned to deal with the 
expeditionary armies of colonialism. There is no case of 
successful liberation without violence. How could you neutral­
ize an army without violence? 
The people of the U.S. are held in the throes of a form of 
colonialism. Controi of their sUbsistence and nearly every 
aspect of the circumstances surrounding their existence has 
passed into the hands bf a clearly distinct and alienated 
oligarchy. If today's young revolutionary vanguard are not 
merely entertaining themselves with a new kind of "chicken," 
a pOlitical form of bumper tag, if they seriously intend to step 
out front and take the monster to task, they should 
understand from the outset that the monster is merciless. 
The second presumption contained in the concept of 
nonviolent political agitation is inherent in the statement of 
this policy, as it stands alone. The mere utterance of 
nonviolent policy statements implies that it is possible for one 
224


--- PAGE 245 ---
to take the opposite course and pursue violence. But in our 
case this has not been proved. In all cases, there is a 
contradiction and a dangerous presumption in the statement 
and pursuit of nonviolent political policy, especially when the 
opposition is not so committed. The danger derives from the 
very realistic fact that the statement and pursuit of nonviolent 
tactics will always be mistaken for weakness, as these tactics 
stand alone. The contradiction is then revealed, in that power 
is expected to surrender to weakness. 
Pure nonviolence as a political ideal, then, is absurd: 
Politics is violence. It may serve our purpose to claim 
nonviolence, but we must never delude ourselves into thinking 
that we can seize power from a position of weakness, with half 
measures, polite programs, righteous indignation, loud entreat­
ies. If this agitation that we like to term as nonviolent is to 
have any meaning at all we must force the fascist to taste the 
bitterness of our wrath. Nonviolence must constantly demon­
strate the effects of its implied opposite. The dialectic between 
Narodnik and Nihilist should never break down. One should 
not exist without the concomitant existence of the other.­
Breakfast is here.-Long live the guerrillas! 
Wednesday, March 25, 19 70 (late) 
I suspect that the pigs have stopped the corre­
spondence form that I sent to your friend. 
The four or five people who attacked the pigs last 
week-recall they had weapons (?), took the keys-they're out 
of the hole (isolation) already, over here with us. I don't, 
however, suspect foul play too strongly. The Mexican was 
beaten pretty badly. Just lit the forty-first cigarette. 
The punks throw stuff at us through the bars when they are 
let out for showers. I mean foul stuff too. We each get a half 
hour a day, six days of the week, to shower or exercise in the 
limited space in front of our cells. The walks are segregated. 
Blacks are never allowed to walk or shower or even to come 
225


--- PAGE 246 ---
out of the cells at all when the whites are out of their cells. 
The more perverse of "Hitler's Little Helpers" save their 
excretions to throw in our cells as they walk back and forth to 
their shower and exercise. The shit literally flies at us almost 
every day. The blacks don't even consider throwing excre­
ment. We retaliate by shooting at them with little, crudely­
made zip guns and powerful slingshots fashioned from the 
elastic on our shorts. If the pigs were interested in stopping 
this silly shit, they would integrate the shower walks. If they 
fear they would lose control that way, they could segregate 
the whole building. No whites or Mexicans on this floor at all. 
To seize power for the people and relegate fascism to the 
history books the vanguard must change the basic patterns of 
thought. We are going to have to study the principles of 
people's movements. We are going to have to study them 
where they took place and interpret them to fit our situation 
here. We have yet to discover the meaning of people's war, 
people's army. The righteous people of the world who are 
struggling with the monster on the only terms that he can be 
fought must have many reservations concerning us, especially 
those of us who are black. What are the fierce and wonderful 
people of Vietnam thinking of us? Where is the real left wing? 
What has been done to us, that makes us fail to resist? 
The successes of China, Cuba, Vietnam, and parts of Africa 
cannot be attributed to any innate, singular quality in the 
characters of their people. Men are social creatures, herd 
animals. We follow leaders. The success or failure of mass 
movements depends on their leadership and the method of 
their leaders. We must take our lessons from these people, 
reorganize our values, decide whether it is our personal desire 
to live long or to chance living right. 
People's war, class struggle, war of liberation means armed 
struggle. Men like Hoover, Reagan, Hunt, Agnew, Johnson, 
Helms, Westmoreland, Abrams, Campbell, Carswell are dan­
gerous men who believe that they are the rightful Fuhrers of 
all the world's people. They must be dealt with now. Can men 
226


--- PAGE 247 ---
like these be converted? Will they allow anyone to maneuver 
them out of their positions of power while they still live? 
Would Nixon accept a people's government, a people's 
economy? How can we deal with these men who have so much 
at stake, so much to defend. Honesty forces us to the 
conclusion that the only men who will successfully deal with 
the Hoovers, Helmses and Abramses will be armed men. It's 
obvious to me that nothing of any consequence can be 
achieved while these men rule. Class struggle means the 
suppression of the opposing class, and suppression of the 
Amerikan General Staff, and The Corporate Elite. The 
moment this three-headed monster detects the danger contain­
ed in our ideas and ideals, he will react violently against us. 
Just the whisper of revolt excites in him a swift and terrible 
reflex, so swift we won't even know how we died. 
Thursday, March 26, 1970 
So, my friend, the terms have been established. That is the 
only way I will accept any more time in this life. I don't want 
to live any other way. I want my food and drink from the 
people's stash. I want to hide, run, and look over my shoulder. 
The only woman that I could ever accept is one who would be 
willing to live out of a flight bag, sleep in a coal car, eat 
milkweed, bloodroot, wild greens, dandelions, a rabbit, a 
handful of rice. She would have to be willing to run and work 
all night and watch all day. She would bathe when we could, 
change clothes when we could. She would own nothing, not 
solely because she loved me, but because she loved the 
principle, the revolution, the people. 
I don't think this rotten society has produced any such 
wonderful creatures. There is a Cuban brother here on the tier. 
His folks left, but he supports the revolution. He can run some 
beautiful things about the people of Cuba when he'll talk and 
when I can understand him. The thing that fixes me best is 
how the revolution is gauged to operate on the family plan-
227


--- PAGE 248 ---
children with a role, women in the same roles as men, 
education standardized. 
I remembered that those people had been some of the most 
corrupt in the Western world. Remember when the U.S. was in 
control, it was just like one of the Mexican border towns. The 
revolution brought aU of those wonderful new people into 
existence. It will be the same here-right on-to the most 
beautiful conclusion. 
Power to the People. 
If they try to read this it will explain my somewhat 
damaged condition in court tomorrow. 
You are my favorite person, Fay Stender, take care of 
yourself. 
George 
228


--- PAGE 249 ---
MA RCH , 19 70 
30 
Dear Fay, 
I'm well-no new problems. You can, however, 
when time allows, write Dr. Boone of the medical staff here 
and tell him to provide me with medication for my sinus 
condition so that we will not be forced into the imposition of 
going through the courts for it. Also let it be known that you 
are aware of the APC and brown-sugar-pill put-off. Do you 
understand? When I ask for medication, the MTA gives me 
an APC or two and some candy pills (brown). This doesn't 
help me. They have better stuff that is reserved for the other 
cons. They're about to stretch me to my limit with this racist 
stuff. I'm tired of hearing it, seeing it, and I'm tired of smelling 
it. I know they read these letters. That's good, because I want 
them to know that the first time they let one of these punks 
. throw something on me we're going to all blow like a 
thermonuclear bomb. I'm just not going to understand!! 
The blacks on this floor never engage in any form of 
name-calling, never defy the lockups, never ask the officials for 
anything other than the state issue. Very seldom do any of the 
brothers ask the officials to pass things down the tier. We do 
the passing. When we come out for showers, we never even 
talk to the other inmates or officials, but still we've been 
attacked in every way conceivable (considering that there are 
always a set of bars between us and them). It doesn't have to 
229


--- PAGE 250 ---
be this way. Since the officials are segregating anyway, they 
could do it in such a way that there would never be any 
contact between blacks and whites. They could give us this 
side of the first floor and them the other side or the reverse. 
They could even give people a choice as to whether they want 
to be segregated. I'm putting you on notice, Moody, * the first 
time I get shit thrown at me the whole country will know how 
it displeases me. 
How ridiculous can animals get. The whites get angry with 
me for just existing. But they seem to get on well with the 
people who are holding them here, the people responsible for 
the living conditions that cause their frustration. 
For the People's Lieben-
George 
*One of the captains at Soledad. 
230


--- PAGE 251 ---
MA RCH, 19 70 
31 
Dear Fay, 
I've finished the legal book you sent me. * Do you 
want it back the next time I see you, or am I free to let a 
couple of other brothers read it? 
It pertains to all of us, I believe. I read your section several 
times. Did you put it together by yourself? It's very heavy! 
I'm thinking that if the Court of Appeals passes favorably on 
it, and other attorneys incorporate it into their defenses, we 
could come up with a detaining or delaying tool at least. It's 
good! I'd stake my life on you any time. 
We have a situation then where dull, heavy-handed, 
desperate types like myself run afoul of the law from time to 
time. Then we have the gracious, sensitive, brainy types, of 
whom you are the quintessence, to hold the legal pigs to the 
strictest interpretation of the Constitution possible. The 
cynic in me, although it allows for the short-term benefits, sees 
another situation building down the road , a situation where 
they will simply hold court at the scene, there in the street. 
Milestiba for the People-
George 
* Ann Fagan Ginger, Minimizing Racism in Jury Trials: The 
Voir Dire Conducted by Charles R. Garry in People of 
California V. Huey P. Newton (The National Lawyers Guild, 
19 69). 
23 1


--- PAGE 252 ---
AP RIL, 19 70 
Dear Fay, 
I just got your letter with the writ article in it. You 
are positively my favorite person. We must take time to get 
acquainted. You have mentioned yourself and your other life 
only once. Please don't misunderstand, I simply wish to know 
you better. I haven't had much contact with anyone outside 
my family and the people who have come through tbese 
prisons in the last decade or so. And I dig people, righteous 
people. I always have found it hard to really hate anyone. I 
loved people. I understood from the beginning that tbe end 
purpose of life was simply to live, experience, contribute, 
connect, to gratify the body and mind. I began to hate when I 
discovered that the mystification was inteJjected intentionally. 
I can't say where it started. I can'ttrace it, but I believe it goes 
back to my earliest years, I mean the feeling that what 
everyone else around me accepted as right wasn't necessarily 
so. The family, the nuns, the pigs, I resisted them all. I know 
my mother likes to tell everyone that I was a good boy, but 
that isn't true, I've been a brigand all my life. It was these 
years in prison with the time and opportunity available to me 
for research and thought that motivated a desire to remold my 
character. I think that if I had been on the street from age 
eighteen to twenty-four, I would probably be a dope fiend or a 
small-stakes gambler, or a hump in the ground. 
Power to the People, 
George 
232


--- PAGE 253 ---
APRI L, 19 70 
4 
Dear Fay, 
For very obvious reasons it pains me to dwell on 
the past. As an individual, and as the male of our order I have 
only the proud flesh * of very recent years to hold up as proof 
that I did not die in the sickbed in which I lay for so long. I've 
taken my lesson from the past and attempted to close it off. 
I've drunk deeply from the cisterns of gall, swam against 
the current in Blood Alley, Urban Fascist Amerika, experi­
enced the nose rub in shit, armed myself with a monumental 
hatred and tried to forget and pretend. A standard black male 
defense mechanism. 
It hasn't worked. It may just be me, but I suspect that it's 
part of the pitiful black condition that the really bad moments 
record themselves so clearly and permanently in the mind, 
while the few brief flashes of gratification are lost immediate­
ly, nightmare overhanging darkly. 
My recall is nearly perfect, time has faded nothing. I recall 
the very first kidnap. I've lived through the passage, died on 
the passage, lain in the unmarked, shallow graves of the 
millions who fertilized the Amerikan soil with their corpses; 
cotton and com growing out of my chest, "unto the third and 
*Proud flesh is a medical term for the abnormal growth of 
flesh that sometimes forms around a healing wound. 
233


--- PAGE 254 ---
fourth generation," the tenth, the hundredth. My mind ranges 
back and forth through the uncounted generations. and I feel 
all that they ever felt, but double. I can't help it; there are too 
many things to remind me of the 2316 hours that I'm in this 
cell. Not ten minutes pass without a reminder. In be�ceeh��m 
left to specualte on what form the reminder will take. 
Down here we hear relaxed, matter-of-fact co ersations 
centering around how best to kill all the nation's niggers and in 
what order. It's not the fact that they consider killing me that 
upsets. They've been "killing all the niggers" for nearly half a 
millennium now, but I am still alive. I might be the most 
resilient dead man in the universe. The upsetting thing is that 
they never take into consideration the fact that I am going to 
resist. No they honestly believe that shit. They do! That's 
what they think of us. That they have beaten and conditioned 
all the defense and attack reflexes from us. That the region of 
the mind that stores the principles upon which men base their 
rationale to resist is missing in us. Don't they talk of 
concentration camps? Don't they state that it couldn't 
happen in the U.S. because the fascists here are nice fascists. 
Not because it's impossible to incarcerate 30 million resisters, 
but because they are humane imperialists, enlightened fascists. 
Well, they've made a terrible mistake. I recall the day I was 
born, the first day of my generation. It was during the second 
(and most destructive) capitalist world war for colonial 
privilege, early on a rainy Wednesday morning, late September, 
Chicago. It happened to me in a little fold-into-the-wall bed, in 
a little half-flat on Racine and Lake. Dr. Rogers attended. The 
el train that rattled by within fifteen feet of our front 
windows (the only two windows) screamed in at me like the 
banshee, portentous of pain, death, threatening and imminent. 
The first motion that my eyes focused on was this pink hand 
swinging in a wide arc in the general direction of my black ass. 
I stopped that hand, the left downward block, and countered 
the right needle finger to the eye. I was born with my defense 
reflexes well developed. 
It's going to be "Kill me if you can," fool, not "Kill me if 
234


--- PAGE 255 ---
I " you pe ase. 
But let them make their plans on the supposition, "like 
slave, like son." I'm not going for it, though, and they've made 
my defense easier. A cop gives the keys to a group of 
right-wing cons. They're going to open our cells-one at a 
time-all over the building. They don't want to escape, or deal 
with the men who hold them here. They can solve their 
problems only if they kill all of us-think about that-these 
guys live a few cells from me. None of them have ever lived, 
most are state-raised in institutions like this one. They have 
nothing coming, nothing at all, they have nothing at stake in 
this order of things. In defending right-wing ideals and the 
status quo they're saying in effect that ninety-nine years and a 
dark day in prison is their idea of fun. Most are in and out, and 
mostly in, aU of their life. The periods that they pass on the 
outside are considered runs. Simply stated, they consider the 
periods spent in the joint more natural, more in keeping with 
their tastes. Well, I understand their condition, and I know 
how they got that way. I could honestly sympathize with 
them if they were not so wrong, so stupid as to let the pigs use 
them. Sounds like Germany of the thirties and forties to me. 
lt's the same on the outside there. I'll venture to say that 
there's not one piece of stock, not one bond owned by anyone 
in any of the families of the pigs who murdered Fred 
Hampton. They organize marches around the country, march­
es and demonstrations in support of total immediate destruct­
ion of Vietnam, and afterward no one is able to pick up the 
tab. The fascists, it seems, have a standard M.O. for dealing 
with the lower classes. Actually oppressive power throughout 
history has used it. They turn a man against himself-think of 
all the innocent things that make us feel good, but that make 
some of us also feel guilty. Think of how the people of the 
lower classes weigh themselves against the men who rule. 
Consider the con going through the courts on a capital offense 
who supports capital punishment. I swear I heard something 
just like that today. Look how long Hershey ran Selective 
Service. Blacks embrace capitalism, the most unnatural and 
235


--- PAGE 256 ---
outstanding example of man against himself that history can 
offer. After the Civil War, the form of slavery changed from 
chattel to economic slavery, and we were thrown onto the 
labor market to compete at a disadvantage with poor whites. 
Ever since that time, our principal enemy must be isolated and 
identified as capitalism. The slaver was and is the factory 
owner, the businessman of capitalist Amerika, the man 
responsible for employment, wages, prices, control of the 
nation's institutions and culture. It was the capitalist infra­
structure of Europe and the U.S. which was responsible for the 
rape of Africa and Asia. Capitalism murdered those 30 million 
in the Congo. Believe me, the European and Anglo-Amerikan 
capitalist would never have wasted the ball and powder were it 
not for the profit principle. The men, all the men who went 
into Africa and Asia, the fleas who climbed on that elephant's 
back with rape on their minds, richly deserve all that they are 
called. Every one of them deserved to die for their crimes. So 
do the ones who are still in Vietnam, Angola, Union of South 
Africa (U.S.A.! I). But we must not allow the emotional aspects 
of these issues, the scum at the surface, to obstruct our view of 
the big picture, the whole rotten hunk. It was capitalism that 
armed the ships, free enterprise that launched them, private 
ownership of property that fed the troops. Imperialism took 
up where the slave trade left off. It wasn't until after the slave 
trade ended that Amerika, England, France, and the Nether­
lands invaded and settled in on Afro-Asian soil in earnest. As 
the European industrial revolution took hold, new economic 
attractions replaced the older ones; chattel slavery was 
replaced by neoslavery. Capitalism, "free" enterprise, private 
ownership of public property armed and launched the ships 
and fed the troops; it should be clear that it was the profit 
motive that kept them there. 
It was the profit motive that built the tenement house and 
the city project. Profit and loss prevents repairs and maintain­
ance. Free enterprise brought the monopolistic chain store 
into the neighborhood. The concept of private ownership of 
236


--- PAGE 257 ---
facilities that the people need to exist brought the legions of 
hip-shooting, brainless pigs down upon our heads, our homes, 
our streets. They're there to protect the entrepreneur!! His 
chain store, and his property that you are renting, his bank. 
If the entrepreneur decides that he no longer wants to sell 
you food, let's say, because the Yankee dollar that we value so 
dearly has suddenly lost its last thirty cents of purchasing 
power, private ownership means that the only way many of 
the people will eat is to break the law. Fat Rat Daley has 
ordered all looters shot. 
Black capitalism, black against itself. The silliest contradict­
ion in a long train of spineless, mindless contradictions. 
Another painless, ultimate remedy: be a better fascist than the 
fascist. Bill Cosby, acting out the establishment agent-what 
message was this soul brother conveying to our children? I Spy 
was certainly programmed to a child's mentality. This running 
dog in the company of a fascist with a cause, a flunky's 
flunky, was transmitting the credo of the slave to our youth, 
the mod version of the old house nigger. We can never learn to 
trust as long as we have them. They are as much a part of the 
repression, more even than the real live, rat-informer-pig, 
Aren't they telling our kids that it is romantic to be a running 
dog? The kids are so hungry to see the black male do some 
shooting and throw some hands that they can't help them­
selves from identifying with the quislings. So first they tum us 
against ourselves, precluding all possibility of trust, then 
fascism takes any latent divisible forces and develops them 
into divisions in fact: racism, nationalism, religions. 
You have Spic, Dago, Jew, Jap, Chink, Gook, Pineapple, 
and the omnibus nigger to represent the nations of Africa. The 
point being that it is easier to persuade that little man who 
joined the army to see the world and who has never murdered 
before to murder a Gook. Well, it's not quite like murdering a 
man. Polack, Frog, Kraut, etc. 
The wheels just fell off altogether in the thirties. People in 
certain circles like to forget it, and any reference to the period 
237


--- PAGE 258 ---
draws from these circles such defensive epithets as "old­
fashioned." "simple old-style socialism," and "out of date." 
But fashion doesn't concern me, I'm after the facts. The facts 
are that no one, absolutely no one in the Western world, and 
very few anywhere else (this includes even those who may 
have been born yesterday), is unaffected by those years when 
capitalism's roulette wheel locked in depression. It affected 
every nation-state on earth. Of course Russia had no stock 
market and consequently no business cycle, but it was affected 
by the war that grew out of the efforts to restart the machines 
and by the effect it had on other nations with which Russia 
has had to deal. Relativism enters. Since international capital­
ism was at the time in its outward peak of expansion, there 
were no African, Asian, or Latin lands organized along 
nation-state lines that were not adversely affected. Every 
society in the world that lived by a money economy was part 
of the depression. Although Russia had abandoned the forms 
and vacillations of capitalism, it too was damaged due to the 
principles of relativism. 
If there is any question whether those years have any effect 
on, or relevance to now, just consider the effect on today's 
mentality. Had the world's people been struck with hereditary 
cretinism all at once, instead of Adam Smith's "invisible 
hand," the analogy couldn't be more perfect. I mean cretinism 
in its literal, medical sense: a congenital deficiency in the 
secretions of the thyroid gland resulting in deformity and 
idiocy. Causation links that depression with World War II. The 
rise to power of Europe's Nazis can be attributed to the 
depression. The WASP fasCists of Amerika secretly desired a 
war with Japan to stimulate demand and control unemploy­
ment. The syllogism is perfect. 
So question and analyze the state of being of Europe's Jews 
who survive. Do the same with the people of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. But we don't have to isolate groups. Causation and 
relativism link everyone inescapably with the past. None of the 
righteous people would even be alive had their parents died of 
238


--- PAGE 259 ---
the underconsumption of that period or the desperate fascist 
chicanery aimed at diverting the lower classes from the 
economic reality of class struggle. The Nazis actually succeed­
ed in foisting upon the lower-class Germans and some of the 
other European national groups the notion that their econom­
ic plight was due not to bad economic principles but caused by 
the existence of Jews within the system and the shortage of 
markets (colonies). The obvious intent being to put lower­
class, depressed German against lower-class Jew, instead of 
exploited lower-class German against privileged upper-class 
German. 
The Amerikan fascist used a thousand similar devises, 
delaying maneuvers, to prevent the people from questioning 
the validity of the principles upon which capitalism is 
founded, to turn the people against themselves, people against 
people, people against other groups of people. Always they 
will promote competition (while they cooperate), division, 
mistrust, a sense of isolation. The antipodes of love. The M.O. 
of the fascist arrangement is always to protect the capitalist 
class by destroying the consciousness, the trust, the unity of 
the lower classes. My father is in his forties today; thirty-five 
years ago he was living through his most formative years. He 
was a child of the Great Depression. I want you to notice for 
later reference that I emphasize and differentiate Great 
Depression. There were many more international, national, 
and regional depressions during the period in history relevant 
to this comment. 
There are millions of blacks of my father's generation now 
living. They are all products of a totally depressed environ­
ment. All of the males have lived all of their lives in a terrible 
quandary; none were able to grasp that a morbid economic 
deprivation, an outrageous and enormous abrasion, formed the 
basis of their character. 
My father developed his character, convention, convictions, 
his traits, his life style, out of a situation that began with his 
mother running out. She left him and his oldest brother on the 
239


--- PAGE 260 ---
corner of one of the canyons in East St. Louis. They raised 
themselves, in the streets, then on a farm somewhere in 
Louisiana, then in CCC camps. This brother, my father, had no 
formal education at all. He taught himself the essentials later 
on. Alone, in the most hostile jungle on earth, ruled over by 
the king of beasts in the fIrst throes of a bloody and 
protracted death. Alone, in the most savage moment of 
history, without arms, and burdened by a black face that he's 
been hiding ever since. 
I love this brother, my father, and when I use the word 
"love" I am not making an attempt at rhetoric. I am 
attempting to express a refulgent, unrestrained emanation 
from the deepest, most durable region of my soul, an 
unshakable thing that I have never questioned. But no one can 
come through his ordeal without suffering the penalty of 
psychosis. It was the price of survival. I would venture that 
there are no healthy brothers of his generation, none at all. 
The brother has reached the prime of his life without ever 
showing in my presence or anywhere, to my knowledge, an 
overt manifestation of real sensitivity, affection, or sentiment. 
He has lived his entire life in a state of shock. Nothing can 
touch him now, his calm is complete, his immunity to pain is 
total. When I can fIx his eyes, which is not often since when 
they aren't closed they are shaded, I see staring back at me the 
expressionless mask of the zombie. 
But he must have loved us, of this I am certain. Part of the 
credo of the neoslave, the latter-day slave, who is free to move 
from place to place if he can come by the means, is to shuffle 
away from any situation that becomes too difficult. He stayed 
with us, worked sixteen hours a day, after which he would eat, 
bathe and sleep-period. He never owned more than two pairs 
of shoes in his life and in the time I was living with him never 
more than one suit, never took a drink, never went to a 
nightclub, expressed no feelings about such things, and never 
once reminded any one of us, or so it seemed, never expected 
any notice of the fact that he was giving to us all of the life 
240


--- PAGE 261 ---
force and activity that the monster-machine had left to him. 
The part that the machine seized, that death of the spirit 
visited upon him by a world that he never influenced, was 
mourned by us, and most certainly by me, but no one ever 
made a real effort to give him solace. How do you console a 
man who is unapproachable? 
He came to visit me when I was in San Quentin. He was in 
his forties then too, an age in men when they have grown full. 
I had decided to reach for my father, to force him with my 
revolutionary dialectic to question some of the mental 
barricades he'd thrown up to protect his body from what to 
him was an undefinable and omnipresent enemy. An enemy 
that would starve his body, expose it to the elements, chain his 
body, jail it, club it, rip it, hang it, electrify it, and poison-gas 
it. I would have him understand that although he had saved his 
body he had done so at a terrible cost to his mind. I felt that if 
I could superimpose the explosive doctrine of self-determina­
tion through people's government and revolutionary culture 
upon what remained of his mind, draw him out into the real 
world, isolate and identify his real enemies, if I could hurl him 
through Fanon's revolutionary catharsis, I would be serving 
him, the people, the historical obligation. 
San Quentin was in th� riot season. It was early January 
1967. The pigs had for the last three months been on a 
search-and-destroy foray into our cells. All times of the day or 
night our cells were being invaded by the goon squad: you 
wake up, take your licks, get skin-searched, and wait on the 
tier naked while they mangled your few personal effects. This 
treatment, fear therapy, was not accorded to all however. 
Some Chicanos behind dope, some whites behind extortionate 
activities were exempted. Mostly, it came down on us. 
Rehabilitational terror. Each new pig must go through a period 
of in-service training where he learns the Gestapo arts, the full 
range of anti-body tactics that he will be expected to use on 
the job. Part of this in-service training is a crash course in 
close-order combat where the pigs are taught how to use club 
241


--- PAGE 262 ---
and sap, and how to form and use the simpler karate hands, 
where to hit a man with these hands for the best (or worst) 
effect. 
The new pigs usually have to serve a period on the goon 
squad before they fall into their regular role on the animal 
farm. They are always anxious to try their new skills-"to see 
if it really works" -we were always forced to do something to 
slow them down, to demonstrate that violence was a two­
edged sword. This must be done at least once every year, or we 
would all be as punchy and fractured as a Thai Boxer before 
our time was up. The brothers wanted to protest. The usual 
protest was a strike, a work stoppage, closing the sweatshops 
where industrial products are worked up for two cents an 
hour. (Some people get four cents after they've been on the 
job for six months.) The outside interests who made the 
profits didn't dig strikes. That meant the captain didn't like 
them either since it meant pressure on him from these 
free-enterprising political connections. 
January in San Quentin is the worst way to be. It's cold 
when you don't have proper clothing, it's wet, dreary. The 
drab green, barred, buttressed walls that close in the upper 
yard are sixty to seventy feet high. They make you feel that 
your condition may be pennanent. 
On the occasion I wish to relate, my father had driven all 
night from Los Angeles alone; he had not slept more than a 
couple of hours in the last forty-eight. 
We shook hands and the dialectic began. He listened while I 
scorned the diabolical dog-capitalism. Didn't it raise pigs and 
murder Vietnamese? Didn't it glut some and starve most of us? 
Didn't it build housing projects that resemble prisons and 
luxury hotels and apartments that resemble the Hanging 
Gardens on the same street? Didn't it build a hospital and then 
a .bomb? Didn't it erect a school and then open a whorehouse? 
Build an airplane to sell a tranquilizer tablet? For every church 
didn't it construct a prison? For each new medical discovery 
didn't it produce as a by-product ten new biological warfare 
242


--- PAGE 263 ---
agents? Didn't it aggrandize men like Hunt and Hughes and 
dwarf him? 
He said, "Yes, but what can we do? There's too many of 
the bastards." His eyes shaded over and his mind went into a 
total regression, a relapse back through time, space, pain, 
neglect, a thousand dreams deferred, broken promises, forgot­
ten ambitions, back through the hundreds of renewed hopes 
shattered to a time when he was young, roaming the Louisiana 
countryside for something to eat. He talked for ten minutes of 
things that were not in the present, people that I didn't know. 
"We'll have to take something back to Aunt Bell." He talked 
of places that we had never seen together. He called me by his 
brother's name twice. I was so shocked I could only sit and 
blink. This was the guy who took nothing seriously, the 
level-headed, practical Negro, the work-a-day, never-complain, 
cool, smooth colored gentlman. They have driven him to the 
abyss of madness; just behind the white veneer waits the 
awesome, vindictive black madness. There are a lot of blacks 
living in his generation, the one of the Great Depression, when 
it was no longer possible to maintain the black self by serving. 
Even that had dried up. Blacks were beaten and killed for jobs 
like porter, bellboy, stoker, pearl diver, and bootblack. My 
clenched fist goes up for them; I forgive them, I understand, 
and if they will stop their collaboration with the fascist 
enemy, stop it now, and support our revolution with just a 
nod, we'll forget and forgive them for casting us naked into a 
grim and deleterious world. 
The black colonies of Amerika have been locked in 
depression since the close of the Civil War. We have lived under 
regional depression since the end of chattel slavery. The 
beginning of the new slavery was marked by massive unem­
ployment and underemployment. That remains with us still. 
The Civil War destroyed the landed aristocracy. The dictator­
ship of the agrarian class was displaced by the dictatorship of 
the manufacturing-capitalist class. The neoslaver destroyed the 
uneconomic plantation, and built upon its ruins a factory and 
243


--- PAGE 264 ---
a thousand subsidiaries to serve the factory setup. Since we 
had no skills, outside of the farming techniques that had 
proved uneconomic, the subsidiary service trades and menial 
occupations fell to us. It is still so today. We are a subsidiary 
subculture, a depressed area within the parent monstrosity. 
The other four stages of the capitalist business cycle are: 
recovery, expansion, inflation, and recession. Have we ever 
gone through a recovery or expansion stage? We are affected 
adversely by inflationary trends within the larger economy. 
Who suffers most when the prices of basic, necessary commod­
ities go up? When the parent economy dips into inflation and 
recession we dip into subdepression. When it goes into 
depression, we go into total desperation. The difference 
between what my father's generation went through during the 
Great Depression and what we are going through now is simply 
a matter of degree. We can sometimes find a service to perform 
across the tracks. They couldn't. We can go home to Mama for 
a meal when things get really tight. They couldn't. There's 
welfare and housework for Mama now. Then there was no 
such thing as welfare. 
Depression is an economic condition. It is a part of the 
capitalist business cycle, a necessary concomitant of capital­
ism. Its colonies-secondary markets-will always be depressed 
areas, because the steadily decreasing labor force, decreasing 
and growing more skilled under the advances of automation, 
casts the unskilled colonial subject into economic roles that 
preclude economic mobility. Learning the new skills even if we 
were allowed wouldn't help. It wouldn't help the masses even 
if they learned them. It wouldn't help because there is a fixed 
ceiling on the labor force. This ceiling gets lower with every 
advance in the arts of production. Learning the newer skills 
would merely put us into a competition with established 
labor that we could not win. One that we don't want. There 
are absolutely no vacuums for us to fill in the business world. 
We don't want to capitalize on people anyway. Capitalism is 
the enemy. It must be destroyed. There is no other recourse. 
244


--- PAGE 265 ---
The System is not workable in view of the modern industrial 
city-based society. Men are born disenfranchised. The contract 
between ruler and ruled perpetuates this disenfranchisement. 
Men in positions of trust owe an equitable distribution of 
wealth and privilege to the men who have trusted them. Each 
individual born in these Amerikan cities should be born with 
those things that are necessary to survival. Meaningful social 
roles, education, medical care, food, shelter, and understanding 
should be guaranteed at birth. They have been part of all 
civilized human societies-until this one. Why else do men 
allow other men to govern? To what purpose is a Department 
of Health, Education, and Welfare, or of Housing and Urban 
Development, etc? Why do we give these men power over us. 
Why do we give them taxes? For nothing? So they can say that 
the world owes our children nothing? This world owes each of 
us a living the very day we are born. If not we can make no 
claims to civilization and we can stop recognizing the power of 
any administrator. Evolution of the huge modern city-based 
society has made our dependence upon government complete. 
Individually, we cannot feed ourselves and our children. We 
cannot, by ourselves, train and educate them at home. We 
cannot organize our own work inside the city structure by 
ourselves. Consequently, we must allow men to specialize in 
coordinating these activities. We pay them, honor them, and 
surrender control of certain aspects of our lives to them so 
that "they will in return take each new, helpless entry into the 
social group and work on him until he is no longer helpless, 
until he can start to support himself and make his contribution 
to the continuity of the society. 
If a man is born into Amerikan society with nothing 
coming, if the capitalist creed that runs "The world doesn't 
owe you a living" is true, then the thing that my father's 
mother did is not outrageous at all. If it is true that 
government shouldn't organize then the fact that my father 
had no place to seek help until he could help himself has little 
consequence. But it would also mean that we are all in the grip 
245


--- PAGE 266 ---
of some monstrous contradiction. And that we have no more 
claim to civilization than a pack of baboons. 
What is it then that really destroyed my father's comfort, 
that doomed his entire generation to a life without content? 
What is it that has been workjng against my generation from 
the day we were born through every day to this one? 
Capitalism and capitalist man, wrecker of worlds, scourge 
of the people. It cannot adpress itself to our needs, it cannot 
and will not change itself to adapt to natural changes within 
the social structure. 
To the black male the losses were most tragic of all. It will 
do us no good to linger over the fatalities, they're numberless 
and beyond our reach. But we who have survived must 
eventually look at ourselves and wonder why. The competition 
at the bottom of the social spectrum is for symbols, honors, 
and objects; black against itself, black against lower-class 
whites and browns, virulent, cutthroat, back-stabbing competi­
tion, the Amerikan way of life. But the fascists cooperate. The 
four estates of power form a morbid lone quadrangle. This 
competition has destroyed trust. Among the black males a 
premium has been placed on distrust. Every other black male 
is viewed as the competition; the wise and practical black is 
the one who cares nothing for any living ass, the cynic who has 
gotten over any principles he may have picked up by mistake. 
We can't express love on the supposition that the recipient will 
automatically use it against us as a weapon. We're going to 
have to start all over again. This next time around we'll let it 
all hang out, we'll stop betraying ourselves, and we'll add some 
trust and love. 
I do not include those who support capitalism in any 
appreciable degree or who feel they have something to lose 
with its destruction. They are our. irreconcilable enemy. We 
can never again trust people like Cosby, Gloves Davis, * or the 
*The black Chicago policeman who was reported to have 
shot Fred Hampton. 
246


--- PAGE 267 ---
old Negro bus driver who testified in the Huey Newton trial. 
Any man who stands up to speak in defense of capitalism must 
be slapped down. 
Right now our disease must be identified as capitalist man 
and his monstrous machine, a machine with the senseless and 
calloused ability to inflict these wounds programmed into its 
every cycle. 
I was born with terminal cancer, a suppurating, malignant 
sore that attacked me in the region just behind the eyes and 
moves outward to destroy my peace. 
It has robbed me of these twenty-eight years. It has robbed 
us all for nearly half a millennium. The greatest bandit of all 
time, we'll stop him now. 
Recall the stories you've read about the other herd animals, 
the great Amerikan bison, the caribou or Amerikan reindeer. 
The great Ameikan bison or buffalo-he's a herd animal, or 
social animal if you prefer, just like us in that. We're social 
animals, we need others of our general kind about us to feel 
secure. Few men would enjoy total isolation. To be alone 
constantly is torture to normal . men. The buffalo, cattle, 
caribou, and some others are like folks in that they need 
company most of the time. They need to butt shoulders and 
butt butts. They like to rub noses. We shake hands, slap backs, 
and rub lips. Of all the world's people we blacks love the 
company of others most, we are the most socialistic. Social 
animals eat, sleep, and travel in company, they need this 
company to feel secure. This fact means that socialistic 
animals also need leaders. It follows logically that if the 
buffalo is going to eat, sleep, and travel in groups some· 
coordinating factor is needed or some will be sleeping when 
others are traveling. Without the leader-follower complex, in a 
crisis the company would roar off in a hundred different 
directions. But the buffalo did evolve the leader-follower 
complex as did the other social animals; if the leader of a herd 
of caribou loses his footing and slips to his death from some 
high place, it is very likely that the whole herd will die behind. 
247


--- PAGE 268 ---
The leader-follower complex. The hunter understood this. 
Predatory man learned of the natural occurrence of leadership 
in all of the social animals; that each group will by nature 
produce a leader, and to these natural leaders fall the 
responsibility for coordination of the group's activity, organ­
izing them for survival. The buffalo hunter knew that if he 
could isolate and identify the leader of the herd and kill him 
first, the rest of the herd would be helpless, at his mercy, to be 
killed off as he saw fit. 
We blacks have the same problem the buffalo had; we have 
the same weakness also, and predatory man understands this 
weakness well. 
Huey Newton, Ahmed Evans, Bobby Seale, and the hun­
dreds of others will be murdered according to the fascist 
scheme. 
A sort of schematic natural selection in reverse: Medgar 
Evers, Malcolm X, Bobby Hutton, Brother Booker, W. L. 
Noland, M. L. King, Featherstone, Mark Clark, and Fred 
Hampton-just a few who have already gone the way of the 
buffalo. 
The effect these moves from the right have had on us is a 
classic textbook exercise in fascist political economy. At the 
instant a black head rises out of our crisis existence, it's lopped 
off and hung from the highest courthouse or newspaper finn. 
Our predetermined response is a schizophrenic indifference, 
withdrawal, and an appreciation of things that do not exist. 
"Oh happy days. Oh happy days. Oh happy days." Self-hyp­
notically induced hallucinations. 
The potential black leadership looks at the pitiable condi­
tion of the black herd: the corruption, the preoccupation with 
irrelevance, the apparent ineptitude concerning matters of 
survival. He knows that were he to give the average brother an 
M-16, this brother wouldn't have anything but a club for a 
week. He weighs this thing that he sees in the herd against the 
possible risks he'll be taking at the hands of the fascist monster 
and he naturally decides to go for himself, feeling that he can't 
248


--- PAGE 269 ---
help us because we are beyond help, that he may as well get 
something out of existence. These are the "successful Ne­
groes," the opposite of the "failures." You find them on the 
ball courts and fields, the stage, pretending and playing 
children's games. And looking for all the world just as pitiable 
as the so-called failures. 
We were colonized by the white predatory fascist economy. 
It was from them that we evolved our freak subculture, and 
the attitudes that perpetuate our conditions. These attitudes 
cause us to give each other up to the Klan pigs. We even on 
occasion work gun in hand right with them. A black killed 
Fred Hampton; blacks working with the CIA killed Malcolm 
X; blacks are plentiful on the payroll of the many police forces 
that fascism must employ to protect itself from the people. 
These fascist subcultural attitudes have sent us to Europe, Asia 
(one-fourth of the fatalities in Vietnam are black fatalities), 
and even Africa (the Congo during the Simba attempt to 
establish people's government) to die for nothing. In the 
recent cases of Africa and Asia we have allowed the neoslaver 
to use us to help enslave people we love. We are so confused, 
so foolishly simple that we not only fail to distinguish what is 
generally right and what is wrong, but we also fail to 
appreciate what is good and not good for us in very personal 
matters concerning the black colony and its liberation. The 
ominous government economic agency whose only clear 
motive is to further enslave, number, and spy on us, the black 
agency subsidized by the government to infiltrate us and 
retard liberation, is accepted, and by some, even invited and 
welcomed, while the Black Panther is avoided and hard-pressed 
to find protection among the people. The Black Panther is our 
brother and son, the one who wasn't afraid. He wasn't so lazy 
as the rest, or so narrow and restricted in his vision. If we 
allow the fascist machine to destroy these brothers, our dream 
of eventual / self-determination and control over the factors 
surrounding our survival is going to die with them, and the 
generations to come will curse and condemn us for irresponsi-
249


--- PAGE 270 ---
ble cowardice. I have a young couragous brother whom I love 
more than I love myself, but I have given him up to the 
revolution. I accept the possibility of his eventual death as I 
accept the possibility of my own. Some moment of weakness, 
a slip, a mistake, since we are the men who can make none, 
will bring the blow that kills. I accept this as a necessary part 
of our life. I don't want to raise any more black slaves. We 
have a determined enemy who will accept us only on a 
master-slave basis. When I revolt, slavery dies with me. I refuse 
to pass it down again_ The terms of my existence are founded 
on that. 
Black Mama, you're going to have to stop making cowards: 
"Be a good boy"; "You're going to worry me to death, boy"; 
"Don't trust those niggers"; "Stop letting those bad niggers 
lead you around, boy"; "Make you a dollar, boy." Black 
Mama, your overriding concern with the survival of our sons is 
mistaken if it is survival at the cost of their manhood. 
The young Panther party member, our vanguard, must be 
embraced, protected, allowed to develop. We must learn from 
him and teach him; he'll be full grown soon, a son and brother 
of whom we can be proud. Ifh e sags we'll brace him up, when 
he takes a step we'll step with him, our dialectic, our 
communion in perfect harmony, and there'll never, never be 
another Fred Hampton affair. 
Power to the people. 
George 
250


--- PAGE 271 ---
APR IL, 19 70 
17 
Dear Fay, 
Slavery is an economic condition. Today's neo­
slavery must be defined in terms of economics. The chattel is a 
property, one man exercising the property rights of his 
established economic order, the other man as that property. 
The owner can move that property or hold it in one square 
yard of the earth's surface; he can let it breed other slaves, or 
make it breed other slaves; he can sell it, beat it, work it, maim 
it, fuck it, kill it. But if he wants to keep it and enjoy all of the 
benefits that property of this kind can render, he must feed it 
sometimes, he must clothe it against the elements, he must 
provide a modicum of shelter. Chattel slavery is an economic 
condition which manifests itself in the total loss or absence of 
self-determination. 
The new slavery, the modern variety of chattel slavery 
updated to disguise itself, places the victim in a factory or in 
the case of most blacks in support roles inside and around the 
factory system (service trades), working for a wage. However, 
if work cannot be found in or around the factory complex, 
today's neoslavery does not allow even for a modicum of food 
and shelter. You are free-to starve. The sense and meaning of 
slavery comes through as a result of our ties to the wage. You 
must have it, without it you would starve or expose yourself 
to the elements. One's entire day centers around the acquisi-
251


--- PAGE 272 ---
tion of the wage. The control of your eight or ten hours on the 
job is detennined by others. You are left with fourteen to 
sixteen hours. But since you don't live at the factory you have 
to subtract at least another hour for transportation. Then you 
are left with thirteen to fifteen hours to yourself. If you can 
afford three meals you are left with ten to twelve hours. Rest 
is also a factor in efficiency so we have to take eight hours 
away for sleeping, leaving two to four hours. But-one must 
bathe, comb, clean teeth, shave, dress-there is no point in 
protracting this. I think it should be generally accepted that if 
a man (or woman) works for a wage at a job that he doesn't 
enjoy, and I am convinced that no one could enjoy any type 
of assembly-line work, or plumbing or hod carrying, or any job 
in the service trades, then he qualifies for this definition of 
neoslave. The man who owns the factory or shop or business 
runs your life; you are dependent on this owner. He organizes 
your work, the work upon which your whole life source and 
style depends. He indirectly detennines your whole day, in 
organizing you for work. If you don't make any more in wages 
than you need to live, you are a neoslave. You qualify if you 
cannot afford to leave California for New York. If you cannot 
visit Zanzibar, Havana, Peking, or even Paris when you get the 
urge, you are a slave. If you're held in one spot on this earth 
because of your economic status, it is just the same as being 
held in one spot because you are the owner's property. Here in 
the black colony the pigs still beat and maim us. They murder 
us and call it justifiable homicide. A brother who had a 
smoking pipe in his belt was shot in the back of the head. 
Neoslavery is an economic condition, a small knot of men 
exercising the property rights of their established economic 
order, organizing and controlling the life style of the slave as if 
he were in fact property. Succinctly: an economic condition 
which manifests itself in the total loss or absence of 
self-detennination. Only after this is understood and accepted 
can we go on to the dialectic that will help us in a remedy. 
A diagnosis of our discomfort is necessary before the 
surgery; it's always necessary to justify the letting of blood. 
252


--- PAGE 273 ---
And we don't want the knife to damage any related parts that 
could be spared for later use. 
The pig is an instrument of neoslavery, to be hated and 
avoided; he is pushed to the front by the men who exercise the 
unnatural right over property. You've heard the patronizing 
shit about the thin blue line that protects property and the 
owners of property. The pigs are not protecting you, your 
home, and its contents. Recall they never found the TV set 
you lost in that burglary. They're protecting the unnatural 
right of a few men to own the means of ali of our subsistence. 
The pig is protecting the right of a few private individuals to 
own public property!! The pig is merely the gun, the tool, a 
mentally inanimate utensil. It is necessary to destroy the gun, 
but destroying the gun and sparing the hand that holds it will 
forever relegate us to a defensive action, hold our revolution in 
the doldrums, ultimately defeat us. The animal that holds the 
gun, that has loosed the pig of war on us, is a bitter-ender, an 
intractable, gluttonous vulture who must eat at our hearts to 
live. Midas-motivated, never satisfied, everything he touches 
will turn into shit! Slaying the shitty pig will have absolutely 
no healing effect at all, if we leave this vulture to touch 
someone else. Spare the hand that holds the gun and it will 
simply fashion another. The Viet soldier has attacked and 
destroyed the pigs and their guns, but this alone has not solved 
his problems. If the Cong could get to the factories and the 
people who own and organize them, the war would end in a 
few months. All wars would end. The pigs who have descended 
upon the Vietnamese colony are the same who have come 
down on us. They come in all colors, though they are mainly 
white. Culturally (or anticulturally), they have the same 
background and the same mentality. They have the same 
intent: to preserve the economically depressed areas of the 
world as secondary markets and sources of cheap raw materials 
for the Amerikan fascist. The black colonies inside the 
Amerikan fascist state are secondary markets and sources of 
cheap raw materials. In our case this cheap raw material is our 
bodies, giving all of the benefits that property of this kind can 
253


--- PAGE 274 ---
render. How much more in wages would they have to pay a 
white, unionized garbage collector? And black mama tricks for 
ten-and-two? 
Right behind the expeditionary forces (the pigs) come the 
missionaries, and the colonial effect is complete. The mission­
aries, with the benefits of christendom, school us on the value 
of symbolism, dead presidents, and the rediscount rate. The 
black colony lost its conscience to these missionaries. Their 
schools, their churches, their newspapers and other periodicals 
destroyed the black conscience and made it almost impossible 
for us to determine our own best interest. 
The cultural links to the established capitalist society have 
been a lot closer than we like to admit. In the area of culture 
(I am using this word in the narrow sense out of necessity), we 
are bonded to the fascist society by chains that have strangled 
our intellect, scrambled our wits, and sent us stumbling 
backward in a wild, disorganized retreat from reality. We don't 
want their culture. We don't want a piece of that pie. It's 
rotten, putrid, repulsive to all the senses. Why are we rushing 
to board a sinking ship? When we join hands with the 
established fascist scum in any way, it gives the people of the 
world, the righteous people of the Congo, Tanzania, Sudan, of 
Cuba, China, Vietnam, etc., the legitimate right to hate us too. 
The Swedish people and their government hate the Ameri­
kan fascist (as almost every civilized state must). They show 
their loathing every chance they get. The Amerikan govern­
ment dresses some black clown in a stovepipe hat and sends 
him over as an ambassador. This black cat isn't representing 
the black colony. He's representing the pigs. The Swedes 
throw bricks at him and call for the "nigger" to go home. 
Chances are that the old slave they sent to Sweden never 
spent a night in the ghetto but still he represents the black 
oppressed. So when the slave turns up in his tails and stovepipe 
lid, a distorted imitation of the genuine fool (tomfool?), the 
hatred felt so deeply for the Amerikan fascist state by the 
Swedes is transferred onto us! 
The government buys and trains these running dogs very 
254


--- PAGE 275 ---
carefully, and sends them scrambling, tails and all, outward to 
represent the establishment. Whole kennels are sent to the 
African nations on the ambassadorial level (and lower, of 
course) on the supposition that the people of these nations 
will be able to relate better to a black face. The leaders of 
these nations, if they can be counted among the righteous, are 
never impressed, but this sort of thing affects the African 
masses deeply. Several years ago, in one of the central African 
states, a gathering of the people marched against the local 
representatives of the Amerikan government, the USIA, over 
an issue that won't come to mind now (there have been so 
many)-but they were resentful enough to carry their protest 
demonstration to violent extremes. They threw bricks and fire 
and called for the slavers' blood. They tore down the Yankee' 
rag and danced on it, spit on it, and were about to burn it. 
They would have burned it and gone on to sack and burn the 
fascist propaganda center, but the running dog, the tomfool, 
stopped them, harangued them in the voice of the ventrilo­
quist, and ran Old Glory back to its familiar station-obstruct­
ing the sun. They should have hung that nigger from the 
flagpole by the fat part of his neck, for that black ventriloquist 
threw up one more barrier to the communion that we must 
establish with the other oppressed peoples of the world. 
They send us to school to learn how to be so disgusting. We 
send our children to places of learning operated by men who 
hate us and hate the truth. It is clear that no school would be 
better. Burn it; all the fascist literature, burn that too. Then 
equip yourself with the Little Red Book. There is no other 
way to regain our senses. We must destroy Johnson Publica­
tions and the little black tabloids that mimic the fascist press 
even to their denunciations of black extremists. Burn them or 
take them over as people's collectives, and give the colonies a 
dynamite case of self-determination, anticolonialism, and Mao 
think!!!!! 
I attended my last year of high school at Bayview High -
that's in San Quentin where I did seven years of the last ten 
that I have spent in jail. The schools in the joint are no different 
255


--- PAGE 276 ---
than those out there in the colony at large, with the exception 
that they are not coeducational. We use the same fascist 
textbooks that contain the same undercurrent of racism and 
overtones of nationalism. The missionaries themselves are the 
same. 
At the time, my eventual release on parole was conditional 
to my fmishing high school, and of course being a good boy, 
never showing any anger, or displeasure, or individuality. I was 
trying to fake it. I would never have been in the mission school 
otherwise. I was working in the daytime and attended school 
evenings. 
The biology wasn't too bad. The instructor seldom ventur­
ed an opinion outside the subjects related to scil)nce, but he 
was exceptional. I attribute this to the fact that he was 
somewhat younger than the other pundits. Each of them had a 
fIxed opinion on every material and metaphysical feature of 
the universe. Colonel Davis in history was outstanding for two 
very typical characteristics of his profession, temperament and 
foolishness. True to his persuasion, this jackass was so patriotic 
and Republican that he actually proposed we begin and end 
each class with a pledge of allegiance to the flag from a 
kneeling position. He was tall and square and gray-blond, a 
veteran of several declared and undeclared Yankee wars. If you 
passed the flag without a genuflection you had this fool to 
fIght. I sat through his shit for a month; Amerika the 
beautiful, the righteous, the only nation on earth where 
everyone can afford a flush toilet and a traffic ticket. All 
Russians were fat Tartars, the Japanese were copyists, Arabs 
couldn't fight and neither could the French. All Africans were 
primitives who didn't know when they were well off. 
Vietnamese were just niggers with slant eyes (there were four 
blacks in the class). The Chinese were so stupid that they 
couldn't feed themselves. Inevitably they would have to return 
to the good old days and ways of the rickshaw, pigtail, the 
coolie, opium dens, and cathouses. I took this shit with a 
stony calm for one month. I tried to get out of the class five or 
256


--- PAGE 277 ---
six times, but you have to have a clear life-and-death situation 
to get out of anything once you get in. This is in keeping with 
the overall prison conspiracy, i.e., you have no will, you have 
no choice or control, so be wise-surrender. There's this sign 
hanging everywhere your eyes may happen to rest, begging: 
"0 lord, help me to accept those things I cannot change." A 
life-death situation is necessary to get out; that's just what I 
had but I couldn't admit to it-looks bad on the parole board 
report. I tried to keep a head between myself and this 
representative of the great silent majority, failing this I would 
fix my eyes on one of the six flags in the room (one in each 
comer, two on the desk) and try to endure. Me and this cat 
fell all the way out in the end. I never planned it that way, in 
fact my plan was to hide my "face" and hang on. The session 
we had was completely spontaneous, it started in the opening 
minutes of our two-hour class. This silent majority had just 
completed a hymn to the great Amerikan corporate monster 
with the line "Now haven't we all the right to be proud?" I 
said, " No." The guy glanced at me, blinked, looked away, and 
kept right on with his eulogy. My answer didn't register with 
him; he heard me but he was positive that he heard me wrong. 
In the cloister of this man's mind, my displeasure, my 
dissatisfaction was just too impossible to be true. The good 
colonel had been explaining that corporate capitalism, the end 
result of a long evolutionary chain of other economic 
arrangements, was as perfect and flawless a system as man can 
ever hope to aehieve. It was the only economic order that 
allowed for man's natural inclinations. The barbarous nations 
of Asia and Africa who had abandoned it for planned 
economics would ultimately fail since the incentive motive 
inherent within the capitalist ideal was missing. Without the 
profit-and-Ioss incentive, production will remain low and 
eventually fail. I stood up, sat on the back of my desk, put one 
foot on the seat, and told this cat that he had just told 
"another" lie. I don't know why I was doing this. I even felt a 
thrill of sympathy for the fool at first. His mouth dropped 
257


--- PAGE 278 ---
open like a shark's, his ears and forehead and nose showed that 
he was as red-blooded an Amerikan as anyone could ever 
become. In an unconscious impulse his hands locked them­
selves around the base of the two flagpoles on his desk, as if to 
protect the little pieces of colored rag from the impudent and 
unpatriotic nigger who did-just-blaspheme! 
"What'd you say, boy?" I said, "You've been lying for a 
month now about 'work ethics' and 'voting processes' and 
'economic incentives,' you've been lying all your life really, 
and now I want to question some of this stuff. Can you stand 
it?" 
I didn't wait for an answer, but continued, "I've worked in 
factories here in this country, on assembly lines, doing 
production work. I've made some study of mass production 
procedures in heavy and light industry, and I've looked into 
political economy in general, and I'm certain that in every­
thing you've said in here for the last month there was a 
conscious intent to misrepresent the truth, to present only 
those parts of the truth that supported your contentions or to 
omit it altogether. This thing about incentive, if it's a factor in 
production, in order for it to influence the volume of 
production, or the quality, it's pretty clear that this incentive 
must find some way of communicating itself down to the 
worker. I can understand an owner or executive having the 
desire to make money-profit-but since ambition is a very 
personal thing, how does it affect the attitude and productiv­
ity of the worker? His wage will be the same if he works hard, 
not so hard, or not hard at all, and it is ultimately on how hard 
the worker works that volume and quality depends." 
He leaned back in his chair, ran his hands through his hair, 
palpitated about the nose and upper lip, looked at his flag, and 
then at me, and answered, "Yes, well, in our factory setups we 
have quotas to meet and foremen and efficiency experts to see 
that they are met." 
"You did say quotas? That sounds like something from one 
of Fidel's public addresses-you know, sugar quotas-the 
258


--- PAGE 279 ---
difference of course being that Fidel is depending on a 
cooperation that springs from a sense of participation, and 
perhaps the knowledge that the volume and quality of 
production determines their general well-being, rather than the 
personal fortunes of an owner or small group of owners. In the 
factories that I worked in and have observed the principal 
interest of most of the workers was coffee and lunch breaks or 
quitting time; we watched the clock, watched out for the 
foreman and other spies, and made as many trips to the toilet 
as we could possibly expect to get away with. Although the 
profit motive may excite owner and supervisor to invest and 
organize for production, the index of productivity is determin­
ed by the attitudes of the worker in a plant that is not totally 
automated and even then it would depend on the workers in 
the machine, tool, and maintenance sectors to a great extent. 
This being the case, it is the diametrical opposite of your 
contention that is true. There is less real incentive. Based on 
the impulse to gain benefits, inherent within the modern form 
of capitalism, it's clear to me that the worker who felt that the 
machine, the factory, all factories were in part his own would 
be very much concerned about productivity and quality of 
product, much more concerned than one who has no more at 
stake than an inadequate wage." 
"But you missed the meaning of my statement." This is 
him talking now. "The spur of profit and the fear of loss are 
the motivations that have made the capitalist system of 
production efficient. It automatically checks the marginal 
facilities and factors of production. It is responsive to demand 
and supply, i.e., the demands of the consumers and the 
availability of materials, and this responsiveness is automatic, 
built in, an inherent part of the system." 
I replied that "the same can be said for any system of 
political economy. With planned, people's economics, how­
ever, the automatic feature is dropped and demand is not 
stimulated artifically in the Madison Avenue sense. It's fatuous 
and misleading to claim profit-and-loss motivation a feature of 
259


--- PAGE 280 ---
capitalism only. It is a feature of all economies in all time past 
and present. The only difference is that with capitalism the 
spur is driven into the flanks of the people by a relatively few 
individuals who by chance or bent of ferocity have been able 
to make fraudulent claims on the rights to profit, the rights to 
benefit from wealth created by labor first, applied to materials 
from man's (plural possessive) source of life support-nature. 
In the People's Republics of Africa, Asia, and Eastern EUrope 
this right to profit-to benefit from their labor and their 
land-is being returned to the people. The people are spurred 
by the profit motive collectively; a situation far more 
conducive to productivity since ultimately productivity de­
pends on the attitude of the individual worker. Proportionally 
China has achieved more economically in twenty years than 
the U.S. has in two hundred. They had the advantage of being 
able to avoid the terri ble mistakes made by the U.S. and 
Western Europe in those two hundred years, but a comparison 
between today's China and let's say today's India and 
Indonesia, where they have developed nothing economically, 
will point up clearly which system is best oriented to meet the 
needs of the people. The leadership in India stayed with 
capitalism (private enterprise) when China turned to revolu­
tionary people's socialism with communism projected for the 
future. I am certain that everyone in this room has the 
intelligence to understand that India's rice riots and street 
sleepers are not indications that China has taken the wrong 
road." 
"But they're starving in China," he said with great 
vehemence, on his feet with his hair streaming over his 
forehead, fists balled, chest out, shoulders thrown back. 
"No one starves in China, that's your ignorance speaking 
now. You were probably just lying before, but it is possible 
that you . are ignorant enough to think that people starve in 
China still, because they were starving in such great numbers 
when you were there in the forties serving the fascist 
military-industrial establishment. You people's ignorance on 
260


--- PAGE 281 ---
these matters has prompted the Chinese and other third 
world nations to the observation that you all live behind a 
veritable curtain of ignorance. There are more people starving 
in the U.S., in the Black Belt of southeastern U.S. in all the 
large cities, in the Appalachian Mountains and grape fields of 
California than in any other country on earth with the possible 
exception of India. China sends grain to other countries on a 
long-term, interest-free-loan basis. Vietnam, Egypt, Pakistan, 
and some others are eating Chinese surplus food supplies right 
now." 
"Nigger they just bought a hundred thousand tons of wheat 
from Canada last month." 
"You did say they 'bought' it, it means that they must be 
doing pretty well; the principle of economic advantage means 
that the people in their respective areas, nations if you prefer, 
with their respective differences in climate and topography 
should produce that thing which is easy and natural for them 
to produce. With proper organization they will be able to 
produce a surplus of this thing that they produce well. It is 
this surplus that the well-ordered society (of today at least) 
uses to exchange for the things that they cannot produce 
economically. China bought that wheat from Canada with 
other food products and raw materials that Canada needed. 
That deal last month was simply good economics on China's 
part. Canada buys beef from Argentina. Does that mean that 
Canada is about to collapse economically? Nothing stays the 
same, not even for an instant. If a thing isn't growing, it's 
decaying. People's government has been on the march since 
the close of World War II everywhere, building, developing, 
challenging, and defeating the capitalist-based systems that 
function on servitude of the people. The inevitable failure will 
be with capitalism, the guns of Vietnam will sound the death 
knell of capitalism. We know how to fight you now; capitalism 
is dying right here tonight, look at yourself, you're defeated." 
He was advancing on me in his Marquis of Queensberry boxing 
stance. I got out of the class that night, I haven't been able to 
26 1


--- PAGE 282 ---
get out of the joint, however. 
We don't want people like Davis teaching the children, he 
has himself been educated into inanity. His favorite platitude 
was that Amerikans "enjoy hard work, desire gainful employ­
ment, and have the natural inclination to be thrifty and save." 
This is a shot against the automated welfare state. He believes 
that Amerikans would rather work with their hands than use a 
machine that could do the -same work better and faster. 
Sounds pretty silly to me. I certainly don't like to work. No 
one could honestly enjoy the monotony of an assembly line. 
And the garbage collecting, the street sweeping, the window 
washing. I'm all for the machines taking over in every sector of 
the economy where they can be applied. I wouldn't have the 
least difficulty in finding something to do with my time. As 
long as my check comes by mail, as long as I didn't have to 
stand in some line somewhere to pick it up, I would never have 
a complaint. To eat bread "in the sweat of thy face" was 
intended as a curse. The conservatives (of their privilege) 
would have us now believe that work is great fun. The 
capitalist Eden fits my description of hell. 
To destroy it will require cooperation and communion 
between our related parts; communion between colony and 
colony, nation and nation. The common bond will be the 
desire to humble the oppressor, the need to destroy capitalist 
man and his terrible, ugly machine. If there were any 
differences or grievances between us in the black colonies and 
the peoples of other colonies across the country, around the 
world, we should be willing to forget them in the desperate 
need for coordination against Amerikan fascism. 
International coordination is the key to defeating this thing 
that must expand to live. Our inability to work with other 
peoples, other slaves who have the same master, is a 
consequence of the inferiority complex we have been condi­
tioned into. We're afraid that in the process the Chinese will 
trick us, or the white folks who support socialism and 
liberation of all the Amerikan colonies really just want to use 
262


--- PAGE 283 ---
us trick us. "We can't trust them, they'll trick us." Well, if 
w;'re tricks we can expect to get tricked and we should rightly 
be afraid. This paranoia is a carry-<>ver from the days when a 
white face in a black crowd meant that the white brain was 
controlling things. It is a carry-<>ver from the days when some 
of us felt that nothing could function properly without the 
presence of a white brain, when we were sufficiently convinc­
ed of our own inferiority to allow them to take us over. Now 
as things stand in the new light of different days, with our 
revolution in the doldrums, our struggles counterpoised by 
vicious political kills and avalanches of propaganda, terror, and 
tokenism, we must overcome the paranoia. It is based on lack 
of confidence in our ability to control situations. Yet no one 
can take us over or betray our interests if we are vigilant and 
aggressively intelligent. We must accept the spirit of the true 
internationalism called for by Comrade Che Guevara. It is not 
a matter of trusting anyone, though I personally find that I 
can still trust certain general types of people since I am of that 
people. I am also assured of my ability to detect in advance 
any atavistic changes that portend betrayal. It isn't just a 
matter of trusting the goodwill of other slaves and other 
colonies and other peoples, it is simply a matter of common 
need. We need allies, we have a powerful enemy who cannot 
be defeated without an allied effort! The enemy at present is 
the capitalist system and its supporters. Our prime interest is 
to destroy them. Anyone else with this same interest must be 
embraced, we must work with, beside, through, over, under 
anyone, regardless of their external physical features, whose 
aim is the same as ours in this. Capitalism must be destroyed, 
and after it is destroyed, if we find that we still have problems, 
we'll work them out. That, the nature of life, struggle, 
permanent revolution; that is the situation we were born into. 
There are other peoples on this earth. In denying their 
existence and turning inward in our misery and accepting any 
form of racism we are taking on the characteristic of our 
enemy. We are resigning ourselves to defeat. For in forming a 
263


--- PAGE 284 ---
conspiracy aimed at the destruction of the system that holds 
us all in the throes of a desperate insecurity we must have 
coordinating elements connecting us and our moves to the 
moves of the other colonies, the African colonies, those in 
Asia and Latin Amerika, in Appalachia and the southwestem 
bean fields. If it is more expediant for a white revolutionary to 
neutralize a certain area, should I deny him the opportunity to 
contribute by withholding the protective influence of my 
cooperation?! If I did it would make me a fool and a myopic 
coward-a trick. 
The revolutionary of Vietnam, this brother is so tried, so 
tested, so clearly antifascist, anti-Amerikan, that I must be 
suspicious of the sincerity of any black who claims anti-Ameri­
kanism and antifascism but who cannot embrace the Congo 
The Chinese have aided every anticolonial movement that has 
occurred since they were successful in their own, particularly 
the ones in Africa. They have offered us in the Amerikan 
colonies any and all support that we require, from hand 
grenades to H-bombs. Some of us would deny these wonderful 
and righteous people. I accept their assistance in my struggle 
with our mutual enemy. I accept and appreciate any love that 
we can build out of our relation in crisis. I'll never, never allow 
my enemy to tum my mind or hand against them. The Yankee 
dog that proposes to me that I should join him in containing 
the fteedom of a Vietnamese or a Chinese brother of the 
revolution is going to get spat on. I don't care how much he 
has to offer in the way of short-term material benefits. 
We must establish a true internationalism with other 
anticolonial peoples. Then we will be on the road of the true 
revolutionary. Only then can we expect to be able to seize the 
power that is rightfully ours, the power to control the 
circumstances of our day-to-day lives. 
The fascist must expand to live. Consequently he has 
pushed his frontiers to the farthest lands and peoples. This is 
an aspect of his being, an ungovernable compulsion. This 
perverted mechanical monster suffers from a disease that 
264


--- PAGE 285 ---
forces him to build ugly things and destroy beauty wherever 
he fmds it. I just read in a legal newspaper that 50 percent of 
all the people ever executed in this country by the state were 
black and 10 0 percent were lower-class poor. I'm going to bust 
my heart trying to stop these smug, detenerate, primi­
tive, omnivorous, uncivil ... and anyone who would aid 
me, I embrace you. We of the black Amerikan colony must 
fmally take courage, control our fear, and adopt a realistic 
picture of this world and our place within it. We are not 
fascist, or Amerikans. We are an oppressed, economically 
depressed colonial people. We were brought here, from Africa 
and other parts of the world of palm and sun, under duress, 
and have passed all our days here under duress. The people 
who run this country will never let us succeed to power. 
Everything in history that was of any value was taken by 
force. We must organize our thoughts, get behind the 
revolutionary vanguard, make the correct alliances this time. 
We must fall on our enemies, the enemies of all righteousness, 
with a ruthless relentless will to win! History sweeps on, we 
must not let it escape our influence this time!!!! 
I am an extremist. I call for extreme measures to solve 
extreme problems. Where face and freedom are concerned I do 
not use or prescribe half measures. To me life without control 
over the determining factors is not worth the effort of drawing 
breath. Without self-determination I am extremely displeased. 
International capitalism cannot be destroyed without the 
extremes of struggle. The entire colonial world is watching the 
blacks inside the U.S., wondering and waiting for us to come 
to our senses. Their problems and struggles with the Amerikan 
monster are much more difficult than they would be if we 
actively aided them. We are on the inside. We are the only ones 
(besides the very small white minority left) who can get at the 
monster's heart without subjecting the world to nuclear fire. 
We have a momentous histroical role to act out if we will. The 
whole world for all time in the future will· love us and 
remember us as the righteous people who made it possible for 
265


--- PAGE 286 ---
the world to live on. If we fail through fear and lack of 
aggressive imagination, then the slaves of the future will curse 
us, as we sometimes curse those of yesterday. I don't want to 
die and leave a few sad songs and a hump in the ground as my 
only momument. I want to leave a world that is liberated from 
trash, pollution, racism, poverty nation-states, nation-state 
wars and armies, from pomp, bigotry, parochialism, a thou­
sand different brands of untruth, and licentious usurious 
economics. 
We must build the true internationalism now. Getting to 
know people under crisis is the best way to learn them. Crisis 
situations show up their weakness and strength. They outline 
our humanity in vivid detail. If there is any basis for a belief in 
the universality of man then we will find it in this struggle 
against the enemy of all mankind. 
George 
266


--- PAGE 287 ---
MARCH , 19 70 
17 
Dear Z., 
Very pleasant surprise for me seeing you again. Old 
friends are rare. Thank you for your concern and convey my 
further thanks to y:our mother. I know you both surrendered 
your holiday time to be present The people are becoming very 
responsive, encouraging to say the least; we love you all. 
You have certainly matured into a fine-looking young 
woman. I knew you would, you were a beautiful baby. Return 
this form and write me a letter (at the same time) and run it all 
down: school, politics, futurities. I want to know it all, all that 
you don't mind the officials knowing also, that is. 
You may also have a half hour with me here, when you can 
get one. But that is all, and that only if you don't mind the 
civil service sitting in. 
This is my tenth year of this, actually my twenty-eighth, 
but I was too numb to feel the first eighteen. All for the events 
of one riotous day, fifteen minutes to be exact. And now they 
would take all of the rest; you are aware that 4500* means 
automatic death penalty. One intimation of displeasure and 
the anti-bodies rush to destroy you. Well I am posillYely 
"The number of the California statute which makes the 
death penalty mandatory for any inmate serving a life sentence 
who is convicted of assault on a noninmate. 
267


--- PAGE 288 ---
displeased and since I am positively destined to remain so. 
Return this form with all dispatch, I would like very much to 
relate and exchange. 
Someone may have to get hurt but Power to the People. 
George 
MARCH, 19 70 
27 
Dear Z .• 
I've been attempting to establish correspondence 
with you for several years now. However, being locked up in 
close confinement has kept me in a position in which I've not 
been able to ascertain your full address (I still don't have the 
Zip Code). Now I have been able to learn which one of your 
parents' names you use officially. The chaplain here was kind 
enough to help me. Did he talk to you yet? When he does, 
thank him, for he went to some lengths to help us. 
I was very pleasantly surprised to hear from the chaplain 
that you live so close to the prison. The only exchange I've 
had with intelligent females or any female outside my family 
in all these years is limited to the brief self-conscious glances 
of the visiting room. My lawyer is the first woman I've talked 
to since my arrest!! That must be the record. 
Distressing is only a mild way of putting the events of these 
last 10 6 (10 6 years). I haven't been able to adjust. They 
adjust, they keep telling me. I keep trying to teU them this just 
isn't the kind of thing I favor. I've been picked up and swept 
268


--- PAGE 289 ---
along by events long gone out of control. Perhaps in the next 
106 I'll be able, with an assist from wonderful pe.ople like your 
mother and you, to win enough of the control factor to get 
out and make the existence of places like this unnecessary. 
I do have plenty of time. I'm in my cell 23\1, hours a day. I 
try to employ all of it (except the three in which I sleep) in 
something related to antithesis, but there remain long periods 
of wasted time in this twenty-three-hour day, back to bed, one 
foot stacked lengthwise atop the other, gazing into the light. It 
would save my eyes and ease my mind a great deal to have 
long, informal, newsy, and perhaps endearing messages reach­
ing me here, from time to time, from San Jose. If we can reach 
each other through all of this, fences, fear, concrete, steel, 
barbed wire, guns, then history will commend us for a great 
victory won. If so-it will be your generosity and my good 
fortune. 
George 
269


--- PAGE 290 ---
APR IL. 19 70 
3 
Dear Z., 
I have your message here beside me now, it was 
delivered ten minutes ago. I do not thlnk Nkrumah has failed 
either. As for me, I plan to save all of your correspondence so 
that when we are old people, and our enemies are no more, we 
can steep ourselves in it again, in an atmosphere where all the 
related parts are in harmony, and we can recall the fearful, 
traumatic, and desperate days at the barricade without rancor. 
Did you receive the message I sent you last Thursday? Let 
me know; we'll be forced to confirm each of our letters, you 
know. Did you mail this one that I have now Thursday April 2 
or March 27? If the former, it took only one day to reach me. 
I cannot read the postmark. It's too faint. 
I dug the poem. I suspect that we are of kindred spirits, 
soldier; my mother and sisters say so, though they never really 
understood me. But I will forgive them, they will learn better. 
We will have much to discuss in the days ahead, if what I 
suspect is true; history sweeps on apace and we mustn't let it 
escape our influence this time. I have messages from Narodnik 
and Nihilist, they are man and woman, coefficients in the 
production of ... one cannot exist without the other. N arod­
nik excites a defense reflex withln the beast; the beast 
encircles, infiltrates, and will destroy Narodnik. Without 
270


--- PAGE 291 ---
Nihilist to enforce and protect, pure nonviolence is a false 
ideal, a contradiction. 
Send me some photographs of you and your family. I liked 
the card. That is the sort of thing I need to take me out of this 
cell on occasion and remind me that the world could be 
beautiful. 
You take care of yourself, I need you; you have my sincere 
regard, soldier. 
George 
APR IL, 19 70 
11 
DearZ., 
I received your letter late this afternoon. I've 
picked it up twenty-five times since then, reading things into 
it, holding it to my nose, fixing myself on the picture I have of 
you in my mind. 
I am very pleased to have someone so warm, and so soft, 
and so lovely come into my miserable life; I haven't met any 
selfless, intelligent (mentally liberated), and aggressive women 
before now, before you. I knew that you existed but I had 
never had the pleasure. I am uneasy thinking that you may be 
attracted to the tragedy of me. I hope not, because my 
response to you is perfectly personal, your eyes, your voice, 
your walk, hands, mouth. It just occurred to me that I've 
never noticed any of these things in Frances or Penny or 
Delora. I like you a lot. 
But I am in such a hurry! 
27 1


--- PAGE 292 ---
My life is so disrupted, so precarious, my inclinations so 
oriented to struggle that anyone who would love me would 
have to be bold indeed-or out of their head. But if you're 
saying what I think you are saying, I like it. (If I have flattered 
myself please try to understand.) I like the way you say it also; 
over the next few months we'll discuss the related problems. 
By the time I've solved these minor ones that temporarily limit 
my movements, we'll have also settled whether or not it is 
selfish for us to seek gratification by reaching and touching 
and holding; does the building of a bed precede the love act 
itself? Or can we "do it in the road" until the people's army 
has satisfied our territory problem? That is important to me, 
whether or not you are willing to "do it in the road." You dig, 
I'm more identifiable with Ernesto than with Fidel. When this 
is over I immediately go under. 
I want to see you! I understand the problems involved, 
money and transportation, but use your imagination, soldier. 
Are you getting your social security; That should hold you 
until you find work. I hate to appear selfish, but you have 
destroyed my peace here. I have a lot to tell you and some 
questions. 
I'll love you till the wings fly off at least, perhaps beyond. 
My love could burn you, however, it runs hot and I have 
nearly half a millennium stored up. Mine is a perfect love, soft 
to the touch but so hot, hard, and dense at its center that its 
weight will soon offset this planet. 
George 
272


--- PAGE 293 ---
AP RIL , 19 70 
16 
DearZ., 
Did you receive my love letter? I wrote it on the 
eleventh or twelfth. 
Jon likes you and your mother, but he does indeed like 
you. I wish very much that I could have been around him 
when he was growing up. He had a hard time identifying 
himself. He was forced to beat on some of the blacks because 
of the big green eyes (used to be blue!) and gold hair. He had 
to beat on the whites because he was a nigger. They used to 
write me about it, the others, but everyone in that house in 
Pasadena is so hare-brained. Well, he had to work out his 
problems on his own. That he turned out to be a beautiful 
black man-child is testimony of his own dogged strength. I 
love him more dearly than I love myself. 
I've been thinking of you. Write me; I know how hard you 
are working and understand the limitations regarding time, but 
when you get a moment, between rounds, remember that I 
want to hear from you. Send the photographs I asked for too. 
Power to the People. Love-
George 
273


--- PAGE 294 ---
APR IL , 19 70 
18 
Dear Z., 
I have your message of April 16 in here with me 
now. 
Arms, holds, and understanding-me and you. 
Your mother must be a wonderful person, or perhaps it was 
the revolution, or maybe some guy, whatever. This guy thanks 
the forces that be for forming you so that you favor me. 
Communion can never be selfish. they are opposing terms, 
diametrical opposites, one the antithesis of the other, com­
munion across the cultures, the nations, the planets, the 
universe-that's the name of our thing. 
The question that I posed, as I think about it, was a ghost 
from the really dark days, when all of my smiles were merely 
gestures to put people at their ease. I was motivated then by 
disgust alone and anything that distracted me from a work­
filled twenty-one-hour day was considered a hindrance, an 
obstacle, or an object of self-interest. I thought of individual 
relationship as a flight from the existential reality of individual 
responsibility to the whole, to the people. I considered it 
selfish to look for some individual to touch and hold and 
understand, because all of my time belonged to all of the 
people. That the deep, burning incessant thing centered in my 
guts was hatred alone, that people who (especially in the joint) 
looked for another individual to relate to, instead of the 
274


--- PAGE 295 ---
people's struggle-ful' time, was lonely, was weak. 
But I've gone through some changes since then, I saw and 
read about Angie Davis and some other females of our kind, 
and I realized that perhaps it was possible that this country has 
produced some females like those of Cuba or Vietnam. 
When you reentered my little cloister last year I was more 
than ready for such an encounter. The look of love from a 
rebel breed-I like it. I'm weak. 
George 
APR IL, 19 70 
27 
DearZ., 
This is just a "thinking of you" note, because I was 
thinking of you. 
It occurred to me how keen you were ten years ago when I 
was out, and we were both eighteen. I've envied you that 
intelligence over these years. Had I been fortunate enought to 
have had someone to relate to my need in that area, perhaps 
things would have been different. But far from me to 
complain. I probably wouldn't have listened anyway. 
Don't compare yourself to me in such things as sleep and 
endurance. I don't sleep any more than I do because I can't 
really. I just don't like the idea of lying around unconscious 
for hours and then too my metabolism is pitched so high that I 
actually need activity to feel well. 
I do know what you meant about beauty, the pleasant 
275


--- PAGE 296 ---
features that remain to us in this life; I haven't seen many 
personally, but I know they exist, otherwise you wouldn't 
exist, F., your mother and the will to resist and win couldn't 
exist-evil can never take full control. But for me you are my 
first beautiful, really beautiful experience, honestly you are. 
And you'll just have to relent-on the issue of photographs. 
Give F. some of the family, kids and all. I know where you're 
at, and I dig it, but consider where I'm at. 
I love that guy T. Are there many like him and M. You 
know about M. Well, he was one out of a thousand (it took 
great courage). Are the ratios that bad everywhere? I'm sure 
you know what I want here. With people like these around, 
my job won't be half as hard as I've always anticipated. 
I must be about my work, comrade, and no more reference 
to my ability to accept love. Perhaps my sensibilities are 
somewhat dulled but not like that. I'll never fail you-it just 
won't happen. 
Sincerely in Love and Revolution, 
George 
276


--- PAGE 297 ---
MA Y, 19 70 
2 
Dear Z, 
Time seems to be passing much faster these last 
few months. Wonder where it's running to, what's building? 
Will I be able to control the outcome of whatever ... 
This is for certain, it's going to get worse. Things will 
become much more difficult before anything good can come 
of this. People like Nixon and the ventriloquists that make 
him speak hold forth by default. The good element has not 
contested them vigorously; for the very same natural reason 
that allows flotsam to rise to the surface these people have 
come by the means and power to cause great discord and 
suffering. "They met little resistance on their way up." "Good 
people don't like to cut throats." This unnatural arrangement 
that allows the sediment to remain on the top while the cream 
rests on the bottom can be righted in one way only. The VC 
have the idea. They understand a trial of combat, an ordeal by 
fue. You simply can't reason with people like them, they have 
too much to lose by being reasonable. 
They make my head ache; I must get off the subject. 
Your "Little Soulful Tune" did make me smile. I must 
confess that you have startled me on occasion, the kinship, 
your sensitivity, almost like we've lived all of it before. You 
know me too well. I suspect you've been peeping with those 
big delightfully sad eyes into my sad soul. Beautiful sister, 
277


--- PAGE 298 ---
desirable woman, quintessence of revolutionary woman, ne 
plus ultra of the new rebel breed, if I didn't take you into my 
heart, and if I didn't find myself loving you, and if this love 
wasn't as easy and natural as breathing, there would be 
something very wrong with me. 
Things have fallen apart, haven't they; that realization must 
come to all of us, it is a prerequisite to remedy. Send it to me 
a piece at a time in your letters, it's best that way. 
Take care of yourself, this cat needs you. 
Love, 
MAY, 19 70 
8 
Dear Joan, * 
George 
You may never read this letter-my correspond­
ence is being limited at present to those approved prior to my 
most recent troubles. However, this limiting policy is not legal, 
nor has it been clearly stated. So if this message reaches you, 
be informed that I have also sent with it a request to have you 
placed permanently on my visiting and mailing list. It is a 
formality that the state requires we go through in order to 
further assure its complete control over our lives here. But I 
don't mind. Ever since the earliest days of my youth, you 
should recall, my foremost wish was to have a big brother. 
* A member of the Soledad Defense Committee. 
278


--- PAGE 299 ---
These people are on my trail this time. Mama probably 
discussed with you the other incidents that occurred while I 
was in San Quentin. What do you think? I try to be a good 
boy and help other boys to be good, and this sort of thing is 
my reward. I get accused of everything that cannot be 
positively established elsewhere, but I mustn't complain too 
much, it isn't allowed. 
I know you have to work pretty hard and consequently 
haven't much time to yourself, but if you have any at all I 
could use it. You did such a wonderful job with your own 
children, I'm thinking that you could probably help my 
mama's children. Me in particular. 
But more seriously, old friend, Mama told me of your 
concern, thanks. We have plenty of support in this, your 
youngest daughter as you probably know came to a couple of 
the appearances. I tried to contact her or establish her as a 
regular correspondent but we got lost in a confusion of red 
tape. She is a lovely young woman. Give my regards. 
When were you last in Chicago? I have heard that the place 
we stayed in and all the surrounding neighborhood has been 
completely rebuilt, city-owned projects. They should have 
done that fifty years ago. I still dream about that place 
sometimes. Big Brother chasing me in slow motion down 
alleys, over the roofs, busting their windows with my 
slingshot. 
Send me lots of brightly colored postcards and some 
pictures of the family. And if you get a few minutes you can 
tell me of your impressions of this fierce world. Oh, if that girl 
is still at home, I want you to try and fatten her up-just a 
little. 
George 
279


--- PAGE 300 ---
19 70 
Angela, * 
I am certain that they plan to hold me incommuni­
cado. All of my letters except for a few to my immediate 
family have come back to me with silly comments on my 
choice of terms. The incoming mail is also sent back to the 
outside sender. The mail which I do receive is sometimes one or 
two weeks old. So, my sweet sister, when I reach you, it will 
be in this manner . 
. . . I'm going to write on both sides of this paper, and 
when I make a mistake I'll just scratch over it and continue on. 
That is my style, completely informal. 
Was that your sister with you in court? If so, she favored 
you. Both very beautiful people. You should have introduced 
me. 
They are going to take your job, I know they are-anything 
else would be expecting too much. They can't, however, stop 
you from teaching in public institutions, can they? 
They hate us, don't they? I like it that way, that is the way 
it's supposed to be. If they didn't hate me I would be doing 
something very wrong, and then I would have to hate myself. I 
prefer it this way. I get little hate notes in the folds of my 
newspaper almost every day now. You know, the racist stuff, 
the traditional "Dear nigger" stuff, and how dead I am going 
to be one day. They think they're mad at me now, but it's 
nothing compared to how it will be when I really get mad 
* Angela Y. Davis 
280 
· .. � 
I


--- PAGE 301 ---
myself. ... 
Pigs are punks, Angela. We've made a terrib Ie mistake in 
overestimating these people. It reflects on us badly that we 
have allowed them to do the things they have done to us. 
Since they are idiots, what does that make us. I just read 
Bobby Seale's account of that scene in Chicago (Ramparts, 
June '70). It started in San Francisco with that "flight to 
evade charge. One of the pigs commented that "this was so 
easy." But it shouldn't have been. Brothers like that are the 
best of us. It shouldn't have gone down like that. We should 
never make it easy for them-by relaxing-at this stage of the 
educational process. Examples are crucially important. Well 
that's the name of the game right now. 
I have ideas, ten years' worth of them, I'd like all those 
brothers on Fiftieth Street to be aware of them. Tell Fay 
Stender to give you a copy of my thoughts on Huey Newton 
and politics .... At the end of these Writings, titled "Letter to 
Huey Newton," there should be a note on revolutionary 
culture and the form it should take in the black Amerikan 
colonies. That was the best section. Without that section the 
power would be lost. Fay and I don't agree altogether on 
political methods. But that is only because we are viewing 
things from very different levels of slavery. Mine is an abject 
slavery. 
I think of you all the time. I've been thinking about women 
a lot lately. Is there anything sentimental or otherwise wrong 
with that? There couldn't be. It's never bothered me too much 
before, the sex thing. I would do my exercises and the 
hundreds of katas, stay busy with something ... this ten years 
really has gone pretty quickly. It has destroyed me as a person, 
a human being that is, but it was sudden, it was a sudden 
death, it seems like ten days rather than ten years. 
Would you like to know a subhuman. I certainly hope you 
have time. I'm not a very nice person. I'll confess out front, 
I've been forced to adopt a set of responses, reflexes, attitudes 
that have made me more kin to the cat than anything else, the 
28 1


--- PAGE 302 ---
big black one. For all of that I am not a selfish person. I don't 
think so anyway, but I do have myself in mind when I talk 
about us relating. You would be the generous one, I the 
recipient of that generosity. 
They're killing niggers again down the tier, all day, every 
day. They are killing niggers and "them protesters" with small 
workings of mouth. One of them told a pig today that he was 
going to be awful disappointed with the pig if the pig didn't 
shoot some niggers or protesters this evening when he got off 
work. The pig found it very amusing. They went off on a 
twenty minute political discussion, pig and his convict 
supporter. There is something very primitive about these 
people. Something very fearful. In all the time I've been down 
here on Maximum Row, no brother has ever spoken to one of 
these people. We never speak about them, you know, across 
the cells. Every brother down here is under the influence of 
the party line, and racist terms like "monky" have never been 
uttered. All of these are beautiful brothers, ones who have 
stepped across the line into the position from which there can 
be no retreat. All are fully committed. They are the most 
desperate and dauntless of our kind. I love them. They are 
men and they do not fight with their mouths. They've brought 
them here from prisons all over the state to be warehoused or 
murdered. Whichever is more expedient. That Brother Ed­
wards who was murdered in that week in January told his 
lawyer that he would never get out of prison alive. He was at 
the time of that statement on Maximum Row, Death Row, 
Soledad, California. He was twenty-one years old. We have 
made it a point to never exchange words with these people. 
But they never relent. Angela, there are some people who will 
never learn new response. They will carry what they incorpo­
rated into their characters at early youth to the grave. Some 
can never be educated. As an historian you know how long and 
how fervently we've appealed to these people to take some of 
the murder out of their system, their economics, their 
propaganda. And as an intelligent observer you must see how 
282


--- PAGE 303 ---
our appeals were received. We've wasted many generations and 
oceans of blood trying to civilize these elements over here. It 
cannot be done in the manner we have attempted it in the 
past. Dialectics, understanding, love, passive resistance, they 
won't work on an activistic, maniacal, gory pig. It's going to 
grow much worse for the black male than it already is, much, 
much worse. We are going to have to be the vanguard, the 
catalyst, in any meaningful change. 
When generalizing about black women I could never 
include you in any of it that is not complimentary. But my 
mother at one time tried to make a coward of me, she did the 
same with Jon. She is changing fast under crisis situation and 
apocalyptic circumstance. John and Fleeta's mothers did the 
same to them, or I should say tried. And so did every brother's 
mother I've ever drawn out. I am reasonably certain that I can 
draw from every black male in this country some comments to 
substantiate that his mother, the black female, attempted to 
aid his survival by discouraging his violence or by turning it 
inward. The blacks of slave society, U.S.A., have always been a 
matriarchal subsociety. The implication is clear, black mama is 
going to have to put a sword in that brother's hand and stop 
that "be a good boy" shit. Channel his spirit instead of break 
it, or to break it I should say. Do you understand? All of the 
sisters I've ever known personally and through other brothers' 
accounts begged and bullied us to look for jobs instead of 
being satisfied with the candy-stick take. The strongest 
impetus a man will ever have, in an individual sense, will come 
from a woman he admires. 
When "Soul" did that feature on you, I discussed you with 
some the comrades. One of them asked me what my response 
would be if it were my job to guard your body (for the party) 
from the attack of ten armed pigs. I told them my response 
would be to charge. There would be eleven people hurting but 
you wouldn't be one of them. Everyone agreed it was the 
correct response. 
As an individual, I am grateful for you. A& the black male, I 
283


--- PAGE 304 ---
hope that since your inclination is to teach you will give 
serious consideration to redeeming this very next generation of 
black males, by reaching for today's black female. I am not 
too certain about my generation. There are a few, and with 
these few we will keep something. But we have altogether too 
many pimps and punks, and black capitalists (who want a 
piece of the putrescent pie). There's no way to predict. 
Sometimes people change fast. I've seen it happen to brothers 
overnight. But then they have to learn a whole new set of 
responses and attack reflexes which can't be learned overnight. 
So cats like me who have no tomorrows have to provide 
examples. I have an ideal regarding tomorrow, but I live an 
hour at a time, right in the present, looking right over my nose 
for the trouble I know is coming. 
There is so much that could be done, right now .... But I 
won't talk about those things right here. I will say that it 
should never be easy for them to destroy us. If you start with 
Malcolm X and count all of the brothers who have died or 
been captured since, you will find that not even one of them 
was really prepared for a fight. No imagination or fighting 
style was evident in any one of the incidents. But each one 
that died professed to know the nature of our enemies. It 
should never be so easy for them. Do you understand what I'm 
saying? Edward V. Hanrahan, Illinois State Attorney General, 
sent fifteen pigs to raid the Panther headquarters and murder 
Hampton and Clark. Do you have any idea what would have 
happened to those fifteen pigs if they had run into as many 
Viet Cong as there were Panthers in that building. The VC are 
all little people with less general education than we have. The 
argument that they have been doing it longer has no validity at 
. all, because they were doing it just as well when they started as 
they are now. It's very contradictory for a man to teach about 
the murder in corporate capitalism, to isolate and expose the 
murderers behind it, to instruct that these madmen are 
completely without stops, are licentious, totally depraved-and 
then not make adquate preparations to defend himself from 
284


--- PAGE 305 ---
the madman's attack. Either they don't really believe their 
own spiel or they harbor some sort of subconscious death 
wish. 
None of this should have happened as it did. I don't know 
if we'll learn in time or not. I am not well here. I pretend that 
all is well for the benefit of my family's peace of mind. But 
I'm going to cry to you, so you can let the people on Fiftieth 
Street know not to let this happen to them, and that they 
must resist that cat with all of their strength when he starts 
that jail talk. 
When the menu reads steak we get a piece of rotten steer (l 
hope) the size of a quarter. When it reads cake we get 
something like cornbread. Those are the best things served. 
When two guys fight, the darker guy will get shot. To 
supplement their incomes the pigs will bring anything into the 
prison and sell it to the convict who smuggles money in from his 
visits. Now black people don't visit their kin in the joint much 
and those that do can't afford to give up any money. So we 
have less of everything that could make life more comfortable 
-and safe (weapons are brought in too). Pigs are fascist right 
out front, the white prisoner who is con-wise joins the Hitler 
party right here in the joint. He doesn't have to worry about 
the rules, he stays high. When he decides to attack us, he has 
the best of weapons (seldom will a pig give a con a gun, 
though. It has happened, however, in San Quentin three times 
to my knowledge. But they will provide cutlery and zip guns). 
The old convict code died years ago. These cons work right 
with the police against us. The only reason that I am still alive 
is because I take everything to the extreme, and they know it. 
I never let any of them get within arm's reach, and their hands 
must be in full view. When on the yard I would stay close to 
something to get under. Nothing, absolutely nothing comes as 
a surprise to me. There is much to be said about these places 
but I must let this go right now or I won't be able to post it 
until tomorrow. In the event that you missed it, (my writing is 
terrible, I know), I think a great deal of you. This is one slave 
285


--- PAGE 306 ---
that knows how to love. It comes natural and runs deep. 
Accepting it will never hurt you. Free, open, honest love, 
that's me. 
Should you run into Yvonne* tell her that I love her also 
and equally. Tell her that I want to see her, up close. Tell her 
I'm not a possessive cat, never demanding, always cool, never 
get upset until my (our) face and freedom get involved. But 
make her understand that I want to hold her (chains and all) 
and run my tongue in that little gap between her two front 
teeth. (That should make her smile.) 
Power to the People! 
George 
*Yvonne is Angela Davis's middle name. 
MA Y, 19 70 
21 
Dear Angela, 
I think about you all of the time. I like thinking 
about you, it gives me occasion for some of the first few really 
deeply felt ear-to-ear grins. And I've had to increase the 
number of my daily push-ups by half. That will make me 
stronger. The contact has been good for me in a hundred ways. 
But then my thoughts return to your enemies. They are 
286


--- PAGE 307 ---
mine too, of course, but thinking of them as your enemies 
calls up the monster in me, the dark, terrible things that I keep 
hidden in the pit, fanged, clawed, armored-they are more 
awful by far when you become involved. I've been finding and 
developing these things for many years now. As soon as you 
isolate, identify, and number your enemies I'll set these things 
loose on them. And you won't be disappointed this time, I 
promise, sweet sister. This time nothing will be held back 
.... Your enemies will be made humbler and wiser men. 
Jon is a young brother and he is just a little withdrawn, but 
he is intelligent and loyal. ... He is at that dangerous age 
where confusion sets in and sends brothers either to the 
undertaker or to prison. He is a little better off than I was and 
than most brothers his age. He learns fast and can distinguish 
the real from the apparent, provided someone takes the time 
to present it. Tell the brothers never to mention his green eyes 
and skin tone. He is very sensitive about it and he will either 
fight or withdraw. Do you understand? You know that some 
of us don't bother to be righteous with each other. He has had 
a great deal of trouble these last few years behind that issue. It 
isn't right. He is a loyal and beautiful black man-child. I love 
him. 
This shit is starting to thicken. Six in Georgia, two in 
Jackson, hard hats, counterdemonstrations, much like 
Germany in the thirties. That thing in Georgia and the one in 
Jackson were like turkey shoots. We die altogether too easy. 
Each one of those brothers has fathers, blood brothers, sisters, 
and mamas. But it's safe to assume that no positive response 
will be made, no eye-for-eye reprisal. Something very wrong 
has swept over us. We've grown so accustomed to seeing 
murder done to us that no one takes it seriously anymore. 
We've grown numb, immune to the pain. Charles Evers and the 
entire world knows who killed Medgar Evers, the murderer is 
still walking the streets .... 
Perhaps I shouldn't even recognize people like Whitney 
Young except as enemies, but the shit that they sling around 
287


--- PAGE 308 ---
does fall on some of us and consequently must be counter­
poised. He has now gone on record as thinking that we 
"should arm ourselves, but strictly for defense only." But then 
he goes on to contradict himself by commenting that if we 
used arms it would be like suicide. His words: "a beer can 
against a tank." Well, how does one defend himself from an 
attacker without at some point launching a counterattack­
especially when guns are the choice of weapons! ... 
There is an element of cowardice, great ignorance, and 
perhaps even treachery in blacks of his general type. And I 
agree with Eldridge and Malcolm, we are not protecting unity 
when we refrain from attacking them. Actually it's the reverse 
that's true. We can never have unity as long as we have these 
idiots among us to confuse and frighten the people. It's not 
possible for anyone to still think that Western mechanized 
warfare is absolute, not after the experiences of the third 
world since World War II. The French had tanks in Algeria, the 
U. S. had them in Cuba. Everything, I mean every trick and 
gadget in the manual of Western arms, has been thrown at the 
VC and they have thrown them back, twisted and ruined; and 
they have written books and pamphlets telling us how we 
could do the same. It's obvious that fighting ultimately 
depends upon men, not gadgets. So I must conclude 'that those 
who stand between us and the pigs, who protect the 
marketplace, are either cowards or traitors. Probably both .... 
One way of indirectly detecting the traitor is to draw him 
out regarding our enemies' enemies. Young and all the other of 
those running dogs attack the white left. Young attacked the 
Chicago Seven and the other whites of the left who want to 
help us destroy fascism. So did LeRoi Jones on national TV in 
the company of Anthony Imperiale, a white racist KKKer, and 
a lot of high police officials. So what's happening with a guy 
who says he is for us but not against the government? Or one 
who says he's for us and against all whites-except the ones 
who may kick his ass? There is a great deal of cowardice and 
treachery and confusion here. The black bourgeoisie (pseudo-
288


--- PAGE 309 ---
bourgeoisie), the right reverends, the militant opportunists, 
have left us in a quandary, rendered us impotent. How 
ridiculous we must sem to the rest of the black world when 
we beg the government to investigate their own protective 
agencies. Aren't the wild hip-shooting pigs loose among us to 
protect the property rights of the people who formed the 
government? I've been sitting in here ten years watching that 
kind of shit go down. It's always the same blacks. I am sure 
that it's intentional. They're not with us, you understand. 
Experience, trial and error, would have changed them if they 
were. Who is the black working for, who does he love when he 
screams "Honky"? He would throw us into a fight where we 
would be outnumbered I to 14 (counting the blacks who 
would fight with/for the other side in a race war. War on the 
honky, it's just another mystification, if not an outright move 
by the fascist. I don 't know, I don't pretend to clairvoyance, I 
can't read all thoughts, and I do know some whites that I 
wouldn't count as enemies, but if all whites were my enemies 
would it make sense for me to fight them all at the same time? 
The blanket indictment of the white race has done nothing but 
perplex us, inhibit us. The theory that all whites are the 
immediate enemy and all blacks our brothers (making them 
loyal) is silly and indicative of a lazy mind (to be generous, 
since it could be a fascist plot). It doesn't explain the black 
pig; there were six on the Hampton-Clark kill. It doesn't 
explain the black paratroopers (just more pigs) who put down 
the great Detroit riot, and it doesn't explain the pseudo­
bourgeois who can be found almost everywhere in the halls of 
government working for white supremacy, fascism, and capi­
talism. It leaves the average brother confused. In Detroit they 
just didn't know what to do when they encountered the black 
paratroopers. They were so stunned when they saw those 
black fools shooting at them that they probably never will 
listen to another black voice regardless of what it's saying. 
If I were at large and wanted to help revolutionize the 
black community so that in as short a time as possible it would 
289


--- PAGE 310 ---
be made ready to take up the vanguard in an antiestablishment 
war, I would start like this: I. Lay my hands on some money 
any way I could. 2. Quietly, without even a hint of political 
flavoring, I would have my fronts open as many skeet, trap, 
rifle, and pistol ranges as I could rent space for in and around 
the black community. I would operate these places at cost and 
advertise. 3. Next door to these places (figurative) I would 
quietly, without political flavoring, open schools that deal 
with the close-order combat arts, ostensibly as a community 
project to keep the children off the streets. The real intent, of 
course, is to instill the "attack as defense" idea that we lost 
somewhere along the line. 4. Apart from the two business 
ventures just mentioned, I would provide myself with printing 
or copying machines, and make the salient points of urban 
guerilla warfare, antitank warfare, and revolutionary culture as 
easy to get, as close to hand, as a glass of water. 
Now that just-mentioned activity would be aside from the 
hard and seriously needed revolutionary work discussed early 
this morning, and the stuff you will find in the writings I 
mentioned in my last letter. 
"One doesn't wait for all conditions to be right to start the 
revolution, the forces of the revolution itself will make the 
conditions right." Che said something like this. Write me and 
let me have it straight. 
Power to the People. 
I love you, little sister. 
George 
290


--- PAGE 311 ---
MAY, 19 70 
22 
Dear Joan, 
They approved us for both correspondence and 
visits. Something really bad must be about to come down on 
me. This is the first time in a long train of efforts that I 
actually received my issue. 
It's good, and I want to hear from you whenever you get 
time. Did you get that thing from John Thorne? 
When I'm not working on my defense I like to be doing 
something like this. Ideals and ideas grow and become more 
definite when one attempts to explain them to others who will 
try to understand. 
You know that my family has never understood me very 
well before, they are trying to now, but for years I had no line 
at all, to the outside prison. It was almost like being held 
incommunicado. Incommunicado, it's almost destroyed me. 
So I thank you, madam. None of us could have made it this 
far without folks like yourself. We would be hunting each 
other over the mins. 
Will you tell me all that you have experienced in these 
years of our separation? It will help me to answer some of the 
questions my mind has posed to itself recently. Everything, 
29 1


--- PAGE 312 ---
events and how they impressed you. We don't have to worry 
about the censor and my record, they already are infonned 
that I am a dirty, real dirty red, and they have already made 
their plans to stone me. I will stop them of course, but at this 
level of the fight there is almost nothing for you to say that 
would compromise me any more than I already am. 
Then, too, they can kill me once more only (we cats live 
nine times, I've started on my ninth). And since they seem 
determined to take this last little bit from me I have nothing 
to lose. So we can bring it right down front. I will anyway. 
Dialectical materialism is my bag. I identify with anyone 
who hates just one fascist. I don't want a piece of the pie, I 
don't want all of it even. I think it's rotten, should be 
discarded, we should start all over again. This new start should 
be made without individualism (read isolation), mysticism 
(read religion), with a modification of the language for the 
purpose of removing the concept of possession (read capi­
talism), without the hard-hat mentality (read William F. 
Buckley, Playboy, Central Intelligence Agency). 
The Buckleys, Babbitts, the snobs who are thoroughly 
convinced of their ability to bluff it through, I'll have to pull 
their arms off; and hope that without their negative influence 
you will be able to educate the rest (note that I didn't say 
reeducate). Power to the People. Love from your friend, 
George 
292


--- PAGE 313 ---
Dear Joan, 
MA Y, 19 70 
25 
I have both of your letters right here. I got them 
about ten minutes ago. One was dated by you May 20, the 
other May 22. 
It is very nice (this is understating it) to see a new hand in 
here, Joan. Yours is a beautiful hand, and I am gratified 
(another understatement) that it would bridge the things that 
separate us and hold me tenderly ... it's the best proof that I 
can ever have, all that I need, to assure me that I am still alive 
and have lived well. 
Love's labor-I understand these things, much better than 
most, always have, but I never could present it in the proper 
light before. Presentation was the problem. People kept 
mistaking it for animality, or criminality, and then, less 
sensibly still, un-Amerikan. 
With you, whom I have always thought so much in 
agreement, I can't fail this time. 
There is a great.. deal to be exchanged between us. There is 
so much that I really need to know, things that will help me 
do the theoretical work for a treatise in which I intend to 
prove that if there is still basis for a belief in the brotherhood 
293


--- PAGE 314 ---
of man, it must be discovered in this struggle for control of 
this country's direction. 
Since I've been an adult (mentally), I've never had the 
opportunity to question a mature, intelligent, and, most 
important, objective person of your particular distinctness 
(class, race, sex). When I can do so without compromising 
either of us I will pose some very sensitive, exploring queries. 
On these things I will fIrst want the detached, statistical 
evidence, and then what you feel to be so. If I overload 
you-well, it's just my style, I encircle and pull. It means 
simply that I think a great deal of you. And I am in such a 
hurry. 
Give John T. the pocketbook edition of A Dying Colonial­
ism, The Wretched of the Earth, Black Face White Mask, 
Malcolm's Au tobiography (the other was borrowed) and 
Malcolm Speaks. Also, if they can be found in pocketbook 
form, African Genesis and The Territorial Imperative by' 
Robert Ardrey. Do you know who Leakey is, the anthro­
pologist? I need him and Ruth Benedict too. She wrote among 
other things Races. She was a very wonderful woman, much 
like yourself in many ways. 
You can and must send photographs of the family, 
yourself, and friends. They took all that I had when they 
started this stuff in January. All my books, everything. We'll 
have to test them on the clippings, if not just give them to 
John T. Then, my friend, anything that you feel that I need to 
know, send it, say it, by all means. You have in me a receptive, 
completely liberated mind. 
Love and Light. 
George 
294


--- PAGE 315 ---
MA Y, 19 70 
26 
Dear Joan. 
I have your message of the twenty-fifth already! 
Things have improved in this respect. You are quite an 
experience for me also, a very new thing altogether. I would 
say fresh-how do you state newness, I can only understate it 
again. Pleasure? To express it I'll confess that with these three 
messages-delicate intrusions on my sobriety-you have re­
defined all of those care elements. It has been a long time since 
I've heard anything whispered, the banshee drowns such things 
out-it has started to dim. 
You have a very fortunate boss. I'm sure he must 
understand how rarely those kind of contacts (too cold-how 
about contract or covenant, perhaps bond? yes, a bond), I'm 
sure he appreciates how uncommon they are. 
I've changed my mind, when I need statistics I'll address 
myself to Liz-don't by shy-the years of our separation mean 
nothing to me. I remain as I was (arms are somewhat longer), 
and we should have a division of labor according to character 
and disposition, some passion-certainly in order. 
Will you excuse me when these letters appear a little 
informal, the scratching in and out? It doesn't mean that I am 
295


--- PAGE 316 ---
lazy, it's an effect of my haste. I'm in a great race against time 
(justifiable homicide). But let's discuss the division of labor. 
It's essential to competent organisms. We are in step with each 
other. Hearts and heads, nervous equipment, arms, hands, 
extensions of the hand (sword and pen), passion. I am sure 
that you know they must all function according to ability in 
perfect harmony, the organism can't survive in good health 
and grow without all of its related parts. 
There are no principal parts. You conceded that with the 
"all or none." It means that the small toe is as important to 
the human organism as the heart. It must be that way: the 
small toe is essential to balance, and its loss could precede or 
let's say presage the loss of the foot. Without footing the 
movements of head and heart become less efficient, the 
remainder of the organism could survive without the arm but 
it should never be surrendered without making the strongest 
possible protest, I won't stand for any loss at all. The instant 
that my toe is taken, I will lose my head. 
We must move along two lines in concert, instruction of the 
unrighteous and destruction of the unrighteous. Within the 
structure of these two (and structure is an imperative) 
components there is a situation for every refinement of 
character-passion is at the heart of instruction. 
I just got a copy of Malcolm x Speaks from Fay so you can 
take that off your list, but send (through John) Malcolm's 
Autobiography. Need it for my legal work. 
I haven't changed, I still adore you-
George 
296


--- PAGE 317 ---
MA Y, 19 70 
28 
Dear Angela, 
I sincerely hope you understand this situation here 
with me, the overall thing I mean, you probably do. I don't 
want to be bash with you, the relative levels of our insecurity 
are too disparate for me to dwell on feelings, the warm, very 
personal, elemental thing. I can never express it in this form 
anyway, but I want you to know, and then we can get on with 
the work. 
I have, like most people, a recurring dream. In this dream 
there is a great deal of abstract activity. Have you ever seen the 
pig they have named -- General Something-or-other --. I 
don't know why my mind locked on him, but part 
of this dream is a still shot of my trying to fit a large steel 
boomerang into his mouth. It switches then to a scene where 
me and two other brothers T.G. and a brother named H.B., are 
holding hands to form a large circle, in the ring. Inside the ring 
formed by the three of us is this guy. He's wearing top hat and 
tails-stars and stripes-beard and bushy eyebrows. The action 
part goes like this: Old Sam tries to break out of the circle; we 
stop him; after about ten tries-we're wearing track shoes-he's 
ragged as an old mophead. It goes on that way, scenes running 
297


--- PAGE 318 ---
into each other, overlapping, all very pleasing-wish fulfill­
ment?-very gratifying stuff; but the high point, the climax­
well, a tall slim African woman, firelight, and the beautiful 
dance of death. This wonderful woman didn't become part of 
my dream until last year sometime. I never thought this kind 
of environment could produce one like her, but at the same 
time I knew that things never could be good with me without 
her. 
But I promised not to be bash with you. It's crazy, all 
women, even the very phenomenal, want at least a promise of 
brighter days, bright tomorrows. I have no tomorrows at all. 
The worst thing that could have ever happened to the woman 
in the dream was letting me touch her. I'll tell you the whole 
thing if we can ever find somewhere to relax .... Until then I 
promise not to bore you. You probably hear these devotions 
all day, and with your incentive factors they're probably all 
sincere devotions. Let me heap mine on you (with these pitiful 
little strokes of the pen) for the last time (unless seized by 
ungovernable impulse) with a statement made at the risk bf 
seeming immodest; but I am modest and I hope that it is 
righteous for me to feel that- no one, and much more 
meaningful no black, wherever the hurricane has washed up his 
broken body, no one at all, can love like I. 
In our last communication I made a statement about 
women, and their part in revolutionary culture (people's war). 
It wasn't a clear statement. I meant to return to it but was 
diverted. I understand exactly what the woman's role should 
be. The very same as the man's. Intellectually, there is very 
little difference between male and female. The differences we 
see in bourgeois society are all conditioned and artificial. 
I was leading up to the obvious fact that black women in 
this country are far more aggressive than black males. But this 
is qualified by the fact that their aggression has, until very 
recently, been within the system-that "get a diploma boy" 
stuff, or "earn you some money." Where it should have been 
the gun. Development of the ability for serious fighting and 
298


--- PAGE 319 ---
organized violence was surely not encouraged in the black 
female, but neither was it discouraged, as it was in the case of 
the black male. 
Please don't dismiss this yet. Let me rush to remind you 
that we have already established that bourgeois society has 
relegated women in general to a very distinct level of 
existence, even the slave woman. I'm not about to say they 
loved you better. Love doesn't even enter this equation, but 
socially primitive bourgeois thinking and the sex mystique 
does. First, a woman wasn't considered dangerous. Second, the 
most important experience in the Amerikan white male's 
"coming into manhood" was entering the body of the black 
female. These two circumstances contributed to the longevity 
and the matriarchal status of black women greatly. 
Add to all of this the fact that the black mother wanted to 
see her son survive in a grim and murderous white male society 
and the grotesque misshapen pieces come together. 
I was saying that if the black mother wants her revenge she 
will have to stop teaching her sons to fear death. By default 
she dominates the black subculture, and her son must be the 
catalyst in any great changes that go down in this country. The 
head and the fist, no one else has as much to gain. 
Power to the People 
George 
299


--- PAGE 320 ---
MA Y, 19 70 
29 
Dearest Angela, 
I'm thinking about you, I've done nothing else all 
day. This photograph that I have of you is not adequate. Do 
you recall what Eldridge said regarding pictures for the cell? 
Give Frances several color enlargements for me. This is the 
cruelest aspect of the prison experience. You can never 
understand how much I hate them for this, no one could, I 
havn't been able to gauge it myself. 
Over this ten years I've never left my cell in the morning 
looking for trouble, never once have I initiated any violence. 
In each case where it was alleged, it was defense attack 
response to some aggression, verbal or physical. Perhaps a 
psychiatrist, a Western psychiatrist that is, could make a case 
against me for anticipating attacks. But I wasn't born this way. 
Perhaps this same psychiatrist would diagnose from the 
overreactions that I am not a very nice person. But again I 
refer you to the fact that I was born innocent and trusting. 
The instinct to survive and all that springs from it developed in 
me, as it is today out of necessity. 
I am not a very nice person, I confess. I don't believe in 
such things as free speech when it's used to rob and defame me. 
300


--- PAGE 321 ---
I don't believe in mercy or forgiveness or restraint. I've gone to 
great lengths to learn every dirty trick devised and have 
improvised some new ones of my own. I don't play fair, don't 
fight fair. As I think of this present situation, the things that 
happen all day, the case they've saddled me with, in 
retrospection of the aggregate injury -all now drawn against 
the background of this picture you've given me-no one will 
profit from this, sister. No one will ever again profit from our 
pain. This is the last treadmill I'll run. They created this 
situation. All that flows from it is their responsibility. They've 
created in me one, irate, resentful nigger-and it's building-to 
what climax? The nation's undertakers have grown wealthy on 
black examples, but I want you to believe in me, Angela. I'm 
going to make a very poor example, no one will profit from 
my immolation. When that day comes they'll have to bury ten 
thousand of their own with full military honors. They'll have 
ear1)ed it. 
Do you sense how drunk this photograph has made me. 
You've got it all, African woman. I'm very pleased, if you 
don't ask me for my left arm, my right eye, both eyes, I'll be 
very disappointed. You're the most powerful stimulus I could 
have. 
From now on when you have books for me to read in 
preparing my motions and jury selection questions, send them 
through John Thorne, people's lawyer, he is less pressed. And I 
do want Lenin, Marx, Mao, Che, Giap, Uncle Ho, Nkrumah, 
and any Black Marxists. Mama has a list. Tell Robert to 
provide money for them, and always look for the pocket 
editions, all right? My father-you'll have to try to understand 
him. He'll be with me in the last days in spite of whatever he 
says and thinks now. I've told him that I love you, and I told 
him that if he respects me at all, and wants me to spare his 
neck at Armageddon, he must be kind to you. 
I got a letter from him this evening wherein he called the 
pigs by their very accurate moniker-pigs-he'll be all right. I 
see your influence already. But back to the books. With each 
301


--- PAGE 322 ---
load of heavy stuff throw in a reference book dealing with 
pure fact, figures, statistics, graphs for my further education. 
Also books on the personel and structure of today's political 
and economic front. I am doing some serious theory work for 
you concerning the case, dedicated to Huey and Angela. If you 
understand what I want, let me know. Sister, it's been like 
being held incommunicado these last ten years. No one 
understood what I was attempting to do and to say. We belong 
among the righteous of the world. We are the most 
powerful. We are in the best position to do the people's work. 
To win will involve taking a chance, crawling on the belly, 
naming, numbering, infiltrating, giving up meaningless small 
comforts, readjusting some values. My life means absolutely 
nothing without positive control over the factors that deter­
mine its quality. If you understand, rush to send all that I've 
asked for. A load should come in each day. I've read it all, 
once anyway, but I need it now ... and time has become very 
important. I want you to believe in me. I love you like a man, 
like a brother, and like a father. Every time I've opened my 
mouth, assumed by battle stance, I was trying in effect to say I 
love you, African-African woman. My protest has been a 
small one, something much more effective is hidden in my 
mind-believe in me Angela. This is one nigger who's got some 
sense and is not afraid to use it. If my enemies, your enemies, 
prove stronger, at least I want them to know that they made 
one righteous African man extremely angry. And that they've 
strained the patience of a righteous and loving people to the 
utmost. 
I've stopped several times in this writing to exercise, to eat, 
and it has grown late. I want to get this off tonight. I must 
know as soon as you get this and the others. Are you sure 
about your mail? I can imagine that the CIA is reading all your 
mail before you get it and deciding what you should and 
shouldn't have. Big Brother. He is rather transparent. I have 
his number. I know he's a punk, he can't stop me. 
302


--- PAGE 323 ---
Should we make a lovers' vow? It's silly, with all my 
tomorrows accounted for, but you can humor me. 
power to the People! 
George 
MA Y, 19 70 
30 
Dear Joan, 
It is early Saturday morning as I write this, I'm 
using the night-light in front of my cell. This is a rare night, a 
departure from the ordinary, it's quiet. 
It occurs to me that you are probably asleep. But then you 
may not be, my family was in the area today and I know how 
disruptive that experience can be. 
I just lit my seventy-fifth cigarette of this day. It will be my 
last-until after breakfast. 
I was, before I started this letter, thinking of all the 
wonderful women in my life, and decided that you should 
hear from me. I'm doing as I've always done, wish for five, 
expect three, and get nothing. 
I'm a little fat perhaps, but I don't know how I manage 
that, I eat nothing (for fear of poison). I seldom sleep, and do 
at least five full hours of martial-type exercises (with plenty of 
303


--- PAGE 324 ---
smoke breaks). 
At the same time we discover and reach for each other, this 
opposite factor, within sometimes (just beneath conscious 
level-let's hope), is working against us. But love is the stronger 
force-if we just let it hang out unbridled-if it's soft and 
warm, hug it hard, look for the common features, f-­
individualism. 
From Dachau with Love, 
George 
JUNE, 19 70 
2 
Dearest Angela (first among the equals), 
This is the fourth attempt to reach you. The others 
were on paper like this. They all said, "I love you, African 
Woman," little else. I will continue to try to reach you in this 
existence that follows. They can't control this. 
Once we have some lines established, I'll set down some of 
my thoughts, but we must hurry. So let me know through 
someone when I have reached you. The dates will tell you 
which letters have gotten through or at least they will tell me. 
I sent a list of stuff that I needed in that line. If you don't 
get it, use Georgia's list excepting the Fanon and Ardrey, 
which I have coming from another quarter. Need reference 
304


--- PAGE 325 ---
books too on everything. I've asked my father to provide you 
with the money for this stuff. He will cooperate with you. But 
remember we want the pocket editions of everything. These 
pigs like to steal-if I lose something it's best if it's only 
something small. 
You haven't much time for writing: This is understandable, 
but always confirm any letters you receive. I worry, and for 
good reason. There is a great deal of bullshit between us, 
concrete and steel, fear and barbed wire. 
It will not be that way for long. The pig is a dying breed, he 
is finding it hard to bluff people these days. If you really need 
me, I'll rush to your side-right now, through steel, concrete, 
all that sort of stuff. They are inert, dead, lacking will and 
intelligence. 
Our enemies from the pig right on up to the Who's Who 
level are idiots. Why do we tolerate them? They're not even 
really bad, because they have the strength which originates in 
the mind. We've been too merciful, too forgiving, too 
understanding, but those days are gone forever. 
I've heard the term nigger 350 times today. Just a 
word-but I don't understand. All of the cons who use it are 
little, young, punk types. At least three are outright homo­
sexuals. They're afraid and it's fear that's impelling them. they 
know that they're so far gone that they have nothing else to 
lose. They've talked away their lives already. 
I guess it's the same way with the pig and the men who 
make pigs. They know they've gone too far, that forgiveness is 
impossible. They cannot be reasonable now, because of 
yesterday's excesses. It's pretty clear, isn't it, what is coming. I 
accept it, it's beautiful. Tomorrow. 
I like the way you do things, I like everything about you. 
Love you, 
George 
305


--- PAGE 326 ---
JUNE, 19 70 
2 
Dear Joan, 
I don't know what to say regarding these people. 
They ... well I won't say it now. I can't. They would simply 
return this letter. They sent me a notice saying that you were 
approved, and how else could you be getting these letters; 
whoever you talked to on the phone was using an arbitrary, 
bad-faith, delaying tactic. 
I got the book all right, Joan. The long mellow communica­
tion with the photos arrived, say, ten minutes ago. Translation 
unnecessary. Thanks. 
I agree with you and Lao-tse (and Mao-who I think 
acknowledged him somewhere), but I agree with you about 
feelings and syntax (I must, look at me). My father has tried 
for years to get me interested in writing fiction stuff. I've tried 
to explain that I was too busy living-and you know where I've 
been these years-however, we can connect the two, feeling 
and writing, just drop the syntax. 
I don't consider myself a writer, an intellectual, really none 
of the things that can be isolated, when I feel I'll write (or 
talk) in an effort to effect and affect, and sometimes on the 
safety-valve principle, but actually I don't prefer anything as 
306


--- PAGE 327 ---
mild as pen and paper. In my fancies I see myself growing up 
to be a VC type, a Che-type cat with all four paws on the 
ground, a clear line drawn, a kiss for some, the claw for the 
malicious. I'm a very simple person at heart. Perfect love, 
perfect hate, that's the insides of me. It means that I've 
devided the world's people into two categories only (I reject 
further classification on the grounds that I will not be 
confused, manipulated, divided to be conquered). I recognize 
two distinct types only, the innocent, the guilty. 
The innocents, even the ones that I'll meet tomorrow, I 
love them all equally. I'll be serious with you, Joan, I find it 
almost impossible to think in terms of digging some more. Do 
you understand. Think of who you love most, Dan or Liz? Do 
you dig it? If told, or made to choose which one of my parents 
should be allowed to live, how could I choose either. I'd have 
to give myself Follow this line by putting your son against my 
brother. I would give myself I will give myself. 
The guilty, I will give the folding crane's wing snap-to the 
temple. Simple. 
I saw your mark in the book -I love you-for several very 
sound reasons-feelings-mainly for understanding. Ironic that 
we couldn't have lived this several years ago. I'll attack Ardrey 
of course, he is a nationalist, capitalist, dilettante, just wanted 
the books so I could do it accurately. 
From Dachau with "these feelings." 
George 
307


--- PAGE 328 ---
JUNE. 19 70 
3 
Dear Joan, 
I have your message of June 2 already, and it feels 
nice to be worried about, I confess. But you can't be my 
mama, I feel a lot older than Dan (how old is he-in years?). 
You and yours truly will have to be sister and brother. I insist. 
I do all right, I never have been a guy who ate much, I 
know you understand Why. They allow us to spend money 
once a week, I stock up then. My father has provided me with 
all the money they'll let me spend in the next six months. I'm 
not really hurting. 
I still think of myself as a black, and an African but I can't 
be satisfied with myself until I am communist man, revolu­
tionary man,' and this without feeling that I've denied myself, 
or failed to identify. 
Your descriptions of places, things, people, leave nothing to 
be desired. I was standing right there over you, with you, on 
the beach. Life can be (could be if) a wonderful experience. I 
have very mixed feelings about this whole affair, of drawing in 
and forcing out air. When I think of the very lovely people, the 
innocent, when I read your descriptions and some others, my 
mind strays momentarily from the fact that I'll never be safe. 
308


--- PAGE 329 ---
At these moments I feel a thrill of promise, but that's only for 
a moment, the rest of my day is elevated to a pledge I made to 
myself, a compact that I would never live at ease as long as 
there was or is one man who would restrict my and your 
self-determination. 
Must go, last chance to post this. Tomorrow. 
From a guy who really digs you. 
JUNE, 19 70 
4 
Dearest Anglea, 
George 
This is the fifth one of these (on legal paper). I 
hope one reaches you soon .... Very discouraging. But I'll 
never stop trying. 
All of these brothers here with me love you. In fact, every 
black I've talked with concerning you who had an opinion at 
all agrees with me about you .... 
One thing about this bothers me a great deal. Do you know 
(of course you do) the secret police (CIA, etc.) go to great 
lengths to murder and consequently silence every effective 
black person the moment he attempts to explain to the ghetto 
that our problems are historically and strategically tied to the 
problems of all colonial people. This means that they are 
309


--- PAGE 330 ---
watching you closely. I worry. If something happened to you I 
just wouldn't understand. 
It's no coincidence that Malcolm X and M. L. King died 
when they did. Malcolm X had just put it together (two and 
three). I seriously believe, they knew all along but were holding 
out and presenting the truth in such a way that it would affect 
the most people situationally-without getting them damaged 
by gunfire. You remember what was on his lips when he died. 
Vietnam and economics, political economy. The professional 
killers could have murdered him long before they did. They let 
Malcolm rage on muslim nationalism for a number of years 
because they knew it was an empty ideal, but the second he 
got his feet on the ground, they murdered him. We die too 
easily. We forgive and forget too easily. 
Gentle and refined people, aren't we. We'll make good 
communists, if someone deals with the fascists for us. 
That was a little bitter. Pay no attention to stuff like that. I 
have more faith in our resilience than is healthy for me. 
I[ what I said about M.L. King is true, and I'm going to put 
it down as if I were positive that it is, he was really on our side 
(the billions of righteous), his image can be used. I mean we 
can just claim him, and use his last statements and his 
image ... to strengthen ours. And Malcolm can also be 
"reformed. " 
I'm working this into my thing right now, I can use 
anything you have or can get that contains King's public 
statements or comments to notable people. I'll be easy with it, 
slip it in, like it was just common knowledge that King was a 
Maoist. 
I sure hope you understand, sister, and hurry. This hour 
hand is sweeping like the second hand. I don't care. My credo 
is to seize the pig by the tusks and ride him till his neck 
breaks. But if fortuitous outcome of circumstance allows him 
to prevail over me-again-then I want to have this carefully 
worked-up comment prepared. I want something to remain, to 
torment his ass, to haunt him, to make him know in no 
310


--- PAGE 331 ---
uncertain terms that he did incur this nigger's sore disfavor. I 
need some facts and figures to dress this passion-insist where 
you have to, but get them to cooperate. 
The lights went out an hour ago perhaps an hour and a haIf. 
It's 12 :45 A.M., June 5, and I love you twice as much as I did 
yesterday. It redoubles and double redoubles. I'm using the 
night-light in front of my cell to write this. You may never 
read it. I make this convenant with myself I'll never again 
relax. I'll never make peace with this world as long as the 
enemies of self-determination have the running of things. You 
may never read this, and I may never touch you, but I feel 
better than I have for many seasons. You do know that I live, 
and I hope that by some means you have discovered that I love 
you deeplY, and would touch you tenderly, warmly, fiercely if 
I could, if my enemies were not at present stronger. I'm going 
to stop here and do something physical, push-ups, finger 
stands, something quiet and strenuous. 
Love to 
George 
311


--- PAGE 332 ---
JUNE, 19 70 
7 
Dear Joan, 
It's early Sunday morning, 4:05 A.M. These are my 
favorite hours, it's when I think of my favorite people, this is 
the only time that it will sometimes settle down here. Bet 
you're asleep this time. 
This is my third day up, I slept for about half an hour 
yesterday when I fell off at my improvised combination 
desk-easy-chair. The "uniforms" probably have put me down 
as insane. They've started to look at me that way. (You 
probably don't know what I'm referring to, however.) There's a 
special air and expression reserved for "those crazy N--" a 
nuance different from the normal disdain. I try not to let them 
see me in my kata* but they're rather sneaky and they catch 
me sometimes. I guess it does look strange, a dance without 
music. 
Last week(?) when I mentioned that I felt older than I am, 
I wasn't referring to my knees or elbows, back or hands, nor 
did I mean that I felt in any way wise. I feel old, Joan, in the 
sense that a paper target is old after about an hour on the 
*Martial exercises mentioned in an earlier letter. 
312


--- PAGE 333 ---
police Academy practice range. Used. 
Whatever it was that I lost these last ten years, I lost it 
suddenly. I can hardly imagine time passing any faster, the 
same can be said for the years before prison also (I picked up 
my first two bullet holes at age fifteen), but the prison 
experience was unique or I should say is unique in that there 
can be absolutely no emoluments for accepting the risks and 
responsibilities for hanging on. 
I haven't seen the night sky for a decade. During the early 
sixties in San Quentin, "lockup" meant just that, twenty-four 
hours a day, all day, a shower once a week, and this could last 
for months (it's not changed much). On a shower walk one 
day in '63??, a brother called me to his cell for an opinion on 
this work he was doing on his walls. He had drawn in the night 
sky with colored pencils and against it, life size, lifelike (he 
was good), female comrades-some with fluffy naturals like 
my sister Angie, some with silky naturals like my sister Betsy. 
He had worked on it for three months. It was enormous­
beautiful, precise, mellow. When he finished the last strokes 
the pigs moved him to another cell and painted over it, gave 
him a bad-conduct report, and made him pay for the new coat 
of paint. That brother didn't draw much any more last time I 
saw him. Some political cartoons, abstracts in book margins. 
Life's "a tale told by an idiot." Have you read any 
Shakespeare? I really enjoyed him when I was young. Macbeth 
is timeless, put him in a Brooks Brothers or a uniform and he'd 
fit right into the seventies. But you read all that stuff when 
you were in high school. I keep fogetting your background 
(class). Forgive me, sister, lorgive the parochialism I sometimes 
slip into, habits formed in being, and addressing myself to, the 
hindmost. 
From Dachau with love-
George 
313


--- PAGE 334 ---
JUNE, 19 70 
7 
Dear John. * 
You and your secretary just left. It's Sunday. 
I hope that ham on the tape was satisfactory. I find that 
sort of thing hard. I'll have to deal with it. I can, I guess, but 
it's not in keeping with my character. I'm the original shy guy? 
No ego at all. It's been crushed. I'd feel more relaxed at a 
shooting scrape than talking at the head of the table. Just not 
the kind of thing I favor. But if you feel that it may be 
necessary in the future. I'll work on it; but you're going to 
have to convince me. 
I've always thought in terms of division of labor-John, 
Huey, Angela Davis, etc., on the political front, cats like me 
behind them, in the crowd, watching the watchers-neutrali­
zing the watchers. Where I have the nervous equipment 
naturally for that, the addressing would be strained. You 
understand, the difference between Fidel and Che. Fidel is at 
home behind a bank of microphones, Che is at home behind 
the carbine. Both can switch roles temporarily but Che is 
really a man of few words. And where would the Cuban 
revolution have ended were it not for Che and Camilo 
Cienfuegos. 
* John Thorne, one of the author's lawyers. 
314


--- PAGE 335 ---
But I'll try. It's merely a question of security, inner 
confidence, you understand. Will these people want to hear 
and bother to understand what I'm saying? 
1 feel a little funny about Angela being fired at this time 
and for that reason. We've fronted them off so often over 
these last few hundred years. I know they would have fired her 
anyway but I still feel ... dependent in a way that damages 
my ego further. I hope like hell I'll have the opportunity to 
live up to expectations. She is such an incentive factor ... how 
can 1 fear otherwise. 
Thanks-Power to the People. 
George 
JU NE. 19 70 
11 
Dear Joan, 
Nice, very nice surprise for me today, but have you 
ever experienced a faster half hour. 1 did have some word for 
my family, but we got so wrapped up that 1 forgot. As you 
were being pulled away (I thought they would dislocate your 
arm), 1 was reflecting on how nice it is to hug. 
Tell Georgia my case requires her to see me at least once a 
week, 1 want to see her now. 
She may come up tomorrow-but if &0 I imagine you'll 
know. 
Adore you-
George 
315


--- PAGE 336 ---
JUNE, 19 70 
14 
Dear G., 
The California Adult Authority board and inmate 
Jackson A63837 clashed for the final time in June 19 69. When 
I was called up in June '70 (the usual arrangement is once a 
year), I refused to go. I was already under indictment for the 
murder of the pig and it wasn't very likely that I would be 
given consideration for anything but the firing squad. The 
June 19 69 appearance, however, was very significant because 
it followed a six-month postponement. I had gone to the 
board for the eighth time in December 1968. I was told by the 
institution employee who always sits on the board hearings 
that I was "granted a parole." I would be back on the street on 
March 4. I walked back to my cell telling everyone I had a 
"date." I even wrote to my family. Three days later I was 
informed that a mistake had been made. Consideration of my 
case was postponed for six months. They explained to me that 
I would be transferred to Soledad from San Quentin. If I did 
well for six months at Soledad, I would be given parole for 
certain. When the June 19 69 appearance finally took place 
different people were on the board panel. No one could find 
any reference to the promises made to me by the earlier board. 
316


--- PAGE 337 ---
I was denied for another full year. 
Something very similar had happened the year before at the 
December 19 67 appearance. At the previous meeting they had 
promised me that if I had seven or eight clean months I would 
be rele ased. When I reminded them of their promise, they 
laughed and stated that "we never make deals like that." 
All the other board appearances were tense affairs con­
ducted in an atmosphere of mutual hostility. We argued over 
conflicting interpretations of the disciplinary reports in my 
central file. I had been accused of being a Muslim, Communist, 
agitator, nationalist, loan shark, thief, assassin, and saboteur. 
Nothing was ever settled, nothing was really exchanged except 
hostility. 
Power to the People. 
Comrade George 
JU NE, 19 70 
15 
Dear Joan, 
I missed a day or two! I will clean up for that soon. 
I've been extremely busy in here, and then sometimes I get 
lazy. Then I'll kick back and think about you all. Since you're 
my eyes, and ears, and interpreter, I find myself with you 
most of the time. 
317


--- PAGE 338 ---
I also missed seeing you today during what may have been 
the best court session to date. We won one. * The people-on 
the march. I've lost so many rounds, Joan-it feels good. We 
love you. You know where I'm at, I've always loved you. But 
all the rest of these cats down here are starting to feel your 
presence also. 
I have Marie in here now. t Marie was my first love, my first 
experience. It was tender, I failed her, but if I try real hard 
now she may forgive me. That's been my thing-for years, to 
always live up to expectations. 
And if you don't ask me for something very difficult, very 
taxing, I won't be able to relax from this point on. 
We won't have to worry about these here too much longer. 
How far is San Jose from San Francisco? 
Hope they'll let me see you, and perhaps they'll relent and 
let me see your daughter also. But ... there isn't much chance 
of that. 
What in your opinion was the principal reason for granting 
the move? Your opinion helps me anticipate. You understand 
that's what kept me here among the living with you over these 
years, anticipating. 
Adore you-
George 
*The court in Salinas granted a change of venue to San 
Francisco. 
t "Someone sent me a card with a picture of 'The African 
Mother' done by and named Marie. I was commenting that I 
and my black male comrades had failed to be fathers and 
husbands, over the decades." 
318


--- PAGE 339 ---
JUNE, 19 70 
17 
Dear Joan, 
I may have read a review or quote from Levi­
Strauss but that's about all. And the World, I love it, send it to 
me. I'll share it with all the rest here who can still love. But 
will have to transfer it soon. The day I leave I'll send you a line 
or two. You let them know. 
Western culture developed out of a very hostile environ­
ment. Rocks, snow, ice, long periods when the ground was too 
hard to be worked, when nothing could be produced from the 
soil, hunting became too important; accumulating, hoarding, 
hiding, protecting enough to last through the winter, things 
falling apart in winter, covetous glances at one's neighbor's 
goods. Would three or four thousand years of that kind of 
survival influence a culture? Would greed color itself into the 
total result, in a large way? Hunt, forage, store, hoard, hide, 
defend, the thing at stake!! Not very conducive to sensitivity, 
. tenderness. 
Change the environment, change the man. Simple. 
Consider tli.e people's store, after full automation, the 
implementation of the theory of economic advantage. You 
dig, no waste makers, no harnesses on production. There is no 
319


--- PAGE 340 ---
intermediary, no money. The store, it stocks everything that 
the body or home could possibly use. Why won't the people 
hoard, how is an operation like that possible, how could the 
storing place keep its stores if its stock (merchandise) is free? 
Men hoard against want, need, don't they? Aren't they 
taught that tomorrow holds terror, pile up a surplus against 
this terror, be greedy and possessive if you want to succeed in 
this insecure world? Nuts hidden away for tomorrow's winter. 
Change the environment, educate the man, he'll change. 
The people's store will work as long as people know that it will 
be there, and have in abundance the things they need and want 
(really want); when they are positive that the common effort 
has and will always produce an abundance, they won't bother 
to take home more than they need. 
Water is free, do people drink more than they need? There 
is a reason for the ugliness of Western culture, many reasons I 
would say, but the fact that it was founded and tied into 
greed, the need to store so much, and work and fight so hard 
for something to store stands out from the other reasons. 
This man that you work with, I know about cats like him. 
They never take more than they can give, so that sounds like a 
near-perfect relationship. You have to ask cats like that for 
something hard to make them relax. 
Love you, 
George 
320


--- PAGE 341 ---
JUNE. 19 70 
27 
Dear G., 
The man who has never received a kind message, a 
gesture, and who has never held anything of value, material or 
otherwise, if he is healthy, or I should say remains healthy (my 
persuasion presupposes original innocence), he never becomes 
so practical as to expect more of the same-nothing. Less but 
never nothing. 
To be denied or re jected means less to this man but never 
nothing. 
And if he is still healthy of mind, he knows he can't be 
practical, he can't afford practicality. His have-nothing status, 
the absence of the all-important controls, predisposes him to 
impracticality, he can never relax, he is or becomes the 
desperate man. And desperate men do desperate things, take 
desperate positions; when revolution comes he is the first to 
join it. If it doesn't come he makes it. 
But the significant feature of the desperate man reveals 
itself when he meets other desperate men, direct or vicarious­
Iy; and he experiences his first kindness, someone to strain 
with him, to strain to see him as he strains to see himself, 
someone to understand, someone to accept the regard, the 
love, that desperation forces into hiding. 
321


--- PAGE 342 ---
This significant feature in the desperate men, and women, 
people, redeems them, redeems the revolution, alters the 
sanguine coloring of war, and gives revolution its love motive. 
Men who have never received and have had little occasion 
to express the love theme or original goodness respond in a 
very significant manner to that first real, spontaneous, 
gratuitous kindness. Those feelings that find no expression in 
desperate times store themselves up in great abundance, ripen, 
strengthen, and strain the walls of their repository to the 
utmost; where the kindred spirit touches this wall it crumbles 
-no one responds to kindness, no one is more sensitive to it 
than the desperate man. 
I'm trying to say thanks. 
Power to the People-
JUNE, 19 70 
2 8 
Dear Joan, 
Comrade George 
I knew you were here Thursday before I got the 
letter informing me of it. Our spirits met right there over the 
flower beds for a while. Then too I have my spies out, tall tan 
lady with huge round blue eyes. They have turned away 
dozens of my visitors, sorry to have put you through that. 
322


--- PAGE 343 ---
What exactly did they say? 
As soon as you finish with this letter, jump into your auto, 
fmd someone who will sell you some envelopes like the ones I 
generally send these messages in, long, business envelopes, then 
frod some a little larger, go back home, write me a love note. 
Put the smaller of the two types of envelopes in one of the 
huger envelopes, include the love and pass to me. 
I'm thinking of Jon now. I wish there was some way to talk 
with him in private. They ran him off too. They certainly must 
be sure of themselves, I mean sure of being able to convict and 
hold and get rid of me, because they're not very concerned 
about making me mad. And they know I don't forget. 
It's real early Sunday morning, you're probably asleep. 
When I'm finished with this I'll join you in that dimension, 
and you're not shy at all. 
Power-Love, 
George 
JUNE, 19 70 
30 
Dear Joan. 
You correctly sensed I am in a terrible rush, all the 
time. This rush characterizes everything that flows from me. 
(I'll take my time loving you, but when I come I'll be fresh 
323


--- PAGE 344 ---
from some hurried encounter with the Minotaur and related 
problems.) 
I'm not really shy either, a little defensive yet-but no one 
would listen! That's what happened to me. But it was good in 
a way. It crushed the egotism, and the egocentric thing. (I only 
wish to help in the work against the minotaur.) The question 
is, do these nice people really want to hear what I have to 
say-as a victim of the first order-will they mistake it-as 
extreme-can these wonderful gentle people understand that 
some extreme situations call for extreme remedies; that the 
only means of ever dealing with a situation that calls for 
movement is to get ahead of the people and pull, not the 
reverse!!! Get ahead and pull. You've heard that ... excuse(?), 
"Don't get ahead of the people." Bull! And then the others 
will change if we pull them into something that demands 
adjustments, breakthroughs. Theotis's job will be to rebuild, 
after I do my work. You, Minerva, will be his teacher. 
You mentioned once-well, you spoke of "Jewish mama 
instincts"-are you Jewish? And what in your view is a Jew? 
(That should keep you working for a While.) All these years 
I've never given it a thought. I mean, I've never noticed 
anything singular or let's say distinctively different. Except in 
ways of love, and of course the physical, personal features so 
pleasing to the inner man. 
Your daughter, I could breathe her in with one intake. I 
was referring to the auto accident when I spoke of her health, 
I've been worrying since I read that letter. Cuts, face, black 
eyes! ! She has a hundred pounds on that wonderful little 
body?? !! One long slow breath. Tell her I am devoted to her, 
and although we can't be together now I do want her to stay 
close as she can to me. 
From me come great feelings of warmth and all kinds of 
love-for Joan. 
George 
324


--- PAGE 345 ---
JUL Y, 19 70 
8 
Dear Joan, 
This, my lovely one is just a note. Troubled times 
here that preoccupy your comrad's attentions. 
Oh! I'm still here. 
They don't like it, however. Fools, to say the least. 
I have your two letters of Tuesday here with me now. 
I feel closer every-things, people, complexities-each time 
I see you (two times). I feel a little closer-what if people start 
talking nasty about us? You with those long legs, and me with 
these long arms. I never feel shy around my other female 
army .... You be cool or I'llbreathe you in. 
I feel so sorry for them both, Georgia and her man. If you 
say I should, I'll send him a line tonight, but don't think 
you've twisted me around that white little finger. It will be a 
while yet before I give in completely to you. 
I dig you a lot. 
Love, 
325 
George


--- PAGE 346 ---
JUL Y, 19 70 
28 
Dear Joan, 
It's certainly nice to have a wonderfully alive, 
intelligent woman in the hand-every fingertip thanks you. 
I've been back in the cell for ten minutes, after waiting 
forty-five for an escort. I saw you and Jon leave (you're almost 
as tall as he). I can't help but worry myself for him, not in the 
same way that his parents worry, actually the opposite of that. 
My concern is that his development not be retarded. Our 
immediate family is relating to him in the exact manner that 
they related to me. Bitter experience has taught them nothing. 
He's clearly rejected selfish love and restraints. Their attitudes 
are forcing him to choose between them and the ideal. We 
oppress each other, smother and confuse with contradictions 
between the tongue and the act. They're pushing him away 
from them. You know he's already somewhat withdrawn. Fear 
responses ... he said he was leaving the house there in 
Pasadena. That should cause some tidal waves of emotional­
ism. I advised him to guide his decisions by necessity first, 
feelings secondly. I wonder, though, if I was right. 
I'm chain-smoking again. 
But you, you give me massive doses of relief. Thanks for 
326


--- PAGE 347 ---
the confidence, the tears, the love. 
*We will win. 
George 
*"Anyone who doesn't sense this fundamental power of 
the people cannot be a guerrilla fighter." 
JUL Y, 19 70 
28 
Dear Fay. Dear Fay. 
The possibility of us, as persons, misunderstanding 
each other will always rest on the fact that I am an alien. It 
will always be my fault. The secret things that I hide from 
almost everyone, and especially the people who are sweet and 
gentle and intellectually inhibited from grasping the full range 
of the ordeal of being fair game, hunted, an alien, precludes 
forever a state of perfect agreement. You dig what I'm saying 
now you've conceded this much. Keep it always in mind, and 
strain with me. 
I feel threatened. That's where we should begin. Recall how 
I attempted to explain that feeling, the singular and inclusive 
sense. Then add to this that even in the days of my darkest 
confusion, when I was at once myself and not myself, my 
response to this feeling (and I've always felt threatened) was 
327


--- PAGE 348 ---
one from the older section of my brain. Being an alien has 
never (or seldom) made me feel sheepish! 
In the inclusive sense, my politics, you'll find all of the 
atypical features of my character. I may run, but all the time 
that I am, I'll be looking for a stick! A defensible position! It's 
never occurred to me to lie down and be kicked! It's silly! 
When I do that I'm depending on the kicker to grow tired. The 
better tactic is to twist his leg a little or pull it off if you can. 
An intellectual argument to an attacker against the logic of his 
violence-or one to myself concerning the wisdom of a natural 
counterviolence-borders on, no, it overleaps the absurd!! 
I just don't subscribe to that superman shit, I've seen too 
many men cry, seen them in all postures of the common 
infirmity-death. My message to black people and to sweet, 
gentle, much-loved people like yourself will be the same 
message I receive from my brain for myself. It will be the same 
as long as we have the same problem, it will be the same 
coming from the living, loving brain or from the grave. 
They just put a new night-light in front of my cell, I'll be 
able to break up my days as I wish. Or not break them, just 
keep on going.-Just keep going-straight ahead-right on. 
You're like no one I've ever met from across the tracks. I 
do think a very great deal of you and I'm certain that you do 
try to understand our problems. Don't mistake this as a 
message from George to Fay, it's a message from the hunted 
running blacks to those people of this society who profess to 
want to change the conditions that destroy life. These blacks 
are still in doubt as to whether those elements across the 
tracks want this change badly enough to accept the U.S. being 
physically brought to its knees to attain it. WiII the Weather­
men always be a microscopic minority? Working outside the 
protection of all their people, instead of with the support of 
an aggressive political cadre. I dig them, and love you. 
Fondly and Always. 
Power to the People, 
328 
George


--- PAGE 349 ---
AUGUS T, 19 70 
9 Real Date, 2 days A.D. 
Dear Joan, 
We reckon all time in the future from the day of 
the man-child's death. 
Man-child, black man-child with submachine gun in hand, 
he was free for a while. I guess that's more than most of us can 
expect. 
I want people to wonder at what forces created him, 
terrible, vindictive, cold, calm man-child, courage in one hand, 
the machine gun in the other, scourge of the unrighteous-"an 
ox for the people to ride"! !! 
Go over all the letters I've sent you, any reference to 
Georgia being less than a perfect revolutionary's mama must 
be removed. Do it now! I want no possibility of anyone 
misunderstanding her as I did. She didn't cry a tear. She is, as I 
am, very proud. She read two things into his rage, love and 
loyalty. 
I can't go any further, it would just be a love story about 
the baddest brother this world has had the privilege to meet, 
and it's just not popular or safe-to say I love him. 
329


--- PAGE 350 ---
Cold and calm though. "All right, gentlemen, I'm taking 
over now."* 
Revolution, 
George 
*The author quotes his brother's words from the San 
Rafael courthouse. 
330


--- PAGE 351 ---
APPEND IX: 
I ntroduction to the First Edition 
by Jean Genet* 
Every authentic writer discovers not only a new style but a 
narrative form which is his alone, and which in most cases he 
uses up, exhausting its effects for his own purposes. 
Many people would be amazed to hear that the epistolary 
narrative was still capable of affording us a resolutely modern 
mode of expression; yet if we merely juxtapose (one after 
another) a certain number of George Jackson's letters, we 
obtain a striking poem of love and of combat. 
But even more surprising, when we read these letters from a 
young black in Soledad Prison, is that they perfectly articulate 
*Brazil, July 1970. Translated by Richard Howard. 
331


--- PAGE 352 ---
the road traveled by their author-first the rather clumsy 
letters to his mother and his brother, then letters to his 
lawyer which become something extraordinary, half-poem, 
half-essay, and then the last letters, of an extreme delicacy, to 
an unknown recipient. And from the first letter to the last, 
nothing has been willed, written or composed for the sake of a 
book, yet here is a book, tough and sure, both a weapon of 
liberation and a love poem. In this case I see no miracle except 
the miracle of truth itself, the naked truth revealed. George 
Jackson is a poet, then. But he faces the death penalty. I shall 
talk about that. 
A court of justice, a certain number of jurors protected by 
uniformed guards, by plainclothesmen, by informers, by the 
whole of white America, will decide whether Jackson and his 
brothers killed a prison guard. The jurors answer yes or no. If 
they answer yes, a very strange operation begins. The judges 
must pronounce sentence-either a death sentence, a life 
sentence, or a sentence of time to be served.t What, then, is 
this intellectual operation which changes a simple act (a 
murder, if there was one) into something quite different: into 
another death, or a life sentence or a period of time served? 
How these two facts are linked together-the initial and 
hypothetical murder, and the sentence pronounced-no one 
knows, no one has yet said. This is because the courts, in 
America as elsewhere, are tribunals of authority, a crude 
authority which adapts itself very well to the arbitrary. 
Yet this sentence, once pronounced, must be carried out. It 
tWhen this Introduction was written, Genet did not realize 
that, under California law, the jury usually determines the 
sentence. In Jackson's case, however, the sentence of death is 
actually mandatory. In California, convicts serving life sen­
tences who are convicted of assault on a noninmate are 
automatically sentenced to death. 
332


--- PAGE 353 ---
will be carried out by and upon the Soledad brothers, upon 
George Jackson, and in this way: either by proceeding from 
his cell to the gas chamber, or by living twenty or thirty years 
in still another cell. 
A guard is discovered-murdered. 
A jury answers yes or no to indicate the murderer. 
The murderer dies in his turn, or lives in a cell for thirty 
years in order to justify a sentence that has been pronounced. 
To understand the significance of this book as a weapon, a 
means of combat, the reader must not forget that George 
Jackson is in danger of death. 
If a certain complicity links the works written in prisons or 
asylums (Sade and Artaud share the same necessity of finding 
in themselves what must lead them to glory , that is, despite 
the walls, the moats, the jailers and the magistracy, into the 
light, into minds not enslaved), these works do not meet in 
what is still called ignominy: starting in search of themselves 
from that ignominy demanded by social repression, they 
discover common ground in the audacity of their undertaking, 
in the rigor and accuracy of their ideas and their visions. In 
prison more than elsewhere one cannot afford to be casual. 
One cannot endure a penalty so monstrous as the lack of 
freedom without demanding of one's mind and body a labor at 
once delicate and brutal, a labor capable of "warping" the 
prisoner in a direction which takes him ever farther from the 
social world. But ... 
It might be supposed that as the site of absolute male­
diction, prison, and at its heart the cell, would enforce by its 
misery upon those confined there a kind of solidarity required 
by that very misery, a merciful harmony in which all social 
distinctions maintained in the free air would be abolished. 
Prison serves no purpose. Do we imagine that at least it can 
strip its inmates of their wretched social differences, that 
333


--- PAGE 354 ---
under the surveillance of a cordon of guards," black or white 
but armed, there develop behind its walls, in its darkness, 
certain new relations between the prisoners, whoever they may 
have been during their moments of freedom? 
That is an idealistic hope which we must avoid or get rid of. 
George Jackson's book tells the brutal truth: in prison, in a 
cell, the white skin of the prisoners becomes an image of 
complicity with the white skin of the guards, so that if white 
guards superintend a hell in which white men are jailed, the 
white prisoners superintend another hell inside that one in 
which black men are jailed. Now the security of the guards, 
their independence-their time off duty, their visits to town, 
their family lives-grant a certain respite to the white 
prisoners; but the fact that .these prisoners must be constantly 
confined, never distracted by the world outside, means that 
they employ all their time and all their imagination in 
maintaining the hell in which they confine the black prisoners. 
Few prisoners, on the whole, escape the tendency of a 
complicity with certain guards: it is a kind of nostalgia for the 
social world from which the prisoner is cut off (a nostalgia 
which makes the prisoner cling to what seems, in his prison, 
closest to the social order: the guard. As for the guard, the 
motives which lead him to accept the game between certain 
prisoners and himself are many and complex). Now would this 
complicity have too much importance, when its meaning is 
abatement, a temporary weakness likely to be revoked, 
abruptly halted-on the occasion of a riot, for example. But in 
the United States, this complicity has a dif f erent meaning: the 
complicity of the white prisoners with the guards exasperates 
and intensifies what constitutes the basis of relations between 
white men and black: racism. 
This racism is scattered, diffused throughout the whole of 
America, grim, underhanded, hypocritical, arrogant. There is 
one place where we might hope it would cease, but on the 
contrary, it is in this place that it reaches its cruelest pitch, 
intensifying every second, preying on body and soul; it is in 
334


--- PAGE 355 ---
this place that racism becomes a kind of concentrate of 
racism: in the American prisons, in Soledad Prison, and in its 
center, the Soledad cells. 
If, by some oversight, racism were to disappear from the 
surface of the United States, we could then seek it out, intact 
and more dense, in one of these cells. It is here, secret and 
public, explicable and mysterious, stupid and more compli­
cated than a tiger's eye, absence of life and source of pain, 
nonexistent mass and radioactive charge, exposed to all and 
yet concealed. One might say that racism is here in its pure 
state, gathering its forces, pulsing with power, ready to spring. 
The extravagant adventure of white America, which is the 
victorious expansion of Victorian England, is doubtless ex­
hausted, it will dissolve and fade, revealing at last what is 
cheerfully devouring it: the black nation which was caught 
within it, itself traversed by liberating currents, liberating 
movements, producing long screams of misery and joy. What 
seems new to me in this black literature IS that now we hear 
almost no echoes of the great Hebrew prophets. From Richard 
Wright to George Jackson, the blacks are stripping themselves 
of all the presbyterian and biblical rags: their voices are rawer, 
blacker, more accusing, more implacable, tearing away any 
reference to the cynical cheats of the religious establishment. 
Their voices are more singular, and singular too in what they 
seem to agree upon: to denounce the curse not of being black, 
but captive. 
Is that new? 
Incontestably. 
George Jackson's style is clear, carefully pitched, simple 
and supple, as is his thinking. Anger alone illuminates his style 
and his thinking, and a kind of joy in anger. 
A book written in prison-in any place of confinement-is 
addressed chiefly perhaps to readers who are not outcasts, who 
have never been to jail and who will never go there. That is 
335


--- PAGE 356 ---
why in some sense such a book proceeds obliquely. Otherwise, 
I know that the man who writes it need only take, in order to 
fling them down on paper, the forbidden words, the accursed 
words, the words covered with blood, the unwritten words of 
spit and sperm-like the ultimate name of God-the dangerous 
words, the padlocked words, the words that do not belong to 
the dictionary, for if they were written there, written out and 
not maimed by elipses, they would utter too fast the 
suffocating misery of a solitude that is not accepted, that is 
flogged only by what it is deprived of: sex and freedom. 
It is therefore prudent that any text which reaches us from 
this infernal place should reach us as though mutilated, pruned 
of its overly tumultuous adornments. 
It is thus behind bars, bars accepted by them alone, that its 
readers, if they dare, will discover the infamy of a situation 
which a respectable vocabulary cannot reinstate-but behind 
the permitted words, listen for the others! 
If the prisoner is a black man captured by whites, a third 
thread runs through this difficult web: hatred. Not the rather 
vague and diffuse hatred of the social order or of fate, but the 
very precise hatred of the white man. Here again, the prisoner 
must use the very language, the words, the syntax of his 
enemy, whereas he craves a separate language belonging only 
to his people. Once again his situation is both hypocritical and 
wretched: he can express his sexual obsessions only in a polite 
dialect, according to a syntax which enables others to read 
him, and as for his hatred of the white man, he can utter it 
only in this language which belongs to black and white alike 
but over which the white man extends his grammarian's 
jurisidiction. It is perhaps a new source of anguish for the 
black man to realize that if he writes a masterpiece, it is his 
enemy's language, his enemy's treasury which is enriched by 
the additional jewel he has so furiously and lovingly carved. 
He has then only one recourse: to accept this language but 
to corrupt it so skillfully that the white men are caught in his 
trap. To accept it in all its richness, to increase that richness 
336


--- PAGE 357 ---
still further, and to suffuse it with all his obsessions and all his 
hatred of the white man. That is a task. 
And it is a task which seems contradicted by the 
revolutionary's. The revolutionary enterprise of the American 
black, it seems, can come into being only out of resentment 
and hatred, that. is, by rejecting with disgust, with rage, but 
radically, the values venerated by the whites, although this 
enterprise can continue only starting from a common lan­
guage, at first rejected, finally accepted, in which the words 
will no longer serve concepts inculcated by the whites, but 
new concepts. In a revolu tionary work written by a black man 
in jail, certain traces must remain, then, of the orgiastic and 
hate-ridden trajectory covered in an imposed solitude. 
Having emerged from his delirium, having achieved a cold 
revolutionary consciousness, Sade still kept something of that 
obsessional delirium which nonetheless led him to his revo­
lutionary lucidity. 
This is also evident in the letters which follow. 
In prison, George Jackson must still be sure to fortify in 
himself what sets him against the whites, and to elaborate a 
consciousness so acute that it will be valid for all men. 
It was almost predictable that having reached this stage of 
self-discovery, his revolutionary consciousness should meet 
and come to terms with the Black Panther party. Thus it is 
without equivocation and without any mystery that he names 
it and abides by its directives in the course of his last letters. 
For myself, who have lived with the Panthers, I see George 
Jackson in his place there, fighting at their side with the same 
conviction and the same talent as his brothers accused of 
murder, Huey Newton and Bobby Seale. 
If we accept this idea, that the revolutionary enterprise of a 
man or of a people originates in their poetic genius, or, more 
precisely, that this enterprise is the inevitable conclusion of 
poetic genius, we must reject n6thing of what makes poetic 
exaltation possible. If certain details of this work seem 
337


--- PAGE 358 ---
immoral to you, it is because the work as a whole denies your 
morality, because poetry contains both the possibility of a 
revolutionary morality and what appears to contradict it. 
Finally, every young American black who writes is trying to 
find himself and test himself and sometimes, at the very center 
of his being, in his own heart, discovers a white man he must 
annihilate. 
But let me return to the amazing coherence of George 
Jackson's life and of his unwilled book. There is nonetheless 
one rather disturbing thing about it: at the same moment he 
was living his life (a kind of death or higher life), without his 
realizing it, by letters and certain notations in his letters, he 
was also writing his legend, that is, he was giving us, without 
intending to, a mythical image of himself and of his life-I 
mean an image transcending his physical person and his 
ordinary life in order to project himself into glory with the 
help of a combat weapon (his book) and of a love poem. 
But I have lived too long in prisons not to recognize, as 
soon as the very first pages were translated for me in San 
Francisco, the special odor and texture of what was written in 
a cell, behind walls, guards, envenomed by hatred, for what I 
did not yet know so intensely was the hatred of the white 
American for the black, a hatred "So deep that I wonder if 
every white man in this country, when he plants a tree, doesn't 
see Negroes hanging from its branches. 
When this book comes out, the man Who wrote it will still 
be in his Soledad cell, with his Soledad Brothers. * What 
follows must be read as a manifesto, as a tract, as a call to 
rebellion, since it is that first of all. 
*In late June 19 70, before the publication of this book, the 
Soledad brothers were transferred to San Quentin. 
338


--- PAGE 359 ---
It is too obvious that the legislative and judiciary systems 
of the United States were established in order to protect a 
capitalist minority and, if forced, the whole of the white 
population; but these infernal systems are still raised against 
the black man. We have known for a long time now that the 
black man is, from the start, natively, the guilty man. We can 
be sure that if the blacks, by the use of their violence, their 
intelligence, their poetry, all that they have accumulated for 
centuries while observing their former masters in silence and in 
secrecy-if the blacks do not undertake their own liberation, 
the whites will not make a move. 
But already Huey Newton, Bobby Seale, the members of 
the Black Panther party, George Jackson, and others have 
stopped lamenting their fate. The time for blues is over, for 
them. They are creating, each according to his means, a 
revolutionary consciousness. And their eyes are clear. Not 
blue. 
JEAN GENET 
339

