=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Grand_Chessboard.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 223
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:28:30.097802
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
ZBIGNIEW
BRZEZINSKI
THE GRAND
CHESSBOARD
American Primacy
and Its -
Geostrategic Imperatives
SA5IC
•A Umhi <4-Q|i


--- PAGE 2 ---
For my students—to help them shape tomorrow's world


--- PAGE 3 ---
CONTENTS
List of Maps ix
List of Charts and Tables xi
Introduction: Superpower Politics xiii
1 Hegemony of a New Type 3
The Short Road to Global Supremacy 3
The First Global Power 10
The American Global System 24
2 The Eurasian Chessboard 30
Geopolitics and Geostrategy 37
Geostrategic Players and Geopolitical Pivots 40
Critical Choices and Potential Challenges 48
3 The Democratic Bridgehead 57
Grandeur and Redemption 61
America's Central Objective 71
Europe's Historic Timetable 81
vii


--- PAGE 4 ---
viii CONTENTS
4 The Black Hole 87
Russia's New Geopolitical Setting 87
Geostrategic Phantasmagoria 96
The Dilemma of the One Alternative 118
5 The Eurasian Balkans 123
The Ethnic Cauldron 125
The Multiple Contest 135
Neither Dominion Nor Exclusion1 148
6 The Far Eastern Anchor 151
China: Not Global but Regional 158
Japan: Not Regional but International 173
America's Geostrategic Adjustment 185
7 Conclusion 194
A Geostrategy for Eurasia 197
A Trans-Eurasian Security System 208
Beyond the Last Global Superpower 209
Index 217


--- PAGE 5 ---
MAPS
The Sino-Soviet Bloc and Three Central
Strategic Fronts 7
The Roman Empire at Its Height 11
The Manchu Empire at Its Height 14
Approximate Scope of Mongol Imperial Control, 1280 16
European Global Supremacy, 1900 18
British Paramountcy, 1860-1914 20
American Global Supremacy 22
The World's Geopolitically Central Continent
and Its Vital Peripheries 32
The Eurasian Chessboard 34
The Global Zone of Percolating Violence 53
France's and Germany's Geopolitical Orbits
of Special Interest 64
Is This Really "Europe"? 82
Beyond 2010: The Critical Core of Europe's Security 85
IX


--- PAGE 6 ---
x MAPS
Loss of Ideological Control
and Imperial Retrenchment 94
Russian Military Bases in the Former Soviet Space 108
The Eurasian Balkans 124
Major Ethnic Groups in Central Asia 126
The Turkic Ethnolinguistic Zone 137
The Competitive Interests of Russia, Turkey, and Iran 138
Caspian-Mediterranean Oil Export Pipelines 146
Boundary and Territorial Disputes in East Asia 155
Potential Scope of China's Sphere of Influence
and Collision Points 167
Overlap Between a Greater China and an
American-Japanese Anti-China Coalition 184


--- PAGE 7 ---
LIST OF CHARTS AND TABLES
The Continents: Area 33
The Continents: Population 33
The Continents: GNP 33
European Organizations 58
EU Membership: Application to Accession 83
Demographic Data for the Eurasian Balkans 127
Asian Armed Forces 156
XI


--- PAGE 8 ---
INTRODUCTION
Superpower
Politics
EVER SINCE THE CONTINENTS started interacting politically,
some five hundred years ago, Eurasia has been the center of
world power. In different ways, at different times, the peo-
ples Inhabiting Eurasia—though mostly those from its Western Eu-
ropean periphery—penetrated and dominated the world's other
regions as individual Eurasian states attained the special status
and enjoyed the privileges of being the world's premier powers.
The last decade of the twentieth century has witnessed a tec-
tonic shift in world affairs. For the first time ever, a non-Eurasian
power has emerged not only as the key arbiter of Eurasian power
relations but also as the world's paramount power. The defeat and
collapse of the Soviet Union was the final step in the rapid ascen-
dance of a Western Hemisphere power, the United States, as the
sole and, indeed, the first truly global power.
Eurasia, however, retains Its geopolitical importance. Not only
is its western periphery—Europe—still the location of much of the
world's political and economic power, but its eastern region—
Asia—has lately become a vital center of economic growth and ris-
ing political influence. Hence, the issue of how a globally engaged
xin


--- PAGE 9 ---
xiv INTRODUCTION
America copes with the complex Eurasian power relationships—
and particularly whether it prevents the emergence of a dominant
and antagonistic Eurasian power—remains central to America's
capacity to exercise global primacy.
It follows that—in addition to cultivating the various novel di-
mensions of power (technology, communications, information, as
well as trade and finance)—American foreign policy must remain
concerned with the geopolitical dimension and must employ its in-
fluence in Eurasia in a manner that creates a stable continental
equilibrium, with the United States as the political arbiter.
Eurasia is thus the chessboard on which the struggle for global
primacy continues to be played, and that struggle involves
geostrategy—the strategic management of geopolitical interests. It
is noteworthy that as recently as 1940 two aspirants to global
power, Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, agreed explicitly (in the se-
cret negotiations of November of that year) that America should
be excluded from Eurasia. Each realized that the injection of Amer-
ican power into Eurasia would preclude his ambitions regarding
global domination. Each shared the assumption that Eurasia is the
center of the world and that he who controls Eurasia controls the
world. A half century later, the issue has been redefined: will Amer-
ica's primacy in Eurasia endure, and to what ends might it be ap-
plied?
The ultimate objective of American policy should be benign
and visionary: to shape a truly cooperative global community, in
keeping with long-range trends and with the fundamental interests
of humankind. But in the meantime, it is imperative that no
Eurasian challenger emerges, capable of dominating Eurasia and
thus also of challenging America. The formulation of a comprehen-
sive and integrated Eurasian geostrategy is therefore the purpose of
this book.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Washington, DC.
April 1997


--- PAGE 10 ---
THE GRAND
CHESSBOARD


--- PAGE 11 ---
CHAPTER 1
Hegemony
of a
New Type
HEGEMONY is AS OLD AS MANKIND. But America's current global
supremacy is distinctive in the rapidity of its emergence, in
its global scope, and in the manner of its exercise. In the
course of a single century, America has transformed itself—and
has also been transformed by international dynamics—from a
country relatively isolated in the Western Hemisphere into a
power of unprecedented worldwide reach and grasp.
THE SHORT ROAD TO GLOBAL SUPREMACY
The Spanish-American War in 1898 was America's first overseas
war of conquest. It thrust American power far into the Pacific, be-
yond Hawaii to the Philippines. By the turn of the century, American
strategists were already busy developing doctrines for a two-ocean
naval supremacy, and the American navy had begun to challenge
the notion that Britain "rules the waves." American claims of a spe-
cial status as the sole guardian of the Western Hemisphere's secu-
rity—proclaimed earlier in the century by the Monroe Doctrine
3


--- PAGE 12 ---
4 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
and subsequently justified by America's alleged "manifest des-
tiny"—were even further enhanced by the construction of the
Panama Canal, which facilitated naval domination over both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
The basis for America's expanding geopolitical ambitions was
provided by the rapid industrialization of the country's economy. By
the outbreak of World War I, America's growing economic might al-
ready accounted for about 33 percent of global GNP, which displaced
Great Britain as the world's leading industrial power. This remark-
able economic dynamism was fostered by a culture that favored ex-
perimentation and innovation. America's political institutions and
free market economy created unprecedented opportunities for ambi-
tious and iconoclastic inventors, who were not inhibited from pursu-
ing their personal dreams by archaic privileges or rigid social
hierarchies. In brief, national culture was uniquely congenial to eco-
nomic growth, and by attracting and quickly assimilating the most
talented individuals from abroad, the culture also facilitated the ex-
pansion of national power.
World War I provided the first occasion for the massive projec-
tion of American military force into Europe. A heretofore relatively
isolated power promptly transported several hundred thousand of
its troops across the Atlantic—a transoceanic military expedition
unprecedented in its size and scope, which signaled the emer-
gence of a new major player in the international arena. Just as im-
portant, the war also prompted the first major American
diplomatic effort to apply American principles in seeking a solu-
tion to Europe's international problems. Woodrow Wilson's famous
Fourteen Points represented the injection into European geopoli-
tics of American idealism, reinforced by American might. (A
decade and a half earlier, the United States had played a leading
role in settling a Far Eastern conflict between Russia and Japan,
thereby also asserting its growing international stature.) The fu-
sion of American idealism and American power thus made itself
fully felt on the world scene.
Strictly speaking, however, World War I was still predominantly
a European war, not a global one. But its self-destructive character
marked the beginning of the end of Europe's political, economic,
and cultural preponderance over the rest of the world. In the
course of the war, no single European power was able to prevail


--- PAGE 13 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 5
decisively—and the war's outcome was heavily influenced by the
entrance into the conflict of the rising non-European power, Amer-
ica. Thereafter, Europe would become increasingly the object,
rather than the subject, of global power politics.
However, this brief burst of American global leadership did not
produce a continuing American engagement in world affairs. In-
stead, America quickly retreated into a self-gratifying combination
of isolationism and idealism. Although by the mid-twenties and
early thirties totalitarianism was gathering strength on the Euro-
pean continent, American power—by then including a powerful
two-ocean fleet that clearly outmatched the British navy—re-
mained disengaged. Americans preferred to be bystanders to
global politics.
Consistent with that predisposition was the American concept
of security, based on a view of America as a continental island.
American strategy focused on sheltering its shores and was thus
narrowly national in scope, with little thought given to interna-
tional or global considerations. The critical international players
were still the European powers and, increasingly, Japan.
The European era in world politics came to a final end in the
course of World War II, the first truly global war. Fought on three
continents simultaneously, with the Atlantic and the Pacific
Oceans also heavily contested, its global dimension was symboli-
cally demonstrated when British and Japanese soldiers—repre-
senting, respectively, a remote Western European island and a
similarly remote East Asian island—collided thousands of miles
from their homes on the Indian-Burmese frontier. Europe and Asia
had become a single battlefield.
Had the war's outcome been a clear-cut victory for Nazi Ger-
many, a single European power might then have emerged as glob-
ally preponderant. (Japan's victory in the Pacific would have
gained for that nation the dominant Far Eastern role, but in all
probability, Japan would still have remained only a regional hege-
mon.) Instead, Germany's defeat was sealed largely by the two ex-
tra-European victors, the United States and the Soviet Union,
which became the successors to Europe's unfulfilled quest for
global supremacy.
The next fifty years were dominated by the bipolar American-
Soviet contest for global supremacy. In some respects, the contest


--- PAGE 14 ---
6 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
between the United States and the Soviet Union represented the
fulfillment of the geopoliticians' fondest theories: it pitted the
world's leading maritime power, dominant over both the Atlantic
and the Pacific Oceans, against the world's leading land power,
paramount on the Eurasian heartland (with the Sino-Soviet bloc
encompassing a space remarkably reminiscent of the scope of the
Mongol Empire). The geopolitical dimension could not have been
clearer: North America versus Eurasia, with the world at stake.
The winner would truly dominate the globe. There was no one else
to stand in the way, once victory was finally grasped.
Each rival projected worldwide an ideological appeal that was
infused with historical optimism, that justified for each the neces-
sary exertions while reinforcing its conviction in inevitable vic-
tory. Each rival was clearly dominant within its own space—unlike
the imperial European aspirants to global hegemony, none of
which ever quite succeeded in asserting decisive preponderance
within Europe itself. And each used its ideology to reinforce its
hold over its respective vassals and tributaries, in a manner some-
what reminiscent of the age of religious warfare.
The combination of global geopolitical scope and the pro-
claimed universality of the competing dogmas gave the contest un-
precedented intensity. But an additional factor—also imbued with
global implications—made the contest truly unique. The advent of
nuclear weapons meant that a head-on war, of a classical type, be-
tween the two principal contestants would not only spell their mu-
tual destruction but could unleash lethal consequences for a
significant portion of humanity. The intensity of the conflict was
thus simultaneously subjected to extraordinary self-restraint on
the part of both rivals.
In the geopolitical realm, the conflict was waged largely on the
peripheries of Eurasia itself. The Sino-Soviet bloc dominated most
of Eurasia but did not control its peripheries. North America suc-
ceeded in entrenching itself on both the extreme western and ex-
treme eastern shores of the great Eurasian continent. The defense
of these continental bridgeheads (epitomized on the western
"front" by the Berlin blockade and on the eastern by the Korean
War) was thus the first strategic test of what came to be known as
the Cold War.


--- PAGE 15 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 7
In the Cold War's final phase, a third defensive "front"—the
southern—appeared on Eurasia's map (see map above). The Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan precipitated a two-pronged American re-
sponse: direct U.S. assistance to the native resistance in Afghanis-
tan in order to bog down the Soviet army; and a large-scale buildup
of the U.S. military presence In the Persian Gulf as a deterrent to
any further southward projection of Soviet political or military
power. The United States committed itself to the defense of the Per-
sian Gulf region, on a par with its western and eastern Eurasian se-
curity interests.
The successful containment by North America of the Eurasian
bloc's efforts to gain effective sway over all of Eurasia—with both
sides deterred until the very end from a direct military collision for
fear of a nuclear war—meant that the outcome of the contest was
eventually decided by nonmilitary means. Political vitality, ideo-
logical flexibility, economic dynamism, and cultural appeal be-
came the decisive dimensions.
The American-led coalition retained its unity, whereas the
Sino-Soviet bloc split within less than two decades. In part, this


--- PAGE 16 ---
8 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
was due to the democratic coalition's greater flexibility, in con-
trast to the hierarchical and dogmatic—but also brittle—charac-
ter of the Communist camp. The former involved shared values,
but without a formal doctrinal format. The latter emphasized dog-
matic orthodoxy, with only one valid interpretative center. Amer-
ica's principal vassals were also significantly weaker than
America, whereas the Soviet Union could not indefinitely treat
China as a subordinate. The outcome was also due to the fact that
the American side proved to be economically and technologically
much more dynamic, whereas the Soviet Union gradually stag-
nated and could not effectively compete either in economic
growth or in military technology. Economic decay in turn fostered
ideological demoralization.
In fact, Soviet military power—and the fear it inspired among
westerners—for a long time obscured the essential asymmetry
between the two contestants. America was simply much richer,
technologically much more advanced, militarily more resilient
and innovative, socially more creative and appealing. Ideological
constraints also sapped the creative potential of the Soviet
Union, making its system increasingly rigid and its economy in-
creasingly wasteful and technologically less competitive. As
long as a mutually destructive war did not break out, in a pro-
tracted competition the scales had to tip eventually in America's
favor.
The final outcome was also significantly influenced by cultural
considerations. The American-led coalition, by and large, accepted
as positive many attributes of America's political and social cul-
ture. America's two most important allies on the western and east-
em peripheries of the Eurasian continent, Germany and Japan,
both recovered their economic health in the context of almost un-
bridled admiration for all things American. America was widely
perceived as representing the future, as a society worthy of admi-
ration and deserving of emulation.
In contrast, Russia was held in cultural contempt by most of its
Central European vassals and even more so by its principal and in-
creasingly assertive eastern ally, China. For the Central Europeans,
Russian domination meant isolation from what the Central Euro-
peans considered their philosophical and cultural home: Western


--- PAGE 17 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 9
Europe and its Christian religious traditions. Worse than that, it
meant domination by a people whom the Central Europeans, often
unjustly, considered their cultural inferior.
The Chinese, for whom the word "Russia" means "the hungry
land," were even more openly contemptuous. Although initially
the Chinese had only quietly contested Moscow's claims of univer-
sality for the Soviet model, within a decade following the Chinese
Communist revolution they mounted an assertive challenge to
Moscow's ideological primacy and even began to express openly
their traditional contempt for the neighboring northern barbar-
ians.
Finally, within the Soviet Union itself, the 50 percent of the pop-
ulation that was non-Russian eventually also rejected Moscow's
domination. The gradual political awakening of the non-Russians
meant that the Ukrainians, Georgians, Armenians, and Azeris be-
gan to view Soviet power as a form of alien imperial domination by
a people to whom they did not feel culturally inferior. In Central
Asia, national aspirations may have been weaker, but here these
peoples were fueled in addition by a gradually rising sense of Is-
lamic identity, intensified by the knowledge of the ongoing decolo-
nization elsewhere.
Like so many empires before it, the Soviet Union eventually im-
ploded and fragmented, falling victim not so much to a direct mili-
tary defeat as to disintegration accelerated by economic and
social strains. Its fate confirmed a scholar's apt observation that
[ejmpires are inherently politically unstable because subordi-
nate units almost always prefer greater autonomy, and
counter-elites in such units almost always act, upon opportu-
nity, to obtain greater autonomy. In this sense, empires do not
fall; rather, they fall apart, usually very slowly, though some-
times remarkably quickly.'
'Donald Puchala. "The History of the Future of International Relations,"
Ethics and International Affairs 8 (1994):183.


--- PAGE 18 ---
10 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
THE FIRST GLOBAL POWER
The collapse of its rival left the United States in a unique position.
It became simultaneously the first and the only truly global power.
And yet America's global supremacy is reminiscent in some ways
of earlier empires, notwithstanding their more confined regional
scope. These empires based their power on a hierarchy of vassals,
tributaries, protectorates, and colonies, with those on the outside
generally viewed as barbarians. To some degree, that anachronis-
tic terminoJogy is not altogether inappropriate for some of the
states currently within the American orbit. As in the past, the exer-
cise of American "imperial" power is derived in large measure from
superior organization, from the ability to mobilize vast economic
and technological resources promptly for military purposes, from
the vague but significant cultural appeal of the American way of
life, and from the sheer dynamism and inherent competitiveness of
the American social and political elites.
Earlier empires, too, partook of these attributes. Rome comes
first to mind. Its empire was established over roughly two and a
half centuries through sustained territorial expansion northward
and then both westward and southeastward, as well as through
the assertion of effective maritime control over the entire shore-
line of the Mediterranean Sea. In geographic scope, it reached its
high point around the year A.D. 211 (see map on page 11). Rome's
was a centralized polity and a single self-sufficient economy. Its
imperial power was exercised deliberately and purposefully
through a complex system of political and economic organiza-
tion. A strategically designed system of roads and naval routes,
originating from the capital city, permitted the rapid redeploy-
ment and concentration—in the event of a major security
threat—of the Roman legions stationed in the various vassal
states and tributary provinces.
At the empire's apex, the Roman legions deployed abroad num-
bered nu less than three hundred thousand men—a remarkable
force, made all the more lethal by the Roman superiority in tactics
and armaments as well as by the center's ability to direct relatively
rapid redeployment. Qt is striking to note that in 1996, the vastly
more populous supreme power, America, was protecting the outer


--- PAGE 19 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 11
MR- Km nan Empire a\ Its Height
reaches of its dominion by stationing 296,000 professional soldiers
overseas.)
Rome's imperial power, however, was also derived from an im-
portant psychological reality. Civis Romanus sum—"I am a Roman
citizen"—was the highest possible self-definition, a source of
pride, and an aspiration for many. Eventually granted even to
those not of Roman birth, the exalted status of the Roman citizen
was an expression of cultural superiority that justified the imperial
power's sense of mission. It not only legitimated Rome's rule, but it
also inclined those subject to it to desire assimilation and inclu-
sion in the imperial structure. Cultural superiority, taken for
granted by the rulers and conceded by the subjugated, thus rein-
forced imperial power.
That supreme, and largely uncontested, imperial power lasted
about three hundred years. With the exception of the challenge


--- PAGE 20 ---
12 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
posed at one stage by nearby Carthage and on the eastern fringes
by the Parthian Empire, the outside world was largely barbaric,
not well organized, capable for most of the time only of sporadic
attacks, and culturally patently inferior. As long as the empire was
able to maintain internal vitality and unity, the outside world was
noncompetitive.
Three major causes led to the eventual collapse of the Roman
Empire. First, the empire became too large to be governed from
a single center, but splitting it into western and eastern halves
automatically destroyed the monopolistic character of its power.
Second, at the same time, the prolonged period of imperial
hubris generated a cultural hedonism that gradually sapped the
political elite's will to greatness. Third, sustained inflation also
undermined the capacity of the system to sustain itself without
social sacrifice, which the citizens were no longer prepared to
make. Cultural decay, political division, and financial inflation
conspired to make Rome vulnerable even to the barbarians in its
near abroad.
By contemporary standards, Rome was not truly a global
power but a regional one. However, given the sense of isolation
prevailing at the time between the various continents of the globe,
its regional power was self-contained and isolated, with no imme-
diate or even distant rival. The Roman Empire was thus a world
unto itself, with its superior political organization and cultural su-
periority making it a precursor of later imperial systems of even
greater geographic scope.
Even so, the Roman Empire was not unique. The Roman and
the Chinese empires emerged almost contemporaneously, though
neither was aware of the other. By the year 221 B.C. (the time of the
Punic Wars between Rome and Carthage), the unification by Chin'
of the existing seven states Into the first Chinese empire had
prompted the construction of the Great Wall in northern China, to
seal off the inner kingdom from the barbarian world beyond. The
subsequent Han Empire, which had started to emerge by 140 B.C.,
was even more impressive in scope and organization. By the onset
of the Christian era, no fewer than 57 million people were subject
to its authority. That huge number, itself unprecedented, testified
to extraordinarily effective central control, exercised through a


--- PAGE 21 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 13
centralized and punitive bureaucracy. Imperial sway extended to
today's Korea, parts of Mongolia, and most of today's coastal
China. However, rather like Rome, the Han Empire also became af-
flicted by internal ills, and its eventual collapse was accelerated by
its division in A.D. 220 into three independent realms.
China's further history involved cycles of reunification and ex-
pansion, followed by decay and fragmentation. More than once,
China succeeded in establishing imperial systems that were self-
contained, isolated, and unchallenged externally by any organized
rivals. The tripartite division of the Han realm was reversed in A.D.
589, with something akin to an imperial system reemerging. But
the period of China's greatest imperial self-assertion came under
the Manchus, specifically during the early Ch'ing dynasty. By the
eighteenth century, China was once again a full-fledged empire,
with the imperial center surrounded by vassal and tributary
states, including today's Korea, Indochina, Thailand, Burma, and
Nepal. China's sway thus extended from today's Russian Far East
all the way across southern Siberia to Lake Baikal and into contem-
porary Kazakstan, then southward toward the Indian Ocean, and
then back east across Laos and northern Vietnam (see map on
page 14).
As in the Roman case, the empire was a complex financial,
economic, educational, and security organization. Control over
the large territory and the more than 300 million people living
within it was exercised through all these means, with a strong em-
phasis on centralized political authority, supported by a remark-
ably effective courier service. The entire empire was demarcated
into four zones, radiating from Peking and delimiting areas that
could be reached by courier within one week, two weeks, three
weeks, and four weeks, respectively. A centralized bureaucracy,
professionally trained and competitively selected, provided the
sinews of unity.
That unity was reinforced, legitimated, and sustained—again,
as in the case of Rome—by a strongly felt and deeply ingrained
sense of cultural superiority that was augmented by Confucianism,
an imperially expedient philosophy, with its stress on harmony, hi-
erarchy, and discipline. China—the Celestial Empire—was seen as
the center of the universe, with only barbarians on its peripheries


--- PAGE 22 ---
14 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
and beyond. To be Chinese meant to be cultured, and for that rea-
son, the rest of the world owed China its due deference. That spe-
cial sense of superiority permeated the response given by the
Chinese emperor—even in the phase of China's growing decline, in
the late eighteenth century—to King George III of Great Britain,
whose emissaries had attempted to inveigle China into a trading
relationship by offering some British industrial products as good-
will gifts:
We, by the Grace of Heaven, Emperor, instruct the King of Eng-
land to take note of our charge:
The Celestial Empire, ruling all within the four seas . ..
does not value rare and precious things . . . nor do we have the
slightest need of your country's manufactures
Hence we ... have commanded your tribute envoys to re-
turn safely home. You, 0 King, should simply act in conformity


--- PAGE 23 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 15
with our wishes by strengthening your loyalty and swearing
perpetual obedience.
The decline and fall of the several Chinese empires was also
primarily due to internal factors. Mongol and later occidental "bar-
barians" prevailed because internal fatigue, decay, hedonism, and
loss of economic as well as military creativity sapped and then ac-
celerated the collapse of Chinese will. Outside powers exploited
China's internal malaise—Britain in the Opium War of 1839-1842,
Japan a century later—which, in turn, generated the profound
sense of cultural humiliation that has motivated the Chinese
throughout the twentieth century, a humiliation all the more in-
tense because of the collision between their ingrained sense of cul-
tural superiority and the demeaning political realities of
postimperial China.
Much as in the case of Rome, imperial China would be classi-
fied today as a regional power. But in its heyday, China had no
global peer, in the sense that no other power was capable of chal-
lenging its imperial status or even of resisting its further expansion
if that had been the Chinese inclination. The Chinese system was
self-contained and self-sustaining, based primarily on a shared eth-
nic identity, with relatively limited projection of central power
over ethnically alien and geographically peripheral tributaries.
The large and dominant ethnic core made it possible for China
to achieve periodic imperial restoration. In that respect, China was
quite unlike other empires, in which numerically small but hege-
monically motivated peoples were able for a time to impose and
maintain domination over much larger ethnically alien popula-
tions. However, once the domination of such small-core empires
was undermined, imperial restoration was out of the question.
To find a somewhat closer analogy to today's definition of a
global power, we must turn to the remarkable phenomenon of the
Mongol Empire. Its emergence was achieved through an intense
struggle with major and well-organized opponents. Among those
defeated were the kingdoms of Poland and Hungary, the forces of
the Holy Roman Empire, several Russian and Rus' principalities,
the Caliphate of Baghdad, and later, even the Sung dynasty of
China.


--- PAGE 24 ---
16 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
"wf >..
Genghis Khan and his successors, by defeating their regional ri-
vals, established centralized control over the territory that latter-
day scholars of geopolitics have identified as the global heartland,
or the pivot for world power. Their Eurasian continental empire
ranged from the shores of the China Sea to Anatolia in Asia Minor
and to Centra] Europe (see map). It was not until the heyday of the
Stalinist Sino-Soviet bloc that the Mongol Empire on the Eurasian
continent was finally matched, insofar as the scope of centralized
control over contiguous territory is concerned.
The Roman, Chinese, and Mongol empires were regional pre-
cursors of subsequent aspirants to global power. In the case of
Rome and China, as already noted, their imperial structures were
highly developed, both politically and economically, while the
widespread acceptance of the cultural superiority of the center ex-
ercised an important cementing role. In contrast, the Mongol Em-
pire sustained political control by relying more directly on military


--- PAGE 25 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 17
conquest followed by adaptation (and even assimilation) to local
conditions.
Mongol imperial power was largely based on military domina-
tion. Achieved through the brilliant and ruthless application of
superior military tactics that combined a remarkable capacity for
rapid movement of forces with their timely concentration, Mon-
gol rule entailed no organized economic or financial system, nor
was Mongol authority derived from any assertive sense of cul-
tural superiority. The Mongol rulers were too thin numerically to
represent a self-regenerating ruling class, and in any case, the ab-
sence of a defined and self-conscious sense of cultural or even
ethnic superiority deprived the imperial elite of the needed sub-
jective confidence.
In fact, the Mongol rulers proved quite susceptible to gradual
assimilation by the often culturally more advanced peoples they
had conquered. Thus, one of the grandsons of Genghis Khan, who
had become the emperor of the Chinese part of the great Khan's
realm, became a fervent propagator of Confucianism; another be-
came a devout Muslim in his capacity as the sultan of Persia; and a
third became the culturally Persian ruler of Central Asia.
It was that factor—assimilation of the rulers by the ruled be-
cause of the absence of a dominant political culture—as well as un-
resolved problems of succession to the great Khan who had
founded the empire, that caused the empire's eventual demise. The
Mongol realm had become too big to be governed from a single cen-
ter, but the solution attempted—dividing the empire into several
self-contained parts—prompted still more rapid local assimilation
and accelerated the imperial disintegration. After lasting two cen-
turies, from 1206 to 1405, the world's largest land-based empire dis-
appeared without a trace.
Thereafter, Europe became both the locus of global power and
the focus of the main struggles for global power. Indeed, in the
course of approximately three centuries, the small northwestern
periphery of the Eurasian continent attained—through the projec-
tion of maritime power and for the first time ever—genuine global
domination as European power reached, and asserted itself on,
every continent of the globe. It is noteworthy that the Western Eu-
ropean imperial hegemons were demographically not very numer-
ous, especially when compared to the numbers effectively


--- PAGE 26 ---



--- PAGE 27 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 19
subjugated. Yet by the beginning of the twentieth century, outside
of the Western Hemisphere (which two centuries earlier had also
been subject to Western European control and which was inhab-
ited predominantly by European emigrants and their descen-
dants), only China, Russia, the Ottoman Empire, and Ethiopia were
free of Western Europe's domination (see map on page 18).
However, Western European domination was not tantamount to
the attainment of global power by Western Europe. The essential
reality was that of Europe's civilizational global supremacy and of
fragmented European continental power. Unlike the land conquest
of the Eurasian heartland by the Mongols or by the subsequent
Russian Empire, European overseas imperialism was attained
through ceaseless transoceanic exploration and the expansion of
maritime trade. This process, however, also involved a continuous
struggle among the leading European states not only for the over-
seas dominions but for hegemony within Europe itself. The geopo-
litically consequential fact was that Europe's global hegemony did
not derive from hegemony in Europe by any single European
power.
Broadly speaking, until the middle of the seventeenth century,
Spain was the paramount European power. By the late fifteenth
century, it had also emerged as a major overseas imperial power,
entertaining global ambitions. Religion served as a unifying doc-
trine and as a source of imperial missionary zeal. Indeed, it took
papal arbitration between Spain and its maritime rival, Portugal, to
codify a formal division of the world into Spanish and Portuguese
colonial spheres in the Treaties of Tordesilla (1494) and Saragossa
(1529). Nonetheless, faced by English, French, and Dutch chal-
lenges, Spain was never able to assert genuine supremacy, either
in Western Europe itself or across the oceans.
Spain's preeminence gradually gave way to that of France. Until
1815, France was the dominant European power, though continu-
ously checked by its European rivals, both on the continent and
overseas. Under Napoleon, France came close to establishing true
hegemony over Europe. Had it succeeded, it might have also
gained the status of the dominant global power. However, its de-
feat by a European coalition reestablished the continental balance
of power.
For the next century, until World War I, Great Britain exercised


--- PAGE 28 ---



--- PAGE 29 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 21
global maritime domination as London became the world's princi-
pal financial and trading center and the British navy "ruled the
waves." Great Britain was clearly paramount overseas, but like the
earlier European aspirants to global hegemony, the British Empire
could not single-handedly dominate Europe. Instead, Britain relied
on an intricate balance-of-power diplomacy and eventually on an
Anglo-French entente to prevent continental domination by either
Russia or Germany.
The overseas British Empire was initially acquired through a
combination of exploration, trade, and conquest. But much like its
Roman and Chinese predecessors or its French and Spanish rivals,
it also derived a great deal of its staying power from the percep-
tion of British cultural superiority. That superiority was not only a
matter of subjective arrogance on the part of the imperial ruling
class but was a perspective shared by many of the non-British sub-
jects. In the words of South Africa's first black president, Nelson
Mandela: "I was brought up in a British school, and at the time
Britain was the home of everything that was best in the world. I
have not discarded the influence which Britain and British history
and culture exercised on us." Cultural superiority, successfully as-
serted and quietly conceded, had the effect of reducing the need
to rely on large military forces to maintain the power of the imper-
ial center. By 1914, only a few thousand British military personnel
and civil servants controlled about 11 million square miles and al-
most 400 million non-British peoples (see map on page 20).
In brief, Rome exercised its sway largely through superior mili-
tary organization and cultural appeal. China relied heavily on an
efficient bureaucracy to rule an empire based on shared ethnic
identity, reinforcing its control through a highly developed sense
of cultural superiority. The Mongol Empire combined advanced
military tactics for conquest with an inclination toward assimila-
tion as the basis for rule. The British (as well as the Spanish,
Dutch, and French) gained preeminence as their flag followed their
trade, their control likewise reinforced by superior military organi-
zation and cultural assertiveness. But none of these empires were
truly global. Even Great Britain was not a truly global power. It did
not control Europe but only balanced it. A stable Europe was crucial
to British international preeminence, and Europe's self-destruction
Inevitably marked the end of British primacy.


--- PAGE 30 ---



--- PAGE 31 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 23
In contrast, the scope and pervasiveness of American global
power today are unique. Not only does the United States control
all of the world's oceans and seas, but it has developed an as-
sertive military capability for amphibious shore control that en-
ables it to project its power inland in politically significant ways.
Its military legions are firmly perched on the western and eastern
extremities of Eurasia, and they also control the Persian Gulf.
American vassals and tributaries, some yearning to be embraced
by even more formal ties to Washington, dot the entire Eurasian
continent, as the map on page 22 shows-
America's economic dynamism provides the necessary precon-
dition tor the exercise of global primacy. Initially, immediately after
World War II, America's economy stood apart from all others, ac-
counting alone for more than 50 percent of the world's GNP. The
economic recovery of Western Europe and Japan, followed by the
wider phenomenon of Asia's economic dynamism, meant that the
American share of global GNP eventually had to shrink from the
disproportionately high levels of the immediate postwar era.
Nonetheless, by the time the subsequent Cold War had ended,
America's share of global GNP, and more specifically its share of
the world's manufacturing output, had stabilized at about 30 per-
cent, a level that had been the norm for most of this century, apart
from those exceptional years immediately after World War II.
More important, America has maintained and has even widened
its lead in exploiting the latest scientific breakthroughs for mili-
tary purposes, thereby creating a technologically peerless mili-
tary establishment, the only one with effective global reach. All
the while, it has maintained its strong competitive advantage in the
economically decisive information technologies. American mastery
in the cutting-edge sectors of tomorrow's economy suggests that
American technological domination is not likely to be undone
soon, especially given that in the economically decisive fields,
Americans are maintaining or even widening their advantage in
productivity over their Western European and Japanese rivals.
To be sure, Russia and China are powers that resent this Amer-
ican hegemony. In early 1996, they jointly stated as much in the
course of a visit to Beijing by Russia's President Boris Yeltsin.
Moreover, they possess nuclear arsenals that could threaten vital
U.S. interests. But the brutal fact is that for the time being, and for


--- PAGE 32 ---
24 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
some time to come, although they can initiate a suicidal nuclear
war, neither one of them can win it. Lacking the ability to project
forces over long distances in order to impose their political will
and being technologically much more backward than America,
they do not have the means to exercise—nor soon attain—sus-
tained political clout worldwide.
In brief, America stands supreme in the four decisive domains of
global power, militarily, it has an unmatched global reach; econom-
ically, it remains the main locomotive of global growth, even if
challenged in some aspects by Japan" and Germany (neither of
which enjoys the other attributes of global might); technologically,
it retains the overall lead in the cutting-edge areas of innovation;
and culturally, despite some crassness, it enjoys an appeal that is
unrivaled, especially among the world's youth—all of which gives
the United States a political clout that no other state comes close
to matching. It is the combination of all four that makes America the
only comprehensive global superpower.
THE AMERICAN GLOBAL SYSTEM
Although America's international preeminence unavoidably evokes
similarities to earlier imperial systems, the differences are more es-
sential. They go beyond the question of territorial scope. American
global power is exercised through a global system of distinctively
American design that mirrors the domestic American experience.
Central to that domestic experience is the pluralistic character of
both the American society and its political system.
The earlier empires were built by aristocratic political elites
and were in most cases ruled by essentially authoritarian or abso-
lutist regimes. The bulk of the populations of the imperial states
were either politically indifferent or, in more recent times, infected
by imperialist emotions and symbols. The quest for national glory,
"the white man's burden," "la mission civilisatrlce," not to speak of
the opportunities for personal profit—all served to mobilize sup-
port for imperial adventures and to sustain essentially hierarchical
imperial power pyramids.
The attitude of the American public toward the external projec-
tion of American power has been much more ambivalent. The pub-


--- PAGE 33 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 25
lie supported America's engagement in World War II largely be-
cause of the shock effect of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
The engagement of the United States in the Cold War was initially
endorsed more reluctantly, until the Berlin blockade and the sub-
sequent Korean War. After the Cold War had ended, the emergence
of the United States as the single global power did not evoke much
public gloating but rather elicited an inclination toward a more
limited definition of American responsibilities abroad. Public opin-
ion polls conducted in 1995 and 1996 indicated a general public
preference for "sharing" global power with others, rather than for
its monopolistic exercise.
Because of these domestic factors, the American global system
emphasizes the technique of co-optation (as in the case of de-
feated rivals—Germany, Japan, and lately even Russia) to a much
greater extent than the earlier imperial systems did. It likewise re-
lies heavily on the indirect exercise of influence on dependent for-
eign elites, while drawing much benefit from the appeal of its
democratic principles and institutions. All of the foregoing are re-
inforced by the massive but intangible impact of the American
domination of global communications, popular entertainment, and
mass culture and by the potentially very tangible clout of Amer-
ica's technological edge and global military reach.
Cultural domination has been an underappreciated facet of
American global power. Whatever one may think of its aesthetic
values, America's mass culture exercises a magnetic appeal, espe-
cially on the world's youth. Its attraction may be derived from the
hedonistic quality of the lifestyle it projects, but its global appeal
is undeniable. American television programs and films account for
about three-fourths of the global market. American popular music
is equally dominant, while American fads, eating habits, and even
clothing are increasingly imitated worldwide. The language of the
Internet is English, and an overwhelming proportion of the global
computer chatter also originates from America, influencing the
content of global conversation. Lastly, America has become a
Mecca for those seeking advanced education, with approximately
half a million foreign students flocking to the United States, with
many of the ablest never returning home. Graduates from Ameri-
can universities are to be found in almost every Cabinet on every
continent.


--- PAGE 34 ---
26 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
The style of many foreign democratic politicians also increas-
ingly emulates the American. Not only did John F. Kennedy find ea-
ger imitators abroad, but even more recent (and less glorified)
American political leaders have become the object of careful study
and political imitation. Politicians from cultures as disparate as the
Japanese and the British (for example, the Japanese prime minister
of the mid-1990s, Ryutaro Hashimoto, and the British prime minis-
ter, Tony Blair—and note the "Tony," imitative of "Jimmy" Carter,
"Bill" Clinton, or "Bob" Dole) find it perfectly appropriate to copy
Bill Clinton's homey mannerisms, populist common touch, and
public relations techniques.
Democratic ideals, associated with the American political tra-
dition, further reinforce what some perceive as America's "cul-
tural imperialism." In the age of the most massive spread of the
democratic form of government, the American political experi-
ence tends to serve as a standard for emulation. The spreading
emphasis worldwide on the centrality of a written constitution
and on the supremacy of law over political expediency, no matter
how short-changed in practice, has drawn upon the strength of
American constitutionalism. In recent times, the adoption by the
former Communist countries of civilian supremacy over the mili-
tary (especially as a precondition for NATO membership) has
also been very heavily influenced by the U.S. system of civil-
military relations.
The appeal and impact of the democratic American political
system has also been accompanied by the growing attraction of
the American entrepreneurial economic model, which stresses
global free trade and uninhibited competition. As the Western wel-
fare state, including its German emphasis on "codetermination"
between entrepreneurs and trade unions, begins to lose its eco-
nomic momentum, more Europeans are voicing the opinion that
the more competitive and even ruthless American economic cul-
ture has to be emulated if Europe is not to fall further behind. Even
in Japan, greater individualism in economic behavior is becoming
recognized as a necessary concomitant of economic success.
The American emphasis on political democracy and economic
development thus combines to convey a simple ideological mes-
sage that appeals to many: the quest for individual success en-
hances freedom while generating wealth. The resulting blend of


--- PAGE 35 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 27
idealism and egoism is a potent combination. Individual self-fulfill-
ment is said to be a God-given right that at the same time can ben-
efit others by setting an example and by generating wealth. It is a
doctrine that attracts the energetic, the ambitious, and the highly
competitive.
As the imitation of American ways gradually pervades the
world, it creates a more congenial setting for the exercise of the in-
direct and seemingly consensual American hegemony. And as in
the case of the domestic American system, that hegemony in-
volves a complex structure of interlocking institutions and proce-
dures, designed to generate consensus and obscure asymmetries
in power and influence. American global supremacy is thus but-
tressed by an elaborate system of alliances and coalitions that lit-
erally span the globe.
The Atlantic alliance, epitomized institutionally by NATO, links
the most productive and influential states of Europe to America,
making the United States a key participant even in intra-European
affairs. The bilateral political and military ties with Japan bind the
most powerful Asian economy to the United States, with Japan re-
maining (at least for the time being) essentially an American pro-
tectorate. America also participates in such nascent trans-Pacific
multilateral organizations as the Asia-Pacific Economic Coopera-
tion Forum (APEC), making itself a key participant in that region's
affairs. The Western Hemisphere is generally shielded from outside
influences, enabling America to play the central role in existing
hemispheric multilateral organizations. Special security arrange-
ments in the Persian Gulf, especially after the brief punitive mis-
sion in 1991 against Iraq, have made that economically vital region
into an American military preserve. Even the former Soviet space
is permeated by various American-sponsored arrangements for
closer cooperation with NATO, such as the Partnership for Peace.
In addition, one must consider as part of the American system
the global web of specialized organizations, especially the "inter-
national" financial institutions. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank can be said to represent "global" inter-
ests, and their constituency may be construed as the world. In re-
ality, however, they are heavily American dominated and their
origins are traceable to American initiative, particularly the Bret-
ton Woods Conference of 1944.


--- PAGE 36 ---
28 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Unlike earlier empires, this vast and complex global system is
not a hierarchical pyramid. Rather, America stands at the center of
an interlocking universe, one in which power is exercised through
continuous bargaining, dialogue, diffusion, and quest for formal
consensus, even though that power originates ultimately from a
single source, namely, Washington, D.C. And that is where the
power game has to be played, and played according to America's
domestic rules. Perhaps the highest compliment that the world
pays to the centrality of the democratic process in American
global hegemony is the degree to which foreign countries are
themselves drawn into the domestic American political bargain-
ing. To the extent that they can, foreign governments strive to mo-
bilize those Americans with whom they share a special ethnic or
religious identity. Most foreign governments also employ Ameri-
can lobbyists to advance their case, especially in Congress, in ad-
dition to approximately one thousand special foreign interest
groups registered as active in America's capital. American ethnic
communities also strive to influence U.S. foreign policy, with the
Jewish, Greek, and Armenian lobbies standing out as the most ef-
fectively organized.
American supremacy has thus produced a new international
order that not only replicates but institutionalizes abroad many
of the features of the American system itself. Its basic features
include
• a collective security system, including integrated command
and forces (NATO, the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, and so
forth);
• regional economic cooperation (APEC, NAFTA [North Amer-
ican Free Trade Agreement]) and specialized global cooper-
ative institutions (the World Bank, IMF, WTO [World Trade
Organization]);
" procedures that emphasize consensual decision making,
even if dominated by the United States;
• a preference for democratic membership within key
alliances;


--- PAGE 37 ---
HEGEMONY OF A NEW TYPE 29
• a rudimentary global constitutional and judicial structure
(ranging from the World Court to a special tribunal to try
Bosnian war crimes).
Most of that system emerged during the Cold War, as part of
America's effort to contain its global rival, the Soviet Union. It was
thus ready-made for global application, once that rival faltered and
America emerged as the first and only global power. Its essence has
been well encapsulated by the political scientist G. John Ikenberry:
It was hegemonic in the sense that it was centered around the
United States and reflected American-styled political mecha-
nisms and organizing principles. It was a liberal order in that it
was legitimate and marked by reciprocal interactions. Euro-
peans [one may also add, the Japanese] were able to recon-
struct and integrate their societies and economies in ways that
were congenial with American hegemony but also with room to
experiment with their own autonomous and semi-independent
political systems ... The evolution of this complex system
served to "domesticate" relations among the major Western
states. There have been tense conflicts between these states
from time to time, but the important point is that conflict has
been contained within a deeply embedded, stable, and increas-
ingly articulated political order.... The threat of war is off the
table.2
Currently, this unprecedented American global hegemony has
no rival. But will it remain unchallenged in the years to come?
2From his paper "Creating Liberal Order: The Origins and Persistence of
the Postwar Western Settlement," University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
November 1995.


--- PAGE 38 ---
CHAPTER 2
The
Eurasian
Chessboard
FOR AMERICA, THE CHIEF geopolitical prize is Eurasia. For half a
millennium, world affairs were dominated by Eurasian pow-
ers and peoples who fought with one another for regional
domination and reached out for global power. Now a non-Eurasian
power is preeminent in Eurasia—and America's global primacy is
directly dependent on how long and how effectively its preponder-
ance on the Eurasian continent is sustained.
Obviously, that condition is temporary. But its duration, and
what follows it, is of critical importance not only to America's well-
being but more generally to international peace. The sudden emer-
gence of the first and only global power has created a situation in
which an equally quick end to its supremacy—either because of
America's withdrawal from the world or because of the sudden
emergence of a successful rival—would produce massive interna-
tional instability. In effect, it would prompt global anarchy. The
Harvard political scientist Samuel P. Huntington is right in boldly
asserting:
30


--- PAGE 39 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 31
A world without U.S. primacy will be a world with more vio-
lence and disorder and less democracy and economic growth
than a world where the United States continues to have more
influence than any other country in shaping global affairs. The
sustained international primacy of the United States is central
to the welfare and security of Americans and to the future of
freedom, democracy, open economies, and international order
in the world.1
In that context, how America "manages" Eurasia is critical.
Eurasia is the globe's largest continent and is geopolitically axial. A
power that dominates Eurasia would control two of the world's
three most advanced and economically productive regions. A
mere glance at the map also suggests that control over Eurasia
would almost automatically entail Africa's subordination, render-
ing the Western Hemisphere and Oceania geopolitically peripheral
to the world's central continent (see map on page 32). About 75
percent of the world's people live in Eurasia, and most of the
world's physical wealth is there as well, both in its enterprises and
underneath its soil. Eurasia accounts for about 60 percent of the
world's GNP and about three-fourths of the world's known energy
resources (see tables on page 33).
Eurasia is also the location of most of the world's politically as-
sertive and dynamic states. After the United States, the next six
largest economies and the next six biggest spenders on military
weaponry are located in Eurasia. All but one of the world's overt
nuclear powers and all but one of the covert ones are located in
Eurasia. The world's two most populous aspirants to regional
hegemony and global influence are Eurasian. All of the potential
political and/or economic challengers to American primacy are
Eurasian. Cumulatively, Eurasia's power vastly overshadows
America's. Fortunately for America, Eurasia is too big to be politi-
cally one.
Eurasia is thus the chessboard on which the struggle for global
primacy continues to be played. Although geostrategy—the strate-
gic management of geopolitical interests—may be compared to
'Samuel P. Huntington. "Why International Primacy Matters," Interna-
tional Security (Spring 1993):83.


--- PAGE 40 ---



--- PAGE 41 ---
Tlie Continents: Area
23.496,900
Eurasia Alrica/MlrJtIle East South Ainerka North America
The Continents: Population
MU lions
4.5O0
4.000
3,500
1,000
2,500
2.000
1.500
1.000
500
4.053.455.374
334.916.662 3S6'292036
Eurasia Atrita/Mlddle Rait South America NorthAmeric
The Continents: GNP
JU.UUU -
20,000
10.000-
0-
34.000
I 1
1
[ - I
1.5O0
1 1
1,750
8.100
[ 1
1 1 i
Eurasia Airtca/Middle Eitt South America North America


--- PAGE 42 ---
34 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
chess, the somewhat oval-shaped Eurasian chessboard engages
not just two but several players, each possessing differing amounts
of power. The key players are located on the chessboard's west,
east, center, and south. Both the western and the eastern extremi-
ties of the chessboard contain densely populated regions, orga-
nized on relatively congested space into several powerful states. In
the case of Eurasia's small western periphery, American power is
deployed directly on it. The far eastern mainland is the seat of an
increasingly powerful and independent player, controlling an enor-
mous population, while the territory of its energetic rival—con-
fined on several nearby islands—and half of a small far-eastern
peninsula provide a perch for American power.
Stretching between the western and eastern extremities is a
sparsely populated and currently politically fluid and organiza-
tionally fragmented vast middle space that was formerly occu-
pied by a powerful rival to U.S. preeminence—a rival that was
once committed to the goal of pushing America out of Eurasia. To
the south of that large central Eurasian plateau lies a politically
anarchic but energy-rich region of potentially great importance


--- PAGE 43 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 35
to both the western and the eastern Eurasian states, including in
the southernmost area a highly populated aspirant to regional
hegemony.
This huge, oddly shaped Eurasian chessboard—extending from
Lisbon to Vladivostok—provides the setting for "the game." If
the middle space can be drawn increasingly into the expanding
orbit of the West (where America preponderates), if the southern
region is not subjected to domination by a single player, and if the
East is not unified in a manner that prompts the expulsion of
America from its offshore bases, America can then be said to pre-
vail. But if the middle space rebuffs the West, becomes an
assertive single entity, and either gains control over the South or
forms an alliance with the major Eastern actor, then America's pri-
macy in Eurasia shrinks dramatically. The same would be the case
if the two major Eastern players were somehow to unite. Finally,
any ejection of America by its Western partners from its perch on
the western periphery would automatically spell the end of Amer-
ica's participation in the game on the Eurasian chessboard, even
though that would probably also mean the eventual subordina-
tion of the western extremity to a revived player occupying the
middle space.
The scope of America's global hegemony is admittedly great,
but its depth is shallow, limited by both domestic and external re-
straints. American hegemony involves the exercise of decisive in-
fluence but, unlike the empires of the past, not of direct control.
The very scale and diversity of Eurasia, as well as the power of
some of its states, limits the depth of American influence and the
scope of control over the course of events. That megacontinent is
just too large, too populous, culturally too varied, and composed
of too many historically ambitious and politically energetic states
to be compliant toward even the most economically successful
and politically preeminent global power. This condition places a
premium on geostrategic skill, on the careful, selective, and very
deliberate deployment of America's resources on the huge
Eurasian chessboard.
It is also a fact that America is too democratic at home to be
autocratic abroad. This limits the use of America's power, espe-
cially its capacity for military intimidation. Never before has a pop-


--- PAGE 44 ---
36 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
ulist democracy attained international supremacy. But the pursuit
of power is not a goal that commands popular passion, except in
conditions of a sudden threat or challenge to the public's sense of
domestic well-being. The economic self-denial (that is, defense
spending) and the human sacrifice (casualties even among profes-
sional soldiers) required in the effort are uncongenial to democra-
tic instincts. Democracy is inimical to imperial mobilization.
Moreover, most Americans by and large do not derive any spe-
cial gratification from their country's new status as the sole global
superpower. Political "triumphalism" connected with America's
victory in the Cold War has generally tended to receive a cold re-
ception and has been the object of some derision on the part of
the more liberal-minded commentators. If anything, two rather
varying views of the implications for America of its historic suc-
cess in the competition with the former Soviet Union have been
politically more appealing: on the one hand, there is the view that
the end of the Cold War justifies a significant reduction in Amer-
ica's global engagement, irrespective of the consequences for
America's global standing; and on the other hand, there is the per-
spective that the time has come for genuine international multilat-
eralism, to which America should even yield some of its
sovereignty. Both schools of thought have commanded the loyalty
of committed constituencies.
Compounding the dilemmas facing the American leadership
are the changes in the character of the global situation itself: the
direct use of power now tends to be more constrained than was
the case in the past. Nuclear weapons have dramatically reduced
the utility of war as a tool of policy or even as a threat. The grow-
ing economic interdependence among nations is making the politi-
cal exploitation of economic blackmail less compelling. Thus
maneuver, diplomacy, coalition building, co-optation, and the very
deliberate deployment of one's political assets have become the
key ingredients of the successful exercise of geostrategic power on
the Eurasian chessboard.


--- PAGE 45 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 37
GEOPOLITICS AND GEOSTRATEGY
The exercise of American global primacy must be sensitive to the
fact that political geography remains a critical consideration in in-
ternational affairs. Napoleon reportedly once said that to know a
nation's geography was to know its foreign policy. Our understand-
ing of the importance of political geography, however, must adapt
to the new realities of power.
For most of the history of international affairs, territorial con-
trol was the focus of political conflict. Either national self-gratifica-
tion over the acquisition of larger territory or the sense of national
deprivation over the loss of "sacred" land has been the cause of
most of the bloody wars fought since the rise of nationalism. It is
no exaggeration to say that the territorial imperative has been the
main impulse driving the aggressive behavior of nation-states. Em-
pires were also built through the careful seizure and retention of
vital geographic assets, such as Gibraltar or the Suez Canal or Sin-
gapore, which served as key choke points or linchpins in a system
of imperial control.
The most extreme manifestation of the linkage between nation-
alism and territorial possession was provided by Nazi Germany and
imperial Japan. The effort to build the "one-thousand-year Reich"
went far beyond the goal of reuniting all German-speaking peoples
under one political roof and focused also on the desire to control
"the granaries" of Ukraine as well as other Slavic lands, whose pop-
ulations were to provide cheap slave labor for the imperial domain.
The Japanese were similarly fixated on the notion that direct terri-
torial possession of Manchuria, and later of the important oil-pro-
ducing Dutch East Indies, was essential to the fulfillment of the
Japanese quest for national power and global status. In a similar
vein, for centuries the definition of Russian national greatness was
equated with the acquisition of territory, and even at the end of the
twentieth century, the Russian insistence on retaining control over
such non-Russian people as the Chechens, who live around a vital
oil pipeline, has been justified by the claim that such control is es-
sential to Russia's status as a great power.
Nation-states continue to be the basic units of the world sys-
tem. Although the decline in big-power nationalism and the fading
of ideology has reduced the emotional content of global politics—


--- PAGE 46 ---
38 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
while nuclear weapons have introduced major restraints on the
use of force—competition based on territory still dominates world
affairs, even if its forms currently tend to be more civil. In that
competition, geographic location is still the point of departure for
the definition of a nation-state's external priorities, and the size of
national territory also remains one of the major criteria of status
and power.
However, for most nation-states, the issue of territorial posses-
sion has lately been waning in salience. To the extent that territor-
ial disputes are still important in shaping the foreign policy of
some states, they are more a matter of resentment over the denial
of self-determination to ethnic brethren said to be deprived of the
right to join the "motherland" or a grievance over alleged mistreat-
ment by a neighbor of ethnic minorities than they are a quest for
enhanced national status through territorial enlargement.
Increasingly, the ruling national elites have come to recognize
that factors other than territory are more crucial in determining
the international status of a state or the degree of its international
influence. Economic prowess, and its translation into technologi-
cal innovation, can also be a key criterion of power. Japan provides
the supreme example. Nonetheless, geographic location still tends
to determine the immediate priorities of a state—and the greater
its military, economic, and political power, the greater the radius,
beyond its immediate neighbors, of that state's vital geopolitical
interests, influence, and involvement.
Until recently, the leading analysts of geopolitics have debated
whether land power was more significant than sea power and what
specific region of Eurasia is vital to gain control over the entire
continent. One of the most prominent, Harold Mackinder, pio-
neered the discussion early in this century with his successive
concepts of the Eurasian "pivot area" (which was said to include
all of Siberia and much of Central Asia) and, later, of the
Central-East European "heartland" as the vital springboards for
the attainment of continental domination. He popularized his
heartland concept by the famous dictum:
Who rules East Europe commands the Heartland;
Who rules the Heartland commands the World-Island;
Who rules the World-Island commands the world.


--- PAGE 47 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 39
Geopolitics was also invoked by some leading German political
geographers to justify their country's "Drang nach Osten," notabiy
with Karl Haushofer adapting Mackinder's concept to Germany's
strategic needs. Its much-vulgarized echo could also be heard in
Adolf Hitler's emphasis on the German people's need for "Lebens-
raum." Other European thinkers of the first half of this century an-
ticipated an eastward shift in the geopolitical center of gravity,
with the Pacific region—and specifically America and Japan—be-
coming the likely inheritors of Europe's fading domination. To fore-
stall such a shift, the French political geographer Paul Demangeon,
as well as other French geopoliticians, advocated greater unity
among the European states even before World War II.
Today, the geopolitical issue is no longer what geographic part
of Eurasia Is the point of departure for continental domination, nor
whether land power is more significant than sea power. Geopoli-
tics has moved from the regional to the global dimension, with pre-
ponderance over the entire Eurasian continent serving as the
central basis for global primacy. The United States, a non-Eurasian
power, now enjoys international primacy, with its power directly
deployed on three peripheries of the Eurasian continent, from
which it exercises a powerful influence on the states occupying the
Eurasian hinterland. But it is on the globe's most important play-
ing field—Eurasia—that a potential rival to America might at some
point arise. Thus, focusing on the key players and properly assess-
ing the terrain has to be the point of departure for the formulation
of American geostrategy for the long-term management of Amer-
ica's Eurasian geopolitical interests.
Two basic steps are thus required:
• first, to identify the geostrategically dynamic Eurasian
states that have the power to cause a potentially important
shift in the international distribution of power and to deci-
pher the central external goals of their respective political
elites and the likely consequences of their seeking to attain
them; and to pinpoint the geopolitically critical Eurasian
states whose location and/or existence have catalytic ef-
fects either on the more active geostrategic players or on
regional conditions;


--- PAGE 48 ---
40 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
• second, to formulate specific U.S. policies to offset, co-opt,
and/or control the above, so as to preserve and promote vi-
tal U.S. interests, and to conceptualize a more comprehen-
sive geostrategy that establishes on a global scale the
interconnection between the more specific U.S. policies.
In brief, for the United States, Eurasian geostrategy involves
the purposeful management of geostrategically dynamic states
and the careful handling of geopolitically catalytic states, in keep-
ing with the twin interests of America in the short-term preserva-
tion of its unique global power and in the long-run transformation
of it into increasingly institutionalized global cooperation. To put it
in a terminology that hearkens back to the more brutal age of an-
cient empires, the three grand imperatives of imperial geostrategy
are to prevent collusion and maintain security dependence among
the vassals, to keep tributaries pliant and protected, and to keep
the barbarians from coming together.
GEOSTRATEGIC PLAYERS AND
GEOPOLITICAL PIVOTS
Active geostrategic players are the states that have the capacity
and the national will to exercise power or influence beyond their
borders in order to alter—to a degree that affects America's inter-
ests—the existing geopolitical state of affairs. They have the poten-
tial and/or the predisposition to be geopolitically volatile. For
whatever reason—the quest for national grandeur, ideological ful-
fillment, religious messianism, or economic aggrandizement—some
states do seek to attain regional domination or global standing.
They are driven by deeply rooted and complex motivations, best
explained by Robert Browning's phrase:"... a man's reach should
exceed his grasp, or what's a heaven for?" They thus take careful
stock of America's power, determine the extent to which their inter-
ests overlap or collide with America, and shape their own more lim-
ited Eurasian objectives, sometimes in collusion but sometimes in


--- PAGE 49 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 41
conflict with America's policies. To the Eurasian states so driven,
the United States must pay special attention.
Geopolitical pivots are the states whose importance is derived
not from their power and motivation but rather from their sensi-
tive location and from the consequences of their potentially vul-
nerable condition for the behavior of geostrategic players. Most
often, geopolitical pivots are determined by their geography,
which in some cases gives them a special role either in denning ac-
cess to important areas or in denying resources to a significant
player. In some cases, a geopolitical pivot may act as a defensive
shield for a vital state or even a region. Sometimes, the very exis-
tence of a geopolitical pivot can be said to have very significant
political and cultural consequences for a more active neighboring
geostrategic player. The identification of the post-Cold War key
Eurasian geopolitical pivots, and protecting them, is thus also a
crucial aspect of America's global geostrategy.
It should also be noted at the outset that although all
geostrategic players tend to be important and powerful countries,
not all important and powerful countries are automatically
geostrategic players. Thus, while the identification of the geo-
strategic players is thus relatively easy, the omission from the list
that follows of some obviously important countries may require
more justification.
In the current global circumstances, at least five key geostrate-
gic players and five geopolitical pivots (with two of the latter per-
haps also partially qualifying as players) can be identified on
Eurasia's new political map. France, Germany, Russia, China, and
India are major and active players, whereas Great Britain, Japan,
and Indonesia, while admittedly very important countries, do not
so qualify. Ukraine, Azerbaijan, South Korea, Turkey, and Iran play
the role of critically important geopolitical pivots, though both
Turkey and Iran are to some extent—within their more limited ca-
pabilities—also geostrategically active. More will be said about
each in subsequent chapters.
At this stage, suffice it to say that in the western extremity of
Eurasia the key and dynamic geostrategic players are France and
Germany. Both of them are motivated by a vision of a united Eu-


--- PAGE 50 ---
42 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
rope, though they differ on how much and in what fashion such a
Europe should remain linked to America. But both want to shape
something ambitiously new in Europe, thus altering the status
quo. France in particular has its own geostrategic concept of Eu-
rope, one that differs in some significant respects from that of the
United States, and is inclined to engage in tactical maneuvers de-
signed to play off Russia against America and Great Britain against
Germany, even while relying on the Franco-German alliance to off-
set its own relative weakness.
Moreover, both France and Germany are powerful enough and
assertive enough to exercise influence within a wider regional ra-
dius. France not only seeks a central political role in a unifying Eu-
rope but also sees itself as the nucleus of a Mediterranean-North
African cluster of states that share common concerns. Germany is
increasingly conscious of its special status as Europe's most im-
portant states—as the area's economic locomotive and the emerg-
ing leader of the European Union (EU). Germany feels it has a
special responsibility for the newly emancipated Central Europe,
in a manner vaguely reminiscent of earlier notions of a German-led
Mitteleuropa. Moreover, both France and Germany consider them-
selves entitled to represent European interests in dealings with
Russia, and Germany even retains, because of its geographic loca-
tion, at least theoretically, the grand option of a special bilateral
accommodation with Russia.
In contrast, Great Britain is not a geostrategic player. It has
fewer major options, it entertains no ambitious vision of Europe's
future, and its relative decline has also reduced its capacity to play
the traditional role of the European balancer. Its ambivalence re-
garding European unification and its attachment to a waning spe-
cial relationship with America have made Great Britain
increasingly irrelevant insofar as the major choices confronting
Europe's future are concerned. London has largely dealt itself out
of the European game.
Sir Roy Denman, a former British senior official in the European
Commission, recalls in his memoirs that as early as the 1955 con-
ference in Messina, which previewed the formation of a European
Union, the official spokesman for Britain flatly asserted to the as-
sembled would-be architects of Europe:


--- PAGE 51 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 43
The future treaty which you are discussing has no chance of
being agreed; if it was agreed, it would have no chance of being
applied. And if it was applied, it would be totally unacceptable
to Britain.... au revoir et bonne chance.2
More than forty years later, the above dictum remains essen-
tially the definition of the basic British attitude toward the con-
struction of a genuinely united Europe. Britain's reluctance to
participate in the Economic and Monetary Union, targeted for Jan-
uary 1999, reflects the country's unwillingness to identify British
destiny with that of Europe. The substance of that attitude was
well summarized in the early 1990s as follows:
• Britain rejects the goal of political unification.
• Britain favors a model of economic integration based on
free trade.
• Britain prefers foreign policy, security, and defense coordi-
nation outside the EC [European Community] framework.
• Britain has rarely maximized its influence with the EC.3
Great Britain, to be sure, still remains important to America. It
continues to wield some degree of global influence through the
Commonwealth, but it is neither a restless major power nor is it
motivated by an ambitious vision. It is America's key supporter, a
very loyal ally, a vital military base, and a close partner in critically
important intelligence activities. Its friendship needs to be nour-
ished, but its policies do not call for sustained attention. It is a re-
tired geostrategic player, resting on its splendid laurels, largely
disengaged from the great European adventure in which France
and Germany are the principal actors.
The other medium-sized European states, with most being
2Roy Den man, Missed Chances (London: Cassell, 1996).
'In Robert Skidelsky's contribution on "Great Britain and the New Eu-
rope," in From the Atlantic to the Urals, ed. David P. Calleo and Philip H. Gor-
don (Arlington, Va.: 1992), p. 145.


--- PAGE 52 ---
44 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
members of NATO and/or the European Union, either follow Amer-
ica's lead or quietly line up behind Germany or France, Their poli-
cies do not have a wider regional impact, and they are not in a
position to alter their basic alignments. At this stage, they are nei-
ther geostrategic players nor geopolitical pivots. The same is true
of the most important potential Central European member of
NATO and the EU, namely, Poland. Poland is too weak to be a
geostrategic player, and it has only one option: to become inte-
grated into the West. Moreover, the disappearance of the old Russ-
ian Empire and Poland's deepening ties with both the Atlantic
alliance and the emerging Europe increasingly give Poland histori-
cally unprecedented security, while confining its strategic choices.
Russia, it hardly needs saying, remains a major geostrategic
player, in spite of its weakened state and probably prolonged
malaise. Its very presence impacts massively on the newly inde-
pendent states within the vast Eurasian space of the former Soviet
Union. It entertains ambitious geopolitical objectives, which it in-
creasingly proclaims openly. Once it has recovered its strength, it
will also impact significantly on its western and eastern neighbors.
Moreover, Russia has still to make its fundamental geostrategic
choice regarding its relationship with America: is it a friend or foe?
It may well feel that it has major options on the Eurasian continent
in that regard. Much depends on how its internal politics evolve
and especially on whether Russia becomes a European democracy
or a Eurasian empire again. In any case, it clearly remains a player,
even though it has lost some of its "pieces," as well as some key
spaces on the Eurasian chessboard.
Similarly, it hardly needs arguing that China is a major player.
China is already a significant regional power and is likely to enter-
tain wider aspirations, given its history as a major power and its
view of the Chinese state as the global center. The choices China
makes are already beginning to affect the geopolitical distribution
of power in Asia, while its economic momentum is bound to give it
both greater physical power and increasing ambitions. The rise of
a "Greater China" will not leave the Taiwan issue dormant, and that
will inevitably impact on the American position in the Far East.
The dismantling of the Soviet Union has also created on the west-
ern edge of China a series of states, regarding which the Chinese


--- PAGE 53 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 45
leaders cannot be indifferent. Thus, Russia will also be much af-
fected by China's more active emergence on the world scene.
The eastern periphery of Eurasia poses a paradox. Japan is
clearly a major power in world affairs, and the American-Japanese
alliance has often—and correctly—been defined as America's
most important bilateral relationship. As one of the very top eco-
nomic powers in the world, Japan clearly possesses the potential
for the exercise of first-class political power. Yet it does not act on
this, eschewing any aspirations for regional domination and pre-
ferring instead to operate under American protection. Like Great
Britain in the case of Europe, Japan prefers not to become engaged
in the politics of the Asian mainland, though at least a partial rea-
son for this is the continued hostility of many fellow Asians to any
Japanese quest for a regionally preeminent political role.
This self-restrained Japanese political profile in turn permits
the United States to play a central security role in the Far East.
Japan is thus not a geostrategic player, though its obvious poten-
tial for quickly becoming one—especially if either China or Amer-
ica were suddenly to alter its current policies—imposes on the
United States a special obligation to carefully nurture the Ameri-
can-Japanese relationship. It is not Japanese foreign policy that
America must watch, but it is Japan's self-restraint that America
must very subtly cultivate. Any significant reduction in Ameri-
can-Japanese political ties would impact directly on the region's
stability.
The case for not listing Indonesia as a dynamic geostrategic
player is easier to make. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia is the most
important country, but even in the region itself, its capacity for
projecting significant influence is limited by the relatively underde-
veloped state of the Indonesian economy, its continued internal
political uncertainties, its dispersed archipelago, and its suscepti-
bility to ethnic conflicts that are exacerbated by the central role
exercised in its internal financial affairs by the Chinese minority. At
some point, Indonesia could become an important obstacle to Chi-
nese southward aspirations. That eventuality has already been
recognized by Australia, which once feared Indonesian expansion-
ism but lately has begun to favor closer Australian-Indonesian se-
curity cooperation. But a period of political consolidation and


--- PAGE 54 ---
46 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
continued economic success is needed before Indonesia can be
viewed as the regionally dominant actor.
In contrast, India is in the process of establishing itself as a re-
gional power and views itself as potentially a major global player
as well. It also sees itself as a rival to China. That may be a matter
of overestimating its own long-term capabilities, but India is un-
questionably the most powerful South Asian state, a regional hege-
mon of sorts. It is also a semisecret nuclear power, and it became
one not only in order to intimidate Pakistan but especially to bal-
ance China's possession of a nuclear arsenal. India has a geostrate-
gic vision of its regional role, both vis-a-vis its neighbors and in the
Indian Ocean. However, its ambitions at this stage only peripher-
ally intrude on America's Eurasian interests, and thus, as a
geostrategic player, India is not—at least, not to the same degree
as either Russia or China—a source of geopolitical concern.
Ukraine, a new and important space on the Eurasian chess-
board, is a geopolitical pivot because its very existence as an inde-
pendent country helps to transform Russia. Without Ukraine,
Russia ceases to be a Eurasian empire. Russia without Ukraine can
still strive for imperial status, but it would then become a predom-
inantly Asian imperial state, more likely to be drawn into debilitat-
ing conflicts with aroused Central Asians, who would then be
resentful of the loss of their recent independence and would be
supported by their fellow Islamic states to the south. China would
also be likely to oppose any restoration of Russian domination
over Central Asia, given its increasing interest in the newly inde-
pendent states there. However, if Moscow regains control over
Ukraine, with its 52 million people and major resources as well as
its access to the Black Sea, Russia automatically again regains the
wherewithal to become a powerful imperial state, spanning Europe
and Asia. Ukraine's loss of independence would have immediate
consequences for Central Europe, transforming Poland into the
geopolitical pivot on the eastern frontier of a united Europe.
Despite its limited size and small population, Azerbaijan, with
its vast energy resources, is also geopolitically critical. It is the
cork in the bottle containing the riches of the Caspian Sea basin
and Central Asia. The independence of the Central Asian states
can be rendered nearly meaningless if Azerbaijan becomes fully


--- PAGE 55 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 47
subordinated to Moscow's control. Azerbaijan's own and very sig-
nificant oil resources can also be subjected to Russian control,
once Azerbaijan's independence has been nullified. An indepen-
dent Azerbaijan, linked to Western markets by pipelines that do
not pass through Russian-controlled territory, also becomes a ma-
jor avenue of access from the advanced and energy-consuming
economies to the energy rich Central Asian republics. Almost as
much as in the case of Ukraine, the future of Azerbaijan and Cen-
tral Asia is also crucial in defining what Russia might or might not
become.
Turkey and Iran are engaged in establishing some degree of influ-
ence in the Caspian Sea-Central Asia region, exploiting the retrac-
tion of Russian power. For that reason, they might be considered as
geostrategic players. However, both states confront serious domes-
tic problems, and their capacity for effecting major regional shifts in
the distribution of power is limited. They are also rivals and thus
tend to negate each other's influence. For example, in Azerbaijan,
where Turkey has gained an influential role, the Iranian posture
(arising out of concern over possible Azeri national stirrings within
Iran itself) has been more helpful to the Russians.
Both Turkey and Iran, however, are primarily important geopo-
litical pivots. Turkey stabilizes the Black Sea region, controls ac-
cess from it to the Mediterranean Sea, balances Russia in the
Caucasus, still offers an antidote to Muslim fundamentalism, and
serves as the southern anchor for NATO. A destabilized Turkey
would be likely to unleash more violence in the southern Balkans,
while facilitating the reimposition of Russian control over the
newly independent states of the Caucasus. Iran, despite the ambi-
guity of its attitude toward Azerbaijan, similarly provides stabiliz-
ing support for the new political diversity of Central Asia. It
dominates the eastern shoreline of the Persian Gulf, while its inde-
pendence, irrespective of current Iranian hostility toward the
United States, acts as a barrier to any long-term Russian threat to
American interests in the Persian Gulf region.
Finally, South Korea is a Far Eastern geopolitical pivot. Its close
links to the United States enable America to shield Japan and
thereby to keep Japan from becoming an independent and major
military power, without an overbearing American presence within


--- PAGE 56 ---
48 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Japan itself. Any significant change in South Korea's status, either
through unification and/or through a shift into an expanding Chi-
nese sphere of influence, would necessarily alter dramatically
America's role in the Far East, thus altering Japan's as well. In addi-
tion, South Korea's growing economic power also makes it a more
important "space" in its own right, control over which becomes in-
creasingly valuable.
The above list of geostrategic players and geopolitical pivots is
neither permanent nor fixed. At times, some states might have to
be added or subtracted. Certainly, in some respects, the case
could be made that Taiwan, or Thailand, or Pakistan, or perhaps
Kazakstan or Uzbekistan should also be included in the latter cate-
gory. However, at this stage, the case for none of the above seems
compelling. Changes in the status of any of them would represent
major events and involve some shifts in the distribution of power,
but it is doubtful that the catalytic consequences would be far-
reaching. The only exception might involve the issue of Taiwan, if
one chooses to view it apart from China. Even then, that issue
would only arise if China were to use major force to conquer the is-
land, in successful defiance of the United States, thereby threaten-
ing more generally America's political credibility in the Far East.
The probability of such a course of events seems low, but that con-
sideration still has to be kept in mind when framing U.S. policy to-
ward China.
CRITICAL CHOICES AND POTENTIAL CHALLENGES
The Identification of the central players and key pivots helps to de-
fine America's grand policy dilemmas and to anticipate the poten-
tial major challenges on the Eurasian supercontinent. These can
be summarized, before more comprehensive discussion in subse-
quent chapters, as involving five broad issues:
• What kind of Europe should America prefer and hence pro-
mote?
• What kind of Russia is in America's interest, and what and
how much can America do about it?


--- PAGE 57 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 49
• What are the prospects for the emergence in Central Eura-
sia of a new "Balkans," and what should America do to mini-
mize the resulting risks?
• What role should China be encouraged to assume in the Far
East, and what are the implications of the foregoing not
only for the United States but also for Japan?
• What new Eurasian coalitions are possible, which might be
most dangerous to U.S. interests, and what needs to be
done to preclude them?
The United States has always professed its fidelity to the
cause of a united Europe. Ever since the days of the Kennedy ad-
ministration, the standard invocation has been that of "equal
partnership." Official Washington has consistently proclaimed its
desire to see Europe emerge as a single entity, powerful enough
to share with America both the responsibilities and the burdens
of global leadership.
That has been the established rhetoric on the subject. But in
practice, the United States has been less clear and less consis-
tent. Does Washington truly desire a Europe that is a genuinely
equal partner in world affairs, or does it prefer an unequal al-
liance? For example, is the United States prepared to share lead-
ership with Europe in the Middle East, a region not only much
closer geographically to Europe than to America but also one in
which several European states have long-standing interests? The
issue of Israel instantly comes to mind. U.S.-European differ-
ences over Iran and Iraq have also been treated by the United
States not as an issue between equals but as a matter of insubor-
dination.
Ambiguity regarding the degree of American support for Euro-
pean unity also extends to the issue of how European unity is to be
defined, especially concerning which country, if any, should lead a
united Europe. Washington has not discouraged London's divisive
posture regarding Europe's integration, though Washington has
also shown a clear preference for German—rather than French—
leadership in Europe. That is understandable, given the traditional
thrust of French policy, but the preference has also had the effect


--- PAGE 58 ---
50 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
of encouraging the occasional appearance of a tactical Franco-
British entente in order to thwart Germany, as well as periodic
French flirtation with Moscow in order to offset the American-Ger-
man coalition.
The emergence of a truly united Europe—especially if that
should occur with constructive American support—will require
significant changes in the structure and processes of the NATO al-
liance, the principal link between America and Europe. NATO pro-
vides not only the main mechanism for the exercise of U.S.
influence regarding European matters but the basis for the politi-
cally critical American military presence in Western Europe. How-
ever, European unity will require that structure to adjust to the
new reality of an alliance based on two more or less equal part-
ners, instead of an alliance that, to use traditional terminology, in-
volves essentially a hegemon and its vassals. That issue has so far
been largely skirted, despite the modest steps taken in 1996 to en-
hance within NATO the role of the Western European Union (WEU), •
the military coalition of the Western European states. A real choice
in favor of a united Europe will thus compel a far-reaching reorder-
ing of NATO, inevitably reducing the American primacy within the "
alliance.
In brief, a long-range American geostrategy for Europe will have
to address explicitly the issues of European unity and real partner-
ship with Europe. An America that truly desires a united and hence
also a more independent Europe will have to throw its weight be-
hind those European forces that are genuinely committed to Eu-
rope's political and economic integration. Such a strategy will also
mean junking the last vestiges of the once-hallowed U.S.-U.K. spe-
cial relationship.
A policy for a united Europe will also have to address—though
jointly with the Europeans—the highly sensitive issue of Europe's
geographic scope. How far eastward should the European Union
extend? And should the eastern limits of the EU be synonymous
with the eastern front line of NATO? The former is more a matter
for a European decision, but a European decision on that issue will
have direct implications for a NATO decision. The latter, however,
engages the United States, and the U.S. voice in NATO is still deci-
sive. Given the growing consensus regarding the desirability of ad-
mitting the nations of Central Europe into both the EU and NATO,


--- PAGE 59 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 51
the practical meaning of this question focuses attention on the fu-
ture status of the Baltic republics and perhaps also that of Ukraine.
There is thus an important overlap between the European
dilemma discussed above and the second one pertaining to Rus-
sia. It is easy to respond to the question regarding Russia's future
by professing a preference for a democratic Russia, closely linked
to Europe. Presumably, a democratic Russia would be more sym-
pathetic to the values shared by America and Europe and hence
also more likely to become a junior partner in shaping a more sta-
ble and cooperative Eurasia. But Russia's ambitions may go be-
yond the attainment of recognition and respect as a democracy.
Within the Russian foreign policy establishment (composed
largely of former Soviet officials), there still thrives a deeply in-
grained desire for a special Eurasian role, one that would conse-
quently entail the subordination to Moscow of the newly
independent post-Soviet states.
In that context, even friendly western policy is seen by some in-
fluential members of the Russian policy-making community as de-
signed to deny Russia its rightful claim to a global status. As two
Russian geopoliticians put it:
[T]he United States and the NATO countries—while sparing
Russia's self-esteem to the extent possible, but nevertheless
firmly and consistently—are destroying the geopolitical foun-
dations which could, at least in theory, allow Russia to hope to
acquire the status as the number two power in world politics
that belonged to the Soviet Union.
Moreover, America is seen as pursuing a policy in which
the new organization of the European space that is being engi-
neered by the West is, in essence, built on the idea of support-
ing, in this part of the world, new, relatively small and weak
national states through their more or less close rapproche-
ment with NATO, the EC, and so forth.4
HA. Bogaturov and V. Kremenyuk (both senior scholars in the Institute of
the United States and Canada), in "Current Relations and Prospects for Inter-
action Between Russia and the United States," Nezauisimaya Gazeta, June
28,1996.


--- PAGE 60 ---
52 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
The above quotations define well—even though with some ani-
mus—the dilemma that the United States faces. To what extent
should Russia be helped economically—which inevitably strength-
ens Russia politically and militarily—and to what extent should
the newly independent states be simultaneously assisted in the de-
fense and consolidation of their independence? Can Russia be
both powerful and a democracy at the same time? If it becomes
powerful again, will it not seek to regain its lost imperial domain,
and can it then be both an empire and a democracy?
U.S. policy toward the vital geopolitical pivots of Ukraine and
Azerbaijan cannot skirt that issue, and America thus faces a diffi-
cult dilemma regarding tactical balance and strategic purpose. In-
ternal Russian recovery is essential to Russia's democratization
and eventual Europeanization. But any recovery of its imperial po-
tential would be inimical to both of these objectives. Moreover, it
is over this issue that differences could develop between America
and some European states, especially as the EU and NATO expand.
Should Russia be considered a candidate for eventual membership
in either structure? And what then about Ukraine? The costs of the
exclusion of Russia could be high—creating a self-fulfilling
prophecy in the Russian mindset—but the results of dilution of ei-
ther the EU or NATO could also be quite destabilizing.
Another major uncertainty looms in the large and geopoliti-
cally fluid space of Central Eurasia, maximized by the potential
vulnerability of the Turkish-Iranian pivots. In the area demarcated
on the following map from Crimea in the Black Sea directly east-
ward along the new southern frontiers of Russia, all the way to the
Chinese province of Xinjiang, then down to the Indian Ocean and
thence westward to the Red Sea, then northward to the eastern
Mediterranean Sea and back to Crimea, live about 400 million peo-
ple, located in some twenty-five states, almost all of them ethni-
cally as well as religiously heterogeneous and practically none of
them politically stable. Some of these states may be in the process
of acquiring nuclear weapons.
This huge region, torn by volatile hatreds and surrounded by
competing powerful neighbors, is likely to be a major battlefield,
both for wars among nation-states and, more likely, for protracted
ethnic and religious violence. Whether India acts as a restraint or
whether it takes advantage of some opportunity to impose its will


--- PAGE 61 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 53
on Pakistan will greatly affect the regional scope of the likely con-
flicts. The internal strains within Turkey and Iran are likely not
only to get worse but to greatly reduce the stabilizing role these
states are capable of playing within this volcanic region. Such de-
velopments will in turn make it more difficult to assimilate the new
Central Asian states into the international community, while also
adversely affecting the American-dominated security of the Per-
sian Gulf region. In any case, both America and the international
community may be faced here with a challenge that will dwarf the
recent crisis in the former Yugoslavia.
A possible challenge to American primacy from Islamic funda-
mentalism could be part of the problem in this unstable region.
By exploiting religious hostility to the American way of life and
taking advantage of the Arab-Israeli conflict, Islamic fundamental-
ism could undermine several pro-Western Middle Eastern govern-
ments and eventually jeopardize American regional interests,


--- PAGE 62 ---
54 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
especially in the Persian Gulf. However, without political cohesion
and in the absence of a single genuinely powerful Islamic state, a
challenge from Islamic fundamentalism would lack a geopolitical
core and would thus be more likely to express itself through dif-
fuse violence.
A geostrategic issue of crucial importance is posed by China's
emergence as a major power. The most appealing outcome would
be to co-opt a democratizing and free-marketing China into a larger
Asian regional framework of cooperation. But suppose China does
not democratize but continues to grow in economic and military
power? A "Greater China" may be emerging, whatever the desires
and calculations of its neighbors, and any effort to prevent that
from happening could entail an intensifying conflict with China.
Such a conflict could strain American-Japanese relations—for it is
far from certain that Japan would want to follow America's lead in
containing China—and could therefore have potentially revolu-
tionary consequences for Tokyo's definition of Japan's regional
role, perhaps even resulting in the termination of the American
presence in the Far East.
However, accommodation with China will also exact its own
price. To accept China as a regional power is not a matter of sim-
ply endorsing a mere slogan. There will have to be substance to
any such regional preeminence. To put it very directly, how large a
Chinese sphere of influence, and where, should America be pre-
pared to accept as part of a policy of successfully co-opting China
into world affairs? What areas now outside of China's political ra-
dius might have to be conceded to the realm of the reemerging Ce-
lestial Empire?
In that context, the retention of the American presence in
South Korea becomes especially important. Without it, it is diffi-
cult to envisage the American-Japanese defense arrangement con-
tinuing in its present form, for Japan would have to become
militarily more self-sufficient. But any movement toward Korean
reunification is likely to disturb the basis for the continued U.S.
military presence in South Korea. A reunified Korea may choose
not to perpetuate American military protection; that, indeed,
could be the price exacted by China for throwing its decisive
weight behind the reunification of the peninsula. In brief, U.S. man-
agement of its relationship with China will inevitably have direct


--- PAGE 63 ---
THE EURASIAN CHESSBOARD 55
consequences for the stability of the American-Japanese-Korean
triangular security relationship.
Finally, some possible contingencies involving future political
alignments should also be briefly noted, subject to fuller discus-
sion in pertinent chapters. In the past, international affairs were
largely dominated by contests among individual states for regional
domination. Henceforth, the United States may have to determine
how to cope with regional coalitions that seek to push America out
of Eurasia, thereby threatening America's status as a global power.
However, whether any such coalitions do or do not arise to chal-
lenge American primacy will in fact depend to a very large degree
on how effectively the United States responds to the major dilem-
mas identified here.
Potentially, the most dangerous scenario would be a grand
coalition of China, Russia, and perhaps Iran, an "antihegemonic"
coalition united not by ideology but by complementary griev-
ances. It would be reminiscent in scale and scope of the challenge
once posed by the Sino-Soviet bloc, though this time China would
likely be the leader and Russia the follower. Averting this contin-
gency, however remote it may be, will require a display of U.S.
geostrategic skill on the western, eastern, and southern perime-
ters of Eurasia simultaneously.
A geographically more limited but potentially even more con-
sequential challenge could involve a Sino-Japanese axis, in the
wake of a collapse of the American position in the Far East and a
revolutionary change in Japan's world outlook. It would combine
the power of two extraordinarily productive peoples, and it could
exploit some form of "Asianism" as a unifying anti-American doc-
trine. However, it does not appear likely that in the foreseeable fu-
ture China and Japan will form an alliance, given their recent
historical experience; and a farsighted American policy in the Far
East should certainly be able to prevent this eventuality from
occurring.
Also quite remote, but not to be entirely excluded, is the possi-
bility of a grand European realignment, involving either a German-
Russian collusion or a Franco-Russian entente. There are obvious
historical precedents for both, and either could emerge if Euro-
pean unification were to grind to a halt and if relations between Eu-
rope and America were to deteriorate gravely. Indeed, in the latter


--- PAGE 64 ---
56 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
eventuality, one could imagine a European-Russian accommoda-
tion to exclude America from the continent. At this stage, all of
these variants seem improbable. They would require not only a
massive mishandling by America of its European policy but also a
dramatic reorientation on the part of the key European states.
Whatever the future, it is reasonable to conclude that Ameri-
can primacy on the Eurasian continent will be buffeted by turbu-
lence and perhaps at least by sporadic violence. America's
primacy is potentially vulnerable to new challenges, either from re-
gional contenders or novel constellations. The currently dominant
American global system, within which "the threat of war is off the
table," is likely to be stable only in those parts of the world in
which American primacy, guided by a long-term geostrategy, rests
on compatible and congenial sociopolitical systems, linked to-
gether by American-dominated multilateral frameworks.


--- PAGE 65 ---
CHAPTER 3
The
Democratic
Bridgehead
EUROPE is AMERICA'S NATURAL ALLY. It shares the same values; par-
takes, in the main, of the same religious heritage; practices the
same democratic politics; and is the original homeland of a
large majority of Americans. By pioneering in the integration of na-
tion-states into a shared supranational economic and eventually po-
litical union, Europe is also pointing the way toward larger forms of
postnational organization, beyond the narrow visions and the de-
structive passions of the age of nationalism. It is already the most
multilateral^ organized region of the world (see chart on page 58).
Success in its political unification would create a single entity of
about 400 million people, living under a democratic roof and enjoy-
ing a standard of living comparable to that of the United States. Such
a Europe would inevitably be a global power.
Europe also serves as the springboard for the progressive ex-
pansion of democracy deeper into Eurasia. Europe's expansion
eastward would consolidate the democratic victory of the 1990s. It
would match on the political and economic plane the essential civ-
ilizational scope of Europe—what has been called the Petrine Eu-
rope—as denned by Europe's ancient and common religious
57


--- PAGE 66 ---
OSCE
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovakia
Hungary
Bulgaria
Romania
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
AlbaniaSlovenia
Croatia
Bosnia-Herzegovina
Yugoslavia
NATO
USA
Canada
Turkey
Iceland
Norway
EU
Greece
/
/
/
/
\
\
\
Malta
Holy See
San Marino
Ireland
Austria
WEU
Belgium
Germany
France
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Finland
^\ Denmark
A\\\
/
//\ United Kingdom /
\
i
y
Switzerland
Liechtenstein
Cyprus
Monaco
Russia
Belarus
Ukraine
Moldova
Kazakstan
Kyrgyzstan
Uzbekistan
Turkmenistan
Tajikistan
ArmeniaAzerbaijan
Georgia


--- PAGE 67 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 59
heritage, derived from Western-rite Christianity. Such a Europe
once existed, long before the age of nationalism and even longer
before the recent division of Europe into its American- and Soviet-
dominated halves. Such a larger Europe would be able to exercise
a magnetic attraction on the states located even farther east,
building a network of ties with Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia, draw-
ing them into increasingly binding cooperation while proselytizing
common democratic principles. Eventually, such a Europe could
become one of the vital pillars of an American-sponsored larger
Eurasian structure of security and cooperation.
But first of all, Europe is America's essential geopolitical
bridgehead on the Eurasian continent. America's geostrategic
stake in Europe is enormous. Unlike America's links with Japan,
the Atlantic alliance entrenches American political influence and
military power directly on the Eurasian mainland. At this stage of
American-European relations, with the allied European nations still
highly dependent on U.S. security protection, any expansion in the
scope of Europe becomes automatically an expansion in the scope
of direct U.S. influence as well. Conversely, without close transat-
lantic ties, America's primacy in Eurasia promptly fades away. U.S.
control over the Atlantic Ocean and the ability to project influence
and power deeper into Eurasia would be severely circumscribed.
The problem, however, is that a truly European "Europe" as
such does not exist. It is a vision, a concept, and a goal, but it is
not yet reality. Western Europe is already a common market, but it
is still far from being a single political entity. A political Europe has
yet to emerge. The crisis in Bosnia offered painful proof of Eu-
rope's continued absence, if proof were still needed. The brutal
fact is that Western Europe, and increasingly also Central Europe,
remains largely an American protectorate, with its allied states
reminiscent of ancient vassals and tributaries. This is not a
healthy condition, either for America or for the European nations.
Matters are made worse by a more pervasive decline in Eu-
rope's internal vitality. Both the legitimacy of the existing socio-
economic system and even the surfacing sense of European
identity appear to be vulnerable. In a number of European states,
one can detect a crisis of confidence and a loss of creative momen-
tum, as well as an inward perspective that is both isolationist and
escapist from the larger dilemmas of the world. It is not clear


--- PAGE 68 ---
60 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
whether most Europeans even want Europe to be a major power
and whether they are prepared to do what is needed for it to be-
come one. Even residual European anti-Americanism, currently
quite weak, is curiously cynical: the Europeans deplore American
"hegemony" but take comfort in being sheltered by it.
The political momentum for Europe's unification was once dri-
ven by three main impulses: the memories of the destructive two
world wars, the desire for economic recovery, and the insecurity
generated by the Soviet threat. By the mid-nineties, however, these
impulses had faded. Economic recovery by and large has been
achieved; if anything, the problem Europe increasingly faces is
that of an excessively burdensome welfare system that is sapping
its economic vitality, while the passionate resistance to any reform
by special interests is diverting European political attention in-
ward. The Soviet threat has disappeared, while the desire of some
Europeans to gain independence from American tutelage has not
translated into a compelling impulse for continental unification.
The European cause has been increasingly sustained by the bu-
reaucratic momentum generated by the large institutional machin-
ery created by the European Community and its successor, the
European Union. The idea of unity still enjoys significant popular
support, but it tends to be lukewarm, lacking in passion and a
sense of mission. In general, the Western Europe of today conveys
the impression of a troubled, unfocused, comfortable yet socially
uneasy set of societies, not partaking of any larger vision. Euro-
pean unification is increasingly a process and not a cause.
Still, the political elites of two leading European nations—
France and Germany—remain largely committed to the goal of
shaping and defining a Europe that would truly be Europe. They
are thus Europe's principal architects. Working together, they
could construct a Europe worthy of its past and of its potential.
But each is committed to a somewhat different vision and design,
and neither is strong enough to prevail by itself.
This condition creates for the United States a special opportu-
nity for decisive intervention. It necessitates American engage-
ment on behalf of Europe's unity, for otherwise unification could
grind to a halt and then gradually even be undone. But any effec-
tive American involvement in Europe's construction has to be
guided by clarity in American thinking regarding what kind of Eu-


--- PAGE 69 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 61
rope America prefers and is ready to promote—an equal partner
or a junior ally—and regarding the eventual scope of both the Eu-
ropean Union and NATO. It also requires careful management of
Europe's two principal architects.
GRANDEUR AND REDEMPTION
France seeks reincarnation as Europe; Germany hopes for redemp-
tion through Europe. These varying motivations go a long way to-
ward explaining and defining the substance of the alternative
French and German designs for Europe.
For France, Europe is the means for regaining France's past
greatness. Even before World War H, serious French thinkers on in-
ternational affairs already worried about the progressive decline
of Europe's centrality in world affairs. During the several decades
of the Cold War, that worry turned into resentment over the "An-
glo-Saxon" domination of the West, not to speak of contempt for
the related "Americanization" of Western culture. The creation of a
genuine Europe—in Charles De Gaulle's words, "from the Atlantic
to the Urals"—was to remedy that deplorable state of affairs. And
such a Europe, since it would be led by Paris, would simultane-
ously regain for France the grandeur that the French still feel re-
mains their nation's special destiny.
For Germany, a commitment to Europe is the basis for national
redemption, while an intimate connection to America is central to
its security. Accordingly, a Europe more assertively independent of
America is not a viable option. For Germany, redemption + security
= Europe + America. That formula defines Germany's posture and
policy, making Germany simultaneously Europe's truly good citi-
zen and America's strongest European supporter.
Germany sees in its fervent commitment to Europe a historical
cleansing, a restoration of its moral and political credentials. By re-
deeming itself through Europe, Germany is restoring its own great-
ness while gaining a mission that would not automatically mobilize
European resentments and fears against Germany. If Germans seek
the German national interest, that runs the risk of alienating other
Europeans; if Germans promote Europe's common interest, that
garners European support and respect.


--- PAGE 70 ---
62 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
On the central issues of the Cold War, France was a loyal, dedi-
cated, and determined ally. It stood shoulder to shoulder with
America when the chips were down. Whether during the two
Berlin blockades or during the Cuban missile crisis, there was no
doubt about French steadfastness. But France's support for NATO
was tempered by a simultaneous French desire to assert a sepa-
rate French political identity and to preserve for France its essen-
tial freedom of action, especially on matters that pertained to
France's global status or to the future of Europe.
There is an element of delusional obsession in the French polit-
ical elite's preoccupation with the notion that France is still a
global power. When Prime Minister Alain Juppe", echoing his prede-
cessors, declared to the National Assembly in May 1995 that
"France can and must assert its vocation as a world power," the
gathering broke out into spontaneous applause. The French insis-
tence on the development of its own nuclear deterrent was moti-
vated largely by the view that France would thereby enhance its
own freedom of action and at the same time gain the capacity to in-
fluence American life-and-death decisions regarding the security of
the Western alliance as a whole. It was not vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union that France sought to upgrade its status, for the French nu-
clear deterrent had, at the very best, only a marginal impact on So-
viet war-making capabilities. Paris felt instead that its own nuclear
weapons would give France a role in the Cold War's top-level and
most dangerous decision-making processes.
In French thinking, the possession of nuclear weapons fortified
France's claim to being a global power, of having a voice that had
to be respected worldwide. It tangibly reinforced France's position
as one of the five veto-wielding UN Security Council members, all
five also nuclear powers. In the French perspective, the British nu-
clear deterrent was simply an extension of the American, espe-
cially given the British commitment to the special relationship and
the British abstention from the effort to construct an independent
Europe. (That the French nuclear program significantly benefited
from covert U.S. assistance was, to the French, of no consequence
for France's strategic calculus.) The French nuclear deterrent also
consolidated, in the French mindset, France's commanding posi-
tion as the leading continental power, the only truly European
state so endowed.


--- PAGE 71 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 63
France's global ambitions were also expressed through its de-
termined efforts to sustain a special security role in most of the
Francophone African countries. Despite the loss, after prolonged
combat, of Vietnam and Algeria and the abandonment of a wider
empire, that security mission, as well as continued French control
over scattered Pacific islands (which have provided the venue for
controversial French atomic tests), has reinforced the conviction
of the French elite that France, indeed, still has a global role to
play, despite the reality of being essentially a middle-rank postim-
perial European power.
All of the foregoing has sustained as well as motivated France's
claim to the mantle of European leadership. With Britain self-mar-
ginalized and essentially an appendage to U.S. power and with Ger-
many divided for much of the Cold War and still handicapped by
its twentieth-century history, France could seize the idea of Eu-
rope, identify itself with it, and usurp it as identical with France's
conception of itself. The country that first invented the idea of the
sovereign nation-state and made nationalism into a civic religion
thus found it quite natural to see itself—with the same emotional
commitment that was once invested in "la patrie"—as the embodi-
ment of an independent but united Europe. The grandeur of a
French-led Europe would then be France's as well.
This special vocation, generated by a deeply felt sense of his-
torical destiny and fortified by a unique cultural pride, has major
policy implications. The key geopolitical space that France had to
keep within its orbit of influence—or, at least, prevent from being
dominated by a more powerful state than itself—can be drawn on
the map in the form of a semicircle. It includes the Iberian Penin-
sula, the northern shore of the western Mediterranean, and Ger-
many up to East-Central Europe (see map on page 64). That is not
only the minimal radius of French security; it is also the essential
zone of French political interest. Only with the support of the
southern states assured, and with Germany's backing guaranteed,
can the goal of constructing a unified and independent Europe, led
by France, be effectively pursued. And obviously, within that
geopolitical orbit, the increasingly powerful Germany is bound to
be the most difficult to manage.
In the French vision, the central goal of a united and independent
Europe can be achieved by combining the unification of Europe


--- PAGE 72 ---
64 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Prance's and (iermaiiy's Geopolitical
Orbits a! Special Interest
French ortnt (J Jpsoal IMMMI
Gsmm oiOfl of spues! inlsiesl
under French leadership with the simultaneous but gradual diminu-
tion of the American primacy on the continent. But if France is to
shape Europe's future, it must both engage and shackle Germany,
while also seeking step-by-step to strip Washington of its political
leadership in European affairs. The resulting key policy dilemmas
for France are essentially twofold: how to preserve the American
security commitment to Europe—which France recognizes is still
essential—while steadily reducing the American presence; and how
to sustain Franco-German partnership as the combined political-
economic engine of European unification while precluding German
leadership in Europe.
If France were truly a global power, the resolution of these dilem-
mas in the pursuit of France's central goal might not be difficult.
None of the other European states, save Germany, are endowed with
the same ambition or driven by the same sense of mission. Even
Germany could perhaps be seduced into acceptance of French lead-


--- PAGE 73 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 65
ership in a united but independent (of America) Europe, but only if
it felt that France was in fact a global power and could thus provide
Europe with the security that Germany cannot but America does.
Germany, however, knows the real limits of French power.
France is much weaker than Germany economically, while its mili-
tary establishment (as the Gulf War of 1991 showed) is not very
competent. It is good enough to squash internal coups in satellite
African states, but it can neither protect Europe nor project signifi-
cant power far from Europe. France is no more and no less than a
middle-rank European power. Accordingly, in order to construct
Europe, Germany has been willing to propitiate French pride, but
in order to keep Europe truly secure, it has not been willing to fol-
low French leadership blindly. It has continued to insist on a cen-
tral role in European security for America.
That reality, painful for French self-esteem, emerged more
clearly after Germany's reunification. Until then, the Franco-Ger-
man reconciliation did have the appearance of French political
leadership riding comfortably on German economic dynamism.
That perception actually suited both parties. It mitigated the tradi-
tional European fears of Germany, and it had the effect of fortifying
and gratifying French illusions by generating the impression that
the construction of Europe was led by France, backed by an eco-
nomically dynamic West Germany.
Franco-German reconciliation, even with its misconceptions,
was nonetheless a positive development for Europe, and its impor-
tance cannot be overstated. It has provided the crucial foundation
for all of the progress so far achieved in Europe's difficult process
of unification. Thus, it was also fully compatible with American in-
terests and in keeping with the long-standing American commit-
ment to the promotion of transnational cooperation in Europe. A
breakdown of Franco-German cooperation would be a fatal set-
back for Europe and a disaster for America's position in Europe.
Tacit American support made it possible for France and Ger-
many to push the process of Europe's unification forward. Ger-
many's reunification, moreover, increased the incentive for the
French to lock Germany into a binding European framework. Thus,
on December 6, 1990, the French president and the German chan-
cellor committed themselves to the goal of a federal Europe, and
ten days later, the Rome intergovernmental conference on political


--- PAGE 74 ---
66 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
union issued—British reservations notwithstanding—a clear man-
date to the twelve foreign ministers of the European Community to
prepare a Draft Treaty on Political Union.
However, Germany's reunification also dramatically changed
the real parameters of European politics. It was simultaneously a
geopolitical defeat for Russia and for France. United Germany not
only ceased to be a political junior partner of France, but it auto-
matically became the undisputed prime power in Western Europe
and even a partial global power, especially through its major finan-
cial contributions to the support of the key international institu-
tions.' The new reality bred some mutual disenchantment in the
Franco-German relationship, for Germany was now able and will-
ing to articulate and openly promote its own vision of a future Eu-
rope, still as France's partner but no longer as its protege.
For France, the resulting diminished political leverage dictated
several policy consequences. France somehow had to regain
greater influence within NATO—from which it had largely ab-
stained as a protest against U.S. domination—while also compen-
sating for its relative weakness through greater diplomatic
maneuver. Returning to NATO might enable France to influence
America more; occasional flirtation with Moscow or London might
generate pressure from the outside on America as well as on Ger-
many.
Consequently, as part of its policy of maneuver rather than
contestation, France returned to NATO's command structure. By
1994, France was again a de facto active participant in NATO's po-
litical and military decision making; by late 1995, the French for-
eign and defense ministers were again regular attendees at alliance
sessions. But at a price: once fully inside, they reaffirmed their de-
termination to reform the alliance's structure in order to make for
greater balance between its American leadership and its European
participation. They wanted a higher profile and a bigger role for a
collective European component. As the French foreign minister,
Herv6 de Charette, stated in a speech on April 8,1996, "For France,
'For example, as a percentage of overall budget, Germany accounts for
EU: 28.5 percent; NATO: 22.8 percent; UN 8.93 percent, in addition to being
the largest shareholder in the World Bank and the EBRD (European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development).


--- PAGE 75 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 67
the basic goal [of the rapprochement] is to assert a European iden-
tity within the alliance that is operationally credible and politically
visible."
At the same time, Paris was quite prepared to exploit tactically
its traditional links with Russia to constrain America's European
policy and to resuscitate whenever expedient the old Franco-
British entente to offset Germany's growing European primacy.
The French foreign minister came close to saying so explicitly in
August 1996, when he declared that "if France wants to play an in-
ternational role, it stands to benefit from the existence of a strong
Russia, from helping it to reaffirm itself as a major power," prompt-
ing the Russian foreign minister to reciprocate by stating that "of
all the world leaders, the French are the closest to having con-
structive attitudes in their relations with Russia."2
France's initially lukewarm support for NATO's eastward ex-
pansion—indeed, a barely suppressed skepticism regarding its de-
sirability—was thus partially a tactic designed to gain leverage in
dealing with the United States. Precisely because America and Ger-
many were the chief proponents of NATO expansion, it suited
France to play cool, to go along reticently, to voice concern regard-
ing the potential impact of that initiative on Russia, and to act as
Europe's most sensitive interlocutor with Moscow. To some Cen-
tral Europeans, it appeared that the French even conveyed the im-
pression that they were not averse to a Russian sphere of influence
in Eastern Europe. The Russian card thus not only balanced Amer-
ica and conveyed a none-too-subtle message to Germany, but it
also increased the pressure on the United States to consider favor-
ably French proposals for NATO reform.
Ultimately, NATO expansion will require unanimity among the
alliance's sixteen members. Paris knew that its acquiescence was
not only vital for that unanimity but that France's actual support
was needed to avoid obstruction from other alliance members.
Thus, it made no secret of the French intention to make support
for NATO expansion a hostage to America's eventually satisfying
the French determination to alter both the balance of power within
the alliance and its fundamental organization.
France was at first similarly tepid in its support for the east-
!As quoted by Le Nouvel Observateur, August 12,1996.


--- PAGE 76 ---
68 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
ward expansion of the European Union. Here the lead was taken
largely by Germany, with American support but without the same
degree of U.S. engagement as in the case of NATO expansion. Even
though in NATO France tended to argue that the EU's expansion
would provide a more suitable umbrella for the former Communist
states, as soon as Germany started pressing for the more rapid en-
largement of the EU to include Central Europe, France began to
raise technical concerns and also to demand that the EU pay equal
attention to Europe's exposed Mediterranean southern flank.
(These differences emerged as early as fhe November 1994 Franco-
German summit.) French emphasis on the latter issue also had the
effect of gaining for France the support of NATO's southern mem-
bers, thereby maximizing France's overall bargaining power. But
the cost was a widening gap in the respective geopolitical visions
of Europe held by France and Germany, a gap only partially nar-
rowed by France's belated endorsement in the second half of 1996
of Poland's accession to both NATO and the EU.
That gap was inevitable, given the changing historical context.
Ever since the end of World War II, democratic Germany had recog-
nized that Franco-German reconciliation was required to build a
European community within the western half of divided Europe.
That reconciliation was also central to Germany's historical reha-
bilitation. Hence, the acceptance of French leadership was a fair
price to pay. At the same time, the continued Soviet threat to a vul-
nerable West Germany made loyalty to America the essential pre-
condition for survival—and even the French recognized that. But
after the Soviet collapse, to build a larger and more united Europe,
subordination to France was neither necessary nor propitious. An
equal Franco-German partnership, with the reunified Germany in
fact now being the stronger partner, was more than a fair deal for
Paris; hence, the French would simply have to accept Germany's
preference for a primary security link with its transatlantic ally
and protector.
With the end of the Cold War, that link assumed new impor-
tance for Germany. In the past, it had sheltered Germany from an
external but very proximate threat and was the necessary precon-
dition for the eventual reunification of the country. With the Soviet
Union gone and Germany reunified, the link to America now pro-
vided the umbrella under which Germany could more openly as-


--- PAGE 77 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 69
sume a leadership role in Central Europe without simultaneously
threatening its neighbors. The American connection provided
more than the certificate of good behavior: it reassured Germany's
neighbors that a close relationship with Germany also meant a
closer relationship with America. All of that made it easier for Ger-
many to define more openly its own geopolitical priorities.
Germany—safely anchored in Europe and rendered harmless
but secure by the visible American military presence—could now
promote the assimilation of the newly freed Central Europe into
the European structures. It would not be the old Mitteleuropa of
German imperialism but a more benign community of economic re-
newal stimulated by German investments and trade, with Germany
also acting as the sponsor of the eventually formal inclusion of the
new Mitteleuropa in both the European Union and NATO. With the
Franco-German alliance providing the vital platform for the asser-
tion of a more decisive regional role, Germany no longer needed to
be shy in asserting itself within an orbit of its special interest.
On the map of Europe, the zone of German special interest
could be sketched in the shape of an oblong, in the West including
of course France and in the East spanning the newly emancipated
post-Communist states of Central Europe, including the Baltic re-
publics, embracing Ukraine and Belarus, and reaching even into
Russia (see map on page 64). In many respects, that zone corre-
sponds to the historical radius of constructive German cultural in-
fluence, carved out in the prenationalist era by German urban and
agricultural colonists in East-Central Europe and in the Baltic re-
publics, all of whom were wiped out in the course of World War II.
More important, the areas of special concern to the French (dis-
cussed earlier) and the Germans, when viewed together as in the
map below, in effect define the western and eastern limits of Eu-
rope, while the overlap between them underlines the decisive
geopolitical importance of the Franco-German connection as the
vital core of Europe.
The critical breakthrough for the more openly assertive Ger-
man role in Central Europe was provided by the German-Polish
reconciliation that occurred during the mid-nineties. Despite some
initial reluctance, the reunited Germany (with American prodding)
did formally recognize as permanent the Oder-Neisse border with
Poland, and that step in turn removed the single most important


--- PAGE 78 ---
70 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Polish reservation regarding a closer relationship with Germany.
Following some further mutual gestures of goodwill and forgive-
ness, the relationship underwent a dramatic change. Not only did
German-Polish trade literally explode (in 1995 Poland superseded
Russia as Germany's largest trading partner in the East), but Ger-
many became Poland's principal sponsor for membership in the
EU and (together with the United States) in NATO. It is no exagger-
ation to say that by the middle of the decade, Polish-German rec-
onciliation was assuming a geopolitical importance in Central
Europe matching the earlier impact on Western Europe of the
Franco-German reconciliation.
Through Poland, German influence could radiate northward—
into the Baltic states—and eastward—into Ukraine and Belarus.
Moreover, the scope of the German-Polish reconciliation was
somewhat widened by Poland's occasional inclusion in important
Franco-German discussions regarding Europe's future. The so-
called Weimar Triangle (named after the German city in which
the first high-level trilateral Franco-German-Polish consultations,
which subsequently became periodic, had taken place) created a
potentially significant geopolitical axis on the European conti-
nent, embracing some 180 million people from three nations with
a highly denned sense of national identity. On the one hand, this
further enhanced Germany's dominant role in Central Europe, but
on the other hand, that role was somewhat balanced by the
Franco-Polish participation in the three-way dialogue.
Central European acceptance of German leadership—and such
was even more the case with the smaller Central European
states—was eased by the very evident German commitment to the
eastward expansion of Europe's key institutions. In so committing
itself, Germany undertook a historical mission much at variance
with some rather deeply rooted Western European outlooks. In
that latter perspective, events occurring east of Germany and Aus-
tria were perceived as somehow beyond the limits of concern to
the real Europe. That attitude—articulated in the early eighteenth
century by Lord Bolingbroke,3 who argued that political violence in
'Cf. his History of Europe, from the Pyrenean Peace to the Death of Louis
XIV.


--- PAGE 79 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 71
the East was of no consequence to the Western Europeans—resur-
faced during the Munich crisis of 1938; and it made a tragic reap-
pearance in the British and French attitudes during the conflict of
the mid-1990s in Bosnia. It still lurks beneath the surface in the on-
going debates regarding the future of Europe.
In contrast, the only real debate in Germany was whether
NATO or the EU should be expanded first—the defense minister fa-
vored the former, the foreign minister advocated the latter—with
the net result that Germany became the undisputed apostle of a
larger and more united Europe. The German chancellor spoke of
the year 2000 as the goal for the EU's first eastward enlargement,
and the German defense minister was among the first to suggest
that the fiftieth anniversary of NATO's founding was an appropri-
ately symbolic date for the alliance's eastern expansion. Ger-
many's conception of Europe's future thus differed from its
principal European allies: the British proclaimed their preference
for a larger Europe because they saw in enlargement the means for
diluting Europe's unity; the French feared that enlargement would
enhance Germany's role and hence favored more narrowly based
integration. Germany stood for both and thus gained a standing in
Central Europe all its own.
AMERICA'S CENTRAL OBJECTIVE
The central issue for America is how to construct a Europe that is
based on the Franco-German connection, a Europe that is viable,
that remains linked to the United States, and that widens the
scope of the cooperative democratic international system on
which the effective exercise of American global primacy so much
depends. Hence, it is not a matter of making a choice between
France and Germany. Without either France or Germany, there will
be no Europe.
Three broad conclusions emerge from the foregoing discussion:
1. American engagement in the cause of European unification is
needed to compensate for the internal crisis of morale and pur-
pose that has been sapping European vitality, to overcome the


--- PAGE 80 ---
72 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
widespread European suspicion that ultimately America does not
favor genuine European unity, and to infuse into the European un-
dertaking the needed dose of democratic fervor. That requires a
clear-cut American commitment to the eventual acceptance of Eu-
rope as America's global partner.
2. In the short run, tactical opposition to French policy and sup-
port for German leadership is justified; in the longer run, European
unity will have to involve a more distinctive European political and
military identity if a genuine Europe is actually to become reality.
That requires some progressive accommodation to the French view
regarding the distribution of power within transatlantic institutions.
3. Neither France nor Germany is sufficiently strong to con-
struct Europe on its own or to resolve with Russia the ambiguities
inherent in the definition of Europe's geographic scope. That re-
quires energetic, focused, and determined American involvement,
particularly with the Germans, in defining Europe's scope and hence
also in coping with such sensitive—especially to Russia—issues as
the eventual status within the European system of the Baltic republics
and Ukraine.
Just one glance at the map of the vast Eurasian landmass un-
derlines the geopolitical significance to America of the European
bridgehead—as well as its geographic modesty. The preservation
of that bridgehead and its expansion as the springboard for
democracy are directly relevant to America's security. The existing
gap between America's global concern for stability and for the re-
lated dissemination of democracy and Europe's seeming indiffer-
ence to these issues (despite France's self-proclaimed status as a
global power) needs to be closed, and it can only be narrowed if
Europe increasingly assumes a more confederated character. Eu-
rope cannot become a single nation-state, because of the tenacity
of its diverse national traditions, but it can become an entity that
through common political institutions cumulatively reflects shared
democratic values, identifies its own interests with their universal-
ization, and exercises a magnetic attraction on its co-inhabitants of
the Eurasian space.
Left to themselves, the Europeans run the risk of becoming ab-


--- PAGE 81 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 73
sorbed by their internal social concerns. Europe's economic re-
covery has obscured the longer-run costs of its seeming success.
These costs are damaging economically as well as politically. The
crisis of political legitimacy and economic vitality that Western Eu-
rope increasingly confronts—but is unable to overcome—is
deeply rooted in the pervasive expansion of the state-sponsored
social structure that favors paternalism, protectionism, and
parochialism. The result is a cultural condition that combines es-
capist hedonism with spiritual emptiness—a condition that can be
exploited by nationalist extremists or dogmatic ideologues.
This condition, if it becomes rampant, could prove deadly to
democracy and the idea of Europe. The two, in fact, are linked, for
the new problems of Europe—be they immigration or economic-
technological competitiveness with America or Asia, not to speak
of the need for a politically stable reform of existing socioeco-
nomic structures—can only be dealt with effectively in an in-
creasingly continental context. A Europe that is larger than the
sum of its parts—that is, a Europe that sees a global role for itself
in the promotion of democracy and in the wider proselytization
of basic human values—is more likely to be a Europe that is
firmly uncongenial to political extremism, narrow nationalism, or
social hedonism.
One need neither evoke the old fears of a separate German-
Russian accommodation nor exaggerate the consequences of
French tactical flirtation with Moscow to entertain concern for the
geopolitical stability of Europe—and for America's place in it—re-
sulting from a failure of Europe's still ongoing efforts to unite. Any
such failure would in fact probably entail some renewed and
rather traditional European maneuvers. It would certainly gener-
ate opportunities for either Russian or German geopolitical self-as-
sertion, though if Europe's modern history contains any lesson,
neither would be likely to gain an enduring success in that regard.
However, at the very least, Germany would probably become more
assertive and explicit in the definition of its national interests.
Currently, Germany's interests are congruent with, and even
sublimated within, those of the EU and of NATO. Even the spokes-
men for the leftist Alliance 90/Greens have advocated the expan-
sion of both NATO and the EU. But if the unification and
enlargement of Europe should stall, there is some reason to as-


--- PAGE 82 ---
74 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
sume that a more nationalist definition of Germany's concept of
the European "order" would then surface, to the potential detri-
ment of European stability. Wolfgang Schauble, the leader of the
Christian Democrats in the Bundestag and a possible successor to
Chancellor Kohl, expressed that mindset when he stated that Ger-
many is no longer "the western bulwark against the East; we have
become the center of Europe," pointedly adding that in "the long
periods during the Middle Ages ... Germany was involved in creat-
ing order in Europe. "* In this vision, Mitteleuropa—instead of being
a European region in which Germany economically preponder-
ates—would become an area of overt German political primacy as
well as the basis tor a more unilateral German policy vis-a-vis the
East and the West.
Europe would then cease to be the Eurasian bridgehead for
American power and the potential springboard for the democratic
global system's expansion into Eurasia. This is why unambiguous
and tangible American support for Europe's unification must be
sustained. Although both during Europe's economic recovery and
within the transatlantic security alliance America has frequently
proclaimed its support for European unification and supported
transnational cooperation in Europe, it has also acted as if it pre-
ferred to deal on troubling economic and political issues with indi-
vidual European states and not with the European Union as such.
Occasional American insistence on a voice within the European
decision-making process has tended to reinforce European suspi-
cions that America favors cooperation among the Europeans when
they follow the American lead but not when they formulate Eu-
rope's policies. This is the wrong message to convey.
American commitment to Europe's unity—reiterated forcefully
in the joint American-European Madrid Declaration of December
1995—will continue to ring hollow until America is ready not only
to declare unambiguously that it is prepared to accept the conse-
quences of Europe becoming truly Europe but to act accordingly.
For Europe, the ultimate consequence would entail a true partner-
ship with America rather than the status of a favored but still ju-
nior ally. And a true partnership does mean sharing in decisions as
well as responsibilities. American support for that cause would
'Poiitiken Sondag, August 2,1996, italics added.


--- PAGE 83 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 75
help to invigorate the transatlantic dialogue and would stimulate
among the Europeans a more serious concentration on the role
that a truly significant Europe might play in the world.
It is conceivable that at some point a truly united and powerful
European Union could become a global political rival to the United
States. It could certainly become a difficult economic-technologi-
cal competitor, while its geopolitical interests in the Middle East
and elsewhere could significantly diverge from those of America.
But, in fact, such a powerful and politically single-minded Europe
is not likely in the foreseeable future. Unlike the conditions prevail-
ing in America at the time of the formation of the United States,
there are deep historical roots to the resiliency of the European na-
tion-states and the passion for a transnational Europe has clearly
waned.
The real alternatives for the next decade or two are either an
expanding and unifying Europe, pursuing—though hesitantly and
spasmodically—the goal of continental unity; a stalemated Europe,
not moving much beyond its current state of integration and geo-
graphic scope, with Central Europe remaining a geopolitical no-
man's-land; or, as a likely sequel to the stalemate, a progressively
fragmenting Europe, resuming its old power rivalries. In a stale-
mated Europe, it is almost inevitable that Germany's self-identifica-
tion with Europe will wane, prompting a more nationalist definition
of the German state interest. For America, the first option is clearly
the best, but it is an option that requires energizing American sup-
port if it is to come to pass.
At this stage of Europe's hesitant construction, America need
not get directly involved in intricate debates regarding such issues
as whether the EU should make its foreign policy decisions by ma-
jority vote (a position favored especially by the Germans);
whether the European Parliament should assume decisive legisla-
tive powers and the European Commission in Brussels should be-
come in effect the European executive; whether the timetable for
implementing the agreement on European economic and monetary
union should be relaxed; or, finally, whether Europe should be a
broad confederation or a multilayered entity, with a federated in-
ner core and a somewhat looser outer rim. These are matters for
the Europeans to thrash out among themselves—and it is more
than likely that progress on all of these issues will be uneven,


--- PAGE 84 ---
76 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
punctuated by pauses, and eventually pushed forward only by
complex compromises.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume that the Economic and
Monetary Union will come into being by the year 2000, perhaps ini-
tially among six to ten of the EU's current fifteen members. This
will accelerate Europe's economic integration beyond the mone-
tary dimension, further encouraging its political integration. Thus,
by fits and starts and with an inner more integrated core as well as
a looser outer layer, a single Europe will increasingly become an
important political player on the Eurasian chessboard.
In any case, America should not convey the impression that it
prefers a vaguer, even if broader, European association, but it
should reiterate, through words and deeds, its willingness to deal
eventually with the EU as America's global political and security
partner and not just as a regional common market made up of
states allied with the United States through NATO. To make that
commitment more credible and thus go beyond the rhetoric of
partnership, joint planning with the EU regarding new bilateral
transatlantic decision-making mechanisms could be proposed and
initiated.
The same principle applies to NATO as such. Its preservation is
vital to the transatlantic connection. On this issue, there is over-
whelming American-European consensus. Without NATO, Europe
not only would become vulnerable but almost immediately would
become politically fragmented as well. NATO ensures European se-
curity and provides a stable framework for the pursuit of European
unity. That is what makes NATO historically so vital to Europe.
However, as Europe gradually and hesitantly unifies, the inter-
nal structure and processes of NATO will have to adjust. On this is-
sue, the French have a point. One cannot someday have a truly
united Europe and yet have an alliance that remains integrated on
the basis of one superpower plus fifteen dependent powers. Once
Europe begins to assume a genuine political identity of its own,
with the EU increasingly taking on some of the functions of a
supranational government, NATO will have to be altered on the ba-
sis of a 1 + 1 (US + EU) formula.
This will not happen overnight and all at once. Progress in that
direction, to repeat, will be hesitant. But such progress will have to
be reflected in the existing alliance arrangements, lest the absence


--- PAGE 85 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 77
of such adjustment itself should become an obstacle to further
progress. A significant step in that direction was the 1996 decision
of the alliance to make room for the Combined Joint Task Forces,
thereby envisaging the possibility of some purely European mili-
tary initiatives based on the alliance's logistics as well as on com-
mand, control, communications, and intelligence. Greater U.S.
willingness to accommodate French demands for an increased role
for the Western European Union within NATO, especially in regard
to command and decision making, would also betoken more gen-
uine American support for European unity and should help to nar-
row somewhat the gap between America and France regarding
Europe's eventual self-definition.
In the longer run, it is possible that the WEU will embrace some
EU member states that, for varying geopolitical or historical rea-
sons, may choose not to seek NATO membership. That could in-
volve Finland or Sweden, or perhaps even Austria, all of which
have already acquired observer status with the WEU.5 Other states
may also seek a WEU connection as a preliminary to eventual
NATO membership. The WEU might also choose at some point to
emulate NATO's Partnership for Peace program with regard to
would-be members of the EU. All of that would help to spin a wider
web of security cooperation in Europe, beyond the formal scope of
the transatlantic alliance.
In the meantime, until a larger and more united Europe
emerges—and that, even under the best of conditions, will not be
soon—the United States will have to work closely with both France
and Germany in order to help such a more united and larger Eu-
rope emerge. Thus, regarding France, the central policy dilemma
for America will continue to be how to inveigle France into closer
Atlantic political and military integration without compromising
the American-German connection, and regarding Germany, how to
5lt is noteworthy that influential voices both in Finland and in Sweden
have began to discuss the possibility of association with NATO. In May 1996,
the commander of the Finnish Defense Forces was reported by the Swedish
media to have raised the possibility of some NATO deployments on Nordic
soil, and in August 1996, the Swedish Parliament's Defense Committee, in an
action symptomatic of a gradual drift toward closer security cooperation
with NATO, recommended that Sweden join the Western European Arma-
ments Group (WEAG) to which only NATO members belong.


--- PAGE 86 ---
78 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
exploit U.S. reliance on German leadership in an Atlanticist Europe
without prompting concern in France and Britain as well as in
other European countries.
More demonstrable American flexibility on the future shape of
the alliance would be helpful in eventually mobilizing greater
French support for the alliance's eastward expansion. In the long
run, a NATO zone of integrated military security on both sides of
Germany would more firmly anchor Germany within a multilateral
framework, and that should be a matter of consequence for
France. Moreover, the expansion of the alliance would increase the
probability that the Weimar Triangle (of Germany, France, and
Poland) could become a subtle means for somewhat balancing
German leadership in Europe. Although Poland relies on German
support for gaining entrance into the alliance (and resents current
French hesitations regarding such expansion), once it is inside the
alliance a shared Franco-Polish geopolitical perspective is more
likely to emerge.
In any case, Washington should not lose sight of the fact that
France is only a short-term adversary on matters pertaining to the
identity of Europe or to the inner workings of NATO. More impor-
tant, it should bear in mind the fact that France is an essential
partner in the important task of permanently locking a democratic
Germany into Europe. That is the historic role of the Franco-
German relationship, and the expansion of both the EU and NATO
eastward should enhance the importance of that relationship as
Europe's inner core. Finally, France is not strong enough either to
obstruct America on the geostrategic fundamentals of America's
European policy or to become by itself a leader of Europe as such.
Hence, its peculiarities and even its tantrums can be tolerated.
It is also germane to note that France does play a constructive
role in North Africa and in the Francophone African countries. It is
the essential partner for Morocco and Tunisia, while also exercis-
ing a stabilizing role in Algeria. There is a good domestic reason
for such French involvement: some 5 million Muslims now reside
in France. France thus has a vital stake in the stability and orderly
development of North Africa. But that interest is of wider benefit
to Europe's security. Without the French sense of mission, Eu-
rope's southern flank would be much more unstable and threaten-
ing. All of southern Europe is becoming increasingly concerned


--- PAGE 87 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 79
with the social-political threat posed by instability along the
Mediterranean's southern littoral. France's intense concern for
what transpires across the Mediterranean is thus quite pertinent
to NATO's security concerns, and that consideration should be
taken into account when America occasionally has to cope with
France's exaggerated claims of special leadership status.
Germany Is another matter. Germany's dominant role cannot
be denied, but caution must be exercised regarding any public en-
dorsements of the German leadership role in Europe. That leader-
ship may be expedient to some European states—like those in
Central Europe that appreciate the German initiative on behalf of
Europe's eastward expansion—and it may be tolerable to the West-
ern Europeans as long as it is subsumed under America's primacy,
but in the long run, Europe's construction cannot be based on it.
Too many memories still linger; too many fears are likely to sur-
face. A Europe constructed and led by Berlin is simply not feasible.
That is why Germany needs France, why Europe needs the Franco-
German connection, and why America cannot choose between
Germany and France.
The essential point regarding NATO expansion is that it is a
process integrally connected with Europe's own expansion. If the
European Union is to become a geographically larger commu-
nity—with a more-integrated Franco-German leading core and less-
integrated outer layers—and if such a Europe is to base its
security on a continued alliance with America, then it follows that
its geopolitically most exposed sector, Central Europe, cannot be
demonstratively excluded from partaking in the sense of security
that the rest of Europe enjoys through the transatlantic alliance.
On this, America and Germany agree. For them, the impulse for en-
largement is political, historical, and constructive. It is not driven
by animosity toward Russia, nor by fear of Russia, nor by the de-
sire to isolate Russia.
Hence, America must work particularly closely with Germany
in promoting the eastward expansion of Europe. American-German
cooperation and joint leadership regarding this issue are essential.
Expansion will happen if the United States and Germany jointly en-
courage the other NATO allies to endorse the step and either nego-
tiate effectively some accommodation with Russia, if it is willing to
compromise (see chapter 4), or act assertively, in the correct con-


--- PAGE 88 ---
80 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
viction that the task of constructing Europe cannot be subordi-
nated to Moscow's objections. Combined American-German pres-
sure will be especially needed to obtain the required unanimous
agreement of all NATO members, but no NATO member wili be able
to deny it if America and Germany jointly press for it.
Ultimately at stake in this effort is America's long-range role in
Europe. A new Europe is still taking shape, and if that new Europe
is to remain geopolitically a part of the "Euro-Atlantic" space, the
expansion of NATO is essential. Indeed, a comprehensive U.S. pol-
icy for Eurasia as a whole will not be possible if the effort to widen
NATO, having been launched by the United States, stalls and fal-
ters. That failure would discredit American leadership; it would
shatter the concept of an expanding Europe; it would demoralize
the Central Europeans; and it could reignite currently dormant or
dying Russian geopolitical aspirations in Central Europe. For the
West, it would be a self-inflicted wound that would mortally dam-
age the prospects for a truly European pillar in any eventual
Eurasian security architecture; and for America, it would thus be
not only a regional defeat but a global defeat as well.
The bottom line guiding the progressive expansion of Europe
has to be the proposition that no power outside of the existing
transatlantic system has the right to veto the participation of any
qualified European state in the European system—and hence also
in its transatlantic security system—and that no qualified European
state should be excluded a priori from eventual membership in ei-
ther the EU or NATO. Especially the highly vulnerable and increas-
ingly qualified Baltic states are entitled to know that eventually
they also can become full-fledged members in both organizations—
and that in the meantime, their sovereignty cannot be threatened
without engaging the interests of an expanding Europe and its U.S.
partner.
In essence, the West—especially America and its Western Euro-
pean allies—must provide an answer to the question eloquently
posed by Vaclav Havel in Aachen on May 15, 1996:
1 know that neither the European Union nor the North Atlantic
Alliance can open its doors overnight to all those who aspire
to join them. What both most assuredly can do—and what
they should do before it is too late—is to give the whole of Eu-


--- PAGE 89 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 81
rope, seen as a sphere ol common values, the clear assurance
that they are not closed clubs. They should formulate a clear
and detailed policy of gradual enlargement that not only contains
a timetable but also explains the logic of that timetable, [italics
added]
EUROPE'S HISTORIC TIMETABLE
Although at this stage the ultimate eastern limits of Europe can nei-
ther be denned firmly nor finally fixed, in the broadest sense Europe
is a common civilization, derived from the shared Christian tradi-
tion. Europe's narrower Western definition has been associated with
Rome and its historical legacy. But Europe's Christian tradition has
involved also Byzantium and its Russian Orthodox emanation. Thus,
culturally, Europe is more than the Petrine Europe, and the Petrine
Europe in turn is much more than Western Europe—even though in
recent years the latter has usurped the identity of "Europe." Even a
mere glance at the map on page 82 confirms that the existing Europe
is simply not a complete Europe. Worse than that, it is a Europe in
which a zone of insecurity between Europe and Russia can have a
suction effect on both, inevitably causing tensions and rivalry.
A Charlemagne Europe (limited to Western Europe) by neces-
sity made sense during the Cold War, but such a Europe is now an
anomaly. This is so because in addition to being a civilization, the
emerging united Europe is also a way of life, a standard of living,
and a polity of shared democratic procedures, not burdened by
ethnic and territorial conflicts. That Europe in its formally orga-
nized scope is currently much less than its actual potential. Sev-
eral of the more advanced and politically stable Central European
states, all part of the Western Petrine tradition, notably the Czech
Republic, Poland, Hungary, and perhaps also Slovenia, are clearly
qualified and eager for membership in "Europe" and its transat-
lantic security connection.
In the current circumstances, the expansion of NATO to include
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary—probably by 1999—ap-
pears to be likely. After this initial but significant step, it is likely
that any subsequent expansion of the alliance will either be coinci-


--- PAGE 90 ---
82 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
dental with or will follow the expansion of the EU. The latter in-
volves a much more complicated process, both in the number of
qualifying stages and in the meeting of membership requirements
(see chart on page 83). Thus, even the first admissions into the EU
from Central Europe are not likely before the year 2002 or perhaps
somewhat later. Nonetheless, after the first three new NATO mem-
bers have also joined the EU, both the EU and NATO will have to
address the question of extending membership to the Baltic re-
publics, Slovenia, Romania, Bulgaria, and Slovakia, and perhaps
also, eventually, to Ukraine.
It is noteworthy that the prospect of eventual membership is
already exercising a constructive influence on the affairs and con-
duct of would-be members. Knowledge that neither the EU nor
NATO wishes to be burdened by additional conflicts pertaining ei-
ther to minority rights or to territorial claims among their mem-
bers (Turkey versus Greece is more than enough) has already


--- PAGE 91 ---
EU Membership: Application to Accession
A European country submits an application for membership to
the Council of the European Union (the Council).
The Council asks the Commission to deliver an opinion
about the application.
The Commission delivers an opinion about
the application to the Council.
The Council decides unanimously to open
negotiations for accession.
The Commission proposes, and the Council adopts
unanimously, positions to be taken by the Union
vis-a-vis the Applicants in accession negotiations.
The Union, represented by the Council President,
conducts negotiations with the Applicant.
Agreement reached between Union and Applicant
on a Draft Treaty of Accession.
Accession Treaty submitted to the Council
and the European Parliament.
European Parliament delivers its assent to the
Accession Treaty by an absolute majority.
The Council approves the Accession Treaty unanimously.
Member States and Applicants formally sign
the Accession Treaty.
Member States and Applicants ratify the Accession Treaty-
After ratification, the Accession Agreement goes into effect.
Prepared by C.S.I.S. US-EU-Poland Action Commission


--- PAGE 92 ---
84 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
given Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania the needed incentive to
reach accommodations that meet the standards set by the Council
of Europe. Much the same is true for the more general principle
that only democracies can qualify for membership. The desire not
to be left out is having an important reinforcing impact on the new
democracies.
In any case, it ought to be axiomatic that Europe's political
unity and security are indivisible. As a practical matter, in fact it is
difficult to conceive of a truly united Europe without a common se-
curity arrangement with America. It follows, therefore, that states
that are in a position to begin and are invited to undertake acces-
sion talks with the EU should automatically also be viewed hence-
forth as subject in effect to NATO's presumptive protection.
Accordingly, the process of widening Europe and enlarging the
transatlantic security system is likely to move forward by deliber-
ate stages. Assuming sustained American and Western European
commitment, a speculative but cautiously realistic timetable for
these stages might be the following:
1. By 1999, the first new Central European members will have
been admitted into NATO, though their entry into the EU
will probably not happen before 2002 or 2003.
2. In the meantime, the EU will initiate accession talks with the
Baltic republics, and NATO will likewise begin to move for-
ward on the issue of their membership as well as Roma-
nia's, with their accession likely to be completed by 2005.
At some point in this stage, the other Balkan states may
likewise become eligible.
3. Accession by the Baltic states might prompt Sweden and
Finland also to consider NATO membership.
4. Somewhere between 2005 and 2010, Ukraine, especially if in
the meantime the country has made significant progress in
its domestic reforms and has succeeded in becoming more
evidently identified as a Central European country, should
become ready for serious negotiations with both the EU
and NATO.


--- PAGE 93 ---
THE DEMOCRATIC BRIDGEHEAD 85
In the meantime, it is likely that Franco-German-Polish collabo-
ration within the EU and NATO will have deepened considerably,
especially in the area of defense. That collaboration could become
the Western core of any wider European security arrangements
that might eventually embrace both Russia and Ukraine. Given the
special geopolitical interest of Germany and Poland in Ukraine's in-
dependence, it is also quite possible that Ukraine will gradually be
drawn into the special Franco-German-Polish relationship. By the
year 2010, Franco-German-Polish-Ukrainian political collaboration,
engaging some 230 million people, could evolve into a partnership
enhancing Europe's geostrategic depth (see map above).
Whether the above scenario emerges in a benign fashion or in
the context of intensifying tensions with Russia is of great impor-
tance. Russia should be continuously reassured that the doors to
Europe are open, as are the doors to its eventual participation in
an expanded transatlantic system of security and, perhaps at some


--- PAGE 94 ---
86 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
future point, in a new trans-Eurasian system of security. To give
credence to these assurances, various cooperative links between
Russia and Europe—in all fields—should be very deliberately pro-
moted. (Russia's relationship to Europe, and the role of Ukraine in
that regard, are discussed more fully in the next chapter.)
If Europe succeeds both in unifying and in expanding and if
Russia in the meantime undertakes successful democratic consoli-
dation and social modernization, at some point Russia can also be-
come eligible for a more organic relationship with Europe. That, in
turn, would make possible the eventual merger of the transatlantic
security system with a transcontinental Eurasian one. However, as
a practical reality, the question of Russia's formal membership will
not arise for quite some time to come—and that, if anything, is yet
another reason for not pointlessly shutting the doors to it.
To conclude: with the Europe of Yalta gone, it is essential that
there be no reversion to the Europe of Versailles. The end of the di-
vision of Europe should not precipitate a step back to a Europe of
quarrelsome nation-states but should be the point of departure for
shaping a larger and increasingly integrated Europe, reinforced by
a widened NATO and rendered even more secure by a constructive
security relationship with Russia. Hence, America's central
geostrategic goal in Europe can be summed up quite simply: it is to
consolidate through a more genuine transatlantic partnership the
U.S. bridgehead on the Eurasian continent so that an enlarging Eu-
rope can become a more viable springboard for projecting into
Eurasia the international democratic and cooperative order.


--- PAGE 95 ---
CHAPTER 4
Black Hole
THE DISINTEGRATION LATE IN 1991 of the world's territorially
largest state created a "black hole" in the very center of
Eurasia. It was as if the geopoliticians' "heartland" had been
suddenly yanked from the global map.
For America, this new and perplexing geopolitical situation
poses a crucial challenge. Understandably, the immediate task has
to be to reduce the probability of political anarchy or a reversion
to a hostile dictatorship in a crumbling state still possessing a
powerful nuclear arsenal. But the long-range task remains: how to
encourage Russia's democratic transformation and economic re-
covery while avoiding the reemergence of a Eurasian empire that
could obstruct the American geostrategic goal of shaping a larger
Euro-Atlantic system to which Russia can then be stably and safely
related.
RUSSIA'S NEW GEOPOLITICAL SETTING
The collapse of the Soviet Union was the final stage in the progres-
sive fragmentation of the vast Sino-Soviet Communist bloc that for
a brief period of time matched, and in some areas even surpassed,
87


--- PAGE 96 ---
88 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
the scope of Genghis Khan's realm. But the more modern transcon-
tinental Eurasian bloc lasted very briefly, with the defection by
Tito's Yugoslavia and the insubordination of Mao's China signaling
early on the Communist camp's vulnerability to nationalist aspira-
tions that proved to be stronger than ideological bonds. The Sino-
Soviet bloc lasted roughly ten years; the Soviet Union about
seventy.
However, even more geopolitically significant was the undoing
of the centuries-old Moscow-ruled Great Russian Empire. The dis-
integration of that empire was precipitated by the general socio-
economic and political failure of the Soviet system—though much
of its malaise was obscured almost until the very end by its sys-
temic secrecy and self-isolation. Hence, the world was stunned by
the seeming rapidity of the Soviet Union's self-destruction. In the
course of two short weeks in December 1991, the Soviet Union was
first defiantly declared as dissolved by the heads of its Russian,
Ukrainian, and Belorussian republics, then formally replaced by a
vaguer entity—called the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS)—embracing all of the Soviet republics but the Baltic ones;
then the Soviet president reluctantly resigned and the Soviet flag
was lowered for the last time from the tower of the Kremlin; and, fi-
nally, the Russian Federation—now a predominantly Russian na-
tional state of 150 million people—emerged as the de facto
successor to the former Soviet Union, while the other republics—
accounting for another 150 million people—asserted in varying de-
grees their independent sovereignty.
The collapse of the Soviet Union produced monumental geopo-
litical confusion. In the course of a mere fortnight, the Russian peo-
ple—who, generally speaking, were even less forewarned than the
outside world of the Soviet Union's approaching disintegration—
suddenly discovered that they were no longer the masters of a
transcontinental empire but that the frontiers of Russia had been
rolled back to where they had been in the Caucasus in the early
1800s, in Central Asia in the mid-1800s, and—much more dramati-
cally and painfully—in the West in approximately 1600, soon after
the reign of Ivan the Terrible. The loss of the Caucasus revived
strategic fears of resurgent Turkish influence; the loss of Central
Asia generated a sense of deprivation regarding the enormous en-


--- PAGE 97 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 89
ergy and mineral resources of the region as well as anxiety over a
potential Islamic challenge; and Ukraine's independence chal-
lenged the very essence of Russia's claim to being the divinely en-
dowed standard-bearer of a common pan-Slavic identity.
The space occupied for centuries by the Tsarist Empire and for
three-quarters of a century by the Russian-dominated Soviet Union
was now to be filled by a dozen states, with most (except for Rus-
sia) hardly prepared for genuine sovereignty and ranging in size
from the relatively large Ukraine with its 52 million people to Ar-
menia with its 3.5 million. Their viability seemed uncertain, while
Moscow's willingness to accommodate permanently to the new re-
ality was similarly unpredictable. The historic shock suffered by
the Russians was magnified by the fact that some 20 million Russ-
ian-speaking people were now inhabitants of foreign states domi-
nated politically by increasingly nationalistic elites determined to
assert their own identities after decades of more or less coercive
Russification.
The collapse of the Russian Empire created a power void in
the very heart of Eurasia. Not only was there weakness and confu-
sion in the newly independent states, but in Russia itself, the up-
heaval produced a massive systemic crisis, especially as the
political upheaval was accompanied by the simultaneous attempt
to undo the old Soviet socioeconomic model. The national trauma
was made worse by Russia's military involvement in Tajikistan,
driven by fears of a Muslim takeover of that newly independent
state, and was especially heightened by the tragic, brutal, and
both economically and politically very costly intervention in
Chechnya. Most painful of all, Russia's international status was
significantly degraded, with one of the world's two superpowers
now viewed by many as little more than a Third World regional
power, though still possessing a significant but increasingly anti-
quated nuclear arsenal.
The geopolitical void was magnified by the scale of Russia's so-
cial crisis. Three-quarters of a century of Communist rule had in-
flicted unprecedented biological damage on the Russian people. A
very high proportion of its most gifted and enterprising individu-
als were killed or perished in the Gulag, in numbers to be counted
in the millions. In addition, during this century the country also


--- PAGE 98 ---
90 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
suffered the ravages of World War I, the killings of a protracted
civil war, and the atrocities and deprivations of World War II. The
ruling Communist regime imposed a stifling doctrinal orthodoxy,
while isolating the country from the rest of the world. Its economic
policies were totally indifferent to ecological concerns, with the re-
sult that both the environment and the health of the people suf-
fered greatly. According to official Russian statistics, by the
mid-1990s only about 40 percent of newborns came into the world
healthy, whiie roughly one-fifth of Russian first graders suffered
from some form of mental retardation. Male longevity had declined
to 57.3 years, and more Russians were dying than were being born.
Russia's social condition was, in fact, typical of a middle-rank
Third World country.
One cannot overstate the horrors and tribulations that have
befallen the Russian people in the course of this century. Hardly a
single Russian family has had the opportunity to lead a normal civ-
ilized existence. Consider the social implications of the following
sequence of events:
• the Russo-Japanese War of 1905, ending in Russia's humili-
ating defeat;
• the first "proletarian" revolution of 1905, igniting large-scale
urban violence;
• World War I of 1914-1917, with its millions of casualties and
massive economic dislocation;
• the civil war of 1918-1921, again consuming several million
lives and devastating the land;
• the Russo-Polish War of 1919-1920, ending in a Russian
defeat;
• the launching of the Gulag in the early 1920s, including the
decimation of the prerevolutionary elite and its large-scale
exodus from Russia;


--- PAGE 99 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 91
• the industrialization and collectivization drives of the early
and mid-1930s, which generated massive famines and mil-
lions of deaths in Ukraine and Kazakstan;
• the Great Purges and Terror of the mid- and late 1930s, with
millions incarcerated in labor camps and upward of 1 mil-
lion shot and several million dying from maltreatment;
• World War II of 1941-1945, with its multiple millions of mili-
tary and civilian casualties and vast economic devastation;
• the reimposition of Stalinist terror in the late 1940s, again
involving large-scale arrests and frequent executions;
• the forty-year-long arms race with the United States, lasting
from the late 1940s to the late 1980s, with its socially impov-
erishing effects;
• the economically exhausting efforts to project Soviet power
into the Caribbean, Middle East, and Africa during the 1970s
and 1980s;
• the debilitating war in Afghanistan from 1979 to 1989;
• the sudden breakup of the Soviet Union, followed by civil
disorders, a painful economic crisis, and the bloody and hu-
miliating war against Chechnya.
Not only was the crisis in Russia's internal condition and the
loss of international status distressingly unsettling, especially for
the Russian political elite, but Russia's geopolitical situation was
also adversely affected. In the West, as a consequence of the Soviet
Union's disintegration, Russia's frontiers had been altered most
painfully, and its sphere of geopolitical influence had dramatically
shrunk (see map on page 94). The Baltic states had been Russian-
controlled since the 1700s, and the loss of the ports of Riga and
Tallinn made Russia's access to the Baltic Sea more limited and
subject to winter freezes. Although Moscow managed to retain a
poiitically dominant position in the formally newly independent


--- PAGE 100 ---
92 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
but highly Russified Belarus, it was far from certain that the na-
tionalist contagion would not eventually also gain the upper hand
there as well. And beyond the frontiers of the former Soviet Union,
the collapse of the Warsaw Pact meant that the former satellite
states of Central Europe, foremost among them Poland, were
rapidly gravitating toward NATO and the European Union.
Most troubling of all was the loss of Ukraine. The appearance of
an independent Ukrainian state not only challenged all Russians to
rethink the nature of their own political and ethnic identity, but it
represented a vital geopolitical setback for the Russian state. The
repudiation of more than three hundred years of Russian imperial
history meant the loss of a potentially rich industrial and agricul-
tural economy and of 52 million people ethnically and religiously
sufficiently close to the Russians to make Russia into a truly large
and confident imperial state. Ukraine's independence also de-
prived Russia of its dominant position on the Black Sea, where
Odessa had served as Russia's vital gateway to trade with the
Mediterranean and the world beyond.
The loss of Ukraine was geopolitically pivotal, for it drastically
limited Russia's geostrategic options. Even without the Baltic
states and Poland, a Russia that retained control over Ukraine
could still seek to be the leader of an assertive Eurasian empire, in
which Moscow could dominate the non-Slavs in the South and
Southeast of the former Soviet Union. But without Ukraine and its
52 million fellow Slavs, any attempt by Moscow to rebuild the
Eurasian empire was likely to leave Russia entangled alone in pro-
tracted conflicts with the nationally and religiously aroused non-
Slavs, the war with Chechnya perhaps simply being the first
example. Moreover, given Russia's declining birthrate and the ex-
plosive birthrate among the Central Asians, any new Eurasian en-
tity based purely on Russian power, without Ukraine, would
inevitably become less European and more Asiatic with each pass-
ing year.
The loss of Ukraine was not only geopolitically pivotal but also
geopoiitically catalytic. It was Ukrainian actions—the Ukrainian
declaration of independence in December 1991, its insistence in
the critical negotiations in Bela Vezha that the Soviet Union should
be replaced by a looser Commonwealth of Independent States, and
especially the sudden coup-like imposition of Ukrainian command


--- PAGE 101 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 93
over the Soviet army units stationed on Ukrainian soil—that pre-
vented the CIS from becoming merely a new name for a more con-
federal USSR. Ukraine's political self-determination stunned
Moscow and set an example that the other Soviet republics,
though initially more timidly, then followed.
Russia's loss of its dominant position on the Baltic Sea was
replicated on the Black Sea not only because of Ukraine's indepen-
dence but also because the newly independent Caucasian states—
Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan—enhanced the opportunities
for Turkey to reestablish its once-lost influence in the region. Prior
to 1991, the Black Sea was the point of departure for the projection
of Russian naval power into the Mediterranean. By the mid-1990s,
Russia was left with a small coastal strip on the Black Sea and with
an unresolved debate with Ukraine over basing rights in Crimea
for the remnants of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet, while observing,
with evident irritation, joint NATO-Ukrainian naval and shore-land-
ing maneuvers and a growing Turkish role in the Black Sea region.
Russia also suspected Turkey of having provided effective aid to
the Chechen resistance.
Farther to the southeast, the geopolitical upheaval produced a
similarly significant change in the status of the Caspian Sea basin
and of Central Asia more generally. Before the Soviet Union's col-
lapse, the Caspian Sea was in effect a Russian lake, with a small
southern sector falling within Iran's perimeter. With the emergence
of the independent and strongly nationalist Azerbaijan—rein-
forced by the influx of eager Western oil investors—and the simi-
larly independent Kazakstan and Turkmenistan, Russia became
only one of five claimants to the riches of the Caspian Sea basin. It
could no longer confidently assume that it could dispose of these
resources on its own.
The emergence of the independent Central Asian states meant
that in some places Russia's southeastern frontier had been
pushed back northward more than one thousand miles. The new
states now controlled vast mineral and energy deposits that were
bound to attract foreign interests. It was almost inevitable that not
only the elites but, before too long, also the peoples of these states
would become more nationalistic and perhaps increasingly Islamic
in outlook. In Kazakstan, a vast country endowed with enormous
natural resources but with its nearly 20 million people split almost


--- PAGE 102 ---



--- PAGE 103 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 95
evenly between Kazaks and Slavs, linguistic and national frictions
are likely to intensify. Uzbekistan—with its much more ethnically
homogeneous population of approximately 25 million and its lead-
ers emphasizing the country's historic glories—has become in-
creasingly assertive in affirming the region's new postcolonial
status. Turkmenistan, geographically shielded by Kazakstan from
any direct contact with Russia, has actively developed new links
with Iran in order to diminish its prior dependence on the Russian
communications system for access to the global markets.
Supported from the outside by Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and
Saudi Arabia, the Central Asian states have not been inclined to
trade their new political sovereignty even for the sake of beneficial
economic integration with Russia, as many Russians continued to
hope they would. At the very least, some tension and hostility in
their relationship with Russia is unavoidable, while the painful
precedents of Chechnya and Tajikistan suggest that something
worse cannot be altogether excluded. For the Russians, the
specter of a potential conflict with the Islamic states along Russia's
entire southern flank (which, adding in Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan,
account for more than 300 million people) has to be a source of se-
rious concern.
Finally, at the time its empire dissolved, Russia was also facing
an ominous new geopolitical situation in the Far East, even though
no territorial or political changes had taken place. For several cen-
turies, China had been weaker and more backward than Russia, at
least in the political-military domains. No Russian concerned with
the country's future and perplexed by the dramatic changes of this
decade can ignore the fact that China is on its way to being a more
advanced, more dynamic, and more successful state than Russia.
China's economic power, wedded to the dynamic energy of its 1.2
billion people, is fundamentally reversing the historical equation
between the two countries, with the empty spaces of Siberia al-
most beckoning for Chinese colonization.
This staggering new reality was bound to affect the Russian
sense of security in its Far Eastern region as well as Russian inter-
ests in Central Asia. Before long, this development might even over-
shadow the geopolitical importance of Russia's loss of Ukraine. Its
strategic implications were well expressed by Vladimir Lukin, Rus-


--- PAGE 104 ---
96 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
sia's first post-Communist ambassador to the United States and
later the chairman of the Duma's Foreign Affairs Committee:
In the past, Russia saw itself as being ahead of Asia, though lag-
ging behind Europe. But since then, Asia has developed much
faster. . . . we find ourselves to be not so much between "mod-
ern Europe" and "backward Asia" but rather occupying some
strange middle space between two "Europes."1
In brief, Russia, until recently the forger of a great territorial
empire and the leader of an ideological bloc of satellite states ex-
tending into the very heart of Europe and at one point to the
South China Sea, had become a troubled national state, without
easy geographic access to the outside world and potentially vul-
nerable to debilitating conflicts with its neighbors on its western,
southern, and eastern flanks. Only the uninhabitable and inacces-
sible northern spaces, almost permanently frozen, seemed geopo-
litically secure.
GEOSTRATEGIC PHANTASMAGORIA
A period of historic and strategic confusion in postimperial Russia
was hence unavoidable. The shocking collapse of the Soviet Union
and especially the stunning and generally unexpected disintegra-
tion of the Great Russian Empire have given rise in Russia to enor-
mous soul-searching, to a wide-ranging debate over what ought to
be Russia's current historical self-definition, to intense public and
private arguments over questions that in most major nations are
not even raised: What is Russia? Where is Russia? What does it
mean to be a Russian?
These questions are not merely theoretical: any reply contains
significant geopolitical content. Is Russia a national state, based on
purely Russian ethnicity, or is Russia by definition something more
(as Britain is more than England) and hence destined to be an im-
perial state? What are—historically, strategically, and ethnically—
the proper frontiers of Russia? Should the independent Ukraine be
'In "Our Security Predicament," Foreign Policy 88 (Fall 1992):60.


--- PAGE 105 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 97
viewed as a temporary aberration when assessed in such historic,
strategic, and ethnic terms? (Many Russians are inclined to feel
that way.) To be a Russian, does one have to be ethnically a Russ-
ian ("Russkyi"), or can one be a Russian politically but not ethni-
cally (that is, be a "Rossyanin"—the equivalent to "British" but not
to "English")? For example, Yeltsin and some Russians have argued
(with tragic consequences) that the Chechens could—indeed,
should—be considered Russians.
A year before the Soviet Union's demise, a Russian nationalist,
one of the few who saw the end approaching, cried out in a desper-
ate affirmation:
If the terrible disaster, which is unthinkable to the Russian peo-
ple, does occur and the state is torn apart, and the people,
robbed and deceived by their 1,000-year history, suddenly end
up alone, and their recent "brothers" have taken their belong-
ings and disappeared into their "national lifeboats" and sail
away from the listing ship—well, we have nowhere to go....
Russian statehood, which embodies the "Russian idea" po-
litically, economically, and spiritually, will be built anew. It will
gather up all the best from its long 1,000-year kingdom and the
70 years of Soviet history that have flown by in a moment.2
But how? The difficulty of defining an answer that would be ac-
ceptable to the Russian people and yet realistic has been com-
pounded by the historic crisis of the Russian state itself.
Throughout almost its entire history, that state was simultane-
ously an instrument of territorial expansion and economic devel-
opment. It was also a state that deliberately did not conceive
itself to be a purely national instrument, in the West European tra-
dition, but defined itself as the executor of a special supranational
mission, with the "Russian idea" variously defined in religious,
geopolitical, or ideological terms. Now, suddenly, that mission
was repudiated as the state shrank territorially to a largely ethnic
dimension.
Moreover, the post-Soviet crisis of the Russian state (of its
"essence," so to speak) was compounded by the fact that Russia
2Aleksandr Prokhanov. "Tragedy of Centralism," Literaturnaya Rossiya,
January 1990, pp. 4-5.


--- PAGE 106 ---
98 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
was not only faced with the challenge of having been suddenly de-
prived of its imperial missionary vocation but, in order to close
the yawning gap between Russia's social backwardness and the
more advanced parts of Eurasia, was now being pressed by domes-
tic modernizers (and their Western consultants) to withdraw from
its traditional economic role as the mentor, owner, and disposer of
social wealth. This called for nothing short of a politically revolu-
tionary limitation of the international and domestic role of the
Russian state. This was profoundly disruptive to the most estab-
lished patterns of Russian domestic life and contributed to a divi-
sive sense of geopolitical disorientation within the Russian
political elite.
In that perplexing setting, as one might have expected,
"Whither Russia and what is Russia?" prompted a variety of re-
sponses. Russia's extensive Eurasian location has long predis-
posed that elite to think in geopolitical terms. The first foreign
minister of the postimperlal and post-Communist Russia, Andrei
Kozyrev, reaffirmed that mode of thought in one of his early at-
tempts to define how the new Russia should conduct itself on the
international scene. Barely a month after the dissolution of the So-
viet Union, he noted: "In abandoning messianism we set course for
pragmatism. ... we rapidly came to understand that geopolitics
... is replacing ideology."'
Generally speaking, three broad and partially overlapping
geostrategic options, each ultimately related to Russia's preoccu-
pation with its status vis-a-vis America and each also containing
some internal variants, can be said to have emerged in reaction to
the Soviet Union's collapse. These several schools of thought can
be classified as follows:
1. priority for "the mature strategic partnership" with Amer-
ica, which for some of its adherents was actually a code
term for a global condominium;
2. emphasis on the "near abroad" as Russia's central concern,
with some advocating a form of Moscow-dominated eco-
nomic integration but with others also expecting an even-
interview In Rossiyskaya Gazeta, January 12,1992.


--- PAGE 107 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 99
tual restoration of some measure of imperial control,
thereby creating a power more capable of balancing Amer-
ica and Europe; and
3. a counteralliance, involving some sort of a Eurasian anti-
U.S. coalition designed to reduce the American preponder-
ance in Eurasia.
Although the first of the foregoing was initially dominant
among President Yeltsin's new ruling team, the second option sur-
faced into political prominence shortly thereafter, in part as a cri-
tique of Yeltsin's geopolitical priorities; the third made itself heard
somewhat later, around the mid-1990s, in reaction to the spreading
sense that Russia's post-Soviet geostrategy was both unclear and
failing. As it happens, all three proved to be historically maladroit
and derived from rather phantasmagoric views of Russia's current
power, international potential, and foreign interests.
In the immediate wake of the Soviet Union's collapse, Yeltsin's
initial posture represented the cresting of the old but never en-
tirely successful "westernizer" conception in Russian political
thought: that Russia belonged in the West, should be part of the
West, and should as much as possible imitate the West in its own
domestic development. That view was espoused by Yeltsin himself
and by his foreign minister, with Yeltsin being quite explicit in de-
nouncing the Russian imperial legacy. Speaking in Kiev on Novem-
ber 19, 1990, in words that the Ukrainians or Chechens could
subsequently turn against him, Yeltsin eloquently declared;
Russia does not aspire to become the center of some sort of
new empire .. . Russia understands better than others the per-
niciousness of that role, inasmuch as it was Russia that per-
formed that role for a long time. What did it gain from this? Did
Russians become freer as a result? Wealthier? Happier? ... his-
tory has taught us that a people that rules over others cannot
be fortunate.
The deliberately friendly posture adopted by the West, espe-
cially by the United States, toward the new Russian leadership was
a source of encouragement to the post-Soviet "westernizers" in the


--- PAGE 108 ---
100 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Russian foreign policy establishment. It both reinforced its pro-
American inclinations and seduced its membership personally.
The new leaders were flattered to be on a first-name basis with the
top policy makers of the world's only superpower, and they found
it easy to deceive themselves into thinking that they, too, were the
leaders of a superpower. When the Americans launched the slogan
of "the mature strategic partnership" between Washington and
Moscow, to the Russians it seemed as if a new democratic Ameri-
can-Russian condominium—replacing the former contest—had
thus been sanctified.
That condominium would be global in scope. Russia thereby
would not only be the legal successor to the former Soviet Union
but the de facto partner in a global accommodation, based on gen-
uine equality. As the new Russian leaders never tired of asserting,
that meant not only that the rest of the world should recognize
Russia as America's equal but that no global problem could be
tackled or resolved without Russia's participation and/or permis-
sion. Although it was not openly stated, implicit in this illusion was
also the notion that Central Europe would somehow remain, or
might even choose to remain, a region of special political proxim-
ity to Russia. The dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and Comecon
would not be followed by the gravitation of their former members
either toward NATO or even only toward the EU.
Western aid, in the meantime, would enable the Russian gov-
ernment to undertake domestic reforms, withdrawing the state
from economic life and permitting the consolidation of democratic
institutions. Russia's economic recovery, its special status as
America's coequal partner, and its sheer attractiveness would then
encourage the recently independent states of the new CIS—grate-
ful that the new Russia was not threatening them and increasingly
aware of the benefits of some form of union with Russia—to en-
gage in ever-closer economic and then political integration with
Russia, thereby also enhancing Russia's scope and power.
The problem with this approach was that it was devoid of ei-
ther international or domestic realism. While the concept of "ma-
ture strategic partnership" was flattering, it was also deceptive.
America was neither inclined to share global power with Russia
nor could it, even if it had wanted to do so. The new Russia was
simply too weak, too devastated by three-quarters of a century of


--- PAGE 109 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 101
Communist rule, and too socially backward to be a real global part-
ner. In Washington's view, Germany, Japan, and China were at least
as important and influential. Moreover, on some of the central
geostrategic issues of national interest to America—in Europe, the
Middle East, and the Far East—it was far from the case that Ameri-
can and Russian aspirations were the same. Once differences in-
evitably started to surface, the disproportion in political power,
financial clout, technological innovation, and cultural appeal made
the "mature strategic partnership" seem hollow—and it struck an
increasing number of Russians as deliberately designed to deceive
Russia.
Perhaps that disappointment might have been averted if earlier
on—during the American-Russian honeymoon—America had em-
braced the concept of NATO expansion and had at the same time
offered Russia "a deal it could not refuse," namely, a special coop-
erative relationship between Russia and NATO. Had America
clearly and decisively embraced the idea of widening the alliance,
with the stipulation that Russia should somehow be included in
the process, perhaps Moscow's subsequent sense of disappoint-
ment with "the mature partnership" as well as the progressive
weakening of the political position of the westernizers in the Krem-
lin might have been averted.
The moment to have done so was during the second half of
1993, right after Yeltsin's public endorsement in August of
Poland's interest in joining the transatlantic alliance as being con-
sistent with "the interests of Russia." Instead, the Clinton adminis-
tration, then still pursuing its "Russia first" policy, agonized for
two more years, while the Kremlin changed its tune and became
increasingly hostile to the emerging but indecisive signals of the
American intention to widen NATO. By the time Washington de-
cided, in 1996, to make NATO enlargement a central goal in Amer-
ica's policy of shaping a larger and more secure Euro-Atlantic
community, the Russians had locked themselves into rigid opposi-
tion. Hence, the year 1993 might be viewed as the year of a missed
historic opportunity.
Admittedly, not all of the Russian concerns regarding NATO ex-
pansion lacked legitimacy or were motivated by malevolent mo-
tives. Some opponents, to be sure, especially among the Russian
military, partook of a Cold War mentality, viewing NATO expansion


--- PAGE 110 ---
102 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
not as an integral part of Europe's own growth but rather as the
advance toward Russia of an American-led and still hostile al-
liance. Some of the Russian foreign policy elite—most of whom
were actually former Soviet officials—persisted in the long-stand-
ing geostrategic view that America had no place in Eurasia and
that NATO expansion was largely driven by the American desire to
increase its sphere of influence. Some of their opposition also de-
rived from the hope that an unattached Central Europe would
some day again revert to Moscow's sphere of geopolitical influ-
ence, once Russia had regained its health.
But many Russian democrats also feared that the expansion of
NATO would mean that Russia would be left outside of Europe, os-
tracized politically, and considered unworthy of membership in
the institutional framework of European civilization. Cultural inse-
curity compounded the political fears, making NATO expansion
seem like the culmination of the long-standing Western policy de-
signed to isolate Russia, leaving it alone in the world and vulnera-
ble to its various enemies. Moreover, the Russian democrats
simply could not grasp the depth either of the Central Europeans'
resentment over half a century of Moscow's domination or of their
desire to be part of a larger Euro-Atlantic system.
On balance, it is probable that neither the disappointment nor
the weakening of the Russian westernizers could have been
avoided. For one thing, the new Russian elite, quite divided within
itself and with neither its president nor its foreign minister capable
of providing consistent geostrategic leadership, was not able to de-
fine clearly what the new Russia wanted in Europe, nor could it re-
alistically assess the actual limitations of Russia's weakened
condition. Moscow's politically embattled democrats could not
bring themselves to state boldly that a democratic Russia does not
oppose the enlargement of the transatlantic democratic commu-
nity and that it wishes to be associated with it. The delusion of a
shared global status with America made it difficult for the Moscow
political elite to abandon the idea of a privileged geopolitical posi-
tion for Russia, not only in the area of the former Soviet Union itself
but even in regard to the former Central European satellite states.
These developments played into the hands of the nationalists,
who by 1994 were beginning to recover their voices, and the mili-
tarists, who by then had become Yeltsin's critically important do-


--- PAGE 111 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 103
mestic supporters. Their increasingly shrill and occasionally
threatening reactions to the aspirations of the Central Europeans
merely intensified the determination of the former satellite
states—mindful of their only recently achieved liberation from
Russian rule—to gain the safe haven of NATO.
The gulf between Washington and Moscow was widened fur-
ther by the Kremlin's unwillingness to disavow all of Stalin's con-
quests. Western public opinion, especially in Scandinavia but also
in the United States, was especially troubled by the ambiguity of
the Russian attitude toward the Baltic republics. While recognizing
their independence and not pressing for their membership in the
CIS, even the democratic Russian leaders periodically resorted to
threats in order to obtain preferential treatment for the large com-
munities of Russian colonists who had deliberately been settled in
these countries during the Stalinist years. The atmosphere was
further clouded by the pointed unwillingness of the Kremlin to de-
nounce the secret Nazi-Soviet agreement of 1939 that had paved
the way for the forcible incorporation of these republics into the
Soviet Union. Even five years after the Soviet Union's collapse,
spokesmen for the Kremlin insisted (in the official statement of
September 10, 1996) that in 1940 the Baltic states had voluntarily
"joined" the Soviet Union.
The post-Soviet Russian elite had apparently also expected
that the West would aid in, or at least not impede, the restoration
of a central Russian role in the post-Soviet space. They thus re-
sented the West's willingness to help the newly independent post-
Soviet states consolidate their separate political existence. Even
while warning that a "confrontation with the United States ... is an
option that should be avoided," senior Russian analysts of Ameri-
can foreign policy argued (not altogether incorrectly) that the
United States was seeking "the reorganization of interstate rela-
tions in the whole of Eurasia .. . whereby there was not one sole
leading power on the continent but many medium, relatively sta-
ble, and moderately strong ones ... but necessarily inferior to the
United States in their individual or even collective capabilities."'1
'A. Bogaturov and V. Kremenyuk (both senior scholars in the Institute of
the United States and Canada), in "The Americans Themselves Will Never
Stop," Nezavisimaya Gazeta, June 28, 1996.


--- PAGE 112 ---
104 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
In this regard, Ukraine was critical. The growing American incli-
nation, especially by 1994, to assign a high priority to American-
Ukrainian relations and to help Ukraine sustain its new national
freedom was viewed by many in Moscow—even by its "westerniz-
ers"—as a policy directed at the vital Russian interest in eventu-
ally bringing Ukraine back into the common fold. That Ukraine will
eventually somehow be "reintegrated" remains an article of faith
among many members of the Russian political elite.5 As a result,
Russia's geopolitical and historical questioning of Ukraine's sepa-
rate status collided head-on with the American view that an imper-
ial Russia could not be a democratic Russia.
Additionally, there were purely domestic reasons that a "ma-
ture strategic partnership" between two "democracies" proved to
be illusory. Russia was just too backward and too devastated by
Communist rule to be a viable democratic partner of the United
States. That central reality could not be obscured by high-sound-
ing rhetoric about partnership. Post-Soviet Russia, moreover, had
made only a partial break with the past. Almost all of its "democra-
tic" leaders—even if genuinely disillusioned with the Soviet past—
were not only the products of the Soviet system but former senior
members of its ruling elite. They were not former dissidents, as in
Poland or the Czech Republic. The key institutions of Soviet
power—though weakened, demoralized, and corrupted—were still
there. Symbolic of that reality and of the lingering hold of the Com-
munist past was the historic centerpiece of Moscow: the contin-
ued presence of the Lenin mausoleum. It was as if post-Nazi
Germany were governed by former middle-level Nazi "Gauleiters"
spouting democratic slogans, with a Hitler mausoleum still stand-
ing in the center of Berlin.
Tor example, even Yeltsin's top adviser, Dmitryi Ryurikov, was quoted
by Interfax (November 20, 1996) as considering Ukraine to be "a temporary
phenomenon," while Moscow's Obshchaya Gazeta (December 10, 1996) re-
ported that "in the foreseeable future events in eastern Ukraine may con-
front Russia with a very difficult problem. Mass manifestations of
discontent... will be accompanied by appeals to Russia, or even demands,
to take over the region. Quite a few people in Moscow would be ready to
support such plans." Western concerns regarding Russian intentions were
certainly not eased by Russian demands for Crimea and Sevastopol, nor by
such provocative acts as the deliberate inclusion in late 1996 of Sevastopol
in Russian public television's nightly weather forecasts lor Russian cities.


--- PAGE 113 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 105
The political weakness of the new democratic elite was com-
pounded by the very scale of the Russian economic crisis. The
need for massive reforms—for the withdrawal of the Russian state
from the economy—generated excessive expectations of Western,
especially American, aid. Although that aid, especially from Ger-
many and America, gradually did assume large proportions, even
under the best of circumstances it still could not prompt a quick
economic recovery. The resulting social dissatisfaction provided
additional underpinning for a mounting chorus of disappointed
critics who alleged that the partnership with the United States was
a sham, beneficial to America but damaging to Russia.
In brief, neither the objective nor the subjective preconditions
for an effective global partnership existed in the immediate years
following the Soviet Union's collapse. The democratic "westerniz-
ers" simply wanted too much and could deliver too little. They de-
sired an equal partnership—or, rather, a condominium—with
America, a relatively free hand within the CIS, and a geopolitical
no-man's-land in Central Europe. Yet their ambivalence about So-
viet history, their lack of realism regarding global power, the depth
of the economic crisis, and the absence of widespread social sup-
port meant that they could not deliver the stable and truly demo-
cratic Russia that the concept of equal partnership implied. Russia
first had to go through a prolonged process of political reform, an
equally long process of democratic stabilization, and an even
longer process of socioeconomic modernization and then manage
a deeper shift from an imperial to a national mindset regarding the
new geopolitical realities not only in Central Europe but especially
within the former Russian Empire before a real partnership with
America could become a viable geopolitical option.
Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that the "near
abroad" priority became both the major critique of the pro-West
option as well as an early foreign policy alternative. It was based
on the argument that the "partnership" concept slighted what
ought to be most important to Russia: namely, its relations with
the former Soviet republics. The "near abroad" came to be the
shorthand formulation for advocacy of a policy that would place
primary emphasis on the need to reconstruct some sort of a viable
framework, with Moscow as the decision-making center, in the
geopolitical space once occupied by the Soviet Union. On this


--- PAGE 114 ---
106 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
premise, there was widespread agreement that a policy of concen-
tration on the West, especially on America, was yielding little and
costing too much. It simply made it easier for the West to exploit
the opportunities created by the Soviet Union's collapse.
However, the "near abroad" school of thought was a broad um-
brella under which several varying geopolitical conceptions could
cluster. It embraced not only the economic functionalists and de-
terminists (including some "westernizers") who believed that the
CIS could evolve into a Moscow-led version of the EU but also oth-
ers who saw in economic integration merely one of several tools of
imperial restoration that could operate either under the CIS um-
brella or through special arrangements (formulated in 1996) be-
tween Russia and Belarus or among Russia, Belarus, Kazakstan,
and Kyrgyzstan; it also included Slavophile romantics who advo-
cated a Slavic Union of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, and, finally,
proponents of the somewhat mystical notion of Eurasianism as the
substantive definition of Russia's enduring historical mission.
In its narrowest form, the "near abroad" priority involved the
perfectly reasonable proposition that Russia must first concen-
trate on relations with the newly independent states, especially as
all of them remained tied to Russia by the realities of the deliber-
ately fostered Soviet policy of promoting economic interdepen-
dence among them. That made both economic and geopolitical
sense. The "common economic space," of which the new Russian
leaders spoke often, was a reality that could not be ignored by the
leaders of the newly independent states. Cooperation, and even
some integration, was an economic necessity. Thus, it was not
only normal but desirable to promote joint CIS institutions in order
to reverse the economic disruptions and fragmentation produced
by the political breakup of the Soviet Union.
For some Russians, the promotion of economic integration was
thus a functionally effective and politically responsible reaction to
what had transpired. The analogy with the EU was often cited as
pertinent to the post-Soviet situation. A restoration of the empire
was explicitly rejected by the more moderate advocates of eco-
nomic integration. For example, an influential report entitled "A
Strategy for Russia," which was issued as early as August 1992 by
the Council for Foreign and Defense Policy, a group of prominent
personalities and government officials, very pointedly advocated


--- PAGE 115 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 107
"post-imperial enlightened integration" as the proper program for
the post-Soviet "common economic space."
However, emphasis on the "near abroad" was not merely a po-
litically benign doctrine of regional economic cooperation. Its
geopolitical content had imperial overtones. Even the relatively
moderate 1992 report spoke of a recovered Russia that would
eventually establish a strategic partnership with the West, in
which Russia would have the role of "regulating the situation in
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Far East." Other advocates of
this priority were more unabashed, speaking explicitly of Russia's
"exclusive role" in the post-Soviet space and accusing the West of
engaging in an anti-Russian policy by providing aid to Ukraine and
the other newly independent states.
A typical but by no means extreme example was the argument
made by Y. Ambartsumov, the chairman in 1993 of the parliamen-
tary Foreign Affairs Committee and a former advocate of the "part-
nership" priority, who openly asserted that the former Soviet
space was an exclusive Russian sphere of geopolitical influence. In
January 1994, he was echoed by the heretofore energetic advocate
of the pro-Western priority, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev, who
stated that Russia "must preserve its military presence in regions
that have been in its sphere of interest for centuries." In fact,
Izvestiia reported on April 8,1994, that Russia had succeeded in re-
taining no fewer than twenty-eight military bases on the soil of the
newly independent states—and a line drawn on a map linking the
Russian military deployments in Kaliningrad, Moldova, Crimea, Ar-
menia, Tajikistan, and the Kuril Islands would roughly approximate
the outer limits of the former Soviet Union, as in the map on page
108.
In September 1995, President Yeltsin issued an official docu-
ment on Russian policy toward the CIS that codified Russian goals
as follows:
The main objective of Russia's policy toward the CIS is to cre-
ate an economically and politically integrated association of
states capable of claiming its proper place in the world com-
munity ... to consolidate Russia as the leading force in the for-
mation of a new system of interstate political and economic
relations on the territory of the post-Union space.


--- PAGE 116 ---
108 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
One should note the emphasis placed on the political dimen-
sion of the effort, on the reference to a single entity claiming "its"
place in the world system, and on Russia's dominant role within
that new entity. In keeping with this emphasis, Moscow insisted
that political and military ties between Russia and the newly con-
stituted CIS also be reinforced: that a common military command
be created; that the armed forces of the CIS states be linked by a
formal treaty; that the "external" borders of the CIS be subject to
centralized (meaning Moscow's) control; that Russian forces play
the decisive role in any peacekeeping actions within the CIS; and
that a common foreign policy be shaped within the CIS, whose
main institutions have come to be located in Moscow (and not in
Minsk, as originally agreed in 1991), with the Russian president pre-
siding at the CIS summit meetings.
And that was not all. The September 1995 document also de-
clared that


--- PAGE 117 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 109
Russian television and radio broadcasting in the near abroad
should be guaranteed, the dissemination of Russian press in
the region should be supported, and Russia should train na-
tional cadres for CIS states.
Special attention should be given to restoring Russia's po-
sition as the main educational center on the territory of the
post-Soviet space, bearing in mind the need to educate the
young generation in CIS states in a spirit of friendly relations
with Russia.
Reflecting this mood, in early 1996 the Russian Duma went so
far as to declare the dissolution of the Soviet Union to be invalid.
Moreover, during spring of the same year, Russia signed two agree-
ments providing for closer economic and political integration be-
tween Russia and the more accommodating members of the CIS.
One agreement, signed with great pomp and circumstance, in ef-
fect provided for a union between Russia and Belarus within a new
"Community of Sovereign Republics" (the Russian abbreviation
"SSR" was pointedly reminiscent of the Soviet Union's "SSSR"), and
the other—signed by Russia, Kazakstan, Belarus, and Kyrgyzs-
tan—postulated the creation in the long term of a "Community of
Integrated States." Both initiatives indicated impatience over the
slow progress of integration within the CIS and Russia's determina-
tion to persist in promoting it.
The "near abroad" emphasis on enhancing the central mecha-
nisms of the CIS thus combined some elements of reliance on ob-
jective economic determinism with a strong dose of subjective
imperial determination. But neither provided a more philosophical
and also a geopolitical answer to the still gnawing question "What
is Russia, what is its true mission and rightful scope?"
It was this void that the increasingly appealing doctrine of
Eurasianism—with its focus also on the "near abroad"—attempted
to fill. The point of departure for this orientation—defined in
rather cultural and even mystical terminology—was the premise
that geopolitically and culturally, Russia is neither quite European
nor quite Asian and that, therefore, it has a distinctive Eurasian
identity of its own. That identity is the legacy of Russia's unique
spatial control over the enormous landmass between Central Eu-
rope and the shores of the Pacific Ocean, the legacy of the imperial
statehood that Moscow forged through four centuries of eastward


--- PAGE 118 ---
110 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
expansion. That expansion assimilated into Russia a large non-
Russian and non-European population, creating thereby also a sin-
gular Eurasian political and cultural personality.
Eurasianism as a doctrine was not a post-Soviet emanation. It
first surfaced in the nineteenth century but became more perva-
sive in the twentieth, as an articulate alternative to Soviet commu-
nism and as a reaction to the alleged decadence of the West.
Russian Emigres were especially active in propagating the doctrine
as an alternative to Sovietism, realizing that the national awaken-
ing of the non-Russians within the Soviet Union required an overar-
ching supranational doctrine, lest the eventual fall of communism
lead also to the disintegration of the old Great Russian Empire.
As early as the mid-1920s, this case was articulated persua-
sively by Prince N. S. Trubetzkoy, a leading exponent of Eurasian-
ism, who wrote that
[c]ommunism was in fact a disguised version of Europeanism in
destroying the spiritual foundations and national uniqueness
of Russian life, in propagating there the materialist frame of ref-
erence that actually governs both Europe and America ...
Our task is to create a completely new culture, our own cul-
ture, which will not resemble European civilization ... when
Russia ceases to be a distorted reflection of European civiliza-
tion ... when she becomes once again herself: Russia-Eurasia,
the conscious heir to and bearer of the great legacy of Genghis
Khan.e
That view found an eager audience in the confused post-Soviet
setting. On the one hand, communism was condemned as a be-
trayal of Russian orthodoxy and of the special, mystical "Russian
idea"; and on the other, westernism was repudiated because the
West, especially America, was seen as corrupt, anti-Russian cultur-
ally, and inclined to deny to Russia its historically and geographi-
cally rooted claim to exclusive control over the Eurasian
landmass.
Eurasianism was given an academic gloss in the much-quoted
writings of Lev Gumilev, a historian, geographer, and ethnogra-
EN. S. Trubetzkoy. "The Legacy of Genghis Khan," Cross Currents 9
(1990):68.


--- PAGE 119 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 111
pher, whose books Medieval Russia and the Great Steppe, The
Rhythms of Eurasia, and The Geography ofEthnos in Historical Time
make a powerful case for the proposition that Eurasia is the nat-
ural geographic setting for the Russian people's distinctive "eth-
nos," the consequence of a historic symbiosis between them and
the non-Russian inhabitants of the open steppes, creating thereby
a unique Eurasian cultural and spiritual identity. Gumilev warned
that adaptation to the West would mean nothing less for the Russ-
ian people than the loss of their own "ethnos and soul."
These views were echoed, though more primitively, by a vari-
ety of Russian nationalist politicians. Yeltsin's former vice presi-
dent, Aleksandr Rutskoi, for example, asserted that "it is apparent
from looking at our country's geopolitical situation that Russia
represents the only bridge between Asia and Europe. Whoever be-
comes the master of this space will become the master of the
world."7 Yeltsin's 1996 Communist challenger, Gennadii Zyuganov,
despite his Marxist-Leninist vocation, embraced Eurasianism's
mystical emphasis on the special spiritual and missionary role of
the Russian people in the vast spaces of Eurasia, arguing that Rus-
sia was thereby endowed both with a unique cultural vocation and
with a specially advantageous geographic basis for the exercise of
global leadership.
A more sober and pragmatic version of Eurasianism was also
advanced by the leader of Kazakstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. Faced
at home with an almost even demographic split between native
Kazaks and Russian settlers and seeking a formula that would
somewhat dilute Moscow's pressures for political integration,
Nazarbayev propagated the concept of the "Eurasian Union" as an
alternative to the faceless and ineffective CIS. Although his version
lacked the mystical content of the more traditional Eurasianist
thinking and certainly did not posit a special missionary role for
the Russians as leaders of Eurasia, it was derived from the notion
that Eurasia—denned geographically in terms analogous to that of
the Soviet Union—constituted an organic whole, which must also
have a political dimension.
To a degree, the attempt to assign to the "near abroad" the
highest priority in Russian geopolitical thinking was justified in the
Interview with {.'Espresso (Rome), July 15, 1994.


--- PAGE 120 ---
112 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
sense that some measure of order and accommodation between
postimperial Russia and the newly independent states was an ab-
solute necessity, in terms of security and economics. However,
what gave much of the discussion a surrealistic touch was the lin-
gering notion that in some fashion, whether it came about either
voluntarily (because of economics) or as a consequence of Rus-
sia's eventual recovery of its lost power—not to speak of Russia's
special Eurasian or Slavic mission—the political "integration" of
the former empire was both desirable and feasible.
In this regard, the frequently invoked comparison with the EU
neglects a crucial distinction: the EU, even allowing for Germany's
special influence, is not dominated by a single power that alone
overshadows all the other members combined, in relative GNP,
population, or territory. Nor is the EU the successor to a national
empire, with the liberated members deeply suspicious that "inte-
gration" is a code word for renewed subordination. Even so, one
can easily imagine what the reaction of the European states would
have been if Germany had declared formally that its goal was to
consolidate and expand its leading role in the EU along the lines of
Russia's pronouncement of September 1995 cited earlier.
The analogy with the EU suffers from yet another deficiency.
The open and relatively developed Western European economies
were ready for democratic integration, and the majority of Western
Europeans perceived tangible economic and political benefits in
such integration. The poorer West European countries were also
able to benefit from substantial subsidies. In contrast, the newly
independent states viewed Russia as politically unstable, as still
entertaining domineering ambitions, and, economically, as an ob-
stacle to their participation in the global economy and to their ac-
cess to much-needed foreign investment.
Opposition to Moscow's notions of "integration" was particu-
larly strong in Ukraine. Its leaders quickly recognized that such
"integration," especially in light of Russian reservations regarding
the legitimacy of Ukrainian independence, would eventually lead
to the loss of national sovereignty. Moreover, the heavy-handed
Russian treatment of the new Ukrainian state—its unwillingness to
grant recognition of Ukraine's borders, its questioning of Ukraine's
right to Crimea, its insistence on exclusive extraterritorial control
over the port of Sevastopol—gave the aroused Ukrainian national-


--- PAGE 121 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 113
ism a distinctively anti-Russian edge. The self-definition of Ukrain-
ian nationhood, during the critical formative stage in the history of
the new state, was thus diverted from its traditional anti-Polish or
anti-Romanian orientation and became focused instead on opposi-
tion to any Russian proposals for a more integrated CIS, for a spe-
cial Slavic community (with Russia and Belarus), or for a Eurasian
Union, deciphering them as Russian imperial tactics.
Ukraine's determination to preserve its independence was en-
couraged by external support. Although initially the West, espe-
cially the United States, had been tardy in recognizing the
geopolitical importance of a separate Ukrainian state, by the mid-
1990s both America and Germany had become strong backers of
Kiev's separate identity. In July 1996, the U.S. secretary of defense
declared, "I cannot overestimate the importance of Ukraine as an
independent country to the security and stability of all of Europe,"
while in September, the German chancellor—notwithstanding his
strong support for President Yeltsin—went even further in declar-
ing that "Ukraine's firm place in Europe can no longer be chal-
lenged by anyone ... No one will be able any more to dispute
Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity." American policy
makers also came to describe the American-Ukrainian relationship
as "a strategic partnership," deliberately invoking the same phrase
used to describe the American-Russian relationship.
Without Ukraine, as already noted, an imperial restoration
based either on the CIS or on Eurasianism was not a viable option.
An empire without Ukraine would eventually mean a Russia that
would become more "Asianized" and more remote from Europe.
Moreover, Eurasianism was also not especially appealing to the
newly independent Central Asians, few of whom were eager for a
new union with Moscow. Uzbekistan became particularly assertive
in supporting Ukraine's objections to any elevation of the CIS into
a supranational entity and in opposing the Russian initiatives de-
signed to enhance the CIS.
Other CIS states, also wary of Moscow's intentions, tended to
cluster around Ukraine and Uzbekistan in opposing or evading
Moscow's pressures for closer political and military integration.
Moreover, a sense of national consciousness was deepening in al-
most alt of the new states, a consciousness increasingly focused
on repudiating past submission to Moscow as colonialism and on


--- PAGE 122 ---
114 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
eradicating its various legacies. Thus, even the ethnically vulnera-
ble Kazakstan joined the other Central Asian states in abandoning
the Cyrillic alphabet and replacing it with the Latin script as
adapted earlier by Turkey. In effect, by the mid-1990s a bloc, qui-
etly led by Ukraine and comprising Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan,
Azerbaijan, and sometimes also Kazakstan, Georgia, and Moldova,
had informally emerged to obstruct Russian efforts to use the CIS
as the tool for political integration.
Ukrainian insistence on only limited and largely economic inte-
gration had the further effect of depriving the notion of a "Slavic
Union" of any practical meaning. Propagated by some Slavophiles
and given prominence by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's support, this
idea automatically became geopolitically meaningless once it was
repudiated by Ukraine. It left Belarus alone with Russia; and it also
implied a possible partition of Kazakstan, with its Russian-popu-
lated northern regions potentially part of such a union. Such an
option was understandably not reassuring to the new rulers of '
Kazakstan and merely intensified the anti-Russian thrust of their
nationalism, In Belarus, a Slavic Union without Ukraine meant
nothing less than incorporation into Russia, thereby also igniting
more volatile feelings of nationalist resentment.
These external obstacles to a "near abroad" policy were power-
fully reinforced by an important internal restraint: the mood of the
Russian people. Despite the rhetoric and the political agitation
among the political elite regarding Russia's special mission in the
space of the former empire, the Russian people—partially out of
sheer fatigue but also out of pure common sense—showed little
enthusiasm for any ambitious program of imperial restoration.
They favored open borders, open trade, freedom of movement,
and special status for the Russian language, but political integra-
tion, especially if it was to involve economic costs or require
bloodshed, evoked little enthusiasm. The disintegration of the
"union" was regretted, its restoration favored; but public reaction
to the war in Chechnya indicated that any policy that went beyond
the application of economic leverage and/or political pressure
would lack popular support.
In brief, the ultimate geopolitical inadequacy of the "near
abroad" priority was that Russia was not strong enough politically
to impose its will and not attractive enough economically to be


--- PAGE 123 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 115
able to seduce the new states. Russian pressure merely made them
seek more external ties, first and foremost with the West but in
some cases also with China and the key Islamic countries to the
south. When Russia threatened to form its own military bloc in re-
sponse to NATO's expansion, it begged the question "With whom?"
And it begged the even more painful answer: at the most, maybe
with Belarus and Tajikistan.
The new states, if anything, were increasingly inclined to dis-
trust even perfectly legitimate and needed forms of economic inte-
gration with Russia, fearing their potential political consequences.
At the same time, the notions of Russia's alleged Eurasian mission
and of the Slavic mystique served only to isolate Russia further
from Europe and, more generally, from the West, thereby perpetuat-
ing the post-Soviet crisis and delaying the needed modernization
and westernization of Russian society along the lines of what Kemal
Ataturk did in Turkey in the wake of the Ottoman Empire's collapse.
The "near abroad" option thus offered Russia not a geopolitical so-
lution but a geopolitical illusion.
If not a condominium with America and if not the "near abroad,"
then what other geostrategic option was open to Russia? The fail-
ure of the Western orientation to produce the desired global co-
equality with America for a "democratic Russia," which was more
a slogan than reality, caused a letdown among the democrats,
whereas the reluctant recognition that "reintegration" of the old
empire was at best a remote possibility tempted some Russian
geopoliticians to toy with the idea of some sort of counteralliance
aimed at America's hegemonic position in Eurasia.
In early 1996, President Yeltsin replaced his Western-oriented
foreign minister, Kozyrev, with the more experienced but also or-
thodox former Communist international specialist Evgenniy Pri-
makov, whose long-standing interest has been Iran and China.
Some Russian commentators speculated that Primakov's orienta-
tion might precipitate an effort to forge a new "antihegemonic"
coalition, formed around the three powers with the greatest
geopolitical stake in reducing America's primacy in Eurasia. Some
of Primakov's initial travel and comments reinforced that impres-
sion. Moreover, the existing Sino-franian connection in weapons
trade as well as the Russian inclination to cooperate in Iran's ef-


--- PAGE 124 ---
116 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
forts to increase its access to nuclear energy seemed to provide a
perfect fit for closer political dialogue and eventual alliance. The
result could, at least theoretically, bring together the world's lead-
ing Slavic power, the world's most militant Islamic power, and the
world's most populated and powerful Asian power, thereby creat-
ing a potent coalition.
The necessary point of departure for any such counterailiance
option involved a renewal of the bilateral Sino-Russian connection,
capitalizing on the resentment among the political elites of both
states over the emergence of America as the only global super-
power. In early 1996, Yeltsin traveled to Beijing and signed a decla-
ration that explicitly denounced global "hegemonic" tendencies,
thereby implying that the two states would align themselves
against the United States. In December, the Chinese prime minis-
ter, Li Peng, returned the visit, and both sides not only reiterated
their opposition to an international system "dominated by one
power" but also endorsed the reinforcement of existing alliances.
Russian commentators welcomed this development, viewing it as
a positive shift in the global correlation of power and as an appro-
priate response to America's sponsorship of NATO's expansion.
Some even sounded gleeful that the Sino-Russian alliance would
give America its deserved comeuppance.
However, a coalition allying Russia with both China and Iran
can develop only if the United States is shortsighted enough to an-
tagonize China and Iran simultaneously. To be sure, that eventual-
ity cannot be excluded, and American conduct in 1995-1996
almost seemed consistent with the notion that the United States
was seeking an antagonistic relationship with both Teheran and
Beijing. However, neither Iran nor China was prepared to cast its
lot strategically with a Russia that was both unstable and weak.
Both realized that any such coalition, once it went beyond some
occasional tactical orchestration, would risk their respective ac-
cess to the more advanced world, with its exclusive capacity for
investment and with its needed cutting-edge technology. Russia
had too little to offer to make it a truly worthy partner in an anti-
hegemonic coalition.
In fact, lacking any shared ideology and united merely by an
"antihegemonic" emotion, any such coalition would be essentially
an alliance of a part of the Third World against the most advanced


--- PAGE 125 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 117
portions of the First World. None of its members would gain much,
and China especially would risk losing its enormous investment in-
flows. For Russia, too, "the phantom of a Russia-China alliance ...
would sharply increase the chances that Russia would once again
become restricted from Western technology and capital," as a crit-
ical Russian geopolitician noted.8 The alignment would eventually
condemn all of its participants, whether two or three in number, to
prolonged isolation and shared backwardness.
Moreover, China would be the senior partner in any serious
Russian effort to jell such an "antihegemonic" coalition. Being
more populous, more industrious, more innovative, more dy-
namic, and harboring some potential territorial designs on Russia,
China would inevitably consign Russia to the status of a junior
partner, while at the same time lacking the means (and probably
any real desire) to help Russia overcome its backwardness. Russia
would thus become a buffer between an expanding Europe and an
expansionist China.
Finally, some Russian foreign affairs experts continued to enter-
tain the hope that a stalemate in European integration, including
perhaps internal Western disagreements over the future shape of
NATO, might eventually create at least tactical opportunities for a
Russo-German or a Russo-French flirtation, in either case to the
detriment of Europe's transatlantic connection with America. This
perspective was hardly new, for throughout the Cold War, Moscow
periodically tried to play either the German or the French card.
Nonetheless, it was not unreasonable for some of Moscow's
geopoliticians to calculate that a stalemate in European affairs
could create tactical openings that might be exploited to Amer-
ica's disadvantage.
But that is about all that could thereby be attained: purely tac-
tical options. Neither France nor Germany is likely to forsake the
American connection. An occasional flirtation, especially with the
French, focused on some narrow issue, cannot be excluded—but a
geopolitical reversal of alliances would have to be preceded by a
massive upheaval in European affairs, a breakdown in European
unification and in transatlantic ties. And even then, it is unlikely
"Aleksei Bogaturov. "Current Relations and Prospects for Interaction Be-
tween Russia and the United States," Nezavisimaya Gazeta, June 28,1996.


--- PAGE 126 ---
118 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
that the European states would be inclined to pursue a truly com-
prehensive geopolitical alignment with a disoriented Russia.
Thus, none of the counteralliance options, in the final analysis,
offer a viable alternative. The solution to Russia's new geopolitical
dilemmas will not be found in counteralliance, nor will it come
about through the illusion of a coequal strategic partnership with
America or in the effort to create some new politically and eco-
nomically "integrated" structure in the space of the former Soviet
Union. All evade the only choice that is in fact open to Russia.
THE DILEMMA OF THE ONE ALTERNATIVE
Russia's only real geostrategic option—the option that could give
Russia a realistic international role and also maximize the opportu-
nity of transforming and socially modernizing itself—is Europe.
And not just any Europe, but the transatlantic Europe of the en-
larging EU and NATO. Such a Europe is taking shape, as we have
seen in chapter 3, and it is also likely to remain linked closely to
America. That is the Europe to which Russia will have to relate, if it
is to avoid dangerous geopolitical isolation.
For America, Russia is much too weak to be a partner but still
too strong to be simply its patient. It is more likely to become a
problem, unless America fosters a setting that helps to convince
the Russians that the best choice for their country is an increas-
ingly organic connection with a transatlantic Europe. Although a
long-term Russo-Chinese and Russo-Iranian strategic alliance is
not likely, it is obviously important for America to avoid policies
that could distract Russia from making the needed geopolitical
choice. To the extent possible, American relations with China and
Iran should, therefore, be formulated with their impact on Russian
geopolitical calculations also kept in mind. Perpetuating illusions
regarding grand geostrategic options can only delay the historic
choice that Russia must make in order to bring to an end its deep
malaise.
Only a Russia that is willing to accept the new realities of Eu-
rope, both economic and geopolitical, will be able to benefit inter-
nally from the enlarging scope of transcontinental European
cooperation in commerce, communications, investment, and edu-


--- PAGE 127 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 119
cation. Russia's participation in the Council of Europe is thus a
step very much in the right direction. It is a foretaste of further in-
stitutional links between the new Russia and the growing Europe.
It also implies that if Russia pursues this path, it will have no
choice other than eventually to emulate the course chosen by
post-Ottoman Turkey, when it decided to shed its imperial ambi-
tions and embarked very deliberately on the road of moderniza-
tion, Europeanization, and democratization.
No other option can offer Russia the benefits that a modern,
rich, and democratic Europe linked to. America can. Europe and
America are not a threat to a Russia that is a nonexpansive national
and democratic state. They have no territorial designs on Russia,
which China someday might have, nor do they share an insecure
and potentially violent frontier, which is certainly the case with
Russia's ethnically and territorially unclear border with the Muslim
nations to the south. On the contrary, for Europe as well as for
America, a national and democratic Russia is a geopolitically desir-
able entity, a source of stability in the volatile Eurasian complex.
Russia consequently faces the dilemma that the choice in favor
of Europe and America, in order for it to yield tangible benefits, re-
quires, first of all, a clear-cut abjuration of the imperial past and,
second, no tergiversation regarding the enlarging Europe's politi-
cal and security links with America. The first requirement means
accommodation to the geopolitical pluralism that has come to
prevail in the space of the former Soviet Union. Such accommoda-
tion does not exclude economic cooperation, rather on the model
of the old European Free Trade Area, but it cannot include limits on
the political sovereignty of the new states—for the simple reason
that they do not wish it. Most important in that respect is the need
for clear and unambiguous acceptance by Russia of Ukraine's sepa-
rate existence, of its borders, and of its distinctive national identity.
The second requirement may be even more difficult to swallow.
A truly cooperative relationship with the transatlantic community
cannot be based on the notion that those democratic states of Eu-
rope that wish to be part of it can be excluded because of a Russ-
ian say-so. The expansion of that community need not be rushed,
and it certainly should not be promoted on an anti-Russian theme.
But neither can it, nor should it, be halted by a political fiat that it-
self reflects an antiquated notion of European security relations. An


--- PAGE 128 ---
120 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
expanding and democratic Europe has to be an open-ended histori-
cal process, not subject to politically arbitrary geographic limits.
For many Russians, the dilemma of the one alternative may at
first, and for some time to come, be too difficult to resolve. It will
require an enormous act of political will and perhaps also an out-
standing leader, capable of making the choice and articulating the
vision of a democratic, national, truly modern and European Rus-
sia. That may not happen for some time. Overcoming the post-
Communist and postimperial crises will require not only more
time than is the case with the post-Communist transformation of
Central Europe but also the emergence of a farsighted and stable
political leadership. No Russian Ataturk is now in sight. Nonethe-
less, Russians will eventually have to come to recognize that Rus-
sia's national redefinition is not an act of capitulation but one of
liberation.9 They will have to accept that what Yeltsin said in Kiev
in 1990 about a nonimperial future for Russia was absolutely on
the mark. And a genuinely nonimperial Russia will still be a great
power, spanning Eurasia, the world's largest territorial unit by far.
In any case, a redefinition of "What is Russia and where is Rus-
sia" will probably occur only by stages, and it will require a wise
and firm Western posture. America and Europe will have to help.
They should offer Russia not only a special treaty or charter with
NATO, but they should also begin the process of exploring with
Russia the shaping of an eventual transcontinental system of secu-
rity and cooperation that goes considerably beyond the loose
structure of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Eu-
rope (OSCE). And if Russia consolidates its internal democratic in-
stitutions and makes tangible progress in free-market-based
economic development, its ever-closer association with NATO and
the EU should not be ruled out.
At the same time, it is equally important for the West, espe-
cially for America, to pursue policies that perpetuate the dilemma
of the one alternative for Russia. The political and economic stabi-
lization of the new post-Soviet states is a major factor in necessi-
tating Russia's historical self-redefinition. Hence, support for the
'In early 1996, General AJeksandr Lebed published a remarkable article
("The Fading of Empire or the Rebirth of Russia," Segodnya, April 26, 1996)
that went a long way toward making that case.


--- PAGE 129 ---
THE BLACK HOLE 121
new post-Soviet states—for geopolitical pluralism in the space of
the former Soviet empire—has to be an integral part of a policy de-
signed to induce Russia to exercise unambiguously its European
option. Among these states, three are geopolitically especially im-
portant: Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine.
An independent Azerbaijan can serve as a corridor for Western
access to the energy-rich Caspian Sea basin and Central Asia. Con-
versely, a subdued Azerbaijan would mean that Central Asia can
be sealed off from the outside world and thus rendered politically
vulnerable to Russian pressures for reiritegration. Uzbekistan, na-
tionally the most vital and the most populous of the Central Asian
states, represents a major obstacle to any renewed Russian con-
trol over the region. Its independence is critical to the survival of
the other Central Asian states, and it is the least vulnerable to
Russian pressures.
Most important, however, is Ukraine. As the EU and NATO ex-
pand, Ukraine will eventually be in the position to choose whether
it wishes to be part of either organization. It is likely that, in order
to reinforce its separate status, Ukraine will wish to join both, once
they border upon it and once its own internal transformation be-
gins to qualify it for membership. Although that will take time, it is
not too early for the West—while further enhancing its economic
and security ties with Kiev—to begin pointing to the decade
2005-2015 as a reasonable time frame for the initiation of Ukraine's
progressive inclusion, thereby reducing the risk that the Ukraini-
ans may fear that Europe's expansion will halt on the Polish-
Ukrainian border.
Russia, despite its protestations, is likely to acquiesce in the
expansion of NATO in 1999 to include several Central European
countries, because the cultural and social gap between Russia and
Central Europe has widened so much since the fall of communism.
By contrast, Russia will find it incomparably harder to acquiesce in
Ukraine's accession to NATO, for to do so would be to acknowl-
edge that Ukraine's destiny is no longer organically linked to Rus-
sia's. Yet if Ukraine is to survive as an independent state, it will
have to become part of Central Europe rather than Eurasia, and if
it is to be part of Central Europe, then it will have to partake fully
of Central Europe's links to NATO and the European Union. Russia's
acceptance of these links would then define Russia's own decision


--- PAGE 130 ---
122 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
to be also truly a part of Europe. Russia's refusal would be tanta-
mount to the rejection of Europe in favor of a solitary "Eurasian"
identity and existence.
The key point to bear in mind is that Russia cannot be in Eu-
rope without Ukraine also being in Europe, whereas Ukraine can
be in Europe without Russia being in Europe. Assuming that Russia
decides to cast its lot with Europe, it follows that ultimately it is in
Russia's own interest that Ukraine be included in the expanding
European structures. Indeed, Ukraine's relationship to Europe
could be the turning point for Russia itself. But that also means
that the defining moment for Russia's relationship to Europe is still
some time off—"defining" in the sense that Ukraine's choice in fa-
vor of Europe will bring to a head Russia's decision regarding the
next phase of its history: either to be a part of Europe as well or to
become a Eurasian outcast, neither truly of Europe nor Asia and
mired in its "near abroad" conflicts.
It is to be hoped that a cooperative relationship between an en-
larging Europe and Russia can move from formal bilateral links to
more organic and binding economic, political, and security ties. In
that manner, in the course of the first two decades of the next cen-
tury, Russia could increasingly become an integral part of a Europe
that embraces not only Ukraine but reaches to the Urals and even
beyond. An association or even some form of membership for Rus-
sia in the European and transatlantic structures would in turn
open the doors to the inclusion of the three Caucasian countries—
Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan—that so desperately aspire to a
European connection.
One cannot predict how fast that process can move, but one
thing is certain: it will move faster if a geopolitical context is
shaped that propels Russia in that direction, while foreclosing
other temptations. And the faster Russia moves toward Europe,
the sooner the black hole of Eurasia will be filled by a society that
is increasingly modern and democratic. Indeed, for Russia the
dilemma of the one alternative is no longer a matter of making a
geopolitical choice but of facing up to the imperatives of survival.


--- PAGE 131 ---
CHAPTER 5
The
Eurasian
Balkans
IN EUROPE, THE WORD "BALKANS" conjures up images of ethnic
conflicts and great-power regional rivalries. Eurasia, too, has its
"Balkans," but the Eurasian Balkans are much larger, more pop-
ulated, even more religiously and ethnically heterogeneous. They
are located within that large geographic oblong that demarcates
the central zone of global instability identified in chapter 2 and
that embraces portions of southeastern Europe, Central Asia and
parts of South Asia, the Persian Gulf area, and the Middle East.
The Eurasian Balkans form the inner core of that large oblong
(see map on page 124), and they differ from its outer zone in one
particularly significant way: they are a power vacuum. Although
most of the states located in the Persian Gulf and the Middle East
are also unstable, American power is that region's ultimate arbiter.
The unstable region in the outer zone is thus an area of single
power hegemony and is tempered by that hegemony. In contrast,
the Eurasian Balkans are truly reminiscent of the older, more famil-
iar Balkans of southeastern Europe: not only are its political enti-
ties unstable but they tempt and invite the intrusion of more
powerful neighbors, each of whom is determined to oppose the re-
123


--- PAGE 132 ---
124 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Zona 01 instability
Flasli points
gion's domination by another. It is this familiar combination of a
power vacuum and power suction that justifies the appellation
"Eurasian Balkans."
The traditional Balkans represented a potential geopolitical
prize in the struggle for European supremacy. The Eurasian
Balkans, astride the inevitably emerging transportation network
meant to link more directly Eurasia's richest and most industrious
western and eastern extremities, are also geopolitically significant.
Moreover, they are of importance from the standpoint of security
and historical ambitions to at least three of their most immediate
and more powerful neighbors, namely, Russia, Turkey, and Iran,
with China also signaling an increasing political interest in the re-
gion. But the Eurasian Balkans are infinitely more important as a
potential economic prize: an enormous concentration of natural
gas and oil reserves is located in the region, in addition to impor-
tant minerals, including gold.


--- PAGE 133 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 125
The world's energy consumption is bound to vastly increase
over the next two or three decades. Estimates by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy anticipate that world demand will rise by more
than 50 percent between 1993 and 2015, with the most significant
increase in consumption occurring in the Far East. The momentum
of Asia's economic development is already generating massive
pressures for the exploration and exploitation of new sources of
energy, and the Central Asian region and the Caspian Sea basin are
known to contain reserves of natural gas and oil that dwarf those
of Kuwait, the Gulf of Mexico, or the North Sea.
Access to that resource and sharing in its potential wealth rep-
resent objectives that stir national ambitions, motivate corporate
interests, rekindle historical claims, revive imperial aspirations,
and fuel international rivalries. The situation is made all the more
volatile by the fact that the region is not only a power vacuum but
is also internally unstable. Every one of its countries suffers from
serious internal difficulties, all of them have frontiers that are ei-
ther the object of claims by neighbors or are zones of ethnic re-
sentment, few are nationally homogeneous, and some are already
embroiled in territorial, ethnic, or religious violence.
THE ETHNIC CAULDRON
The Eurasian Balkans include nine countries that one way or an-
other fit the foregoing description, with two others as potential
candidates. The nine are Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbek-
istan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Georgia—all of
them formerly part of the defunct Soviet Union—as well as
Afghanistan. The potential additions to the list are Turkey and
Iran, both of them much more politically and economically viable,
both active contestants for regional influence within the Eurasian
Balkans, and thus both significant geostrategic players in the re-
gion. At the same time, both are potentially vulnerable to internal
ethnic conflicts. If either or both of them were to be destabilized,
the internal problems of the region would become unmanageable,
while efforts to restrain regional domination by Russia could even
become futile.
The three states of the Caucasus—Armenia, Georgia, and Azer-


--- PAGE 134 ---



--- PAGE 135 ---
Population
(Million. '95)
Life
Expectancy
Ethnic
Divisions
f95esL)
GDP
($ billion)*
Major
Exports:
*Purchaslne DO
Afghanistan
21.3
45.4
Pashtun
(38%)
Tajik
(25%)
Hazara
(19%)
Uzbek
(CIQ
<
NA
Wheat
Livestock
Fruits
Carpets
Wool
Gems
wer Darltv: '94.
Armenia
3.6
72.4
Armenian
(93%)
Azeri
(3%)
Russian
(2%)
Other
(2%)
8.1
Gold
Aluminum
Transport eq.
Elec. eq.
as extraDolated ire
Azerbaijan
7.8
71.1
Azeri
(90%)
Dagestani
(3.2%)
Russian
(2.5%)
Armenian
(2.3%)
Other
(2%)
13.8
Oil, Gas
Chemicals
Oilfield eq.
Textiles
Cotton
m World Bank <
Georgia
5.7
73.1
Georgian
(70.1%)
Armenian
(8.1%)
Russian
(6.3%)
Azeri
(5.7%)
Os set Ian
(3%)
Abkhaz
(1.8%)
Other
(5%)
6.0
Citrus fruits
Tea
Wine
Machinery
Ferrous m.
Non-ferrous
m.
Kazakstan
17.4
68.3
Kazak
(41.9%)
Russian
(37%)
Ukrainian
(5.2%)
German
(4.7%)
Uzbek
(2.1%)
Tatar
(2%)
Other
(7%)
55.2
Oil
Ferrous m.
NonJerrous m.
Chemicals
Grain
Wool
Meat
Coal
Kyrgyzstan
4.8
68.1
Kyrgyz
(52.4%)
Russian
(21.5%)
Uzbek
(12.9%)
Ukrainian
(2.5%)
German
(2.4%)
Other
(8.3%)
8.4
Wool
Chemicals
Cotton
Ferrous m.
Non-ferrous m.
Shoes
Machinery
Tobacco
st. for 1992. "Turkmenistan is the world's tenth Ian
Tajikistan
6.2
69.0
Tajik
(64.9%)
Uzbek
(25%)
Russian
(3.5%)
Other
(6.6%)
8.5
Cotton
Aluminum
Fruits
Vegetable oil
Textiles
rest cotton prod
Turkmenistan Uzbekistan
4.1
65.4
Turkmen
(73.3%)
Russian
(9.8%)
Uzbek
(9%)
Kazak
(2%)
Other
(5.9%)
13.1
Natural gas
Cotton**
Petroleum
prod."
Electricity
Textiles
Carpets
uter. It has the
23.1
68.8
Uzbek
(71.4%)
Russian
(8.3%)
Tajik
(4.7%)
Kazak
(4.1%)
Tatar
(2.4%)
Karakalpak
(2.1%)
Other
(7%)
54.5
Cotton
Gold
Natural gas
Mineral
fertilizers
Ferrous metals
Textiles
Food products
world's fifth largest
reserves of natural gas ahd significant oil reserves.


--- PAGE 136 ---
128 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
baijan—can be said to be based on truly historic nations. As a re-
sult, their nationalisms tend to be both pervasive and intense,
and external conflicts have tended to be the key challenge to their
well-being. The five new Central Asian states, by contrast, can be
said to be rather more in the nation-building phase, with tribal
and ethnic identities still strong, making internal dissension the
major difficulty. In either type of state, these vulnerabilities have
tempted exploitation by their more powerful and imperially
minded neighbors.
The Eurasian Balkans are an ethnic mosaic (see preceding table
and map), The frontiers of its states were drawn arbitrarily by So-
viet cartographers in the 1920s and 1930s, when the respective So-
viet republics were formally established. (Afghanistan, never
having been part of the Soviet Union, is the exception.) Their bor-
ders were carved out largely on the ethnic principle, but they also
reflected the Kremlin's interest in keeping the southern region of
the Russian Empire internally divided and thus more subservient.
Accordingly, Moscow rejected proposals by Central Asian na-
tionalists to meld the various Central Asian peoples (most of
whom were not yet nationalistically motivated) into a single politi-
cal unit—to be called "Turkestan"—preferring instead to create
five separate "republics," each with a distinctive new name and jig-
saw borders. Presumably out of a similar calculation, the Kremlin
abandoned plans for a single Caucasian federation. Therefore, it is
not surprising that, upon the collapse of the Soviet Union, neither
the three states of the Caucasus nor the five states of Central Asia
were fully prepared for their newly independent status nor for the
needed regional cooperation.
In the Caucasus, Armenia's less than 4 million people and Azer-
baijan's more than 8 million promptly became embroiled in open
warfare over the status of Nagorno-Karabakh, a largely Armenian-
populated enclave within Azerbaijan. The conflict generated large-
scale ethnic cleansings, with hundreds of thousands of refugees
and expellees fleeing in both directions. Given the fact that Arme-
nia is Christian and Azerbaijan Muslim, the war has some over-
tones of a religious conflict. The economically devastating war
made it much more difficult for either country to establish itself as
stably independent. Armenia was driven to rely more on Russia,
which had provided significant military help, while Azerbaijan's


--- PAGE 137 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 129
new independence and internal stability were compromised by the
loss of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Azerbaijan's vulnerability has wider regional implications be-
cause the country's location makes it a geopolitical pivot. It can
be described as the vitally important "cork" controlling access to
the "bottle" that contains the riches of the Caspian Sea basin and
Central Asia. An independent, Turkic-speaking Azerbaijan, with
pipelines running from it to the ethnically related and politically
supportive Turkey, would prevent Russia from exercising a mo-
nopoly on access to the region and would thus also deprive Rus-
sia of decisive political leverage over the policies of the new
Central Asian states. Yet Azerbaijan is very vulnerable to pres-
sures from powerful Russia to the north and from Iran to the
south. There are twice as many Azeris—some estimate as many
as 20 million—living in northwestern Iran as in Azerbaijan
proper. That reality makes Iran fearful of potential separatism
among its Azeris and hence quite ambivalent regarding Azerbai-
jan's sovereign status, despite the two nations' shared Muslim
faith. As a result, Azerbaijan has become the object of combined
Russian and Iranian pressures to restrict its dealings with the
West.
Unlike either Armenia or Azerbaijan, both of which are ethni-
cally quite homogeneous, about 30 percent of Georgia's 6 million
people are minorities. Moreover, these small communities, rather
tribal in organization and identity, have intensely resented Geor-
gian domination. Upon the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Os-
setians and the Abkhazians therefore took advantage of internal
Georgian political strife to attempt secession, which Russia quietly
backed in order to compel Georgia to accede to Russian pressures
to remain within the CIS (from which Georgia initially wanted to se-
cede altogether) and to accept Russian military bases on Georgian
soil in order to seal the area off from Turkey.
In Central Asia, internal factors have been more significant in
promoting instability. Culturally and linguistically, four of the five
newly independent Central Asian states are part of the Turkic
world. Tajikistan is linguistically and culturally Persian, while
Afghanistan (outside of the former Soviet Union) is a Pathan, Tajik,
Pashtun, and Persian ethnic mosaic. All six countries are Muslim.
Most of them, over the years, were under the passing influence of


--- PAGE 138 ---
130 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
the Persian, Turkish, and Russian empires, but that experience has
not served to foster a spirit of a shared regional interest among
them. On the contrary, their diverse ethnic composition makes
them vulnerable to internal and external conflicts, which cumula-
tively tempt intrusion by more powerful neighbors.
Of the five newly independent Central Asian states, Kazakstan
and Uzbekistan are the most important. Regionally, Kazakstan is
the shield and Uzbekistan is the soul for the region's diverse na-
tional awakenings. Kazakstan's geographic size and location shel-
ter the others from direct Russian * physical pressure, since
Kazakstan alone borders on Russia. However, its population of
about 18 million is approximately 35 percent Russian (the Russian
population throughout the area is steadily declining), with another
20 percent also non-Kazak, a fact that has made it much more diffi-
cult for the new Kazak rulers—themselves increasingly nationalis-
tic but representing only about one-half of the country's total
population—to pursue the goal of nation building on the basis of
ethnicity and language.
The Russians residing in the new state are naturally resentful of
the new Kazak leadership, and being the formerly ruling colonial
class and thus also better educated and situated, they are fearful
of the loss of privilege. Furthermore, they tend to view the new
Kazak nationalism with barely concealed cultural disdain. With
both the northwestern and northeastern regions of Kazakstan
heavily dominated by Russian colonists, Kazakstan would face the
danger of territorial secession if Kazak-Russian relations were to
deteriorate seriously. At the same time, several hundred thousand
Kazaks reside on the Russian side of the state borders and in
northeastern Uzbekistan, the state that the Kazaks view as their
principal rival for Central Asian leadership.
Uzbekistan is, in fact, the prime candidate for regional leader-
ship in Central Asia. Although smaller in size and iess endowed
with natural resources than Kazakstan, it has a larger population
(nearly 25 million) and, much more important, a considerably
more homogeneous population than Kazakstan's. Given higher in-
digenous birthrates and the gradual exodus of the formerly domi-
nant Russians, soon about 75 percent of its people will be Uzbek,
with only an insignificant Russian minority remaining largely in
Tashkent, the capital.


--- PAGE 139 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 131
Moreover, the country's political elite deliberately identifies
the new state as the direct descendant of the vast medieval empire
of Tamerlane (1336-1404), whose capital, Samarkand, became the
region's renowned center for the study of religion, astronomy, and
the arts. This lineage imbues modern Uzbekistan with a deeper
sense of historical continuity and regional mission than its neigh-
bors. Indeed, some Uzbek leaders see Uzbekistan as the national
core of a single Central Asian entity, presumably with Tashkent as
its capital. More than in any of the other Central Asian states,
Uzbekistan's political elite and increasingly also its people, already
partake of the subjective makings of a modern nation-state and are
determined—domestic difficulties notwithstanding—never to re-
vert to colonial status.
That condition makes Uzbekistan both the leader in fostering a
sense of post-ethnic modern nationalism and an object of some un-
easiness among its neighbors. Even as the Uzbek leaders set the
pace in nation building and in the advocacy of greater regional self-
sufficiency, the country's relatively greater national homogeneity
and more intense national consciousness inspire fear among the
rulers of Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and even Kazak-
stan that Uzbek regional leadership could evolve into Uzbek re-
gional domination. That concern inhibits regional cooperation
among the newly sovereign states—which is not encouraged by
the Russians in any case—and perpetuates regional vulnerability.
However, like the others, Uzbekistan is not entirely free of eth-
nic tensions. Parts of southern Uzbekistan, particularly around the
historically and culturally important centers of Samarkand and
Bukhara, have significant Tajik populations, which remain resent-
ful of the frontiers drawn by Moscow. Complicating matters fur-
ther is the presence of Uzbeks in western Tajikistan and of both
Uzbeks and Tajiks in Kyrgyzstan's economically important Fergana
Valley (where in recent years bloody ethnic violence has erupted),
not to mention the presence of Uzbeks in northern Afghanistan.
Of the other three Central Asian states that have emerged from
Russian colonial rule—Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan—
only the third is relatively cohesive ethnically. Approximately 75
percent of its 4.5 million people are Turkmen, with Uzbeks and
Russians each accounting for less than 10 percent. Turkmenistan's
shielded geographic location makes it relatively remote from Rus-


--- PAGE 140 ---
132 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
sia, with Uzbekistan and Iran of far greater geopolitical relevance
to the country's future. Once pipelines to the area have been de-
veloped, Turkmenistan's truly vast natural gas reserves augur a
prosperous future for the country's people.
Kyrgyzstan's 5 million people are much more diverse. The Kyr-
gyz themselves account for about 55 percent of the total and the
Uzbeks for about 13 percent, with the Russians lately dropping
from over 20 percent to slightly over 15 percent. Prior to indepen-
dence, the Russians largely composed the technical-engineering
intelligentsia, and their exodus has hurt the country's economy.
Although rich in minerals and endowed with a natural beauty that
has led some to describe the country as the Switzerland of Central
Asia (and thus potentially as a new tourist frontier), Kyrgyzstan's
geopolitical location, squeezed between China and Kazakstan,
makes it highly dependent on the degree to which Kazakstan itself
succeeds in maintaining its independence.
Tajikistan is only somewhat more ethnically homogeneous. Of
its 6.5 million people, fewer than two-thirds are Tajik and more
than 25 percent are Uzbek (who are viewed with some hostility
by the Tajiks), while the remaining Russians account for only
about 3 percent. However, as elsewhere, even the dominant eth-
nic community is sharply—even violently—divided along tribal
lines, with modern nationalism confined largely to the urban po-
litical elite. As a result, independence has produced not only civil
strife but a convenient excuse for Russia to continue deploying
its army in the country. The ethnic situation is even further com-
plicated by the large presence of Tajiks across the border, in
northeastern Afghanistan. In fact, almost as many ethnic Tajiks
live in Afghanistan as in Tajikistan, another factor that serves to
undermine regional stability.
Afghanistan's current state of disarray is likewise a Soviet
legacy, even though the country is not a former Soviet republic.
Fragmented by the Soviet occupation and the prolonged guerrilla
warfare conducted against it, Afghanistan is a nation-state in name
only. Its 22 million people have become sharply divided along eth-
nic lines, with growing divisions among the country's Pashtuns,
Tajiks, and Hazaras. At the same time, the jihad against the Russ-
ian occupiers has made religion the dominant dimension of the
country's political life, infusing dogmatic fervor into already sharp


--- PAGE 141 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 133
political differences. Afghanistan thus has to be seen not only as a
part of the Central Asian ethnic conundrum but also as politically
very much part of the Eurasian Balkans.
Although all of the formerly Soviet Central Asian states, as well
as Azerbaijan, are populated predominantly by Muslims, their po-
litical elites—still largely the products of the Soviet era—are al-
most uniformly nonreligious in outlook and the states are formally
secular. However, as their populations shift from a primarily tradi-
tional clannish or tribal identity to a more modern national aware-
ness, they are likely to become imbued with an intensifying Islamic
consciousness. In fact, an Islamic revival—already abetted from
the outside not only by Iran but also by Saudi Arabia—is likely to
become the mobilizing impulse for the increasingly pervasive new
nationalisms, determined to oppose any reintegration under Russ-
ian—and hence infidel—control.
Indeed, the process of Isiamization is likely to prove contagious
also to the Muslims who have remained within Russia proper. They
number about 20 million—more than twice the number of disaf-
fected Russians (circa 9.5 million) who continue to live under for-
eign rule in the independent Central Asian states. The Russian
Muslims thus account for about 13 percent of Russia's population,
and it is almost inevitable that they will become more assertive in
claiming their rights to a distinctive religious and political identity.
Even if that claim does not take the form of a quest for outright in-
dependence, as it has in Chechnya, it will overlap with the dilem-
mas that Russia, given its recent imperial involvement and the
Russian minorities in the new states, will continue to face in Cen-
tral Asia.
Gravely increasing the instability of the Eurasian Balkans and
making the situation potentially much more explosive is the fact
that two of the adjoining major nation-states, each with a histori-
cally imperial, cultural, religious, and economic interest in the re-
gion—namely, Turkey and Iran—are themselves volatile in their
geopolitical orientation and are internally potentially vulnerable.
Were these two states to become destabilized, it is quite likely that
the entire region would be plunged into massive disorder, with the
ongoing ethnic and territorial conflicts spinning out of control and
the region's already delicate balance of power severely disrupted.
Accordingly, Turkey and Iran are not only important geostrategic


--- PAGE 142 ---
134 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
players but are also geopolitical pivots, whose own internal condi-
tion is of critical importance to the fate of the region. Both are mid-
dle-sized powers, with strong regional aspirations and a sense of
their historical significance. Yet the future geopolitical orientation
and even the national cohesion of both states remains uncertain.
Turkey, a postimperial state still in the process of redefining its
identity, is pulled in three directions: the modernists would like to
see it become a European state and thus look to the west; the Is-
lamists lean in the direction of the Middle East and a Muslim com-
munity and thus look to the south; and the historically minded
nationalists see in the Turkic peoples of the Caspian Sea basin and
Central Asia a new mission for a regionally dominant Turkey and
thus look eastward. Each of these perspectives posits a different
strategic axis, and the clash between them introduces for the first
time since the Kemalist revolution a measure of uncertainty re-
garding Turkey's regional role.
Moreover, Turkey itself could become at least a partial victim
of the region's ethnic conflicts. Although its population of about 65
million is predominantly Turkish, with about 80 percent Turkic
stock (though including a variety of Circassians, Albanians, Bosni-
ans, Bulgarians, and Arabs), as much as 20 percent or perhaps
even more are Kurdish. Concentrated in the country's eastern re-
gions, the Turkish Kurds have increasingly been drawn into the
struggle for national independence waged by the Iraqi and Iranian
Kurds. Any internal tensions within Turkey regarding the country's
overall direction would doubtless encourage the Kurds to press
even more violently for a separate national status.
Iran's future orientation is even more problematic. The funda-
mentalist Shiite revolution that triumphed in the late 1970s may be
entering its "Thermidorian" phase, and that heightens the uncer-
tainty regarding Iran's geostrategic role. On the one hand, the col-
lapse of the atheistic Soviet Union opened up Iran's newly
independent northern neighbors to religious proselytizing but, on
the other, Iran's hostility to the United States has inclined Teheran
to adopt at least a tactically pro-Moscow orientation, reinforced by
Iran's concerns regarding the impact on its own cohesion of Azer-
baijan's new independence.
That concern is derived from Iran's vulnerability to ethnic ten-
sions. Of the country's 65 million people (almost identical in num-


--- PAGE 143 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 135
ber to Turkey's), only somewhat more than one-half are Persians.
Roughly one-fourth are Azeri, and the remainder include Kurds,
Baluchis, Turkmens, Arabs, and other tribes. Outside of the Kurds
and the Azeris, the others at present do not have the capacity to
threaten Iran's national integrity, especially given the high degree
of national, even imperial, consciousness among the Persians. But
that could change quite quickly, particularly in the event of a new
political crisis in Iranian politics.
Furthermore, the very fact that several newly independent
"stans" now exist in the area and that even the 1 million Chechens
have been able to assert their political aspirations is bound to
have an infectious effect on the Kurds as well as on all the other
ethnic minorities in Iran. If Azerbaijan succeeds in stable political
and economic development, the Iranian Azeris will probably be-
come increasingly committed to the idea of a greater Azerbaijan.
Thus, political instability and divisions in Teheran could expand
into a challenge to the cohesion of the Iranian state, thereby dra-
matically extending the scope and increasing the stakes of what is
involved in the Eurasian Balkans.
THE MULTIPLE CONTEST
The traditional Balkans of Europe involved head-on competition
among three imperial rivals: the Ottoman Empire, the Austro-Hun-
garian Empire, and the Russian Empire. There were also three indi-
rect participants who were concerned that their European interests
would be adversely affected by the victory of a particular protago-
nist: Germany feared Russian power, France opposed Austria-Hun-
gary, and Great Britain preferred to see a weakening Ottoman
Empire in control of the Dardanelles than the emergence of any one
of the other major contestants in control of the Balkans. In the
course of the nineteenth century, these powers managed to contain
Balkan conflicts without prejudice to anyone's vital interests, but
they failed to do so in 1914, with disastrous consequences for all.
Today's competition within the Eurasian Balkans also directly
involves three neighboring powers: Russia, Turkey, and Iran,
though China may eventually become a major protagonist as well.
Also involved in the competition, but more remotely, are Ukraine,


--- PAGE 144 ---
136 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Pakistan, India, and the distant America. Each of the three princi-
pal and most directly engaged contestants is driven not only by
the prospect of future geopolitical and economic benefits but also
by strong historical impulses. Each was at one time or another ei-
ther the politically or the culturally dominant power in the region.
Each views the others with suspicion. Although head-on warfare
among them is unlikely, the cumulative impact of their external ri-
valry could contribute to regional chaos.
In the case of the Russians, the attitude of hostility to the Turks
verges on the obsessive. The Russian media portrays the Turks as
bent on control over the region, as instigators of local resistance
to Russia (with some justification in the case of Chechnya), and as
threatening Russia's overall security to a degree that is altogether
out of proportion to Turkey's actual capabilities. The Turks recip-
rocate in kind and view their role as that of liberators of their
brethren from prolonged Russian oppression. The Turks and the
Iranians (Persians) have also been historical rivals in the region,
and that rivalry has in recent years been revived, with Turkey pro-
jecting the image of a modern and secular alternative to the Iran-
ian concept of an Islamic society.
Although each of the three can be said to seek at least a sphere
of influence, in the case of Russia, Moscow's ambitions have a
much broader sweep because of the relatively fresh memories of
imperial control, the presence in the area of several million Rus-
sians, and the Kremlin's desire to reinstate Russia as a major
global power. Moscow's foreign policy statements have made it
plain that it views the entire space of the former Soviet Union as a
zone of the Kremlin's special geostrategic interest, from which out-
side political—and even economic—influence should be excluded.
In contrast, although Turkish aspirations for regional influence
retain some vestiges of an imperial, albeit more dated, past (the
Ottoman Empire reached its apogee in 1590 with the conquest of
the Caucasus and Azerbaijan, though it did not include Central
Asia), they tend to be more rooted in an ethnic-linguistic sense of
identity with the Turkic peoples of the area (see map on page 137).
Given Turkey's much more limited political and military power, a
sphere of exclusive political influence is simply unattainable.
Rather, Turkey sees itself as potential leader of a loose Turkic-
speaking community, taking advantage to that end of its appealing


--- PAGE 145 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 137
relative modernity, its linguistic affinity, and its economic means to
establish itself as the most influential force in the nation-building
processes underway in the area.
Iran's aspirations are vaguer still, but in the long run no less
threatening to Russia's ambitions. The Persian Empire is a much
more distant memory. At its peak, circa 500 B.C., it embraced the
current territory of the three Caucasian states, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan, and Afghanistan, as well as Turkey,
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Israel. Although Iran's current geopoliti-
cal aspirations are narrower than Turkey's, pointing mainly at
Azerbaijan and Afghanistan, the entire Muslim population in the
area—even within Russia itself—is the object of Iranian religious
interest. Indeed, the revival of Islam in Central Asia has become an
organic part of the aspirations of Iran's current rulers.
The competitive interests of Russia, Turkey, and Iran are repre-
sented on the map on page 138: in the case of the geopolitical


--- PAGE 146 ---
138 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
thrust of Russia, by two arrows pointing directly south at Azerbai-
jan and Kazakstan; in Turkey's case, by a single arrow pointing
eastward through Azerbaijan and the Caspian Sea at Central Asia;
and in Iran's case, by two arrows aiming northward at Azerbaijan
and northeast at Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan. These
arrows not only crisscross; they can collide.
At this stage, China's role is more limited and its goals less evi-
dent. It stands to reason that China prefers to face a collection of
relatively independent states in the West rather than a Russian
Empire. At a minimum, the new states serve as a buffer, but China
is also anxious that its own Turkic minorities in Xinjiang Province
might see in the newly independent Central Asian states an attrac-
tive example for themselves, and for that reason, China has sought
assurances from Kazakstan that cross-border minority activism
will be suppressed. In the long run, the energy resources of the re-
gion are bound to be of special interest to Beijing, and direct ac-


--- PAGE 147 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 139
cess to them, not subject to Moscow's control, has to be China's
central goal. Thus, the overall geopolitical interest of China tends
to clash with Russia's quest for a dominant role and is complemen-
tary to Turkish and Iranian aspirations.
For Ukraine, the central issues are the future character of the
CIS and freer access to energy sources, which would lessen
Ukraine's dependence on Russia. In that regard, closer relations
with Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan have become im-
portant to Kiev, with Ukrainian support for the more independent-
minded states being an extension of Ukraine's efforts to enhance its
own independence from Moscow. Accordingly, Ukraine has sup-
ported Georgia's efforts to become the westward route for Azeri oil
exports. Ukraine has also collaborated with Turkey in order to
weaken Russian influence in the Black Sea and has supported Turk-
ish efforts to direct oil flows from Central Asia to Turkish terminals.
The involvement of Pakistan and India is more remote still, but
neither is indifferent to what may be transpiring in these new
Eurasian Balkans. For Pakistan, the primary interest is to gain
geostrategic depth through political influence in Afghanistan—and
to deny to Iran the exercise of such influence in Afghanistan and
Tajikistan—and to benefit eventually from any pipeline construction
linking Central Asia with the Arabian Sea. India, in reaction to Pak-
istan and possibly concerned about China's long-range influence in
the region, views Iranian influence in Afghanistan and a greater
Russian presence in the former Soviet space more favorably.
Although distant, the United States, with its stake in the main-
tenance of geopolitical pluralism in post-Soviet Eurasia, looms in
the background as an increasingly important if indirect player,
clearly interested not only in developing the region's resources but
also in preventing Russia from exclusively dominating the region's
geopolitical space. In so doing, America is not only pursuing its
larger Eurasian geostrategic goals but is also representing its own
growing economic interest, as well as that of Europe and the Far
East, in gaining unlimited access to this hitherto closed area.
Thus, at stake in this conundrum are geopolitical power, access
to potentially great wealth, the fulfillment of national and/or reli-
gious missions, and security. The particular focus of the contest,
however, is on access. Until the collapse of the Soviet Union, ac-
cess to the region was monopolized by Moscow. All rail transport,


--- PAGE 148 ---
140 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
gas and oil pipelines, and even air travel were channeled through
the center. Russian geopoliticians would prefer it to remain so,
since they know that whoever either controls or dominates access
to the region is the one most likely to win the geopolitical and eco-
nomic prize.
It is this consideration that has made the pipeline issue so cen-
tral to the future of the Caspian Sea basin and Central Asia. If the
main pipelines to the region continue to pass through Russian ter-
ritory to the Russian outlet on the Black Sea at Novorossiysk, the
political consequences of this condition will make themselves felt,
even without any overt Russian power plays. The region will re-
main a political dependency, with Moscow in a strong position to
determine how the region's new wealth is to be shared. Con-
versely, if another pipeline crosses the Caspian Sea to Azerbaijan
and thence to the Mediterranean through Turkey and if one more
goes to the Arabian Sea through Afghanistan, no single power will
have monopoly over access.
The troubling fact is that some elements in the Russian politi-
cal elite act as if they prefer that the area's resources not be devel-
oped at all if Russia cannot have complete control over access. Let
the wealth remain unexploited if the alternative is that foreign in-
vestment will lead to more direct presence by foreign economic,
and thus also political, interests. That proprietary attitude is
rooted in history, and it will take time and outside pressures be-
fore it changes.
The Tsarist expansion into the Caucasus and Central Asia oc-
curred over a period of about three hundred years, but its recent
end was shockingly abrupt. As the Ottoman Empire declined in vi-
tality, the Russian Empire pushed southward, along the shores of
the Caspian Sea toward Persia. It seized the Astrakhan khanate in
1556 and reached Persia by 1607. It conquered Crimea during
1774-1784, then took over the kingdom of Georgia in 1801 and
overwhelmed the tribes astride the Caucasian mountain range
(with the Chechens resisting with unique tenacity) during the sec-
ond half of the 1800s, completing the takeover of Armenia by 1878.
The conquest of Central Asia was less a matter of overcoming a
rival empire than of subjugating essentially isolated and quasi-
tribal feudal khanates and emirates, capable of offering only spo-
radic and isolated resistance. Uzbekistan and Kazakstan were


--- PAGE 149 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 141
taken over through a series of military expeditions during the
years 1801-1881, with Turkmenistan crushed and incorporated in
campaigns lasting from 1873 to 1886. However, by 1850, the con-
quest of most of Central Asia was essentially completed, though
periodic outbreaks of local resistance occurred even during the
Soviet era.
The collapse of the Soviet Union produced a dramatic histori-
cal reversal. In the course of merely a few weeks in December 1991,
Russia's Asian space suddenly shrank by about 20 percent, and the
population Russia controlled in Asia was cut from 75 million to
about 30 million. In addition, another 18 million residents in the
Caucasus were also detached from Russia. Making these reversals
even more painful to the Russian political elite was the awareness
that the economic potential of these areas was now being targeted
by foreign interests with the financial means to invest in, develop,
and exploit resources that until very recently were accessible to
Russia alone.
Yet Russia faces a dilemma: it is too weak politically to seal off
the region entirely from the outside and too poor financially to de-
velop the area exclusively on its own. Moreover, sensible Russian
leaders realize that the demographic explosion underway in the
new states means that their failure to sustain economic growth will
eventually create an explosive situation along Russia's entire
southern frontier. Russia's experience in Afghanistan and Chech-
nya could be repeated along the entire borderline that stretches
from the Black Sea to Mongolia, especially given the national and
Islamic resurgence now underway among the previously subju-
gated peoples.
It follows that Russia must somehow find a way of accommo-
dating to the new postimperial reality, as it seeks to contain the
Turkish and Iranian presence, to prevent the gravitation of the new
states toward its principal rivals, to discourage the formation of
any truly independent Central Asian regional cooperation, and to
limit American geopolitical influence in the newly sovereign capi-
tals. The issue thus is no longer that of imperial restoration—
which would be too costly and would be fiercely resisted—but
instead involves creating a new web of relations that would con-
strain the new states and preserve Russia's dominant geopolitical
and economic position.


--- PAGE 150 ---
142 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
The chosen instrument for accomplishing that task has primar-
ily been the CIS, though in some places the use of the Russian mili-
tary and the skillful employment of Russian diplomacy to "divide
and rule" has served the Kremlin's interests just as well. Moscow
has used its leverage to seek from the new states the maximum de-
gree of compliance to its vision of an increasingly integrated "com-
monwealth" and has pressed for a centrally directed system of
control over the external borders of the CIS; for closer military in-
tegration, within the framework of a common foreign policy; and
for the further expansion of the existing (originally Soviet) pipeline
network, to the exclusion of any new ones that could skirt Russia.
Russian strategic analyses have explicitly stated that Moscow
views the area as its own special geopolitical space, even if it is no
longer an integral part of its empire.
A clue to Russian geopolitical intentions is provided by the in-
sistence with which the Kremlin has sought to retain a Russian mil-
itary presence on the territories of the new states. Taking
advantage of the Abkhazian secession movement, Moscow ob-
tained basing rights in Georgia, legitimated its military presence
on Armenian soil by exploiting Armenia's need for support in the
war against Azerbaijan, and applied political and financial pres-
sure to obtain Kazakstan's agreement to Russian bases; in addi-
tion, the civil war in Tajikistan made possible the continued
presence there of the former Soviet army.
In defining its policy, Moscow has proceeded on the apparent
expectation that its postimperial web of relationships with Central
Asia will gradually emasculate the substance of the sovereignty of
the individually weak new states and that it will place them in a
subordinate relationship to the command center of the "inte-
grated" CIS. To accomplish that goal, Russia is discouraging the
new states from creating their own separate armies, from fostering
the use of their distinctive languages (in which they are gradually
replacing the Cyrillic alphabet with the Latin), from cultivating
close ties with outsiders, and from developing new pipelines di-
rectly to outlets in the Arabian or Mediterranean Seas. If the policy
succeeds, Russia could then dominate their foreign relations and
determine revenue sharing.
In pursuing that goal, Russian spokesmen often invoke, as we
have seen in chapter 4, the example of the European Union. In fact,


--- PAGE 151 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 143
however, Russia's policy toward the Central Asian states and the
Caucasus is much more reminiscent of the Francophone African
community—with the French military contingents and budgetary
subsidies determining the politics and policies of the French-
speaking postcolonial African states.
While the restoration of the maximum feasible degree of Russ-
ian political and economic influence in the region is the overall
goal and the reinforcement of the CIS is the principal mechanism
for achieving it, Moscow's primary geopolitical targets for political
subordination appear to be Azerbaijan and Kazakstan. For a Russ-
ian political counteroffensive to be successful, Moscow must not
only cork access to the region but must also penetrate its geo-
graphic shield.
For Russia, Azerbaijan has to be a priority target. Its subordina-
tion would help to seal off Central Asia from the West, especially
from Turkey, thereby further increasing Russia's leverage vis-a-vis
the recalcitrant Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan. To that end, tactical
cooperation with Iran regarding such controversial issues as how
to divide the drilling concessions to the Caspian seabed serves the
important objective of compelling Baku to accommodate itself to
Moscow's wishes. A subservient Azerbaijan would also facilitate
the consolidation of a dominant Russian position in both Georgia
and Armenia.
Kazakstan offers an especially tempting primary target as well,
because its ethnic vulnerability makes it impossible for the Kazak
government to prevail in an open confrontation with Moscow.
Moscow can also exploit the Kazak fear of China's growing dy-
namism, as well as the likelihood of growing Kazak resentment
over the Sinification of the adjoining Xinjiang Province in China.
Kazakstan's gradual subordination would have the geopolitical ef-
fect of almost automatically drawing Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan
into Moscow's sphere of control, while exposing both Uzbekistan
and Turkmenistan to more direct Russian pressure.
The Russian strategy, however, runs counter to the aspirations
of almost all of the states located in the Eurasian Balkans. Their
new political elites will not voluntarily yield the power and privi-
lege they have gained through independence. As the local Rus-
sians gradually vacate their previously privileged positions, the
new elites are rapidly developing a vested interest in sovereignty, a


--- PAGE 152 ---
144 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
dynamic and socially contagious process. Moreover, the once po-
litically passive populations are also becoming more nationalistic
and, outside of Georgia and Armenia, also more conscious of their
Islamic identity.
Insofar as foreign affairs are concerned, both Georgia and Ar-
menia (despite the latter's dependence on Russian support against
Azerbaijan) would like to become gradually more associated with
Europe. The resource-rich Central Asian states, along with Azer-
baijan, would like to maximize the economic presence on their soil
of American, European, Japanese, and lately Korean capital, hop-
ing thereby to greatly accelerate their own economic development
and consolidate their independence. To this end, they also wel-
come the increasing role of Turkey and Iran, seeing in them a coun-
terweight to Russian power and a bridge to the large Muslim world
to the south.
Azerbaijan—encouraged by both Turkey and America—has
thus not only rejected Russian demands for military bases but it
also defied Russian demands for a single pipeline to a Russian Black
Sea port, opting instead for a dual solution involving a second
pipeline through Georgia to Turkey. (A pipeline southward through
Iran, to be financed by an American company, had to be abandoned
because of the U.S. financial embargo on deals with Iran.) In 1995,
amid much fanfare, a new rail link between Turkmenistan and Iran
was opened, making it feasible for Europe to trade with Central Asia
by rail, skirting Russia altogether. There was a touch of symbolic
drama to this reopening of the ancient Silk Route, with Russia thus
no longer able to separate Europe from Asia.
Uzbekistan has also become increasingly assertive in its oppo-
sition to Russia's efforts at "integration." Its foreign minister de-
clared flatly in August 1996 that "Uzbekistan opposes the creation
of CIS supranational institutions which can be used as instruments
of centralized control." Its strongly nationalistic posture had al-
ready prompted sharp denunciations in the Russian press con-
cerning Uzbekistan's
emphatically pro-West orientation in the economy, the harsh
invective apropos integration treaties within the CIS, the deci-
sive refusal to join even the Customs Union, and a methodical
anti-Russian nationality policy (even kindergartens which use


--- PAGE 153 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 145
Russian are being closed down). ... For the United States,
which is pursuing in the Asia region a policy of the weakening
of Russia, this position is so attractive.1
Even Kazakstan, in reaction to Russian pressures, has come to
favor a secondary non-Russian route for its own outflows. As
Umirserik Kasenov, the adviser to the Kazak president, put it:
It is a fact that Kazakstan's search for alternative pipelines has
been fostered by Russia's own actions, such as the limitation
of shipments of Kazakstan's oil to Novorossiysk and of Tyumen
oil to the Pavlodar Refinery. Turkmenistan's efforts to promote
the construction of a gas line to Iran are partly due to the fact
that the CIS countries pay only 60 percent of the world price or
do not pay for it at all.2
Turkmenistan, for much the same reason, has been actively ex-
ploring the construction of a new pipeline through Afghanistan
and Pakistan to the Arabian Sea, in addition to the energetic con-
struction of new rail links with Kazakstan and Uzbekistan to the
north and with Iran and Afghanistan to the south. Very preliminary
and exploratory talks have also been held among the Kazaks, the
Chinese, and the Japanese regarding an ambitious pipeline project
that would stretch from Central Asia to the China Sea (see map on
page 146). With long-term Western oil and gas investment commit-
ments in Azerbaijan reaching some $13 billion and in Kazakstan go-
ing well over $20 billion (1996 figures), the economic and political
isolation of this area is clearly breaking down in the face of global
economic pressures and limited Russian financial options.
Fear of Russia has also had the effect of driving the Central
Asian states into greater regional cooperation. The initially dor-
mant Central Asian Economic Union, formed in January 1993, has
been gradually activated. Even President Nursultan Nazarbayev of
Kazakstan, at first an articulate advocate of a new "Eurasian
Union," gradually became a convert to ideas of closer Central
lZavtm 28 (June 1996).
iUWhat Russia Wants in the Transcaucasus and Central Asia," Nezavisi-
maya Gazeta, January 24,1995.


--- PAGE 154 ---
146 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Asian cooperation, increased military collaboration among the re-
gion's states, support for Azerbaijan's efforts to channel Caspian
Sea and Kazak oil through Turkey, and joint opposition to Russian
and Iranian efforts to prevent the sectoral division of the Caspian
Sea's continental shelf and mineral resources among the coastal
states.
Given the fact that the governments in the area tend to be
highly authoritarian, perhaps even more important has been the
personal reconciliation among the principal leaders. It was com-
mon knowledge that the presidents of Kazakstan, Uzbekistan, and
Turkmenistan were not particularly fond of one another (which
they made eminently plain to foreign visitors), and that personal
antagonism initially made it easier for the Kremlin to play off one
against the other. By the mid-1990s, the three had come to realize
that closer cooperation among them was essential to the preserva-
tion of their new sovereignty, and they began to engage in highly


--- PAGE 155 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 147
publicized displays of their allegedly close relations, stressing that
henceforth they would coordinate their foreign policies.
But more important still has been the emergence within the CIS
of an informal coalition, led by Ukraine and Uzbekistan, dedicated
to the idea of a "cooperative," but not "integrated," common-
wealth. Toward this end, Ukraine has signed agreements on mili-
tary cooperation with Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Georgia; and
in September 1996, the foreign ministers of Ukraine and Uzbek-
istan even engaged in the highly symbolic act of issuing a declara-
tion, demanding that henceforth CIS summits not be chaired by
Russia's president but that the chairmanship be rotated.
The example set by Ukraine and Uzbekistan has had an impact
even on the leaders who have been more deferential to Moscow's
central concerns. The Kremlin must have been especially dis-
turbed to hear Kazakstan's Nursultan Nazarbayev and Georgia's
Eduard Shevardnadze declare in September 1996 that they would
leave the CIS "if our independence is threatened." More generally,
as a counter to the CIS, the Central Asian states and Azerbaijan
stepped up their level of activity in the Organization of Economic
Cooperation, a still relatively loose association of the region's Is-
lamic states—including Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan—dedicated to
the enhancement of financial, economic, and transportation links
among its members. Moscow has been publicly critical of these
initiatives, viewing them, quite correctly, as diluting the pertinent
states' membership in the CIS.
In a similar vein, there has been steady enhancement of ties
with Turkey and, to a lesser extent, Iran. The Turkic-speaking
countries have eagerly accepted Turkey's offers of military train-
ing for the new national officer corps and the laying down of the
Turkish welcome mat for some ten thousand students. The fourth
summit meeting of the Turkic-speaking countries, held in Tashkent
in October 1996 and prepared with Turkish backing, focused heav-
ily on the enhancement of transportation links, on increased trade,
and also on common educational standards as well as closer cul-
tural cooperation with Turkey. Both Turkey and Iran have been
particularly active in assisting the new states with their television
programming, thereby directly influencing large audiences.
A ceremony in Alma-Ata, the capital of Kazakstan, in December
1996 was particularly symbolic of Turkey's identification with the


--- PAGE 156 ---
148 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
independence of the region's states. On the occasion of the fifth
anniversary of Kazakstan's independence, the Turkish president,
Suleyman Demirel, stood at the side of President Nazarbayev at
the unveiling of a gold-colored column twenty-eight meters high,
crowned with a legendary Kazak/Turkic warrior's figure atop a
griffinlike creature. At the event, Kazakstan hailed Turkey for
"standing by Kazakstan at every step of its development as an in-
dependent state," and the Turks reciprocated by granting Kazak-
stan a credit line of $300 million, beyond existing private Turkish
investment of about $1.2 billion.
While neither Turkey nor Iran has the means to exclude Russia
from regional influence, Turkey and (more narrowly) Iran have
thus been reinforcing the will and the capacity of the new states to
resist reintegration with their northern neighbor and former mas-
ter. And that certainly helps to keep the region's geopolitical future
open,
NEITHER DOMINION NOR EXCLUSION
The geostrategic implications for America are clear: America is too
distant to be dominant in this part of Eurasia but too powerful not
to be engaged. All the states in the area view American engage-
ment as necessary to their survival. Russia is too weak to regain
imperial domination over the region or to exclude others from it,
but it is also too close and too strong to be excluded. Turkey and
Iran are strong enough to be influential, but their own vulnerabili-
ties could make the area unable to cope with both the challenge
from the north and the region's internal conflicts. China is too
powerful not to be feared by Russia and the Central Asian states,
yet its very presence and economic dynamism facilitates Central
Asia's quest for wider global outreach.
It follows that America's primary interest is to help ensure that
no single power comes to control this geopolitical space and that
the global community has unhindered financial and economic ac-
cess to it. Geopolitical pluralism will become an enduring reality
only when a network of pipeline and transportation routes links
the region directly to the major centers of global economic activity
via the Mediterranean and Arabian Seas, as well as overland.


--- PAGE 157 ---
THE EURASIAN BALKANS 149
Hence, Russian efforts to monopolize access need to be opposed
as inimical to regional stability.
However, the exclusion of Russia from the area is neither desir-
able nor feasible, nor is the fanning of hostility between the area's
new states and Russia. In fact, Russia's active economic participa-
tion in the region's development is essential to the area's stabil-
ity—and having Russia as a partner, but not as an exclusive
dominator, can also reap significant economic benefits as a result.
Greater stability and increased wealth within the region would
contribute directly to Russia's well-being and give real meaning to
the "commonwealth" promised by the acronym CIS. But that coop-
erative option will become Russia's policy only when much more
ambitious, historically anachronistic designs that are painfully
reminiscent of the original Balkans are effectively precluded.
The states deserving America's strongest geopolitical support
are Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, and (outside this region) Ukraine, all
three being geopolitically pivotal. Indeed, Kiev's role reinforces the
argument that Ukraine is the critical state, insofar as Russia's own
future evolution is concerned. At the same time, Kazakstan—given
its size, economic potential, and geographically important loca-
tion—is also deserving of prudent international backing and espe-
cially of sustained economic assistance. In time, economic growth
in Kazakstan might help to bridge the ethnic split that makes this
Central Asian "shield" so vulnerable to Russian pressure.
In this region, America shares a common interest not only with
a stable, pro-Western Turkey but also with Iran and China. A grad-
ual improvement in American-Iranian relations would greatly in-
crease global access to the region and, more specifically, reduce
the more immediate threat to Azerbaijan's survival. China's grow-
ing economic presence in the region and its political stake in the
area's independence are also congruent with America's interests.
China's backing of Pakistan's efforts in Afghanistan is also a posi-
tive factor, for closer Pakistani-Afghan relations would make inter-
national access to Turkmenistan more feasible, thereby helping to
reinforce both that state and Uzbekistan (in the event that Kazak-
stan were to falter).
Turkey's evolution and orientation are likely to be especially
decisive for the future of the Caucasian states. If Turkey sustains
its path to Europe—and if Europe does not close its doors to


--- PAGE 158 ---
150 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Turkey—the states of the Caucasus are also likely to gravitate into
the European orbit, a prospect they fervently desire. But if
Turkey's Europeanization grinds to a halt, for either internal or ex-
ternal reasons, then Georgia and Armenia will have no choice but
to adapt to Russia's inclinations. Their future will then become a
function of Russia's own evolving relationship with the expanding
Europe, for good or ill.
Iran's role is likely to be even more problematic. A return to a
pro-Western posture would certainly facilitate the stabilization
and consolidation of the region, and it is therefore strategically de-
sirable for America to encourage such a turn in Iran's conduct. But
until that happens, Iran is likely to play a negative role, adversely
affecting Azerbaijan's prospects, even as it takes positive steps like
opening Turkmenistan to the world and, despite Iran's current fun-
damentalism, reinforcing the Central Asians' sense of their reli-
gious heritage.
Ultimately, Central Asia's future is likely to be shaped by an
even more complex set of circumstances, with the fate of its states
determined by the intricate interplay of Russian, Turkish, Iranian,
and Chinese interests, as well as by the degree to which the United
States conditions its relations with Russia on Russia's respect for
the independence of the new states. The reality of that interplay
precludes either empire or monopoly as a meaningful goal for any
of the geostrategic players involved. Rather, the basic choice is be-
tween a delicate regional balance—which would permit the grad-
ual inclusion of the area in the emerging global economy while the
states of the region consolidate themselves and probably also ac-
quire a more pronounced Islamic identity—or ethnic conflict, po-
litical fragmentation, and possibly even open hostilities along
Russia's southern frontiers. The attainment and consolidation of
that regional balance has to be a major goal in any comprehensive
U.S. geostrategy for Eurasia.


--- PAGE 159 ---
CHAPTER 6
The
Far Eastern
Anchor
AN EFFECTIVE AMERICAN POLICY for Eurasia has to have a Far
Eastern anchor. That need will not be met if America is ex-
cluded or excludes itself from the Asian mainland. A close
relationship with maritime Japan is essential for America's global
policy, but a cooperative relationship with mainland China is im-
perative for America's Eurasian geostrategy. The implications of
that reality need to be faced, for the ongoing interaction in the Far
East between three major powers—America, China, and Japan—
creates a potentially dangerous regional conundrum and is almost
certain to generate geopolitically tectonic shifts.
For China, America across the Pacific should be a natural ally
since America has no designs on the Asian mainland and has his-
torically opposed both Japanese and Russian encroachments on
a weaker China. To the Chinese, Japan has been the principal en-
emy over the last century; Russia, "the hungry land" in Chinese,
has long been distrusted; and India, too, now looms as a poten-
tial rival. The principle "my neighbor's neighbor is my ally" thus
fits the geopolitical and historical relationship between China
and America.
151


--- PAGE 160 ---
152 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
However, America is no longer Japan's adversary across the
ocean but is now closely allied with Japan. America also has strong
ties with Taiwan and with several of the Southeast Asian nations.
The Chinese are also sensitive to America's doctrinal reservations
regarding the internal character of the current Chinese regime.
Thus, America is also seen as the principal obstacle in China's
quest not only to become globally preeminent but even just re-
gionally predominant. Is a collision between America and China,
therefore, inevitable?
For Japan, America has been the .umbrella under which the
country could safely recover from a devastating defeat, regain its
economic momentum, and on that basis progressively attain a po-
sition as one of the world's prime powers. But the very fact of that
umbrella imposes a limit on Japan's freedom of action, creating the
paradoxical situation of a world-class power being simultaneously
a protectorate. For Japan, America continues to be the vital part-
ner in Japan's emergence as an international leader. But America is
also the main reason for Japan's continued lack of national self-re-
liance in the security area. How long can this situation endure?
In other words, in the foreseeable future two centrally impor-
tant—and very directly interacting—geopolitical issues will define
America's role in Eurasia's Far East:
1. What is the practical definition and—from America's point
of view—the acceptable scope of China's potential emer-
gence as the dominant regional power and of its growing as-
pirations for the status of a global power?
2. As Japan seeks to define a global role for itself, how should
America manage the regional consequences of the in-
evitable reduction in the degree of Japan's acquiescence in
its status as an American protectorate?
The East Asian geopolitical scene is currently characterized by
metastable power relations. Metastability involves a condition of
external rigidity but of relatively little flexibility, in that regard
more reminiscent of iron than steel. It is vulnerable to a destruc-
tive chain reaction generated by a powerful jarring blow. Today's
Far East is experiencing extraordinary economic dynamism along-


--- PAGE 161 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 153
side growing political uncertainty. Asian economic growth may in
fact even contribute to that uncertainty, because prosperity ob-
scures the region's political vulnerabilities even as it intensifies na-
tional ambitions and expands social expectations.
That Asia is an economic success without parallel in human de-
velopment goes without saying. Just a few basic statistics dramati-
cally highlight that reality. Less than four decades ago, East Asia
(including Japan) accounted for a mere 4 percent or so of the
world's total GNP, while North America led with approximately
35-40 percent; by the mid-1990s, the two regions were roughly
equal (in the neighborhood of 25 percent). Moreover, Asia's pace
of growth has been historically unprecedented. Economists have
noted that in the takeoff stage of industrialization, Great Britain
took more than fifty years and America just somewhat less than
fifty years to double their respective outputs per head, whereas
both China and South Korea accomplished the same gain in ap-
proximately ten years. Barring some massive regional disruption,
within a quarter of a century, Asia is likely to outstrip both North
America and Europe in total GNP.
However, in addition to becoming the world's center of eco-
nomic gravity, Asia is also its potential political volcano. Although
surpassing Europe in economic development, Asia is singularly de-
ficient in regional political development. It lacks the cooperative
multilateral structures that so dominate the European political
landscape and that dilute, absorb, and contain Europe's more tra-
ditional territorial, ethnic, and national conflicts. There is nothing
comparable in Asia to either the European Union or NATO. None of
the three regional associations—ASEAN (Association of Southeast
Asian Nations), ARF (Asian Regional Forum, ASEAN's platform for a
political-security dialogue), and APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Co-
operation Group)—even remotely approximates the web of multi-
lateral and regional cooperative ties that bind Europe together.
On the contrary, Asia is today the seat of the world's greatest
concentration of rising and recently awakened mass nationalisms,
fueled by sudden access to mass communications, hyperactivated
by expanding social expectations generated by growing economic
prosperity as well as by widening disparities in social wealth, and
made more susceptible to political mobilization by the explosive
increase both in population and urbanization. This condition is


--- PAGE 162 ---
154 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
rendered even more ominous by the scale of Asia's arms buildup.
In 1995, the region became—according to the International Insti-
tute of Strategic Studies—the world's biggest importer of arms,
outstripping Europe and the Middle East.
In brief, East Asia is seething with dynamic activity, which so
far has been channeled in peaceful directions by the region's rapid
pace of economic growth. But that safety valve could at some
point be overwhelmed by unleashed political passions, once they
have been triggered by some flash point, even a relatively trivial
one. The potential for such a flash point is present in a large num-
ber of contentious issues, each vulnerable to demagogic exploita-
tion and thus potentially explosive:
• China's resentment of Taiwan's separate status is intensify-
ing as China gains in strength and as the increasingly pros-
perous Taiwan begins to flirt with a formally separate status
as a nation-state.
• The Paracel and Spratly Islands in the South China Sea pose
the risk of a collision between China and several Southeast
Asian states over access to potentially valuable seabed en-
ergy sources, with China imperially viewing the South China
Sea as its legitimate national patrimony.
• The Senkaku Islands are contested by both Japan and China
(with the rivals Taiwan and mainland China ferociously of a
single mind on this issue), and the historical rivalry for re-
gional preeminence between Japan and China infuses this
issue with symbolic significance as well.
" The division of Korea and the inherent instability of North
Korea—made all the more dangerous by North Korea's
quest for nuclear capability—pose the risk that a sudden ex-
plosion could engulf the peninsula in warfare, which in turn
would engage the United States and indirectly involve Japan.
• The issue of the southernmost Kuril Islands, unilaterally
seized in 1945 by the Soviet Union, continues to paralyze
and poison Russo-Japanese relations.


--- PAGE 163 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 155
PACIFIC OCEAN
INDIAN OCEAN
Uu mid dry ami Territorial
Disputes in Kast tola
3 Chinese Claim
4 China-Vlelnarn Boi»r Friction
5 Parecsl Islands
6. Spratly Islands
7 Prates Island
8 Senkskj Islands i Diao-Yu-Tsi
9 Uancourr Rocks
10 D"iu'iM:n L'np
11 N rrheni V'|-.i,i"s
• Other latent territorial-ethnic conflicts involve Russo-Chi-
nese, Chinese-Vietnamese, Japanese-Korean, and Chinese-
Indian border issues; ethnic unrest in Xinjiang Province;
and Chinese-Indonesian disputes over oceanic boundaries.
(See map above.)
The distribution of power in the region is also unbalanced.
China, with its nuclear arsenal and its large armed forces, is clearly
the dominant military power (see table on page 156). The Chinese
navy has already adopted a strategic doctrine of "offshore active
defense," seeking to acquire within the next fifteen years an ocean-
going capability for "effective control of the seas within the first is-
land chain," meaning the Taiwan Strait and the South China Sea. To
be sure, Japan's military capability is also increasing, and in terms
of quality, it has no regional peer. At present, however, the Japan-
ese armed forces are not a tool of Japanese foreign policy and are


--- PAGE 164 ---
156 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Personnel
Total
China 3,030.000
Pakistan 577,000
India 1,100,000
Thailand 295,000
Singapore 55,500
North Korea 1,127,000
South Korea 633,000
Japan 237,700
Taiwan" 442,000
Vietnam 857,000
Malaysia*" 114,500
Philippines 106,500
Indonesia 270,900
Asian Armed Forces
Tanks
Total
Fighters
Total
Surface
Ships
Total
•iSub-
marines
Total
(Numbers in parentheses are advanced systems)
9,400 (500)
1,890 (40)
3,500 (2,700)
633 (313)
350 (0)
4,200 (2,225)
1,860 (450)
1,200 (929)
1,400 (0)
1,900 (400)
26 (26)
41 (0)
235 (110)
5,224 (124)
336 (160)
700 (374)
-74 (18)
143 (6)
730 (136)
334 (48)
324 (231)
460 (10)
240 (0)
50 (0)
7 (0)
54 (12)
57 (40)
11 (8)
21 (14)
14 (6)
0 (0)
3 (0)
17 (9)
62 (40)
38(11)
7 (5)
2 (0)
1 (0)
17 (4)
53 (7)
6 (6)
18 (12)
0 (0)
0 (0)
23 (0)
3 (3)
17(17)
4 (2)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (2)
"Taiwan has 150 F-16s, 60 Mirage, and 130 other fighter jets on order and several
naval vessels under construction.
'"Malaysia is purchasing 8 F-18s and possibly IS MiG-29s.
Note: Personnel means all active military; tanks are mainbattle tanks and light
tanks; fighters are air-to-air and ground attack aircraft; surface ships are carriers,
cruisers, destroyers, and frigates;and submarines are all types. Advanced
systems are at least mid-1960s design with advanced technologies, such as laser
range finders for tanks.
Source: General Accounting Office report, "Impact of China's Military Moderniza-
tion in the Pacific Region,June 1995.
largely viewed as an extension of the American military presence
in the region.
The emergence of China has already prompted its southeastern
neighbors to be increasingly deferential to Chinese concerns. It is
noteworthy that during the minicrisis of early 1996 concerning Tai-
wan (in which China engaged in some threatening military maneu-
vers and barred air and sea access to a zone near Taiwan,
precipitating a demonstrative U.S. naval deployment), the foreign
minister of Thailand hastily declared that such a ban was normal,


--- PAGE 165 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 157
his Indonesian counterpart stated that this was purely a Chinese
affair, and the Philippines and Malaysia declared a policy of neu-
trality on the issue.
The absence of a regional balance of power has in recent years
prompted both Australia and Indonesia—heretofore rather wary of
each other—to initiate growing military coordination. Both countries
made little secret of their anxiety over the longer-range prospects of
Chinese regional military domination and over the staying power of
the United States as the region's security guarantor. This concern
has also caused Singapore to explore closer security cooperation
with these nations. In fact, throughout the region, the central but
unanswered question among strategists has become this: "For how
long can peace in the world's most populated and increasingly most
armed region be assured by one hundred thousand American sol-
diers, and for how much longer in any case are they likely to stay?"
It is in this volatile setting of intensifying nationalisms, increas-
ing populations, growing prosperity, exploding expectations, and
overlapping power aspirations that genuinely tectonic shifts are
occurring in East Asia's geopolitical landscape:
• China, whatever its specific prospects, is a rising and poten-
tially dominant power.
• America's security role is becoming increasingly dependent
on collaboration with Japan.
• Japan is groping for a more denned and autonomous politi-
cal role.
• Russia's role has greatly diminished, while the formerly
Russian-dominated Central Asia has become an object of in-
ternational rivalry.
• The division of Korea is becoming less tenable, making Ko-
rea's future orientation a matter of increasing geostrategic
interest to its major neighbors.
These tectonic shifts give added salience to the two central is-
sues posed at the outset of this chapter.


--- PAGE 166 ---
158 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
CHINA: NOT GLOBAL BUT REGIONAL
China's history is one of national greatness. The currently intense
nationalism of the Chinese people is new only in its social perva-
siveness, for it engages the self-identification and the emotions of
an unprecedented number of Chinese. It is no longer a phenome-
non confined largely to the students who, in the early years of this
century, formed the precursors of the Kuomintang and the Chi-
nese Communist Party. Chinese nationalism is now a mass phe-
nomenon, defining the mindset of the world's most populous state.
That mindset has deep historical roots. History has predis-
posed the Chinese elite to think of China as the natural center of
the world. In fact, the Chinese word for China—Chung-kuo, or the
"Middle Kingdom"—both conveys the notion of China's centrality
in world affairs and reaffirms the importance of national unity.
That perspective also implies a hierarchical radiation of influence
from the center to the peripheries, and thus China as the center
expects deference from others.
Moreover, since time immemorial, China, with its vast popula-
tion, has been a distinctive and proud civilization all its own. That
civilization was highly advanced in all areas: philosophy, culture,
the arts, social skills, technical inventiveness, and political power.
The Chinese recall that until approximately 1600, China led the
world in agricultural productivity, industrial innovation, and stan-
dard of living. But unlike the European and the Islamic civiliza-
tions, which have spawned some seventy-five-odd states, China
has remained for most of its history a single state, which at the
time of America's declaration of independence already contained
more than 200 million people and was also the world's leading
manufacturing power.
From that perspective, China's fall from greatness—the last 150
years of China's humiliation—is an aberration, a desecration of
China's special quality, and a personal insult to every individual Chi-
nese. It must be erased, and its perpetrators deserve due punish-
ment. These perpetrators, in varying degrees, have primarily been
four: Great Britain, Japan, Russia, and America—Great Britain, be-
cause of the Opium War and its consequent shameful debasement of
China; Japan, because of the predatory wars spanning the last cen-
tury, resulting in terrible (and still unrepented) infliction of suffering


--- PAGE 167 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 159
on the Chinese people; Russia, because of protracted encroachment
on Chinese territories in the North as well as Stalin's domineering in-
sensitivity toward Chinese self-esteem; and finally America, because
through its Asian presence and support of Japan, it stands in the
way of China's external aspirations.
In the Chinese view, two of these four powers have already
been punished, so to speak, by history. Great Britain is no longer
an empire, and the lowering of the Union Jack in Hong Kong for-
ever closes that particularly painful chapter. Russia remains next
door, though much diminished in stature, prestige, and territory. It
is America and Japan that pose the most serious problems for
China, and it is in the interaction with them that China's regional
and global role will be substantively defined.
That definition, however, will depend in the first instance on
how China itself evolves, on how much of an economic and mili-
tary power it actually becomes. On this score, the prognosis for
China is generally promising, though not without some major un-
certainties and qualifications. Both the pace of China's economic
growth and the scale of foreign investment in China—each among
the highest in the world—provide the statistical basis for the con-
ventional prognosis that within two decades or so China will be-
come a global power, roughly on a par with the United States and
Europe (assuming that the latter both unites and expands further).
China might by then have a GDP considerably in excess of Japan's,
and it already exceeds Russia's by a significant margin. That eco-
nomic momentum should permit China to acquire military power
on a scale that will be intimidating to all its neighbors, perhaps
even to the more geographically distant opponents of China's aspi-
rations. Further strengthened by the incorporation of Hong Kong
and Macao, and perhaps also eventually by the political subordina-
tion of Taiwan, a Greater China will emerge not only as the domi-
nant state in the Far East but as a world power of the first rank.
However, there are pitfalls in any such prognosis for the "Mid-
dle Kingdom's" inevitable resurrection as a central global power,
the most obvious of which pertains to the mechanical reliance on
statistical projection. That very error was made not long ago by
those who prophesied that Japan would supplant the United
States as the world's leading economy and that Japan was des-
tined to be the new superstate. That perspective failed to take into


--- PAGE 168 ---
160 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
account both the factor of Japan's economic vulnerability and the
problem of political discontinuity—and the same error is being
made by those who proclaim, and also fear, the inevitable emer-
gence of China as a world power.
First of all, it is far from certain that China's explosive growth
rates can be maintained over the next two decades. An economic
slowdown cannot be excluded, and that by itself would discredit
the conventional prognosis. In fact, for these rates to be sustained
over a historically long period of time would require an unusually
felicitous combination of effective national leadership, political
tranquillity, domestic social discipline, high rates of savings, con-
tinued very high inflow of foreign investment, and regional stabil-
ity. A prolonged combination of all of these positive factors is
problematic.
Moreover, China's fast pace of growth is likely to produce polit-
ical side effects that could limit its freedom of action. Chinese con-
sumption of energy is already expanding at a rate that far exceeds
domestic production. That excess will widen in any case, but espe-
cially so if China's rate of growth continues to be very high. The
same is the case with food. Even given the slowdown in China's de-
mographic growth, the Chinese population is still increasing in
large absolute numbers, with food imports becoming more essen-
tial to internal well-being and political stability. Dependence on im-
ports will not only impose strains on Chinese economic resources
because of higher costs, but they will also make China more vul-
nerable to external pressures.
Militarily, China might partially qualify as a global power, since
the very size of its economy and its high growth rates should en-
able its rulers to divert a significant ratio of the country's GDP to
sustain a major expansion and modernization of China's armed
forces, including a further buildup of its strategic nuclear arsenal.
However, if that effort is excessive (and according to some West-
ern estimates, in the mid-1990s it was already consuming about 20
percent of China's GDP), it could have the same negative effect on
China's long-term economic growth that the failed attempt by the
Soviet Union to compete in the arms race with the United States
had on the Soviet economy. Furthermore, a major Chinese effort in
this area would be likely to precipitate a countervailing Japanese
arms buildup, thereby negating some of the political benefits of


--- PAGE 169 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 161
China's growing military prowess. And one must not ignore the
fact that outside of its nuclear forces, China is likely to lack the
means, for some time to come, to project its military power be-
yond its regional perimeter.
Tensions within China could also intensify, as a result of the
inevitable unevenness of highly accelerated economic growth,
driven heavily by the uninhibited exploitation of marginal advan-
tages. The coastal South and East as well as the principal urban
centers—more accessible to foreign investment and overseas
trade—have so far been the major beneficiaries of China's im-
pressive economic growth. In contrast, the inland rural areas in
general and some of the outlying regions have lagged (with up-
ward of 100 million rural unemployed).
The resulting resentment over regional disparities could begin
to interact with anger over social inequality. China's rapid growth
is widening the social gap in the distribution of wealth. At some
point, either because the government may seek to limit such differ-
ences or because of social resentment from below, the regional dis-
parities and the wealth gap could in turn impact on the country's
political stability.
The second reason for cautious skepticism regarding the wide-
spread prognoses of China's emergence during the next quarter of
a century as a dominating power in global affairs is, indeed, the fu-
ture of China's politics. The dynamic character of China's nonsta-
tist economic transformation, including its social openness to the
rest of the world, is not mutually compatible in the long run with a
relatively closed and bureaucratically rigid Communist dictator-
ship. The proclaimed communism of that dictatorship is progres-
sively less a matter of ideological commitment and more a matter
of bureaucratic vested interest. The Chinese political elite remains
organized as a self-contained, rigid, disciplined, and monopolisti-
cally intolerant hierarchy, still ritualistically proclaiming its fidelity
to a dogma that is said to justify its power but that the same elite is
no longer implementing socially. At some point, these two dimen-
sions of life will collide head-on, unless Chinese politics begin to
adapt gradually to the social imperatives of China's economics.
Thus, the issue of democratization cannot be evaded indefi-
nitely, unless China suddenly makes the same decision it made in
the year 1474: to isolate itself from the world, somewhat like con-


--- PAGE 170 ---
162 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
temporary North Korea. To do that, China would have to recall its
more than seventy thousand students currently studying in Amer-
ica, expel foreign businessmen, shut down its computers, and tear
down satellite dishes from millions of Chinese homes. It would be
an act of madness, reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution. Perhaps
for a brief moment, in the context of a domestic struggle for power,
a dogmatic wing of the ruling but fading Chinese Communist Party
might attempt to emulate North Korea, but it could not be more
than a brief episode. More likely than not, it would produce eco-
nomic stagnation and then prompt a political explosion.
In any case, self-isolation would mean the end of any serious
Chinese aspirations not only to global power but even to regional
primacy. Moreover, the country has too much of a stake in access
to the world, and that world, unlike that of 1474, is simply too in-
trusive to be effectively excluded. There is thus no practical, eco-
nomically productive, and politically viable alternative to China's
continued openness to the world.
Democratization will thus increasingly haunt China. Neither
that issue nor the related question of human rights can be evaded
for too long. China's future progress, as well as its emergence as a
major power, will thus depend to a large degree on how skillfully
the ruling Chinese elite handles the two related problems of power
succession from the present generation of rulers to a younger
team and of coping with the growing tension between the coun-
try's economic and political systems.
The Chinese leaders might perhaps succeed in promoting a
slow and evolutionary transition to a very limited electoral author-
itarianism, in which some low-level political choice is tolerated,
and only thereafter move toward more genuine political pluralism,
including more emphasis on incipient constitutional rule. Such a
controlled transition would be more compatible with the impera-
tives of the increasingly open economic dynamics of the country
than persistence in maintaining exclusive Party monopoly on polit-
ical power.
To accomplish such controlled democratization, the Chinese
political elite will have to be led with extraordinary skill, guided by
pragmatic common sense, and stay relatively united and willing to
yield some of its monopoly on power (and personal privilege)—
while the population at large will have to be both patient and un-


--- PAGE 171 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 163
demanding. That combination of felicitous circumstances may
prove difficult to attain. Experience teaches that pressures for
democratization from below, either from those who have felt
themselves politically suppressed (intellectuals and students) or
economically exploited (the new urban labor class and the rural
poor), generally tend to outpace the willingness of rulers to
yield. At some point, the politically and the socially disaffected in
China are likely to join forces in demanding more democracy,
freedom of expression, and respect for human rights. That did
not happen in Tiananmen Square in 1989, but it might well hap-
pen the next time.
Accordingly, it is unlikely that China will be able to avoid a
phase of political unrest. Given its size, the reality of growing re-
gional differences, and the legacy of some fifty years of doctrinal
dictatorship, such a phase could be disruptive both politically and
economically. Even the Chinese leaders themselves seem to ex-
pect as much, with internal Communist Party studies undertaken
in the early 1990s foreseeing potentially serious political unrest.1
Some China experts have even prophesied that China might spin
into one of its historic cycles of internal fragmentation, thereby
halting China's march to greatness altogether. But the probability
of such an extreme eventuality is diminished by the twin impacts
of mass nationalism and modern communications, both of which
work in favor of a unified Chinese state.
There is, finally, a third reason for skepticism regarding the
prospects of China's emergence in the course of the next twenty or
so years as a truly major—and to some Americans, already menac-
ing—global power. Even if China avoids serious political disrup-
tions and even if it somehow manages to sustain its extraordinarily
high rates of economic growth over a quarter of a century—which
are both rather big "ifs"—China would still be relatively very poor.
Even a tripling of GDP would leave China's population in the lower
ranks of the world's nations in per capita income, not to mention
'"Official Document Anticipates Disorder During the Post-Deng Period,™
Cheng Ming (Hong Kong), February 1, 1995, provides a detailed summary of
two analyses prepared lor the Party leadership concerning various forms of
potential unrest. A Western perspective on the same topic is contained in
Richard Baum, "China Alter Deng; Ten Scenarios in Search of Reality," China
Quarterly (March 1996).


--- PAGE 172 ---
164 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
the actual poverty of a significant portion of its people.2 Its com-
parative standing in per capita access to telephones, cars, and
computers, let alone consumer goods, would be very low.
To sum up: even by the year 2020, it is quite unlikely even un-
der the best of circumstances that China could become truly com-
petitive in the key dimensions of global power. Even so, however,
China is well on the way to becoming the preponderant regional
power in East Asia. It is already geopoiitically dominant on the
mainland. Its military and economic power dwarfs its immediate
neighbors, with the exception of India. It is, therefore, only natural
that China will increasingly assert itself regionally, in keeping with
the dictates of its history, geography, and economics.
Chinese students of their country's history know that as re-
cently as 1840, China's imperial sway extended throughout South-
east Asia, all the way down to the Strait of Malacca, including
Burma, parts of today's Bangladesh as well as Nepal, portions of
today's Kazakstan, all of Mongolia, and the region that today is
called the Russian Far Eastern Province, north of where the Amur
River flows into the ocean (see map on page 14 in chapter 1).
These areas were either under some form of Chinese control or
paid tribute to China. Franco-British colonial expansion ejected
Chinese influence from Southeast Asia during the years 1885-95,
while two treaties imposed by Russia in 1858 and 1864 resulted in
territorial losses in the Northeast and Northwest. In 1895, follow-
ing the Sino-Japanese War, China also lost Taiwan.
It is almost certain that history and geography will make the
Chinese increasingly insistent—even emotionally charged—re-
garding the necessity of the eventual reunification of Taiwan with
the mainland. It is also reasonable to assume that China, as its
power grows, will make that goal its principal objective during the
first decade of the next century, following the economic absorp-
tion and political digestion of Hong Kong. Perhaps a peaceful re-
unification—maybe under a formula of "one nation, several
2In the somewhat optimistic report titled "China's Economy Toward the
21st Century" (Zou xiang 21 shiji de Zhongguo jinji), issued in 1996 by the
Chinese Institute for Quantitative Economic and Technological Studies, it
was estimated that the per capita income in China in 2010 will be approxi-
mately S735, or less than $30 higher than the World Bank definition of a low-
income country.


--- PAGE 173 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 165
systems" (a variant of Deng Xiaoping's 1984 slogan "one country,
two systems")—might become appealing to Taiwan and would not
be resisted by America, but only if China has been successful in
sustaining its economic progress and adopting significant democ-
ratizing reforms. Otherwise, even a regionally dominant China is
still likely to lack the military means to impose its will, especially
in the face of American opposition, in which case the issue is
bound to continue galvanizing Chinese nationalism while souring
American-Chinese relations.
Geography is also an important factor driving the Chinese in-
terest in making an alliance with Pakistan and establishing a mili-
tary presence in Burma. In both cases, India is the geostrategic
target. Close military cooperation with Pakistan increases India's
security dilemmas and limits India's ability to establish itself as
the regional hegemon in South Asia and as a geopolitical rival to
China. Military cooperation with Burma gains China access to
naval facilities on several Burmese offshore islands in the Indian
Ocean, thereby also providing some further strategic leverage in
Southeast Asia generally and in the Strait of Malacca particularly.
And if China were to control the Strait of Malacca and the
geostrategic choke point at Singapore, it would control Japan's ac-
cess to Middle Eastern oil and European markets.
Geography, reinforced by history, also dictates China's interest
in Korea. At one time a tributary state, a reunited Korea as an ex-
tension of American (and indirectly also of Japanese) influence
would be intolerable to China. At the very minimum, China would
insist that a reunited Korea be a nonaligned buffer between China
and Japan and would also expect that the historically rooted Ko-
rean animosity toward Japan would of itself draw Korea into the
Chinese sphere of influence. For the time being, however, a divided
Korea suits China best, and thus China is likely to favor the contin-
ued existence of the North Korean regime.
Economic considerations are also bound to influence the
thrust of China's regional ambitions. In that regard, the rapidly
growing demand for new energy sources has already made China
insistent on a dominant role in any regional exploitation of the
seabed deposits of the South China Sea. For the same reason,
China is beginning to display an increasing interest in the indepen-
dence of the energy-rich Central Asian states. In April 1996, China,


--- PAGE 174 ---
166 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Russia, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan signed a joint border
and security agreement; and during President Jiang Zemin's visit
to Kazakstan in July of the same year, the Chinese side was quoted
as having provided assurances of China's support for "the efforts
made by Kazakstan to defend its independence, sovereignty, and
territorial integrity." The foregoing clearly signaled China's grow-
ing involvement in the geopolitics of Central Asia.
History and economics also conspire to increase the interest
of a regionally more powerful China in Russia's Far East. For the
first time since China and Russia have come to share a formal
border, China is the economically more dynamic and politically
stronger party. Seepage into the Russian area by Chinese immi-
grants and traders has already assumed significant proportions,
and China is becoming more active in promoting Northeast Asian
economic cooperation that also engages Japan and Korea. In that
cooperation, Russia now holds a much weaker card, while the
Russian Far East increasingly becomes economically dependent
on closer links with China's Manchuria, Similar economic forces
are also at work in China's relations with Mongolia, which is no
longer a Russian satellite and whose formal independence China
has reluctantly recognized.
A Chinese sphere of regional influence is thus in the making. A
sphere of influence, however, should not be confused with a zone
of exclusive political domination, such as the Soviet Union exer-
cised in Eastern Europe. It is socioeconomically more porous and
politically less monopolistic. Nonetheless, it entails a geographic
space in which its various states, when formulating their own poli-
cies, pay special deference to the interests, views, and anticipated
reactions of the regionally predominant power. In brief, a Chinese
sphere of influence—perhaps a sphere of deference would be a
more accurate formulation—can be defined as one in which the
very first question asked in the various capitals regarding any
given issue is "What is Beijing's view on this?"
The map that follows traces out the potential range over the
next quarter of a century of a regionally dominant China and also
of China as a global power, in the event that—despite the internal
and external obstacles already noted—China should actually be-
come one. A regionally dominant Greater China, which would mo-
bilize the political support of its enormously rich and economically


--- PAGE 175 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 167
powerful diaspora in Singapore, Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Manila,
and Jakarta, not to speak of Taiwan and Hong Kong (see footnote
below for some startling data)3 and which would penetrate into
both Central Asia and the Russian Far East, would thus approxi-
mate in its radius the scope of the Chinese Empire before the onset
of its decline some 150 years ago, even expanding its geopolitical
range through the alliance with Pakistan. As China rises in power
and prestige, the wealthy overseas Chinese are likely to identify
themselves more and more with China's aspirations and will thus
become a powerful vanguard of China's imperial momentum. The
Southeast Asian states may find it prudent to defer to China's polit-
'According to Yazhou Zhoukan (Asiaweek), September 25, 1994, the ag-
gregate assets of the 500 leading Chinese-owned companies in Southeast
Asia totaled about $540 billion. Other estimates are even higher: Interna-
tional Economy, November/December 1996, reported that the annual in-
come of the 50 million overseas Chinese was approximately the above


--- PAGE 176 ---
168 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
ical sensitivities and economic interests—and they are increas-
ingly doing so/ Similarly, the new Central Asian states increasingly
view China as a power that has a stake in their independence and
in their role as buffers between China and Russia.
The scope of China as a global power would most probably in-
volve a significantly deeper southern bulge, with both Indonesia
and the Philippines compelled to adjust to the reality of the Chi-
nese navy as the dominant force in the South China Sea. Such a
China might be much more tempted to resolve the issue of Taiwan
by force, irrespective of America's attitude. In the West, Uzbek-
istan, the Central Asian state most determined to resist Russian
encroachments on its former imperial domain, might favor a coun-
tervailing alliance with China, as might Turkmenistan; and China
might also become more assertive in the ethnically divided and
thus nationally vulnerable Kazakstan. A China that becomes truly
both a political and an economic giant might also project more
overt political influence into the Russian Far East, while sponsor-
ing Korea's unification under its aegis (see map on page 167).
But such a bloated China would also be more likely to en-
counter strong external opposition. The previous map makes it ev-
ident that in the West, both Russia and India would have good
geopolitical reasons to ally in seeking to push back China's chal-
lenge. Cooperation between them would be likely to focus heavily
amount and thus roughly equal to the GDP of China's mainland. The over-
seas Chinese were said to control about 90 percent of Indonesia's economy,
75 percent of Thailand's, 50-60 percent of Malaysia's, and the whole econ-
omy in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore. Concern over this condition
even led a former Indonesian ambassador to Japan to warn publicly of a
"Chinese economic intervention in the region," which might not only exploit
such Chinese presence but which could even lead to Chinese-sponsored
"puppet governments" (Saydiman Suryohadiprojo, "How to Deal with China
and Taiwan," Asahi Shimbun [Tokyo], September 23,1996).
^Symptomatic in that regard was the report published in the Bangkok
English-language daily, The Nation (March 31, 1997), on the visit to Beijing
by the Thai Prime Minister, Chavalit Yongchaiyudh. The purpose of the visit
was defined as establishing a firm strategic alliance with "Greater China."
The Thai leadership was said to have "recognized China as a superpower
that has a global role," and as wishing to serve as "a bridge between China
and ASEAN." Singapore has gone even farther in stressing its identification
with China.


--- PAGE 177 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 169
on Central Asia and Pakistan, whence China would threaten their
interests the most. In the south, opposition would be strongest
from Vietnam and Indonesia (probably backed by Australia). In the
east, America, probably backed by Japan, would react adversely to
any Chinese efforts to gain predominance in Korea and to incorpo-
rate Taiwan by force, actions that would reduce the American po-
litical presence in the Far East to a potentially unstable and
solitary perch in Japan.
Ultimately, the probability of either scenario sketched out on
the maps fully coming to pass depends not only on how China it-
self develops but also very much on American conduct and pres-
ence. A disengaged America would make the second scenario
much more likely, but even the comprehensive emergence of the
first would require some American accommodation and self-re-
straint. The Chinese know this, and hence Chinese policy has to be
focused primarily on influencing both American conduct and, es-
pecially, the critical American-Japanese connection, with China's
other relationships manipulated tactically with that strategic con-
cern in mind.
China's principal objection to America relates less to what
America actually does than to what America currently is and
where it is. America is seen by China as the world's current hege-
mon, whose very presence in the region, based on its dominant
position in Japan, works to contain China's influence. In the words
of a Chinese analyst employed in the research arm of the Chinese
Foreign Ministry: "The U.S. strategic aim is to seek hegemony in
the whole world and it cannot tolerate the appearance of any big
power on the European and Asian continents that will constitute a
threat to its leading position."5 Hence, simply by being what it is
and where it is, America becomes China's unintentional adversary
rather than its natural ally.
Accordingly, the task of Chinese policy—in keeping with Sun
Tsu's ancient strategic wisdom—is to use American power to
'Song Yimin. "A Discussion of the Division and Grouping oi Forces in the
World After the End of the Coid War," Internationa! Studies (China Institute of
Internationa] Studies, Beijing) 6-8 (1996):10. That this assessment of Amer-
ica represents the view of China's top leadership is indicated by the fact
that a shorter version oi the analysis appeared in the mass-circulation offi-
cial organ of the Party, Renmin Ribao (People's Daily), April 29, 1996.


--- PAGE 178 ---
170 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
peacefully defeat American hegemony, but without unleashing any
latent Japanese regional aspirations. To that end, China's geostrat-
egy must pursue two goals simultaneously, as somewhat obliquely
defined in August 1994 by Deng Xiaoping: "First, to oppose hege-
monism and power politics and safeguard world peace; second, to
build up a new international political and economic order." The
first obviously targets the United States and has as its purpose the
reduction in American preponderance, while carefully avoiding a
military collision that would end China's drive for economic
power; the second seeks to revise the distribution of global power,
capitalizing on the resentment in some key states against the cur-
rent global pecking order, in which the United States is perched at
the top, supported by Europe (or Germany) in the extreme west of
Eurasia and by Japan in the extreme east.
China's second objective prompts Beijing to pursue a regional
geostrategy that seeks to avoid any serious conflicts with its im-
mediate neighbors, even while continuing its quest for regional
preponderance. A tactical improvement in Sino-Russian relations
is particularly timely, especially since Russia is now weaker than
China. Accordingly, in April 1997, both countries joined in de-
nouncing "hegemonism" and declaring NATO's expansion "imper-
missible." However, it is unlikely that China would seriously
consider any long-term and comprehensive Russo-Chinese alliance
against America. That would work to deepen and widen the scope
of the American-Japanese alliance, which China would like to di-
lute slowly, and it would also isolate China from critically impor-
tant sources of modern technology and capital.
As in Sino-Russian relations, it suits China to avoid any direct
collision with India, even while continuing to sustain its close mili-
tary cooperation with Pakistan and Burma. A policy of overt antag-
onism would have the negative effect of complicating China's
tactically expedient accommodation with Russia, while also push-
ing India toward a more cooperative relationship with America. To
the extent that India also shares an underlying and somewhat anti-
Western predisposition against the existing global "hegemony," a
reduction in Sino-Indian tensions is also in keeping with China's
broader geostrategic focus.
The same considerations generally apply to China's ongoing re-
lations with Southeast Asia. Even while unilaterally asserting their


--- PAGE 179 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 171
claims to the South China Sea, the Chinese have simultaneously
cultivated Southeast Asian leaders (with the exception of the his-
torically hostile Vietnamese), exploiting the more outspoken anti-
Western sentiments (particularly on the issue of Western values
and human rights) that in recent years have been voiced by the
leaders of Malaysia and Singapore. They have especially welcomed
the occasionally strident anti-American rhetoric of Prime Minister
Datuk Mahathir of Malaysia, who in a May 1996 forum in Tokyo
even publicly questioned the need for the U.S.-Japan Security
Treaty, demanding to know the identity of the enemy the alliance
is supposed to defend against and asserting that Malaysia does
not need allies. The Chinese clearly calculate that their influence
in the region will be automatically enhanced by any diminution of
America's standing.
In a similar vein, patient pressure appears to be the motif of
China's current policy toward Taiwan. While adopting an uncom-
promising position with regard to Taiwan's international status—
to the point of even being willing to deliberately generate
international tensions in order to convey China's seriousness on
this matter (as in March 1996)—the Chinese leaders presumably
realize that for the time being they will continue to lack the power
to compel a satisfactory solution. They realize that a premature re-
liance on force would only serve to precipitate a self-defeating
clash with America, while strengthening America's role as the re-
gional guarantor of peace. Moreover, the Chinese themselves ac-
knowledge that how effectively Hong Kong is first absorbed into
China will greatly determine the prospects for the emergence of a
Greater China.
The accommodation that has been taking place in China's rela-
tions with South Korea is also an integral part of the policy of con-
solidating its flanks in order to be able to concentrate more
effectively on the central goal. Given Korean history and public
emotions, a Sino-Korean accommodation of itself contributes to a
reduction in Japan's potential regional role and prepares the
ground for the reemergence of the more traditional relationship
between China and (either a reunited or a still-divided) Korea.
Most important, the peaceful enhancement of China's regional
standing will facilitate the pursuit of the central objective, which
ancient China's strategist Sun Tsu might have formulated as fol-


--- PAGE 180 ---
172 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
lows: to dilute American regional power to the point that a dimin-
ished America will come to need a regionally dominant China as its
ally and eventually even a globally powerful China as its partner.
This goal is to be sought and accomplished in a manner that does
not precipitate either a defensive expansion in the scope of the
American-Japanese alliance or the regional replacement of Amer-
ica's power by that of Japan.
To attain the central objective, in the short run, China seeks to
prevent the consolidation and expansion of American-Japanese se-
curity cooperation. China was particularly alarmed at the implied
increase in early 1996 in the range of U.S.-Japanese security coop-
eration from the narrower "Far East" to a wider "Asia-Pacific," per-
ceiving in it not only an immediate threat to China's interests but
also the point of departure for an American-dominated Asian sys-
tem of security aimed at containing China (in which Japan would
be the vital linchpin,6 much as Germany was in NATO during the
Cold War). The agreement was generally perceived in Beijing as fa-
cilitating Japan's eventual emergence as a major military power,
perhaps even capable of relying on force to resolve outstanding
economic or maritime disputes on its own. China thus is likely to
fan energetically the still strong Asian fears of any significant
Japanese military role in the region, in order to restrain America
and intimidate Japan.
However, in the longer run, according to China's strategic cal-
culus, American hegemony cannot last. Although some Chinese,
especially among the military, tend to view America as China's im-
fiAn elaborate examination of America's alleged intent to construct such
an anti-China Asian system is contained in Wang Chunyin, "Looking Ahead
to Asia-Pacific Security in the Early Twenty-first Century," Guoji Zhanwang
(World Outlook), February 1996.
Another Chinese commentator argued that the American-Japanese security
arrangement has been altered from a "shield of defense" aimed at containing
Soviet power to a "spear of attack" pointed at China (Yang Baijiang, "Implica-
tions of Japan-U.S. Security Declaration Outlined," Xiandai Guoji Guanxi [Con-
temporary International Relations], June 20, 1996). On January 31, 1997, the
authoritative daily organ of the Chinese Communist Party, Renmin Ribao, pub-
lished an article entitled "Strengthening Military Alliance Does Not Conform
with Trend of the Times," In which the redefinition of the scope of the U.S.-
Japanese military cooperation was denounced as "a dangerous move."


--- PAGE 181 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 173
placable foe, the predominant expectation in Beijing is that Amer-
ica will become regionally more isolated because of its excessive
reliance on Japan and that consequently America's dependence on
Japan will grow even further, but so will American-Japanese con-
tradictions and American fears of Japanese militarism. That will
then make it possible for China to play off America and Japan
against each other, as China did earlier in the case of the United
States and the Soviet Union. In Beijing's view, the time will come
when America will realize that—to remain an influential Asia-Pa-
cific power—it has no choice but to turn to its natural partner on
the Asian mainland.
JAPAN: NOT REGIONAL BUT INTERNATIONAL
How the American-Japanese relationship evolves is thus a critical
dimension in China's geopolitical future. Since the end of the Chi-
nese civil war in 1949, America's policy in the Far East has been
based on Japan. At first only the site for the occupying American
military, Japan has since become the basis for America's political-
military presence in the Asia-Pacific region and America's centrally
important global ally, yet also a security protectorate. The emer-
gence of China, however, does pose the question whether—and to
what end—the close American-Japanese relationship can endure
in the altering regional context. Japan's role in an anti-China al-
liance would be clear; but what should Japan's role be if China's
rise is to be accommodated in some fashion even as it reduces
America's primacy in the region?
Like China, Japan is a nation-state with a deeply ingrained
sense of its unique character and special status. Its insular history,
even its imperial mythology, has predisposed the highly industri-
ous and disciplined Japanese people to see themselves as en-
dowed with a distinctive and superior way of life, which Japan first
defended by splendid isolation and ft*"", when the world imposed
itself in the nineteenth century, by emulating the European em-
pires in seeking to create one of its own on the Asian mainland.
The disaster of World War II then focused the Japanese people on


--- PAGE 182 ---
174 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
the one-dimensional goal of economic recovery, but it also left
them uncertain regarding their country's wider mission.
Current American fears of a dominant China are reminiscent of
the relatively recent American paranoia regarding Japan. Japanopho-
bia has now yielded to Sinophobia. A mere decade ago, predictions
of Japan's inevitable and imminent appearance as the world's "super-
state"—poised not only to dethrone America (even to buy it out!) but
to impose some sort of a "Pax Nipponica"—were a veritable cottage
industry among American commentators and politicians. But not
only among the Americans. The Japanese themselves soon became
eager imitators, with a series of best-sellers in Japan propounding
the thesis that Japan was destined to prevail in its high-tech rivalry
with the United States and that Japan would soon become the center
of a global "information empire," while America was allegedly sliding
into a decline because of historical fatigue and social self-indulgence.
These facile analyses obscured the degree to which Japan was,
and remains, a vulnerable country. It is vulnerable to the slightest
disruptions in the orderly global flow of resources and trade, not
to mention global stability more generally, and it is beset by sur-
facing domestic weaknesses—demographic, social, and political.
Japan is simultaneously rich, dynamic, and economically power-
ful, but it is also regionally isolated and politically limited by its se-
curity dependence on a powerful ally that happens to be the
principal keeper of global stability (on which Japan so depends) as
well as Japan's main economic rival.
It is unlikely that Japan's current position—on the one hand, as
a globally respected economic powerhouse and, on the other, as a
geopolitical extension of American power—will remain acceptable
to the new generations of Japanese, no longer traumatized and
shamed by the experience of World War II. For reasons of both his-
tory and self-esteem, Japan is a country not entirely satisfied with
the global status quo, though in a more subdued fashion than
China. It feels, with some justification, that it is entitled to formal
recognition as a world power but is also aware that the regionally
useful (and, to its Asian neighbors, reassuring) security depen-
dence on America inhibits that recognition.
Moreover, China's growing power on the mainland of Asia, along
with the prospect that its influence may soon radiate into the mari-
time regions of economic importance to Japan, intensifies the


--- PAGE 183 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 175
Japanese sense of ambiguity regarding the country's geopolitical
future. On the one hand, there is in Japan a strong cultural and
emotional identification with China as well as a latent sense of a
common Asian identity. Some Japanese may also feel that the emer-
gence of a stronger China has the expedient effect of enhancing
Japan's importance to the United States as America's regional para-
mountcy is reduced. On the other hand, for many Japanese, China
is the traditional rival, a former enemy, and a potential threat to the
stability of the region. That makes the security tie with America
more important than ever, even If it increases the resentment of
some of the more nationalistic Japanese concerning the irksome re-
straints on Japan's political and military independence.
There is a superficial similarity between Japan's situation in
Eurasia's Far East and Germany's in Eurasia's Far West. Both are the
principal regional allies of the United States. Indeed, American
power in Europe and Asia is derived directly from the close al-
liances with these two countries. Both have respectable military es-
tablishments, but neither is independent in that regard: Germany is
constrained by its military integration into NATO, while Japan is re-
stricted by its own (though American-designed) constitutional limi-
tations and the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty. Both are trade and
financial powerhouses, regionally dominant and also preeminent
on the global scale. Both can be classified as quasi-global powers,
and both chafe at the continuing denial to them of formal recogni-
tion through permanent seats on the UN Security Council.
But the differences in their respective geopolitical conditions
are pregnant with potentially significant consequences. Germany's
actual relationship with NATO places the country on a par with its
principal European allies, and under the North Atlantic Treaty,
Germany has formal reciprocal defense obligations with the United
States. The U.S.-Japan Security Treaty stipulates American obliga-
tions to defend Japan, but it does not provide (even if only for-
mally) for the use of the Japanese military in the defense of
America. The treaty in effect codifies a protective relationship.
Moreover, Germany, by its proactive membership in the Euro-
pean Union and NATO, is no longer seen as a threat by those neigh-
bors who in the past were victims of its aggression but is viewed
instead as a desirable economic and political partner. Some even
welcome the potential emergence of a German-led Mitteleuropa,


--- PAGE 184 ---
176 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
with Germany seen as a benign regional power. That is far from the
case with Japan's Asian neighbors, who harbor lingering animosity
toward Japan over World War II. A contributing factor to neigh-
borly resentment is the appreciation of the yen, which has not
only prompted bitter complaints but has impeded reconciliation
with Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, and even China, 30 per-
cent of whose large long-term debts to Japan are in yen.
Japan also has no equivalent in Asia to Germany's France: that
is, a genuine and more or less equal regional partner. There is ad-
mittedly a strong cultural attraction to China, mingled perhaps
with a sense of guilt, but that attraction is politically ambiguous in
that neither side trusts the other and neither is prepared to accept
the other's regional leadership. Japan also has no equivalent to
Germany's Poland: that is, a much weaker but geopolitically impor-
tant neighbor with whom reconciliation and even cooperation is
becoming a reality. Perhaps Korea, especially so after eventual re-
unification, could become that equivalent, but Japanese-Korean re-
lations are only formally good, with the Korean memories of past
domination and the Japanese sense of cultural superiority imped-
ing any genuine social reconciliation.7 Finally, Japan's relations
with Russia have been much cooler than Germany's. Russia still re-
tains the southern Kuril Islands by force, which it seized just be-
fore the end of World War II, thereby freezing the Russo-Japanese
relationship. In brief, Japan is politically isolated in its region,
whereas Germany is not.
In addition, Germany shares with its neighbors both common
democratic principles and Europe's broader Christian heritage. It
also seeks to identify and even sublimate itself within an entity
and a cause larger than itself, namely, that of "Europe." In con-
trast, there is no comparable "Asia." Indeed, Japan's insular past
and even its current democratic system tend to separate it from
the rest of the region, in spite of the emergence in recent years of
democracy in several Asian countries. Many Asians view Japan
not only as nationally selfish but also as overly imitative of the
West and reluctant to join them in questioning the West's views
T/ie Japan Digest, February 25, 1997, reported that, according to a gov-
ernmental poll, only 36 percent of the Japanese felt friendly toward South
Korea.


--- PAGE 185 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 177
on human rights and on the importance of individualism. Thus,
Japan is perceived as not truly Asian by many Asians, even as the
West occasionally wonders to what degree Japan has truly be-
come Western.
In effect, though in Asia, Japan is not comfortably Asian. That
condition greatly limits its geostrategic options. A genuinely re-
gional option, that of a regionally preponderant Japan that over-
shadows China—even if no longer based on Japanese domination
but rather on benign Japanese-led regional cooperation—does not
seem viable for solid historical, political,, and cultural reasons. Fur-
thermore, Japan remains dependent on American military protec-
tion and international sponsorship. The abrogation or even the
gradual emasculation of the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty would ren-
der Japan instantly vulnerable to the disruptions that any serious
manifestation of regional or global turmoil might produce. The
only alternatives then would be either to accept China's regional
predominance or to undertake a massive—and not only costly but
also very dangerous—program of military rearmament.
Understandably, many Japanese find their country's present
position—simultaneously a quasi-global power and a security pro-
tectorate—to be anomalous. But dramatic and viable alternatives to
the existing arrangements are not self-evident. If it can be said that
China's national goals, notwithstanding the inescapable variety of
views among the Chinese strategists on specific aspects, are reason-
ably clear and the regional thrust of China's geopolitical ambitions
relatively predictable, Japan's geostrategic vision tends to be rela-
tively cloudy and the Japanese public mood much more ambiguous.
Most Japanese realize that a strategically significant and ab-
rupt change of course could be dangerous. Can Japan become a re-
gional power in a region where it is still the object of resentment
and where China is emerging as the regionally preeminent power?
Yet should Japan simply acquiesce in such a Chinese role? Can
Japan become a truly comprehensive global power (in all its di-
mensions) without jeopardizing American support and galvanizing
even more regional animosity? And will America, in any case, stay
put in Asia, and if it does, how will its reaction to China's growing
influence impinge on the priority so far given to the American-
Japanese connection? For most of the Cold War, none of these
questions ever had to be raised. Today, they have become strategi-


--- PAGE 186 ---
178 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
cally salient and are propelling an increasingly lively debate in
Japan.
Since the 1950s, Japanese foreign policy has been guided by
four basic principles promulgated by postwar Prime Minister
Shigeru Yoshida. The Yoshida Doctrine postulated that (1) Japan's
main goal should be economic development, (2) Japan should be
lightly armed and should avoid involvement in international con-
flicts, (3) Japan should follow the political leadership of and ac-
cept military protection from the United States, and (4) Japanese
diplomacy should he nonideological and should focus on interna-
tional cooperation. However, since many Japanese also felt uneasy
about the extent of Japan's involvement in the Cold War, the fiction
of semineutrality was simultaneously cultivated. Indeed, as late as
1981, Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ito was forced to resign for hav-
ing permitted the term "alliance" (domef) to be used in character-
izing U.S.-Japan relations.
That is now ail past. Japan was then recovering, China was self-
isolated, and Eurasia was polarized. By contrast, Japan's political
elite now senses that a rich Japan, economically involved in the
world, can no longer define self-enrichment as its central national
purpose without provoking international resentment. Further, an
economically powerful Japan, especially one that competes with
America, cannot simply be an extension of American foreign policy
while at the same time avoiding any international political respon-
sibilities. A politically more influential Japan, especially one that
seeks global recognition (for example, a permanent seat on the UN
Security Council), cannot avoid taking stands on the more critical
security or geopolitical issues affecting world peace.
As a result, recent years have seen a proliferation of special
studies and reports by a variety of Japanese public and private
bodies, as well as a plethora of often controversial books by well-
known politicians and professors, outlining new missions for
Japan in the post-Cold War era.8 Many of these have involved
"For example, the Higuchi Commission, a prime-ministerial advisory
board that outlined the "Three Pillars of Japanese Security Policy" in a re-
port issued in the summer of 1994, stressed the primacy of the American-
Japanese security ties but also advocated an Asian multilateral security
dialogue; the 1994 Ozawa Committee report, "Blueprint for a New Japan";


--- PAGE 187 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 179
speculation regarding the durability and desirability of the Ameri-
can-Japanese security alliance and have advocated a more active
Japanese diplomacy, especially toward China, or a more energetic
Japanese military role in the region. If one were to judge the state
of the American-Japanese connection on the basis of the public di-
alogue, one would be justified in concluding that by the mid-1990s
relations between the two countries had entered a crisis stage.
However, on the level of public policy, the seriously discussed
recommendations have been, on the whole, relatively sober, mea-
sured, and moderate. The extreme options—that of outright paci-
fism (tinged with an anti-U.S. flavor) or of unilateral and major
rearmament (requiring a revision of the Constitution and pursued
presumably in defiance of an adverse American and regional reac-
tion)—have won few adherents. The public appeal of pacifism has,
if anything, waned in recent years, and unilateralism and mili-
tarism have also failed to gain much public support, despite the
advocacy of some flamboyant spokesmen. The public at large and
certainly the influential business elite visceraliy sense that neither
option provides a real policy choice and, in fact, could only endan-
ger Japan's well-being.
The politically dominant public discussions have primarily in-
volved differences in emphasis regarding Japan's basic interna-
the Yomiuri Shimbun 's outline for "A Comprehensive Security Policy" of May
1995, advocating among other items the use abroad of the Japanese military
for peacekeeping; the April 1996 report of the Japan Association of Corpo-
rate Executives (keizai doyukai), prepared with the assistance of the Fuji
Bank think tank, urging greater symmetry in the American-Japanese defense
system; the report entitled "Possibility and Role of a Security System in the
Asian-Pacific Region," submitted to the prime minister in June 1996 by the
Japan Forum on International Affairs; as well as numerous books and arti-
cles published over the last several years, often much more polemical and
extreme in their recommendations and more often cited by the Western me-
dia than the above-mentioned mostly mainstream reports. For example, in
1996 a book edited by a Japanese general evoked widespread press com-
mentaries when it dared to speculate that under some circumstances the
United States might fail to protect Japan and hence Japan should augment
its national defense capabilities (see General Yasuhiro Morino, ed., Next
Generation Ground Self-Defense Force and the commentary on it in "Myths of
the U.S. Coming to Our Aid," Sankei Shimbun, March 4, 1996).


--- PAGE 188 ---
180 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
tional posture, with some secondary variations concerning geopo-
litical priorities. In broad terms, three major orientations, and per-
haps a minor fourth one, can be identified and labeled as follows:
the unabashed "America Firsters," the global mercantilists, the
proactive realists, and the international visionaries. However, in
the final analysis, all four share the same rather general goal and
partake of the same central concern: to exploit the special relation-
ship with the United States in order to gain global recognition for
Japan, while avoiding Asian hostility and without prematurely jeop-
ardizing the American security umbrella.
The first orientation takes as its point of departure the proposi-
tion that the maintenance of the existing (and admittedly asym-
metrical) American-Japanese relationship should remain the
central core of Japan's geostrategy. Its adherents desire, as do
most Japanese, greater international recognition for Japan and
more equality in the alliance, but it is their cardinal article of faith,
as Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa put it in January 1993, that "the
outlook for the world going into the twenty-first century will
largely depend on whether or not Japan and the United States . ..
are able to provide coordinated leadership under a shared
vision." This viewpoint has been dominant within the interna-
tionalist political elite and the foreign policy establishment that
has held power over the course of the last two or so decades. On
the key geostrategic issues of China's regional role and America's
presence in Korea, that leadership has been supportive of the
United States, but it also sees its role as a source of restraint on
any American propensity to adopt a confrontationist posture to-
ward China. In fact, even this group has become increasingly in-
clined to emphasize the need for closer Japanese-Chinese
relations, ranking them in importance just below the ties with
America.
The second orientation does not contest the geostrategic iden-
tification of Japan's policy with America's, but it sees Japanese in-
terests as best served by the frank recognition and acceptance of
the fact that Japan is primarily an economic power. This outlook is
most often associated with the traditionally influential bureau-
cracy of the MfTI (Ministry of International Trade and Industry)
and with the country's trading and export business leadership. In
this view, Japan's relative demilitarization is an asset worth pre-


--- PAGE 189 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 181
serving. With America assuring the security of the country, Japan
is free to pursue a policy of global economic engagement, which
quietly enhances its global standing.
In an ideal world, the second orientation would be inclined to
favor a policy of at least de facto neutralism, with America offset-
ting China's regional power and thereby protecting Taiwan and
South Korea, thus making Japan free to cultivate a closer economic
relationship with the mainland and with Southeast Asia. However,
given the existing political realities, the global mercantilists accept
the American-Japanese alliance as a necessary arrangement, in-
cluding the relatively modest budgetary outlays for the Japanese
armed forces (still not much exceeding 1 percent of the country's
GDP), but they are not eager to infuse the alliance with any region-
ally significant substance.
The third group, the proactive realists, tend to be the new
breed of politicians and geopolitical thinkers. They believe that as
a rich and successful democracy Japan has both the opportunity
and the obligation to make a real difference in the post-Cold War
world. By doing so, it can also gain the global recognition to which
Japan is entitled as an economic powerhouse that historically
ranks among the world's few truly great nations. The appearance
of such a more muscular Japanese posture was foreshadowed in
the 1980s by Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, but perhaps the
best-known exposition of that perspective was contained in the
controversial Ozawa Committee report, published in 1994 and en-
titled suggestively "Blueprint for a New Japan: The Rethinking of a
Nation."
Named after the committee's chairman, Ichiro Ozawa, a rapidly
rising centrist political leader, the report advocated both a democ-
ratization of the country's hierarchical political culture and a re-
thinking of Japan's international posture. Urging Japan to become
"a normal country," the report recommended the retention of the
American-Japanese security connection but also counseled that
Japan should abandon its international passivity by becoming ac-
tively engaged in global politics, especially by taking the lead in in-
ternational peacekeeping efforts. To that end, the report
recommended that the country's constitutional limitations on the
dispatch abroad of Japanese armed forces be lifted.
Left unsaid but implied by the emphasis on "a normal country"


--- PAGE 190 ---
182 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
was also the notion of a more significant geopolitical emancipation
from America's security blanket. The advocates of this viewpoint
tended to argue that on matters of global importance, Japan
should not hesitate to speak up for Asia, instead of automatically
following the American lead. However, they remained characteris-
tically vague on such sensitive matters as the growing regional
role of China or the future of Korea, not differing much from their
more traditionalist colleagues. Thus, in regard to regional security,
they partook of the still strong Japanese inclination to let both
matters remain primarily the responsibility of America, with Japan
merely exercising a moderating role on any excessive American
zeal.
By the second half of the 1990s, this proactive realist orienta-
tion was beginning to dominate public thinking and affect the for-
mulation of Japanese foreign policy. In the first half of 1996, the
Japanese government started to speak of Japan's "independent
diplomacy" (jishu gaiko), even though the ever-cautious Japanese
Foreign Ministry chose to translate the Japanese phrase as the
vaguer (and to America presumably less pointed) term "proactive
diplomacy."
The fourth orientation, that of the international visionaries, has
been less influential than any of the preceding, but it occasionally
serves to infuse the Japanese viewpoint with more idealistic
rhetoric. It tends to be associated publicly with outstanding indi-
viduals—like Akio Morita of Sony—who personally dramatize the
importance to Japan of a demonstrative commitment to morally
desirable global goals. Often invoking the notion of "a new global
order," the visionaries call on Japan—precisely because it is not
burdened by geopolitical responsibilities—to be a global leader in
the development and advancement of a truly humane agenda for
the world community.
All four orientations are in agreement on one key regional is-
sue: that the emergence of more multilateral Asia-Pacific coopera-
tion is in Japan's interest. Such cooperation can have, over time,
three positive effects: it can help to engage (and also subtly to re-
strain) China; it can help to keep America in Asia, even while grad-
ually reducing its predominance; and it can help to mitigate
anti-Japanese resentment and thus increase Japan's influence. Al-
though it is unlikely to create a Japanese sphere of regional influ-


--- PAGE 191 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 183
ence, it might gain Japan some degree of regional deference, espe-
cially in the offshore maritime countries that may be uneasy over
China's growing power.
All four viewpoints also agree that a cautious cultivation of
China is much to be preferred over any American-led effort toward
the direct containment of China. In fact, the notion of an American-
led strategy to contain China, or even the idea of an informal bal-
ancing coalition confined to the island states of Taiwan, the
Philippines, Brunei, and Indonesia, backed by Japan and America,
has had no significant appeal for the Japanese foreign policy estab-
lishment. In the Japanese perspective, any effort of that sort would
not only require an indefinite and major American military pres-
ence in both Japan and Korea but—by creating an incendiary
geopolitical overlap between Chinese and American-Japanese re-
gional interests (see map on page 184)—would be likely to become
a self-fulfilling prophesy of a collision with China.9 The result would
be to inhibit Japan's evolutionary emancipation and threaten the
Far East's economic well-being.
By the same token, few favor the opposite: a grand accommo-
dation between Japan and China. The regional consequences of
such a classical reversal of alliances would be too unsettling: an
American withdrawal from the region as well as the prompt subor-
dination of both Taiwan and Korea to China, leaving Japan at
China's mercy. This is not an appealing prospect, save perhaps to a
few extremists. With Russia geopolitically marginalized and histor-
ically despised, there is thus no alternative to the basic consensus
that the link with America remains Japan's central lifeline. Without
it, Japan can neither ensure itself a steady supply of oil nor protect
itself from a Chinese (and perhaps soon, also a Korean) nuclear
bomb. The only real policy issue is how best to manipulate the
American connection in order to advance Japanese interests.
Accordingly, the Japanese have gone along with American de-
sires to enhance American-Japanese military cooperation, includ-
ing the seemingly increased scope from the more specific "Far
'Some conservative Japanese have been tempted by the notion of a spe-
cial Japan-Taiwan connection, and in 1996 a "Japan-Taiwan Parliamentari-
ans' Association" was formed to promote that goal The Chinese reaction
has been predictably hostile.


--- PAGE 192 ---
184 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
American -Japanese Anh-Cf*ina Coalition
Ov&iao wtfi dina as a Global Power
East" to a broader "Asia-Pacific formula." Consistent with this, in
early 1996 in its review of the so-called Japan-U.S. defense guide-
lines, the Japanese government also broadened its reference to the
possible use of Japanese defense forces from in "Far East emergen-
cies" to "emergencies in Japan's neighboring regions." Japanese
willingness to accommodate America on this matter has also been
driven by percolating doubts regarding America's long-term stay-
ing power in Asia and by concerns that China's rise—and Amer-
ica's seeming anxiety over it—could at some point in the future
still impose on Japan an unacceptable choice: to stand with Amer-
ica against China or without America and allied with China.
For Japan, that fundamental dilemma also contains a historic
imperative: since becoming a dominant regional power is not a vi-
able goal and since without a regional base the attainment of truly
comprehensive global power is unrealistic, it follows that Japan
can best attain the status of a global leader through active involve-


--- PAGE 193 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 185
ment in worldwide peacekeeping and economic development. By
taking advantage of the American-Japanese military alliance to en-
sure the stability of the Far East—but without letting it evolve into
an anti-Chinese coalition—Japan can safely carve out a distinctive
and influential global mission as the power that promotes the
emergence of genuinely international and more effectively institu-
tionalized cooperation. Japan could thus become a much more
powerful and globally influential equivalent of Canada: a state that
is respected for the constructive use of its wealth and power but
one that is neither feared nor resented. '
AMERICA'S GEOSTRATEGIC ADJUSTMENT
It should be the task of American policy to make certain that Japan
pursues such a choice and that China's rise to regional preemi-
nence does not preclude a stable triangular balance of East Asian
power. The effort to manage both Japan and China and to maintain
a stable three-way interaction that also involves America will se-
verely tax American diplomatic skills and political imagination.
Shedding past fixation on the threat allegedly posed by Japan's
economic ascension and eschewing fears of Chinese political mus-
cle could help to infuse cool realism into a policy that must be
based on careful strategic calculus: how to channel Japanese en-
ergy in the international direction and how to steer Chinese power
into a regional accommodation.
Only in this manner will America be able to forge on the east-
ern mainland of Eurasia a geopolitically congenial equivalent to
Europe's role on the western periphery of Eurasia, that is, a struc-
ture of regional power based on shared interests. However, unlike
the European case, a democratic bridgehead on the eastern main-
land will not soon emerge. Instead, in the Far East the redirected
alliance with Japan must also serve as the basis for an American
accommodation with a regionally preeminent China.
For America, several important geostrategic conclusions flow
from the analysis contained in the preceding two sections of this
chapter:
The prevailing wisdom that China is the next global power is
breeding paranoia about China and fostering megalomania within


--- PAGE 194 ---
186 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
China. Fears of an aggressive and antagonistic China that before
long is destined to be the next global power are, at best, prema-
ture; and, at worst, they can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. It fol-
lows that it would be counterproductive to organize a coalition
designed to contain China's rise to global power. That would only
ensure that a regionally influential China would be hostile. At the
same time, any such effort would strain the American-Japanese re-
lationship, since most Japanese would be likely to oppose such a
coalition. Accordingly, the United States should desist from press-
ing Japan to assume larger defense responsibilities in the Asia-Pa-
cific region. Efforts to that effect will merely hinder the emergence
of a stable relationship between Japan and China, while also fur-
ther isolating Japan in the region.
But precisely because China is in fact not likely to emerge soon
as a global power—and because for that very reason it would be
unwise to pursue a policy of China's regional containment—it is
desirable to treat China as a globally significant player. Drawing
China into wider international cooperation and granting it the sta-
tus it craves can have the effect of dulling the sharper edges of
China's national ambitions. An important step in that direction
would be to include China in the annual summit of the world's
leading countries, the so-called G-7 (Group of Seven), especially
since Russia has also been invited to it.
Despite appearances, China does not in fact have grand strate-
gic options. China's continued economic success remains heavily
dependent on the inflow of Western capital and technology and on
access to foreign markets, and that severely limits China's options.
An alliance with an unstable and impoverished Russia would not
enhance China's economic or geopolitical prospects (and for Rus-
sia it would mean subordination to China). It is thus not a viable
geostrategic option, even if it is tactically tempting for both China
and Russia to toy with the idea. Chinese aid to Iran and Pakistan is
of more immediate regional and geopolitical significance to China,
but that also does not provide the point of departure for a serious
quest for global power status. An "antihegemonic" coalition could
become a last-resort option if China came to feel that its national or
regional aspirations were being blocked by the United States (with
Japan's support). But it would be a coalition of the poor, who would
then be likely to remain collectively poor for quite some time.


--- PAGE 195 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 187
A Greater China is emerging as the regionally dominant power.
As such, it may attempt to impose itself on its neighbors in a man-
ner that is regionally destabilizing; or it may be satisfied with exer-
cising its influence more indirectly, in keeping with past Chinese
imperial history. Whether a hegemonic sphere of influence or a
vaguer sphere of deference emerges will depend in part on how
brutal and authoritarian the Chinese regime remains and in part
also on the manner in which the key outside players, notably
America and Japan, react to the emergence of a Greater China. A
policy of simple appeasement could encourage a more assertive
Chinese posture; but a policy of merely obstructing the emergence
of such a China would also be likely to produce a similar outcome.
Cautious accommodation on some issues and a precise drawing of
the line on others might avoid either extreme.
In any case, in some areas of Eurasia, a Greater China may exer-
cise a geopolitical influence that is compatible with America's
grand geostrategic interests in a stable but politically pluralistic
Eurasia. For example, China's growing interest in Central Asia in-
evitably constrains Russia's freedom of action in seeking to
achieve any form of political reintegration of the region under
Moscow's control. In this connection and as related to the Persian
Gulf, China's growing need for energy dictates a common interest
with America in maintaining free access to and political stability in
the oil-producing regions. Similarly, China's support for Pakistan
restrains India's ambitions to subordinate that country and offsets
India's inclination to cooperate with Russia in regard to
Afghanistan and Central Asia. Finally, Chinese and Japanese in-
volvement in the development of eastern Siberia can likewise help
to enhance regional stability. These common interests should be
explored through a sustained strategic dialogue.1"
There are also areas where Chinese ambitions might clash with
l0ln a meeting in 1996 with China's top national security and defense offi-
cials, I identified (using occasionally deliberately vague formulations) the
following areas ol common strategic interest as the basis for such a dia-
logue: (1) a peaceful Southeast Asia; (2) nonuse of force in the resolution of
offshore issues; (3) peaceful reunification of China; (4) stability in Korea; (5)
independence of Central Asia; (6) balance between India and Pakistan; (7)
an economically dynamic and internationally benign Japan; (8) a stable but
not too strong Russia.


--- PAGE 196 ---
188 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
American (and also Japanese) interests, especially if these ambi-
tions were to be pursued through historically more familiar strong-
arm tactics. This applies particularly to Southeast Asia, Taiwan,
and Korea.
Southeast Asia is potentially too rich, geographically too spread
out, and simply too big to be easily subordinated by even a powerful
China—but it is also too weak and politically too fragmented not to
become at least a sphere of deference for China. China's regional in-
fluence, abetted by the Chinese financial and economic presence in
all of the area's countries, is bound to grow as China's power in-
creases. Much depends on how China applies that power, but it is
not self-evident that America has any special interest in opposing it
directly or in becoming involved in such issues as the South China
Sea dispute. The Chinese have considerable historical experience
in subtly managing unequal (or tributary) relationships, and it
would certainly be in China's own interest to exercise self-restraint
in order to avoid regional fears of Chinese imperialism. That fear
could generate a regional anti-Chinese coalition (and some over-
tones of that are already present in the nascent Indonesian-Aus-
tralian military cooperation), which would then most likely seek
support from the United States, Japan, and Australia.
A Greater China, especially after digesting Hong Kong, will al-
most certainly seek more energetically to achieve Taiwan's reunifi-
cation with the mainland. It is important to appreciate the fact that
China has never acquiesced in the indefinite separation of Taiwan.
Therefore, at some point, that issue could generate a head-on
American-Chinese collision. Its consequences for all concerned
would be most damaging: China's economic prospects would be
set back; America's ties with Japan could become severely
strained; and American efforts to create a stable balance of power
in eastern Eurasia could be derailed.
Accordingly, it is essential to attain and maintain reciprocally
the utmost clarity on this issue. Even if for the foreseeable future
China is likely to lack the means to effectively coerce Taiwan, Bei-
jing must understand—and be credibly convinced—that American
acquiescence in an attempt at the forcible reintegration of Taiwan,
sought by the use of military power, would be so devastating to
America's position in the Far East that America simply could not


--- PAGE 197 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 189
afford to remain militarily passive if Taiwan were unable to protect
itself.
In other words, America would have to intervene not for the
sake of a separate Taiwan but for the sake of America's geopolitical
interests in the Asia-Pacific area. This is an important distinction.
The United States does not have, per se, any special interest in a
separate Taiwan. In fact, its official position has been, and should
remain, that there is only one China. But how China seeks reunifi-
cation can impinge on vital American interests, and the Chinese
have to be clearly aware of that.
The issue of Taiwan also gives America a legitimate reason for
raising the human rights question in its dealings with China with-
out justifying the accusation of interference in Chinese domestic
affairs. It is perfectly appropriate to reiterate to Beijing that reunifi-
cation will be accomplished only when China becomes more pros-
perous and more democratic. Only such a China will be able to
attract Taiwan and assimilate it within a Greater China that is also
prepared to be a confederation based on the principle of "one
country, several systems." In any case, because of Taiwan, it is in
China's own interest to enhance respect for human rights, and it is
appropriate in that context for America to address the matter.
At the same time, it behooves the United States—in keeping
with its promise to China—to abstain from directly or indirectly
supporting any international upgrading of Taiwan's status. In the
1990s, some U.S.-Taiwanese official contacts conveyed the impres-
sion that the United States was tacitly beginning to treat Taiwan as
a separate state, and the Chinese anger over this issue was under-
standable, as was Chinese resentment of the intensifying effort by
Taiwanese officials to gain international recognition for Taiwan's
separate status.
The United States should not be shy, therefore, in making it
clear that its attitude toward Taiwan will be adversely affected by
Taiwanese efforts to alter the long-estabiished and deliberate am-
biguities governing the China-Taiwan relationship. Moreover, if
China does prosper and does democratize and if its absorption of
Hong Kong does not involve a retrogression regarding civil rights,
American encouragement of a serious cross-Strait dialogue regard-
ing the terms of an eventual reunification would also help generate


--- PAGE 198 ---
190 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
pressure for increased democratization within China, while foster-
ing a wider strategic accommodation between the United States
and a Greater China.
Korea, the geopolitically pivotal state in Northeast Asia, could
again become a source of contention between America and China,
and its future will also impact directly on the American-Japanese
connection. As long as Korea remains divided and potentially vul-
nerable to a war between the unstable North and the increasingly
rich South, American forces will have to remain on the peninsula.
Any unilateral U.S. withdrawal would not only be likely to precipi-
tate a new war but would, in all probability, also signal the end of
the American military presence in Japan. It is difficult to conceive
of the Japanese continuing to rely on continued U.S. deployment
on Japanese soil in the wake of an American abandonment of
South Korea. Rapid Japanese rearmament would be the most likely
consequence, with broadly destabilizing consequences in the re-
gion as a whole.
Korea's reunification, however, would also be likely to pose se-
rious geopolitical dilemmas. If American forces were to remain in a
reunified Korea, they would inevitably be viewed by the Chinese as
pointed against China. In fact, it is doubtful that the Chinese would
acquiesce in reunification under these circumstances. If that reuni-
fication were taking place by stages, involving a so-called soft land-
ing, China would obstruct it politically and support those elements
in North Korea that remained opposed to reunification. If that re-
unification were taking place violently, with North Korea "crash
landing," even Chinese military intervention could not be pre-
cluded. From the Chinese perspective, a reunified Korea would be
acceptable only if it is not simultaneously a direct extension of
American power (with Japan in the background as its spring-
board).
However, a reunified Korea without U.S. troops on its soil
would be quite likely to gravitate first toward a form of neutrality
between China and Japan and then gradually—driven in part by
residual but still intense anti-Japanese feelings—toward a Chinese
sphere of either politically more assertive influence or somewhat
more delicate deference. The issue would then arise as to whether
Japan would still be willing to serve as the only Asian base for


--- PAGE 199 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 191
American power. At the very least, the issue would be most divi-
sive within Japanese domestic politics. Any resulting retraction in
the scope of U.S. military reach in the Far East would in turn make
the maintenance of a stable Eurasian balance of power more diffi-
cult. These considerations thus enhance the American and Japan-
ese stakes in the Korean status quo (though in each case, for
somewhat different reasons), and if that status quo is to be al-
tered, it must occur in very slow stages, preferably in a setting of a
deepening American-Chinese regional accommodation.
In the meantime, a true Japanese-Korean reconciliation would
contribute significantly to a more stable regional setting for any
eventual reunification. The various international complications
that could ensue from Korean reintegration would be mitigated by
a genuine reconciliation between Japan and Korea, resulting in an
increasingly cooperative and binding political relationship be-
tween these two countries. The United States could play the criti-
cal role in promoting that reconciliation. Many specific steps that
were taken to advance first the German-French reconciliation and
later that between Germany and Poland (for example, ranging from
joint university programs eventually to combined military forma-
tions) could be adapted to this case. A comprehensive and region-
ally stabilizing Japanese-Korean partnership would, in turn,
facilitate a continuing American presence in the Far East even per-
haps after Korea's unification.
It almost goes without saying that a close political relationship
with Japan is in America's global geostrategic interest. But whether
Japan is to be America's vassal, rival, or partner depends on the
ability of the Americans and Japanese to define more clearly what
international goals the countries should seek in common and to de-
marcate more sharply the dividing line between the U.S. geostrate-
gic mission in the Far East and Japan's aspirations for a global role.
For Japan, despite the domestic debates about Japan's foreign pol-
icy, the relationship with America still remains the central beacon
for its own sense of international direction. A disoriented Japan,
lurching toward either rearmament or a separate accommodation
with China, would spell the end of the American role in the Asia-Pa-
cific region and would foreclose the emergence of a regionally stable
triangular arrangement involving America, Japan, and China. That,


--- PAGE 200 ---
192 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
in turn, would preclude the shaping of an American-managed politi-
cal equilibrium throughout Eurasia.
In brief, a disoriented Japan would be like a beached whale:
thrashing around helplessly but dangerously. It could destabilize
Asia, but it could not create a viable alternative to the needed sta-
bilizing balance among America, Japan, and China. It is only
through a close alliance with Japan that America will be able to ac-
commodate China's regional aspirations and constrain its more ar-
bitrary manifestations. Only on that basis can an intricate
three-way accommodation—one that involves America's global
power, China's regional preeminence, and Japan's international
leadership—be contrived.
It follows that in the foreseeable future, reduction of the exist-
ing levels of U.S. forces in Japan (and, by extension, in Korea) is
not desirable. By the same token, however, any significant increase
in the geopolitical scope and the actual magnitude of the Japanese
military effort is also undesirable. A significant U.S. withdrawal
would most probably prompt a major Japanese armament pro-
gram in the context of an unsettling strategic disorientation,
whereas American pressure on Japan to assume a greater military
role can only damage the prospects for regional stability, impede a
wider regional accommodation with a Greater China, divert Japan
from undertaking a more constructive international mission, and
thereby complicate the effort to foster stable geopolitical plural-
ism throughout Eurasia.
It also follows that Japan—if it is to turn its face to the world
and away from Asia—must be given a meaningful incentive and a
special status, so that its own national interest is thereby well
served. Unlike China, which can seek global power by first becom-
ing a regional power, Japan can gain global influence by eschewing
the quest for regional power. But that makes it al! the more impor-
tant for Japan to feel that it is America's special partner in a global
vocation that is as politically satisfying as it is economically bene-
ficial. To that end, the United States would do well to consider the
adoption of an American-Japanese free trade agreement, thereby
creating a common American-Japanese economic space. Such a
step, formalizing the growing linkage between the two economies,
would provide the geopolitical underpinning both for America's


--- PAGE 201 ---
THE FAR EASTERN ANCHOR 193
continued presence in the Far East and for Japan's constructive
global engagement."
To conclude: For America, Japan should be its vital and fore-
most partner in the construction of an increasingly cooperative
and pervasive system of global cooperation but not primarily its
military ally in any regional arrangement designed to contest
China's regional preeminence. In effect, Japan should be America's
global partner in tackling the new agenda of world affairs. A re-
gionally preeminent China should become America's Far Eastern
anchor in the more traditional domain of power politics, helping
thereby to foster a Eurasian balance of power, with Greater China
in Eurasia's East matching in that respect the role of an enlarging
Europe in Eurasia's West.
"A strong case for this initiative, pointing out the mutual economic bene-
fits thereof, is made by Kurt Tong, "Revolutionizing America's Japan Policy,"
Foreign Policy (Winter 1996-1997).


--- PAGE 202 ---
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
THE TIME HAS COME for the United States to formulate and
prosecute an integrated, comprehensive, and long-term
geostrategy for all of Eurasia. This need arises out of the in-
teraction between two fundamental realities: America is now the
only global superpower, and Eurasia is the globe's central arena.
Hence, what happens to the distribution of power on the Eurasian
continent will be of decisive importance to America's global pri-
macy and to America's historical legacy.
American global primacy is unique in its scope and character.
It is a hegemony of a new type that reflects many of the features of
the American democratic system: it is pluralistic, permeable, and
flexible. Attained in the course of less than a century, the principal
geopolitical manifestation of that hegemony is America's unprece-
dented role on the Eurasian landmass, hitherto the point of origin
of all previous contenders for global power. America is now Eur-
asia's arbiter, with no major Eurasian issue soluble without Amer-
ica's participation or contrary to America's interests.
How the United States both manipulates and accommodates
the principal geostrategic players on the Eurasian chessboard and
194


--- PAGE 203 ---
CONCLUSION 195
how it manages Eurasia's key geopolitical pivots will be critical to
the longevity and stability of America's global primacy. In Europe,
the key players will continue to be France and Germany, and Amer-
ica's central goal should be to consolidate and expand the existing
democratic bridgehead on Eurasia's western periphery. In Eur-
asia's Far East, China is likely to be increasingly central, and Amer-
ica will not have a political foothold on the Asian mainland unless
an American-Chinese geostrategic consensus is successfully nur-
tured. In the center of Eurasia, the space between an enlarging Eu-
rope and a regionally rising China will remain a geopolitical black
hole at least until Russia resolves its inner struggle over its postim-
perial self-definition, while the region to the south of Russia—the
Eurasian Balkans—threatens to become a cauldron of ethnic con-
flict and great-power rivalry.
In that context, for some time to come—for more than a gener-
ation—America's status as the world's premier power is unlikely
to be contested by any single challenger. No nation-state is likely
to match America in the four key dimensions of power (military,
economic, technological, and cultural) that cumulatively produce
decisive global political clout. Short of a deliberate or uninten-
tional American abdication, the only real alternative to American
global leadership in the foreseeable future is international anarchy.
In that respect, it is correct to assert that America has become, as
President Clinton put it, the world's "indispensable nation."
It is important to stress here both the fact of that indispensabil-
ity and the actuality of the potential for global anarchy. The dis-
ruptive consequences of population explosion, poverty-driven
migration, radicalizing urbanization, ethnic and religious hostili-
ties, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction would
become unmanageable if the existing and underlying nation-state-
based framework of even rudimentary geopolitical stability were
itself to fragment. Without sustained and directed American in-
volvement, before long the forces of global disorder could come to
dominate the world scene. And the possibility of such a fragmenta-
tion is inherent in the geopolitical tensions not only of today's
Eurasia but of the world more generally.
The resulting risks to global stability are likely to be further in-
creased by the prospect of a more general degradation of the hu-
man condition. Particularly in the poorer countries of the world,


--- PAGE 204 ---
196 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
the demographic explosion and the simultaneous urbanization of
these populations are rapidly generating a congestion not only of
the disadvantaged but especially of the hundreds of millions of un-
employed and increasingly restless young, whose level of frustra-
tion is growing at an exponential rate. Modern communications
intensify their rupture with traditional authority, while making
them increasingly conscious—and resentful—of global inequality
and thus more susceptible to extremist mobilization. On the one
hand, the rising phenomenon of global migrations, already reach-
ing into the tens of millions, may act as a temporary safety valve,
but on the other hand, it is also likely to serve as a vehicle for the
transcontinental conveyance of ethnic and social conflicts.
The global stewardship that America has inherited is hence
likely to be buffeted by turbulence, tension, and at least sporadic
violence. The new and complex international order, shaped by
American hegemony and within which "the threat of war is off the
table," is likely to be restricted to those parts of the world where
American power has been reinforced by democratic sociopolitical
systems and by elaborate external multilateral—but also Ameri-
can-dominated—frameworks.
An American geostrategy for Eurasia will thus be competing
with the forces of turbulence. In Europe, there are signs that the
momentum for integration and enlargement is waning and that tra-
ditional European nationalisms may reawaken before long. Large-
scale unemployment persists even in the most successful
European states, breeding xenophobic reactions that could sud-
denly cause a lurch in French or German politics toward significant
political extremism and inward-oriented chauvinism. Indeed, a
genuinely prerevolutionary situation could even be in the making.
The historical timetable for Europe, outlined in chapter 3, will be
met only if Europe's aspirations for unity are both encouraged and
even prodded by the United States.
The uncertainties regarding Russia's future are even greater
and the prospects for a positive evolution much more tenuous. It
is therefore imperative for America to shape a geopolitical context
that is congenial to Russia's assimilation into a larger setting of
growing European cooperation and that also fosters the self-reliant
independence of its newly sovereign neighbors. Yet the viability of,
say, Ukraine or Uzbekistan (not to speak of the ethnically bifur-


--- PAGE 205 ---
CONCLUSION 197
cated Kazakstan) will remain uncertain, especially if American at-
tention becomes diverted by new internal crises in Europe, by a
growing gap between Turkey and Europe, or by intensifying hostil-
ity in American-Iranian relations.
The potential for an eventual grand accommodation with China
could also be aborted by a future crisis over Taiwan; or because in-
ternal Chinese political dynamics prompt the emergence of an ag-
gressive and hostile regime; or simply because American-Chinese
relations turn sour. China could then become a highly destabilizing
force in the world, imposing enormous strains on the American-
Japanese relationship and perhaps also generating a disruptive
geopolitical disorientation in Japan itself. In that setting, the stabil-
ity of Southeast Asia would certainly be at risk, and one can only
speculate how the confluence of these events would impact on the
posture and cohesion of India, a country critical to the stability of
South Asia.
These observations serve as a reminder that neither the new
global problems that go beyond the scope of the nation-state nor
more traditional geopolitical concerns are likely to be resolved, or
even contained, if the underlying geopolitical structure of global
power begins to crumble. With warning signs on the horizon
across Europe and Asia, any successful American policy must fo-
cus on Eurasia as a whole and be guided by a geostrategic design.
A GEOSTRATEGY FOR EURASIA
The point of departure for the needed policy has to be hard-nosed
recognition of the three unprecedented conditions that currently
define the geopolitical state of world affairs: for the first time in
history, (1) a single state is a truly global power, (2) a non-Eurasian
state is globally the preeminent state, and (3) the globe's central
arena, Eurasia, is dominated by a non-Eurasian power.
However, a comprehensive and integrated geostrategy for
Eurasia must also be based on recognition of the limits of Amer-
ica's effective power and the inevitable attrition over time of its
scope. As noted earlier, the very scale and diversity of Eurasia, as
well as the potential power of some of its states, limit the depth of
American influence and the degree of control over the course of


--- PAGE 206 ---
198 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
events. This condition places a premium on geostrategic insight
and on the deliberately selective deployment of America's re-
sources on the huge Eurasian chessboard. And since America's un-
precedented power is bound to diminish over time, the priority
must be to manage the rise of other regional powers in ways that
do not threaten America's global primacy.
As in chess, American global planners must think several
moves ahead, anticipating possible countermoves. A sustainable
geostrategy must therefore distinguish between the short-run per-
spective (the next five or so years), the middle term (up to twenty
or so years), and the long run (beyond twenty years). Moreover,
these phases must be viewed not as watertight compartments but
as part of a continuum. The first phase must gradually and consis-
tently lead into the second—indeed, be deliberately pointed to-
ward it—and the second must then lead subsequently into the
third.
In the short run, it is in America's interest to consolidate and per-
petuate the prevailing geopolitical pluralism on the map of Eurasia.
That puts a premium on maneuver and manipulation in order to pre-
vent the emergence of a hostile coalition that could eventually seek
to challenge America's primacy, not to mention the remote possibility
of any one particular state seeking to do so. By the middle term, the
foregoing should gradually yield to a greater emphasis on the emer-
gence of increasingly important but strategically compatible partners
who, prompted by American leadership, might help to shape a more
cooperative trans-Eurasian security system. Eventually, in the much
longer run still, the foregoing could phase into a global core of gen-
uinely shared political responsibility.
The most immediate task is to make certain that no state or
combination of states gains the capacity to expel the United States
from Eurasia or even to diminish significantly its decisive arbitrat-
ing role. However, the consolidation of transcontinental geopoliti-
cal pluralism should not be viewed as an end in itself but only as a
means to achieve the middle-term goal of shaping genuine strate-
gic partnerships in the key regions of Eurasia. It is unlikely that de-
mocratic America will wish to be permanently engaged in the
difficult, absorbing, and costly task of managing Eurasia by con-
stant manipulation and maneuver, backed by American military re-
sources, in order to prevent regional domination by any one


--- PAGE 207 ---
CONCLUSION 199
power. The first phase must, therefore, logically and deliberately
lead into the second, one in which a benign American hegemony
still discourages others from posing a challenge not only by mak-
ing the costs of the challenge too high but also by not threatening
the vital interests of Eurasia's potential regional aspirants.
What that requires specifically, as the middle-term goal, is the
fostering of genuine partnerships, predominant among them those
with a more united and politically defined Europe and with a re-
gionally preeminent China, as well as with (one hopes) a postimpe-
rial and Europe-oriented Russia and, on the southern fringe of
Eurasia, with a regionally stabilizing and democratic India. But it
will be the success or failure of the effort to forge broader strategic
relationships with Europe and China, respectively, that will shape
the denning context for Russia's role, either positive or negative.
It follows that a wider Europe and an enlarged NATO will serve
well both the short-term and the longer-term goals of U.S. policy. A
larger Europe will expand the range of American influence—and,
through the admission of new Central European members, also in-
crease in the European councils the number of states with a pro-
American proclivity—without simultaneously creating a Europe
politically so integrated that it could soon challenge the United
States on geopolitical matters of high importance to America else-
where, particularly in the Middle East. A politically defined Europe
is also essential to the progressive assimilation of Russia into a
system of global cooperation.
Admittedly, America cannot on its own generate a more united
Europe—that is up to the Europeans, especially the French and the
Germans—but America can obstruct the emergence of a more
united Europe. And that could prove calamitous for stability in
Eurasia and thus also for America's own interests. Indeed, unless
Europe becomes more united, it is likely to become more disunited
again. Accordingly, as stated earlier, it is vital that America work
closely with both France and Germany in seeking a Europe that is
politically viable, a Europe that remains linked to the United
States, and a Europe that widens the scope of the cooperative de-
mocratic international system. Making a choice between France
and Germany is not the issue. Without either France or Germany,
there will be no Europe, and without Europe there will be no trans-
Eurasian system.


--- PAGE 208 ---
200 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
In practical terms, the foregoing will require gradual accommo-
dation to a shared leadership in NATO, greater acceptance of
France's concerns for a European role not only in Africa but also in
the Middle East, and continued support for the eastward expan-
sion of the EU, even as the EU becomes a more politically and eco-
nomically assertive global player.' A Transatlantic Free Trade
Agreement, already advocated by a number of prominent Atlantic
leaders, could also mitigate the risk of growing economic rivalry
between a more united EU and the United States. In any case, the
EU's eventual success in burying the centuries-old European na-
tionalist antagonisms, with their globally disruptive effects, would
be well worth some gradual diminution in America's decisive role
as Eurasia's current arbitrator.
The enlargement of NATO and the EU would serve to reinvigo-
rate Europe's own waning sense of a larger vocation, while consoli-
dating, to the benefit of both America and Europe, the democratic
gains won through the successful termination of the Cold War. At
stake in this effort is nothing less than America's long-range rela-
tionship with Europe itself. A new Europe is still taking shape, and
if that new Europe is to remain geopolitically a part of the "Euro-
Atlantic" space, the expansion of NATO is essential. By the same
token, a failure to widen NATO, now that the commitment has been
made, would shatter the concept of an expanding Europe and de-
moralize the Central Europeans. It could even reignite currently
dormant or dying Russian geopolitical aspirations in Central Eu-
rope.
Indeed, the failure of the American-led effort to expand NATO
could reawaken even more ambitious Russian desires. It is not yet
evident—and the historical record is strongly to the contrary—
that the Russian political elite shares Europe's desire for a strong
'A number of constructive proposals to that end were advanced at the
CSIS (Center for International and Strategic Studies) Conference on America
and Europe, held in Brussels in February 1997. They ranged from joint ef-
forts at structural reform, designed to reduce government deficits, to the
development of an enhanced European defense industrial base, which
would enhance transatlantic defense collaboration and a greater European
role in NATO. A useful list of similar and other initiatives, meant to generate
a greater European role, is contained in David C. Gompert and F. Stephen
Larrabee, eds., America and Europe: A Partnership for a New Em (Santa Mon-
ica, Calif.: RAND, 1997).


--- PAGE 209 ---
CONCLUSION 201
and enduring American political and military presence. Therefore,
while the fostering of an increasingly cooperative relationship with
Russia is clearly desirable, it is important for America to send a
clear message about its global priorities. If a choice has to be
made between a larger Euro-Atlantic system and a better relation-
ship with Russia, the former has to rank incomparably higher to
America.
For that reason, any accommodation with Russia on the issue
of NATO enlargement should not entail an outcome that has the ef-
fect of making Russia a de facto decision-making member of the al-
liance, thereby diluting NATO's special Euro-Atlantic character
while simultaneously relegating its newly admitted members to
second-class status. That would create opportunities for Russia to
resume not only the effort to regain a sphere of influence in Central
Europe but to use its presence within NATO to play on any Ameri-
can-European disagreements in order to reduce the American role
in European affairs.
It is also crucial that, as Central Europe enters NATO, any new
security assurances to Russia regarding the region be truly recip-
rocal and thus mutually reassuring. Restrictions on the deploy-
ment of NATO troops and nuclear weapons on the soil of new
members can be an important factor in allaying legitimate Russian
concerns, but these should be matched by symmetrical Russian
assurances regarding the demilitarization of the potentially strate-
gically menacing salient of Kaliningrad and by limits on major
troop deployments near the borders of the prospective new mem-
bers of NATO and the EU. While all of Russia's newly independent
western neighbors are anxious to have a stable and cooperative re-
lationship with Russia, the fact is that they continue to fear it for
historically understandable reasons. Hence, the emergence of an
equitable NATO/EU accommodation with Russia would be wel-
comed by all Europeans as a signal that Russia is finally making the
much-desired postimperial choice in favor of Europe.
That choice could pave the way for a wider effort to enhance
Russia's status and esteem. Formal membership in the G-7, as well
as the upgrading of the policy-making machinery of the OSCE
(within which a special security committee composed of America,
Russia, and several key European countries could be established),
would create opportunities for constructive Russian engagement


--- PAGE 210 ---
202 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
in shaping both the political and security dimensions of Europe.
Coupied with ongoing Western financial assistance to Russia,
along with the development of much more ambitious schemes for
linking Russia more closely to Europe through new highway and
railroad networks, the process of giving substance to a Russian
choice in favor of Europe could move forward significantly.
Russia's longer-term role in Eurasia will depend largely on the
historic choice that Russia has to make, perhaps still in the course
of this decade, regarding its own self-definition. Even with Europe
and China increasing the radius of their respective regional influ-
ence, Russia will remain in charge of the world's largest single
piece of real estate. It spans ten time zones and is territorially
twice as large as either the United States or China, dwarfing in that
regard even an enlarged Europe. Hence, territorial deprivation is
not Russia's central problem. Rather, the huge Russia has to face
squarely and draw the proper implications from the fact that both
Europe and China are already economically more powerful and
that China is also threatening to outpace Russia on the road to so-
cial modernization.
In these circumstances, it should become more evident to the
Russian political elite that Russia's first priority is to modernize it-
self rather than to engage in a futile effort to regain its former sta-
tus as a global power. Given the enormous size and diversity of the
country, a decentralized political system, based on the free mar-
ket, would be more likely to unleash the creative potential of both
the Russian people and the country's vast natural resources. In
turn, such a more decentralized Russia would be less susceptible
to imperial mobilization. A loosely confederated Russia—com-
posed of a European Russia, a Siberian Republic, and a Far Eastern
Republic—would also find it easier to cultivate closer economic re-
lations with Europe, with the new states of Central Asia, and with
the Orient, which would thereby accelerate Russia's own develop-
ment. Each of the three confederated entities would also be more
able to tap local creative potential, stifled for centuries by
Moscow's heavy bureaucratic hand.
A clear choice by Russia in favor of the European option over
the imperial one will be more likely if America successfully pur-
sues the second imperative strand of its strategy toward Russia:
namely, reinforcing the prevailing geopolitical pluralism in the


--- PAGE 211 ---
CONCLUSION 203
post-Soviet space. Such reinforcement will serve to discourage any
imperial temptations. A postimperial and Europe-oriented Russia
should actually view American efforts to that end as helpful in con-
solidating regional stability and in reducing the possibility of con-
flicts along its new, potentially unstable southern frontiers. But the
policy of consolidating geopolitical pluralism should not be condi-
tioned on the existence of a good relationship with Russia. Rather,
it is also important insurance in case such a good relationship fails
to develop, as it creates impediments to the reemergence of any
truly threatening Russian imperial policy.
It follows that political and economic support for the key newly
independent states is an integral part of a broader strategy for
Eurasia. The consolidation of a sovereign Ukraine, which in the
meantime redefines itself as a Central European state and engages
in closer integration with Central Europe, is a critically important
component of such a policy, as is the fostering of a closer relation-
ship with such strategically pivotal states as Azerbaijan and Uzbek-
istan, in addition to the more generalized effort to open up Central
Asia (in spite of Russian impediments) to the global economy.
Large-scale international investment in an increasingly accessi-
ble Caspian-Central Asian region would not only help to consoli-
date the independence of its new countries but in the long run
would also benefit a postimperial and democratic Russia. The tap-
ping of the region's energy and mineral resources would generate
prosperity, prompting a greater sense of stability and security in
the area, while perhaps also reducing the risks of Balkan-type con-
flicts. The benefits of accelerated regional development, funded by
external investment, would also radiate to the adjoining Russian
provinces, which tend to be economically underdeveloped. More-
over, once the region's new ruling elites come to realize that Russia
acquiesces in the region's integration into the global economy,
they will become less fearful of the political consequences of close
economic relations with Russia. In time, a nonimperial Russia
could thus gain acceptance as the region's preeminent economic
partner, even though no longer its imperial ruler.
To promote a stable and independent southern Caucasus and
Central Asia, America must be careful not to alienate Turkey and
should explore whether an improvement in American-Iranian rela-
tions is feasible. A Turkey that feels that it is an outcast from Eu-


--- PAGE 212 ---
204 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
rope, which it has been seeking to join, will become a more Islamic
Turkey, more likely to veto the enlargement of NATO out of spite
and less likely to cooperate with the West in seeking both to stabi-
lize and integrate a secular Central Asia into the world community.
Accordingly, America should use its influence in Europe to en-
courage Turkey's eventual admission to the EU and should make a
point of treating Turkey as a European state—provided internal
Turkish politics do not take a dramatic turn in the Islamist direc-
tion. Regular consultations with Ankara regarding the future of the
Caspian Sea basin and Central Asia would foster in Turkey a sense
of strategic partnership with the United States. America should
also strongly support Turkish aspirations to have a pipeline from
Baku in Azerbaijan to Ceyhan on the Turkish Mediterranean coast
serve as major outlet for the Caspian Sea basin energy sources.
In addition, it is not in America's interest to perpetuate Ameri-
can-Iranian hostility. Any eventual reconciliation should be based
on the recognition of a mutual strategic interest in stabilizing what
currently is a very volatile regional environment for Iran. Admit-
tedly, any such reconciliation must be pursued by both sides and
is not a favor granted by one to the other. A strong, even reli-
giously motivated but not fanatically anti-Western Iran is in the
U.S. interest, and ultimately even the Iranian political elite may rec-
ognize that reality. In the meantime, American long-range interests
in Eurasia would be better served by abandoning existing U.S. ob-
jections to closer Turkish-Iranian economic cooperation, espe-
cially in the construction of new pipelines, and also to the
construction of other links between Iran, Azerbaijan, and Turk-
menistan. Long-term American participation in the financing of
such projects would in fact also be in the American interest.2
^t is appropriate to quote here the wise advice offered by my colleague
at CSIS, Anthony H. Cordesman (in his paper on "The American Threat to
the United States," February 1997, p. 16, delivered as a speech to the Army
War College), who has warned against the American propensity to demonize
issues and even nations. As he put it: "Iran, Iraq, and Libya are cases where
the U.S. has taken hostile regimes that pose real, but limited threats and 'de-
monized' them without developing any workable mid- to long-term end
game for its strategy. U.S. planners cannot hope to totally isolate these
states, and it makes no sense to treat them as if they were identical 'rogue'
or terrorist' states. ... The U.S. lives in a morally gray world and cannot
succeed by trying to make it black and white."


--- PAGE 213 ---
CONCLUSION 205
India's potential role needs also to be highlighted, although it
is currently a relatively passive player on the Eurasian scene. In-
dia is contained geopolitically by the Chinese-Pakistani coalition,
while a weak Russia cannot offer it the political support once pro-
vided by the Soviet Union. However, the survival of its democracy
is of importance in that it refutes better than volumes of academic
debate the notion that human rights and democracy are purely a
parochial Western manifestation. India proves that antidemocra-
tic "Asian values," propagated by spokesmen from Singapore to
China, are simply antidemocratic but not necessarily characteris-
tic of Asia. India's failure, by the same token, would be a blow to
the prospects for democracy and would remove from the scene a
power that contributes to greater balance on the Asian scene, es-
pecially given China's rise to geopolitical preeminence. It follows
that a progressive engagement of India in discussions pertaining
to regional stability, especially regarding the future of Central
Asia, is becoming timely, not to mention the promotion of more di-
rectly bilateral connections between American and Indian defense
communities.
Geopolitical pluralism in Eurasia as a whole will neither be at-
tainable nor stable without a deepening strategic understanding
between America and China. It follows that a policy of engaging
China in a serious strategic dialogue, eventually perhaps in a
three-way effort that involves Japan as well, is the necessary first
step in enhancing China's interest in an accommodation with
America that reflects the several geopolitical interests (espe-
cially in Northeast Asia and in Central Asia) the two countries in
fact share in common. It also behooves America to eliminate any
uncertainties regarding America's own commitment to the one-
China policy, lest the Taiwan issue fester and worsen, especially
after China's absorption of Hong Kong. By the same token, it is
in China's own interest to make that absorption a successful
demonstration of the principle that even a Greater China can tol-
erate and safeguard increased diversity in its internal political
arrangements.
While—as argued earlier in chapters 4 and 6—any would-be
Chinese-Russian-Iranian coalition against America is unlikely to jell
beyond some occasional tactical posturing, it is important for the
United States to deal with China in a fashion that does not drive


--- PAGE 214 ---
206 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
Beijing in that direction. In any such "antihegemonic" alliance,
China would be the linchpin. It would be the strongest, the most
dynamic, and thus the leading component. Such a coalition could
only emerge around a disaffected, frustrated, and hostile China.
Neither Russia nor Iran has the wherewithal to be the central mag-
net for such a coalition.
An American-Chinese strategic dialogue regarding the areas
that both countries desire to see free of domination by other as-
piring hegemons is therefore imperative. But to make progress,
the dialogue should be sustained and serious. In the course of
such communication, more contentious issues pertaining to Tai-
wan and even to human rights could then be addressed more
persuasively. Indeed, the point can be made quite credibly that
the issue of China's internal liberalization is not a purely domes-
tic Chinese affair, since only a democratizing and prosperous
China has any prospect of peacefully enticing Taiwan. Any at-
tempt at forcible reunification would not only place the American-
Chinese relationship in jeopardy but would inevitably generate
adverse consequences for China's capacity to attract foreign
capital and sustain its development. China's own aspirations
to regional preeminence and global status would thereby be vic-
timized.
Although China is emerging as a regionally dominant power, it
is not likely to become a global one for a long time to come (for
reasons stated in chapter 6)—and paranoiac fears of China as a
global power are breeding megalomania in China, while perhaps
also becoming the source of a self-fulfilling prophesy of intensified
American-Chinese hostility. Accordingly, China should be neither
contained nor propitiated. It should be treated with respect as the
world's largest developing state, and—so far at least—a rather
successful one. Its geopolitical role not only in the Far East but in
Eurasia as a whole is likely to grow as well. Hence, it would make
sense to coopt China into the G-7 annual summit of the world's
leading countries, especially since Russia's inclusion has widened
the summit's focus from economics to politics.
As China becomes more integrated into the world system and
hence less able and less inclined to exploit its regional primacy in
a politically obtuse fashion, it also follows that a de facto emer-
gence of a Chinese sphere of deference in areas of historic interest


--- PAGE 215 ---
CONCLUSION 207
to China is likely to be part of the emerging Eurasian structure of
geopolitical accommodation. Whether a united Korea will oscillate
toward such a sphere depends much on the degree of Japanese-
Korean reconciliation (which America should more actively en-
courage), but in any case, the reunification of Korea without an
accommodation with China is unlikely.
A Greater China at some point will inevitably press for a resolu-
tion of the issue of Taiwan, but the degree of China's inclusion in
an increasingly binding set of international economic and political
links may also have a positive impact on the nature of Chinese do-
mestic politics. If China's absorption of Hong Kong proves not to
be repressive, Deng's formula for Taiwan of "one country, two sys-
tems" can become redefined as "one country, several systems."
That might make reunification more acceptable to the parties con-
cerned—which again reinforces the point that without some politi-
cal evolution of China itself, a peaceful reconstitution of one China
will not be possible.
In any case, for historic as well as geopolitical reasons, China
should consider America its natural ally. Unlike Japan or Russia,
America has never had any territorial designs on China; and, unlike
Great Britain, it never humiliated China. Moreover, without a viable
strategic consensus with America, China is not likely to be able to
keep attracting the massive foreign investment so necessary to its
economic growth and thus also to its attainment of regional preemi-
nence. For the same reason, without an American-Chinese strategic
accommodation as the eastern anchor of America's involvement in
Eurasia, America will not have a geostrategy for mainland Asia; and
without a geostrategy for mainland Asia, America will not have a
geostrategy for Eurasia. Thus for America, China's regional power,
co-opted into a wider framework of international cooperation, can be
a vitally important geostrategic asset—in that regard coequally im-
portant with Europe and more weighty than Japan—in assuring Eura-
sia's stability.
However, unlike the European situation, a democratic bridge-
head on the eastern mainland will not emerge soon. That makes it
all the more important that America's efforts to nurture a deepen-
ing strategic relationship with China be based on the unambiguous
acknowledgment that a democratic and economically successful
Japan is America's premier Pacific and key global partner. Al-


--- PAGE 216 ---
208 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
though Japan cannot become a dominant Asian regional power,
given the strong regional aversion it evokes, it can become a lead-
ing international one. Tokyo can carve out a globally influential
role by cooperating closely with the United States regarding what
might be called the new agenda of global concerns, while avoiding
any futile and potentially counterproductive effort to become a re-
gional power itself. The task of American statesmanship should
hence be to steer Japan in that direction. An American-Japanese
free trade agreement, creating a common economic space, would
fortify the connection and promote the goal, and hence its utility
should be jointly examined.
It is through a close political relationship with Japan that Amer-
ica will more safely be able to accommodate China's regional aspi-
rations, while opposing its more arbitrary manifestations, Only on
that basis can an intricate three-way accommodation—one that in-
volves America's global power, China's regional preeminence, and
Japan's international leadership—be contrived. However, that
broad geostrategic accommodation could be undermined by an
unwise expansion of American-Japanese military cooperation.
Japan's central role should not be that of America's unsinkable air-
craft carrier in the Far East, nor should it be America's principal
Asian military partner or a potential Asian regional power. Mis-
guided efforts to promote any of the foregoing would serve to cut
America off from the Asian mainland, to vitiate the prospects for
reaching a strategic consensus with China, and thus to frustrate
America's capacity to consolidate stable geopolitical pluralism
throughout Eurasia.
A TRANS-EURASIAN SECURITY SYSTEM
The stability of Eurasia's geopolitical pluralism, precluding the ap-
pearance of a single dominant power, would be enhanced by the
eventual emergence, perhaps sometime early in the next century,
of a Trans-Eurasian Security System (TESS). Such a transcontinen-
tal security agreement should embrace an expanded NATO—con-
nected by a cooperative charter with Russia—and China as well as
Japan (which would still be connected to the United States by the
bilateral security treaty). But to get there, NATO must first expand,


--- PAGE 217 ---
CONCLUSION 209
while engaging Russia in a larger regional framework of security
cooperation. In addition, the Americans and Japanese must closely
consult and collaborate in setting in motion a triangular political-
security dialogue in the Far East that engages China. Three-way
American-Japanese-Chinese security talks could eventually in-
volve more Asian participants and later lead to a dialogue between
them and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In turn, such a dialogue could pave the way for a series of confer-
ences by all European and Asian states, thereby beginning the
process of institutionalizing a transcontinental security system.
In time, a more formal structure could begin to take shape,
prompting the emergence of a Trans-Eurasian Security System that
for the first time would span the entire continent. The shaping of
that system—denning its substance and then institutionalizing it—
could become the major architectural initiative of the next decade,
once the policies outlined earlier have created the necessary pre-
conditions. Such a broad transcontinental security framework
could also contain a standing security committee, composed of
the major Eurasian entities, in order to enhance TESS's ability to
promote effective cooperation on issues critical to global stability.
America, Europe, China, Japan, a confederated Russia, and India,
as well as perhaps some other countries, might serve together as
the core of such a more structured transcontinental system. The
eventual emergence of TESS could gradually relieve America of
some of its burdens, even while perpetuating its decisive role as
Eurasia's stabilizer and arbitrator.
BEYOND THE LAST GLOBAL SUPERPOWER
In the long run, global politics are bound to become increasingly
uncongenial to the concentration of hegemonic power in the
hands of a single state. Hence, America is not only the first, as well
as the only, truly global superpower, but it is also likely to be the
very last.
That is so not only because nation-states are gradually becom-
ing increasingly permeable but also because knowledge as power
is becoming more diffuse, more shared, and less constrained by
national boundaries. Economic power is also likely to become


--- PAGE 218 ---
210 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
more dispersed. In the years to come, no single power is likely to
reach the level of 30 percent or so of the world's GDP that America
sustained throughout much of this century, not to speak of the 50
percent at which it crested in 1945. Some estimates suggest that by
the end of this decade, America will still account for about 20 per-
cent of global GDP, declining perhaps to about 10-15 percent by
2020 as other powers—Europe, China, Japan—increase their rela-
tive share to more or less the American level. But global economic
preponderance by a single entity, of the sort that America attained
in the course of this century, is unlikely, and that has obviously far-
reaching military and political implications.
Moreover, the very multinational and exceptional character of
American society has made it easier for America to universalize its
hegemony without letting it appear to be a strictly national one.
For example, an effort by China to seek global primacy would in-
evitably be viewed by others as an attempt to impose a national
hegemony. To put it very simply, anyone can become an American,
but only a Chinese can be Chinese—and that places an additional
and significant barrier in the way of any essentially national global
hegemony.
Accordingly, once American leadership begins to fade, Amer-
ica's current global predominance is unlikely to be replicated by
any single state. Thus, the key question for the future is "What
will America bequeath to the world as the enduring legacy of its
primacy?"
The answer depends in part on how long that primacy lasts
and on how energetically America shapes a framework of key
power partnerships that over time can be more formally institu-
tionalized. In fact, the window of historical opportunity for Amer-
ica's constructive exploitation of its global power could prove to
be relatively brief, for both domestic and external reasons. A gen-
uinely populist democracy has never before attained international
supremacy. The pursuit of power and especially the economic
costs and human sacrifice that the exercise of such power often re-
quires are not generally congenial to democratic instincts. Democ-
ratization is inimical to imperial mobilization.
Indeed, the critical uncertainty regarding the future may well
be whether America might become the first superpower unable or
unwilling to wield its power. Might it become an impotent global


--- PAGE 219 ---
CONCLUSION 211
power? Public opinion polls suggest that only a small minority
(13 percent) of Americans favor the proposition that "as the sole
remaining superpower, the U.S. should continue to be the preem-
inent world leader in solving international problems." An over-
whelming majority (74 percent) prefer that America "do its fair
share in efforts to solve international problems together with
other countries."3
Moreover, as America becomes an increasingly multicultural
society, it may find it more difficult to fashion a consensus on for-
eign policy issues, except in the circumstances of a truly massive
and widely perceived direct external threat. Such a consensus gen-
erally existed throughout World War II and even during the Cold
War. It was rooted, however, not only in deeply shared democratic
values, which the public sensed were being threatened, but also in
a cultural and ethnic affinity for the predominantly European vic-
tims of hostile totalitarianisms.
In the absence of a comparable external challenge, American
society may find it much more difficult to reach agreement regard-
ing foreign policies that cannot be directly related to central be-
liefs and widely shared cultural-ethnic sympathies and that still
require an enduring and sometimes costly imperial engagement. If
anything, two extremely varying views on the implications of
America's historic victory in the Cold War are likely to be politi-
cally more appealing: on the one hand, the view that the end of the
Cold War justifies a significant reduction in America's global en-
gagement, irrespective of the consequences for America's global
standing; and on the other, the perception that the time has come
for genuine international multilateralism, to which America should
even yield some of its sovereignty. Both extremes command the
loyalty of committed constituencies.
More generally, cultural change in America may also be uncon-
a"An Emerging Consensus—A Study of American Public Attitudes on
America's Role in the World" (College Park: Center for International and Se-
curity Studies at the University oi Maryland, July 1996). It is noteworthy, but
not inconsistent with the foregoing, that studies by the above center, con-
ducted in early 1997 (under principal investigator Steven Kull), also showed
a considerable majority in favor of NATO expansion (62 percent in favor,
with 27 percent strongly in favor: and only 29 percent against, with 14 per-
cent strongly against).


--- PAGE 220 ---
212 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
genial to the sustained exercise abroad of genuinely imperial
power. That exercise requires a high degree of doctrinal motiva-
tion, intellectual commitment, and patriotic gratification. Yet the
dominant culture of the country has become increasingly fixated
on mass entertainment that has been heavily dominated by per-
sonally hedonistic and socially escapist themes. The cumulative
effect has made it increasingly difficult to mobilize the needed po-
litical consensus on behalf of sustained, and also occasionally
costly, American leadership abroad. Mass communications have
been playing a particularly important role in that regard, generat-
ing a strong revulsion against any selective use of force that entails
even low levels of casualties.
In addition, both America and Western Europe have been find-
ing it difficult to cope with the cultural consequences of social he-
donism and the dramatic decline in the centrality of religious-based
values in society. (The parallels with the decline of the imperial sys-
tems summarized in chapter 1 are striking in that respect.) The
resulting cultural crisis has been compounded by the spread of
drugs and, especially in America, by its linkage to the racial issue.
Lastly, the rate of economic growth is no longer able to keep up
with growing material expectations, with the latter stimulated by a
culture that places a premium on consumption. It is no exaggera-
tion to state that a sense of historical anxiety, perhaps even of pes-
simism, is becoming palpable in the more articulate sectors of
Western society.
Almost half a century ago, a noted historian, Hans Kohn, hav-
ing observed the tragic experience of the two world wars and the
debilitating consequences of the totalitarian challenge, worried
that the West may have become "fatigued and exhausted." Indeed,
he feared that
[t]wentieth century man has become less confident than his
nineteenth century ancestor was. He has witnessed the dark
powers of history in his own experience. Things which seemed
to belong to the past have reappeared: fanatical faith, infallible
leaders, slavery and massacres, the uprooting of whole popu-
lations, ruthlessness and barbarism.'
'Hans Kohn. The Twentieth Century (New York: 1949), p. 53.


--- PAGE 221 ---
CONCLUSION 213
That lack of confidence has been intensified by widespread dis-
appointment with the consequences of the end of the Cold War. In-
stead of a "new world order" based on consensus and harmony,
"things which seemed to belong to the past" have all of a sudden be-
come the future. Although ethnic-national conflicts may no longer
pose the risk of a central war, they do threaten the peace in signifi-
cant parts of the globe. Thus, war is not likely to become obsolete
for some time to come. With the more-endowed nations constrained
by their own higher technological capacity for self-destruction as
well as by self-interest, war may have become a luxury that only the
poor peoples of this world can afford. In the foreseeable future, the
impoverished two-thirds of humanity may not be motivated by the
restraint of the privileged.
It is also noteworthy that international conflicts and acts of
terrorism have so far been remarkably devoid of any use of the
weapons of mass destruction. How long that self-restraint may
hold is inherently unpredictable, but the increasing availability,
not only to states but also to organized groups, of the means to
inflict massive casualties—by the use of nuclear or bacteriologi-
cal weapons—also inevitably increases the probability of their
employment.
In brief, America as the world's premier power does face a nar-
row window of historical opportunity. The present moment of rela-
tive global peace may be short lived. This prospect underlines the
urgent need for an American engagement in the world that is delib-
erately focused on the enhancement of international geopolitical
stability and that is capable of reviving in the West a sense of his-
torical optimism. That optimism requires the demonstrated capac-
ity to deal simultaneously with internal social and external
geopolitical challenges.
However, the rekindling of Western optimism and the universal-
ism of the West's values are not exclusively dependent on America
and Europe. Japan and India demonstrate that the notions of hu-
man rights and the centrality of the democratic experiment can be
valid in Asian settings as well, both in highly developed ones and
in those that are still only developing. The continued democratic
success of Japan and India is, therefore, also of enormous impor-
tance in sustaining a more confident perspective regarding the fu-
ture political shape of the globe. Indeed, their experience, as well


--- PAGE 222 ---
214 THE GRAND CHESSBOARD
as that of South Korea and Taiwan, suggests that China's contin-
ued economic growth, coupled with pressures from outside for
change generated by greater international inclusion, might per-
haps also lead to the progressive democratization of the Chinese
system.
Meeting these challenges is America's burden as well as its
unique responsibility. Given the reality of American democracy, an
effective response will require generating a public understanding
of the continuing importance of American power in shaping a
widening framework of stable geopolitical cooperation, one that si-
multaneously averts global anarchy and successfully defers the
emergence of a new power challenge. These two goals—averting
global anarchy and impeding the emergence of a power rival—are
inseparable from the longer-range definition of the purpose of
America's global engagement, namely, that of forging an enduring
framework of global geopolitical cooperation.
Unfortunately, to date, efforts to spell out a new central and
worldwide objective for the United States, in the wake of the termi-
nation of the Cold War, have been one-dimensional. They have
failed to link the need to improve the human condition with the im-
perative of preserving the centrality of American power in world
affairs. Several such recent attempts can be identified. During the
first two years of the Clinton administration, the advocacy of "as-
sertive multilateralism" did not sufficiently take into account the
basic realities of contemporary power. Later on, the alternative
emphasis on the notion that America should focus on global "de-
mocratic enlargement" did not adequately take into account the
continuing importance to America of maintaining global stability
or even of promoting some expedient (but regrettably not "demo-
cratic") power relationships, as with China.
As the central U.S. priority, more narrowly focused appeals
have been even less satisfactory, such as those concentrating on
the elimination of prevailing injustice in the global distribution of
income, on shaping a special "mature strategic partnership" with
Russia, or on containing weapons proliferation. Other alterna-
tives—that America should concentrate on safeguarding the envi-
ronment or, more narrowly, on combating local wars—have also
tended to ignore the central realities of global power. As a result,
none of the foregoing formulations have fully addressed the need


--- PAGE 223 ---
CONCLUSION 215
to create minimal global geopolitical stability as the essential foun-
dation for the simultaneous protraction of American hegemony
and the effective aversion of international anarchy.
In brief, the U.S. policy goal must be unapologetically twofold:
to perpetuate America's own dominant position for at least a gen-
eration and preferably longer still; and to create a geopolitical
framework that can absorb the inevitable shocks and strains of so-
cial-political change while evolving into the geopolitical core of
shared responsibility for peaceful global management. A pro-
longed phase of gradually expanding cooperation with key
Eurasian partners, both stimulated and arbitrated by America, can
also help to foster the preconditions for an eventual upgrading of
the existing and increasingly antiquated UN structures. A new dis-
tribution of responsibilities and privileges can then take into ac-
count the changed realities of global power, so drastically different
from those of 1945.
These efforts will have the added historical advantage of
benefiting from the new web of global linkages that is growing
exponentially outside the more traditional nation-state system.
That web—woven by multinational corporations, NGOs (non-
governmental organizations, with many of them transnational in
character) and scientific communities and reinforced by the In-
ternet—already creates an informal global system that is inher-
ently congenial to more institutionalized and inclusive global
cooperation.
In the course of the next several decades, a functioning struc-
ture of global cooperation, based on geopolitical realities, could
thus emerge and gradually assume the mantle of the world's cur-
rent "regent," which has for the time being assumed the burden of
responsibility for world stability and peace. Geostrategic success
in that cause would represent a fitting legacy of America's role as
the first, only, and last truly global superpower.

