=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Handbook of Revolutionary Warfare -  A Guide to the Armed Phase of the African Revolution.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 73
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:26:08.564252
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
HANDBOOK 
of 
REVOLUTIONARY 
WARFARE 
A Guide to the Armed Phase of the 
African Revolution 
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS 
New York


--- PAGE 3 ---
To 
The African Guerrilla 
Copyright © by Kwame Nkrumah, 1968 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
First United States Edition, 1969 
PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
The Handbook of Revolutionary Warfare was published 
toward the end of 1968 by Panaf Books, Ltd., London. A 
significant historical document, it provides basic source mate-
rial for the study of the new phase of the African Revolution. 
Within the present decade guerrilla warfare has emerged 
as a new feature of the liberation movement in those areas of 
Southern Africa dominated by white racial minorities. Be-
ginning with the launching of armed struggles in the Portu-
guese colonies of Angola, Guinea Bissau and later in 
Mozambique, it appeared also in Southwest Africa and more 
recently in the Union of South Africa and Rhodesia. Other 
African countries have helped train and supply the guerrilla 
forces, while preparations for similar movements seem to be 
under way elsewhere in Africa. 
Although each of these liberation movements have their 
specific features and their own leaderships, there is present a 
strong tendency toward the coordination of their efforts, in 
face of the supra-national oppressive military role being as-
sumed by the apartheid oligarchy of South Africa and the 
intervention of the neo-colonial powers. A formal coordinat-
ing body already exists for the struggles in the Portuguese 
colonies and the movements in Rhodesia and South Africa 
are coordinated through their respective organizations. In the 
Handbook, President Kwame Nkrumah presents his analysis 
of the new stage of the African Revolution and his proposals 
for anti-imperialist coordination on a continental scale. 
Printed in the United States of America


--- PAGE 4 ---
AUTHOR'S NOTE 
This book has been written during my stay in Conakry. 
Previous notes I made for a manual of guerrilla warfare 
for African freedom fighters were left behind in Ghana 
when I departed for Hanoi on 21st February 1966. The 
manuscript was handed over to imperialist and neo-
colonialist intelligence organisations by the military and 
police traitors. 
This HANDBOOK, presenting a completely new approach 
will, I hope, help to make possible the successful completion 
of the armed phase of the African revolutionary struggle 
for total emancipation and an All-African Union Govern-
ment. 
The Black Power movement in the U.S.A., and the 
struggles of peoples of African descent in the Caribbean, 
South America and elsewhere, form an integral part of the 
African politico-military revolutionary struggle. Our victory 
will be their victory also, and the victory of all the revolu-
tionary, oppressed and exploited masses of the world who 
are challenging the capitalist, imperialist and neo-colonialist 
power structure of reaction and counter-revolution. 
Conakry, Guinea. 
30th July 1968.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RULES OF DISCIPLINE 
1. Obey orders in all your actions. 
2. Do not take a single needle or piece of thread from the 
masses. 
3. Turn in everything captured. 
4. Speak politely. 
5. Pay fairly for what you buy. 
6. Return everything you borrow. 
7. Pay for anything you damage. 
8. Do not hit or swear at people. 
9. Do not damage crops. 
10. Do not take liberties with women. 
11. Do not ill-treat captives. 
12. Keep your eyes and ears open. 
13. Know the enemy within. 
14. Always guide and protect the children. 
15. Always be the servant of the people.


--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
BOOK ONE—KNOW THE ENEMY   1 
PREFACE 
CHAPTER ONE 
THE WORLD STRATEGY OF 
IMPERIALISM 1 
Know the enemy—Collective imperialism—
Sham independence—Neo-colonialism—The 
struggle  against neo-colonialism—Propa-
ganda and psychological warfare—Foreign 
military preparedness—The need for Pan-
African organisation. 
CHAPTER TWO 
OUR OBJECTIVES     24 
Nationalism — Pan-Africanism — Socialism 
—The present stage of the liberation struggle 
—Accumulated experience of the African 
people's unity movement—Sham indepen-
dence and the unity movement—African 
people's wars and imperialist escalation—
The Organisation of African Unity—Some 
essential features of the enemy's offensive—
The need for self-critical objective diagnosis.


--- PAGE 7 ---
BOOK TWO—STRATEGY, TACTICS AND 
TECHNIQUES 
PAGE 
PREFACE 42 
CHAPTER ONE 
ORGANISATION FOR REVOLU-
TIONARY WARFARE 
A. THE MILITARY BALANCE   43 
Liberated areas—Zones under enemy control 
— Contested zones — Retarding factors —
High command—The need for co-ordinated 
revolutionary action. 
B. POLITICO-MILITARY 
ORGANISATION   56 
The All-African People's Revolutionary Party 
(AAPRP) and the All-African Committee 
for Political Co-ordination (AACPC)—The 
All-African People's Revolutionary Army 
(AAPRA) — AAPRA headquarters — The 
AACPC and our revolutionary strategy—
The army corps—AAPRA's structure and 
strategy—Equipment and composition of the 
armed forces—Recruitment—General princi-
ples of training—Physical training—Tech-
nical training—Political education—Leader-
ship. 
C. OUR HUMAN FORCES     75 
The peasants—The rural proletariat—Neo-
colonialist control over the advanced sectors 
of production—Workers in the mines, indust-
ries and trade—Neo-colonialist attempts at 
integration—The truth behind the salaries 
The failure of imperialist tactics—The 
workers' movement and revolutionary strat-
egy—The role of students—The nationalist 
bourgeoisie—Revolutionary outsiders—The 
role of women—Women in enemy-held zones 
—Women in the bases and liberated areas—
The training of women. 
PAGE 
D. PROPAGANDA   95 
Propaganda to subvert the enemy—Propa-
ganda addressed to the people—Suggestions 
for propaganda items. 
CHAPTER TWO 
BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES 
OF GUERRILLA WARFARE 
A. ORGANISATION OF A GUERRILLA 
ARMY     103 
Recruitment — Information — Operations 
—Sabotage — Instruction — Armament —
Provisions — Health — Propaganda — Vol-
unteers — Communications — Guerrilla units 
— Guerrilla unit and group leaders 
Training — Equipment. 
B. STRATEGY AND TACTICS   108 
Mobility—Concentration and dispersal of 
forces—Bases—Choice of objectives for attack 
—Combat in favourable terrain—Combat in 
unfavourable terrain — Villages — Towns —
Discipline — Reconnaissance — Prisoners —
Camouflage—Acquisition of arms—Storage 
of arms — Espionage — Enemy spies and


--- PAGE 8 ---
infiltrators — Enemy attack — Sabotage —
Attacking a village—Dead and wounded—
Defence of an occupied village—Relations 
between guerrillas and civilians—Political 
work—Civilian organisations. 
PAGE 
C. MATERIALS FOR DESTRUCTION 122 
The guerrilla is the masses in arms


--- PAGE 9 ---
BOOK ONE 
KNOW THE ENEMY 
PREFACE 
The new phase of the armed revolutionary struggle in Africa 
embraces the entire continent. It is essential that we know 
what we fight, and why we fight. Imperialism and neo-
colonialism must be broken down into their component 
parts so that we can clearly see them. We must know their 
world strategy. 
In this book I have attempted to show the nature and 
extent of imperialist and neo-colonialist aggression, and our 
objectives in the struggle for the freedom and the political 
unification of Africa. 
CHAPTER ONE 
THE WORLD STRATEGY OF IMPERIALISM 
Know the enemy 
A number of external factors affect the African situation, 
and if our liberation struggle is to be placed in correct per-
spective and we are to KNOW THE ENEMY, the impact 
of these factors must be fully grasped. First among them is 
imperialism, for it is mainly against exploitation and 
poverty that our peoples revolt. It is therefore of paramount 
importance to set out the strategy of imperialism in clear 
terms : 
1. The means used by the enemy to ensure the continued 
economic exploitation of our territories. 
2. The nature of the attempts made to destroy the lib-
eration movement. 
Once the components of the enemy's strategy are deter- 
1


--- PAGE 10 ---
mined, we will be in a position to outline the correct strategy 
for our own struggle in terms of our actual situation and 
in accordance with our objectives. 
Before the Second World War, the world (excluding the 
USSR, China, etc.) was divided into : 
(a) Capitalist states practising orthodox imperialism 
under the generally known form of imperialism. 
(b) Colonial territories which fed the economies of the 
capitalist imperialist states. (The Latin American 
territories had already passed from the status of 
"Spanish" and "Portuguese" colonies to that of neo-
colonies.) 
However, after the Second World War, serious economic, 
social and political tensions arose in both spheres. 
(a) Inside the capitalist-imperialist states, workers' 
organisations had become comparatively strong and 
experienced, and the claims of the working class for 
a more substantial share of the wealth produced by 
the capitalist economy could no longer be ignored. 
The necessity to concede had become all the more im-
perative since the European capitalist system had 
been seriously shaken up by the near-holocaust which 
marked the experience of imperialist wars. 
(b) While the capitalist system of exploitation was coming 
to grips with its internal crises, the world's colonised 
areas were astir with the upsurge of strong liberation 
movements. Here again, demands could no longer be 
cast aside or ignored especially when they were chan-
nelled through irresistible mass movements, like the 
Rassemblement Democratique Africain (RDA), 
the Parti Démocratique de Guineé (PDG) and the 
Convention Peoples' Party (CPP) in Ghana. In 
certain areas, for example in Vietnam, Kenya and 
Algeria, direct confrontation demonstrated the readi-
ness of the oppressed peoples to implement their 
claims with blood and fire. 
Both in the colonial territories and in the metropolitan 
states, the struggle was being waged against the same 
enemy : international finance capital under its external and 
internal forms of exploitation, imperialism and capitalism. 
Threatened with disintegration by the double-fisted 
attack of the working class movement and the liberation 
movement, capitalism had to launch a series of reforms in 
order to build a protective armour around the inner 
workings of its system. 
To avoid an internal breakdown of the system under the 
pressure of the workers' protest movement, the govern-


--- PAGE 11 ---
ments of capitalist countries granted their workers certain 
concessions which did not endanger the basic nature of the 
capitalist system of exploitation. They gave them social 
security, higher wages, better working conditions, profess-
ional training facilities, and other improvements. 
These reforms helped to blur fundamental contradictions, 
and to remove some of the more glaring injustices while at 
the same time ensuring the continued exploitation of the 
workers. The myth was established of an affluent capitalist 
society promising abundance and a better life for all. The 
basic aim, however, was the establishment of a "welfare 
state" as the only safeguard against the threat of fascism 
or communism. 
However, the problem was to find a way to avoid sacri- 
ficing the all-important principle of ever-increasing profits 
for the owning minority, and also to find the money needed 
to finance the welfare state. 
By way of a solution, capitalism proceeded to introduce 
not only internal reforms, but external reforms designed to 
raise the extra money needed for the establishment and the 
maintenance of the welfare state at home. In other words, 
modern capitalism had come to depend more heavily than 
before on the exploitation of the material and human re-
sources of the colonial territories. On the external front, 
therefore, it became necessary for international finance 
capital to carry out reforms in order to eliminate the 
deadly threat to its supremacy of the liberation movement. 
The urgent need for such reforms was made clear by the 
powerful growth and expansion of the liberation forces in 
Africa, Asia and Latin America, where revolutionary move-
ments had not only seized power but were actually con-
solidating their gains. Developments in the USSR, 
China, Cuba, North Vietnam, North Korea, and in 
Egypt, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Algeria and other parts of 
Africa, showed that not only was the world balance of forces 
shifting, but that the capitalist-imperialist states were con-
fronted with a real danger of encirclement. 
Collective imperialism 
The modifications introduced by imperialism in its strategy 
were expressed : 
(a) through the disappearance of the numerous old-
fashioned "colonies" owing exclusive allegiance to a 
single metropolitan country. 
(b) through the replacement of "national" imperialisms 
by a "collective" imperialism in which the USA 
occupies a leading position.


--- PAGE 12 ---
The roots of this process may be traced back to the period 
of the Second World War, when the socialist camp was 
still too small and weak to give decisive assistance to the 
European working class movement. The workers were 
therefore all the more easily deflected from the objectives 
of their struggle, and allowed themselves to be dragged into 
a bloody war of imperialism. 
The Second World War seriously strained the political 
and economic strength of Europe, although capitalism as a 
system emerged relatively intact. However, the true winner 
of the whole contest turned out to be the United States of 
America. Having helped the allies to win the war, the USA 
was from then on able to retain its pre-eminent position, 
and to acquire increasing influence in the economic life of 
the exhausted European states. 
This "internationalisation" or "syndicalisation" enabled 
US imperialism to forestall temporarily an incipient 
crisis by fulfilling two sin qua non conditions : 
I. The need to expand 
The US-European post-war alliance not only enabled 
the USA to benefit from the advantages of the Euro-
pean market, which had hitherto been largely closed 
to its penetration; but also opened up new horizons in 
Asia, Africa, and Latin America where the USA 
had already superceded European supremacy and 
established neo-colonialist domination. 
2. The need to militarise 
The militarisation of the US economy, based on 
the political pretext of the threatening rise of the 
USSR and later of the People's Republic of China as 
socialist powers, enabled the USA to postpone its in-
ternal crises, first during the "hot" war (1939-1945) 
and then during the "cold" war (since 1945) . 
6 
Militarisation served two main purposes : 
1. It absorbed, and continues to absorb, an excess of 
unorganised energy into the intense armaments drive 
which supports imperialist aggression and many blocs 
and alliances formed by imperialist powers over the 
last twenty years. 
2. It made possible an expensive policy of paternalist 
corruption of the poor and oppressed people of the 
world. 
The principle of mutual inter-imperialist assistance 
whereby American, British, French and West German 
monopoly capital extends joint control over the wealth of 
the non-liberated zones of Africa, Latin America and Asia, 
finds concrete expression in the formation of interlocked 
international financial institutions and bodies of credit: 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), USA 25% of the 
votes. 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD), USA 34% of the votes. 
International Development Association (IDA), USA 
41% of the votes. 
On a lesser scale, Europe as a whole, and West Germany 
in particular, find profitable outlets for big business in 
Africa through the agencies of such organisations as the 
European Common Market (EEC). 
The imperialists even make use of the United Nations 
Organisation in order to camouflage their neo-colonialist 
objectives. This can be seen, for example in US policy in 
South Korea and the Congo. 
Sham independence 
But as far as the imperialists are concerned the real solu- 
tion to the problem of continued exploitation through con- 
7


--- PAGE 13 ---
cessions and reform lies in the concept of "sham-indepen-
dence". A state can be said to be a neo-colonialist or client 
state if it is independent de jure and dependent de facto. 
It is a state where political power lies in the conservative 
forces of the former colony and where economic power re-
mains under the control of international finance capital. 
In other words, the country continues to be economically 
exploited by interests which are alien to the majority of 
the ex-colonised population but are intrinsic to the world 
capitalist sector. Such a state is in the grip of neo-
colonialism. It has become a client state. 
Neo-colonialism 
The pre-requisite of a correct and global strategy to defeat 
neo-colonialism is the ability to discover and expose the 
way in which a state becomes neo-colonialist. For although 
a neo-colonialist state enjoys only sham independence it is 
to all outward appearances independent, and therefore the 
very roots of neo-colonialism must be traced back to the 
struggle for independence in a colonial territory. 
If the liberation movement is firmly established, the colo-
nial power invariably resorts to a "containment" policy 
in order to stop any further progress, and to deaden its 
impact. To achieve this objective, the colonial power uses 
its arsenal of alliances, its network of military bases, eco-
nomic devices such as corruption, sabotage and blackmail, 
and equally insidious, the psychological weapon of propa-
ganda with a view to impressing on the masses a number of 
imperialist dogmas : 
1. That western democracy and the parliamentary 
system are the only valid ways of governing; that 
they constitute the only worth-while model for the 
training of an indigenous élite by the colonial power. 
2. That capitalism, free enterprise, free competition, 
etc., are the only economic systems capable of pro-
moting development; that the western powers have 
mastered the liberal-capitalist technique perfectly; 
that the colonial territory should become an economic 
satellite in its own interest; that there is no reason to 
put an end to the policy of "co-operation" pursued 
during the colonial regime; and that any attempt to 
break away would be dangerous, since the colonial 
power is always ready to give "aid". 
3. That the slightest "lapse" on the part of the leaders 
of the liberation movement could push the country 
into the grip of "communism" and of "totalitarian 
dictatorship". 
4. That the carve-up agreed upon by the imperialists 
during the colonial period is fair and sacred; that it 
would be unthinkable even to attempt to liberate areas 
in terms of their common cultural and historical links; 
that the only acceptable version of "liberation" must 
apply to the artificial units designed by the imperia-
lists, and hurriedly labelled "nations" in spite of the 
fact that they are neither culturally unified, nor 
economically self-sufficient. 
As a further justification of its policy, imperialism usu-
ally resorts to all types of propaganda in order to highlight 
and exploit differences of religion, culture, race, outlook, 
and of political ideology among the oppressed masses, or 
between regions which share a long history of mutual 
commercial and cultural exchange. 
Such methods aim to orientate the leaders of the libera-
tion movements towards a brand of nationalism based on 
petty-minded and aggressive ,  chauvinism, as well as to steer 
the liberation movement along a reformist path. The prob-


--- PAGE 14 ---
lem of "liberation" is therefore usually raised in terms of 
a participation of "good" indigenous elements in the 
administration of the colonised territory, for instance 
through a policy of "africanisation" devoid of any funda-
mental changes in the political, economic and administrative 
structure of the territory. 
The transition to neo-colonialism is marked by a succes-
sion of more or less important measures which culminate 
into a ritual of so-called free elections, mostly organised 
through methods of intimidation. Local agents, selected by 
the colonial power as "worthy representatives" are then 
presented to the people as the champions of national inde-
pendence, and are immediately given all the superficial 
attributes of power : a puppet government has been formed. 
By the very nature of its essential objective, which is 
exploitation, neo-colonialism can only flourish in a client 
state. 
When the farce of sham elections to form a puppet gov-
ernment proves too difficult to enact, the colonial power 
tries to divide the liberation movement into a "moderate" 
wing with which it seeks accommodation, and a militant 
wing which it endeavours to isolate and to suppress by 
force. 
In the last resort, neo-colonialists can even set up a bogus 
"progressive" party or organisation using local agents and 
maintain an artificial liberation movement which serves 
both as a worthy partner for negotiations and as an intelli-
gence and/or repression agency against the genuine libera-
tion movement supported by the oppressed masses. Such 
is the role played by FLING in regard to Guinea-Bissao, 
and UPA in regard to Angola. And so once more the stage 
is set for negotiations, autonomy and the formation of a 
puppet government. 
10 
However, the machinations of the colonial power will fail 
wherever the leaders of the struggle for independence main-
tain a clear spirit of vigilance, and cultivate genuinely 
revolutionary qualities. 
Then, and only then, does a truly independent govern-
ment emerge, dedicated to national reconstruction in 
the liberated territory, and determined to assist all those 
engaged in anti-imperialist struggle. 
Such a government is an obstacle barring the advance of 
neo-colonialism, and such obstacles must be increased be-
cause the example of genuine independence is contagious 
and will help to fortify extensive zones against imperialist 
aggression. 
Faced with genuine independence, imperialism is increas-
ingly compelled to resort to encirclement and subversion 
in order to overthrow these popular governments, using 
such weapons as coups d'etat, assassination, mutiny within 
the party, tribal revolt, palace revolutions, and so on, while 
at the same time strengthening neighbouring puppet 
regimes to form a political safety belt, a cordon sanitaire. 
Therefore, the main sphere in which we must strive to 
defeat neo-colonialist intrigues is within the movement for 
true independence; that is, within the progressive political 
party which forms the government. This is particularly true 
in the one party state which can only function successfully 
under socialism. Usually, this ruling party is made up 
of several groups each with its distinct economic and politi-
cal interests. The relative importance of each group in the 
party and state machinery will determine the course of de-
velopment. Imperialist strategy is therefore directed 
towards bringing into a position of pre-eminence that group 
which most nearly shares its economic and political views. 
If a member of a group which is absolutely opposed to 
11


--- PAGE 15 ---
imperialism is in control of the state and party, attempts 
are made to organise : 
Either 
1. Assassination or a coup d'état or "palace revolu-
tion" which will permit political power to fall into 
the lap of the rival but pro-imperialist group. 
Or 
2. A decentralisation of political power within the ruling 
party, one group being strong in the state machinery, 
the other strong in the party machine. Even in the 
state machine, the vital organs are artfully put into 
the hands of forces ready to parley with imperialists. 
The nursing of discontent and confusion within the 
party and among the people, through the spread of 
conflicting ideologies, rumours of economic run-
down, maladministration and corruption, will per-
mit the creation of an atmosphere of dissatisfaction 
favourable to a change in the personnel of govern-
ment. Ostensibly the same party is in power. In 
truth, a qualitative change in the nature of political 
power has taken place. 
Since the conglomerate nature of the ruling party is the 
basic fact on which neo-colonialist strategy depends, the 
main remedial measures must be directed to this sphere, 
and this problem must be borne in mind even before the 
achievement of independence. It is essential that positive 
action should in its dialectical evolution anticipate the 
seminal disintegration and discover a way of containing 
the future schismatic tendencies. 
Neo-colonialism constitutes the necessary condition for 
the establishment of welfare states by the imperialist 
nations. Just as the welfare state is the internal condition, 
neo-colonialism is the external condition, for the continued 
12 
hegemony of international finance capital. 
It is precisely the increasing dependence of the imperialist 
system on neo-colonialist exploitation on an international 
scale which renders its existence so precarious, and its future 
so uncertain. 
Significantly, the neo-colonialist system costs the capi-
talist powers comparatively little, while enormous and in-
creasing profits are made. This is shown by the ever-rising 
graphs representing the turn-over figures of the big capitalist 
business concerns implanted in the neo-colonialist areas of 
the world, and by the ever-widening gap between the 
wealthy and the poor peoples of the world. 
In the final analysis, the neo-colonialist system of exploi-
tation, which is the external condition for the maintenance 
13


--- PAGE 16 ---
of the capitalist welfare state, remains essentially dependent 
on the production of the neo-colonised workers, who must 
not only continue to produce under stagnant and continu-
ally worsening living conditions, but must produce sub-
stantially more than they did in the colonial days. They 
must do more than satisfy the needs of the metropolitan 
state. They must cater for the insatiable demands of the 
client government. 
The explosive character of this situation cannot be 
denied. The neo-colonialist government is virtually in a 
state of permanent conflict with its own masses, whilst the 
gap between the puppet administration and neo-colonised 
workers widens every day. 
It is therefore clear that a puppet regime cannot draw its 
strength from the support of the broad masses. It can only 
stay in power as long as it manages to subsist in the teeth 
of popular opposition and revolt. Hence, the imperative 
need to depend on a foreign power for military assistance 
merely to keep the neo-colonised government physically in 
power. 
Thus, the three essential components of neo-colonialism 
are : 
1. Economic exploitation 
2. Puppet governments and client states 
3. Military assistance 
4. Economic "aid" 
The vital necessity of "military aid" is fulfilled through 
various channels : foreign technical assistance to the armed 
forces, control of the armed forces by officers and western 
military cadres, secret military agreements, the formation 
of special units for the repression of popular insurrection, 
and so on. The important thing is to know how to recognise 
this type of "aid", in whatever guise it appears, for it is 
the most blatant proof of the anti-popular, aggressive and 
basically violent character of all neo-colonialist regimes. Its 
escalation and impact increase proportionately to the widen-
ing gap between the puppets and the oppressed masses, and 
it is directly related to the development of organised, 
popular resistance. 
It is also to be noted that US policy found its most 
complete expression, after the murder of President 
Kennedy, in the Johnson doctrine whereby military aggres-
sion, under the name of "preventive measures", became an 
integral part of neo-colonialist practice. 
The struggle against neo-colonialism 
Military strategy presupposes political aims. All military 
15


--- PAGE 17 ---
problems are political, and all political problems are 
economic. 
Both the basic nature of neo-colonialism and the accu-
mulated experience of liberation movements in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America indicate clearly that the only way for 
the broad masses to eradicate neo-colonialism is through 
a revolutionary movement springing from a direct confront-
ation with the imperialists, and drawing its strength from 
the exploited and disinherited masses. The struggle against 
puppet governments, and against all forms of exploitation, 
is the basic condition for the survival and development of 
a genuine liberation movement in Africa. We must accept 
the challenge and fight to destroy this threat to our future 
as a free and united continent. 
Independence must never be considered as an end in it-
self but as a stage, the very first stage of the people's revo-
lutionary struggle. 
Propaganda and psychological warfare 
Throughout the struggle we must recognise and combat 
enemy attempts to demoralise us. For, in the face of the 
failure to achieve military solutions against well-organised, 
broadly-based guerrilla forces, as for example in Vietnam, 
the enemy has stepped up its efforts in the propaganda war. 
The aim is: 
1. To prevent a liberation movement from getting under 
way, by destroying it at its source, i.e. by under-
mining the will to fight. 
2. Where revolutionary warfare has actually begun, to 
conquer it by political means, i.e. by granting just 
sufficient political, economic and social "reform" to 
encourage all but the so-called "extremists" to aban-
don the struggle. 
16 
Psychological attacks are made through the agency of 
broadcasting stations like the BBC, Voice of Germany, 
and above all, Voice of America, which pursues its brain-
washing mission through newsreels, interviews and other 
"informative" programmes at all hours of the day and 
night, on all wavelengths and in many languages, including 
"special English". The war of words is supplemented by 
written propaganda using a wide range of political devices 
such as embassy bulletins, pseudo "revolutionary" publi-
cations, studies on "nationalism" and on "African socia-
lism", the literature spread by the so-called independent 
and liberal publishers, "cultural" and "civic education" 
centres, and other imperialist subversive organisations. 
The paper war penetrates into every town and village, 
and into the remotest parts of the "bush". It spreads in the 
form of free distributions of propaganda films praising the 
qualities of western civilisation and culture. These are some 
of the ways in which the psychological terrain is prepared. 
When the target, a certain country or continent, is suffi-
ciently "softened", then the invasion of evangelist brigades 
begins, thus perpetuating the centuries old tactic whereby 
missionaries prepare the way for guns. Peace Corps divi-
sions stream in, and Moral Rearmament units, Jehovah 
witnesses, information agencies and international financial 
"aid" organisations. 
In this way, a territory or even an entire continent is 
besieged without a single marine in sight. A sprinkling of 
political and little-publicised murders, like that of Pio 
Pinto in Kenya, and Moumié  in Geneva, are used to assist 
the process. 
A recent development in the psychological war is the 
campaign to convince us that we cannot govern ourselves, 
that we are unworthy of genuine independence, and that 
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
foreign tutelage is the only remedy for our wild, warlike 
and primitive ways. 
Imperialism has done its utmost to brainwash Africans 
into thinking that they need the strait-jackets of colonialism 
and neo-colonialism if they are to be saved from their retro-
gressive instincts. Such is the age-old racialist justification 
for the economic exploitation of our continent. And now, 
the recent military coups engineered throughout Africa by 
foreign reactionaries are also being used to corroborate 
imperialism's pet theory that the Africans have shamelessly 
squandered the "golden opportunities" of independence, 
and that they have plunged their political kingdoms into 
blood and barbarism. 
Therefore, the imperialist mission : we must save them 
anew; and they hail the western-trained and western-bought 
army puppets as saviours. The press, films and radio are 
fast spreading the myth of post-independence violence and 
chaos. Everywhere, the more or less covert implication is : 
Africa needs to be recolonised. 
The fact that Africa has advanced politically more 
quickly than any other continent in the world is ignored. 
In 1957 when Ghana became independent and the political 
renaissance began in Africa, there were only eight inde-
pendent states. Now, in just over ten years, there are over 
forty and the final liberation of the continent is in sight. 
Imperialists are not content with trying to convince us 
that we are politically immature. They are telling us, now 
that we are realising that armed revolution is the only way 
to defeat neo-colonialism, that we are inherently incapable 
of fighting a successful revolutionary war. 
This new psychological propaganda campaign is being 
waged in various subtle ways. First, there is what may be 
called the "moral" argument : Africans are constantly 
18 
being reminded that they are a peace-loving, tolerant and 
communalist-minded people. The African is projected as an 
individual who has always been loath to shed blood. The 
corollary of this argument is that it would be immoral and 
against our nature to engage in revolutionary warfare. 
The moral argument is easily destroyed. Centuries of 
liberation wars, wars of conquest, revolution and counter-
revolution in the west were not considered to be moral or 
immoral. They were simply part of western historical de-
velopment. Our armed struggle for freedom is neither 
moral nor immoral, it is a scientific historically-determined 
necessity. 
The second argument used to deflect us from the inevi-
tability of armed struggle is the so-called "economy" argu-
ment. It runs something like this : modern neo-colonialism 
does not constitute a danger to young, revolutionary Afri-
can states, and therefore the military training and arming 
of the broad masses is an expensive and frivolous enter-
prise. The corollary of this reactionary argument is : since 
you cannot, in the present under-developed state of your 
economy, afford the "luxury" of your own defence, let 
us take care of it for you. And the trap is set. 
Last but not least, is a third series of racialist and de-
featist arguments designed to spread the myth that no Afri-
can revolutionary is capable of carrying an armed struggle 
through to the end. It condemns a-priori all African revo-
lutionary activities to failure. It wraps revolutionary war-
fare on our continent in an aura of disparagement, and tries 
to cripple us with a sense of inadequacy as freedom fighters. 
By means of press and radio, accounts are given of the 
capture of "terrorists" by "security forces", (note the 
choice of words), the "terrorists" being usually described 
as poorly-trained, ill-equipped, demoralised and uncertain 
19


--- PAGE 19 ---
of the cause for which they are fighting. Where arms and 
military equipment are seized, it is always labelled 
"Russian" or "Chinese", to suggest that the freedom 
fighters who use them are not African nationalists, but the 
dupes and tools of foreign governments. 
When freedom fighters are captured and tried in courts 
of law, they are treated as criminals, not as prisoners of war, 
and are imprisoned, shot or hanged, usually after 
so-called confessions have been extorted. This refusal to 
recognise freedom fighters as soldiers is again part of im-
perialist strategy designed to pour scorn on the armed revo-
lutionary movement, and at the same time to discourage 
further recruits. 
The campaign is based on the counter-insurgency law 
whereby "it is necessary to attack the revolution during 
the initial stages of the movement when it is still weak, 
when it has not yet fulfilled that which should be its main 
aspiration,—a total integration with the people". (Ché 
Guevara.) This is why we are being told that Africans are 
incapable of sustaining revolutionary warfare : — 
(a) racially 
(b) because of our historical background 
(c) for lack of cadres, ideology and leadership. 
In one breath, we are accused of being too primitive to 
govern ourselves, and in the next we are accused of not 
being primitive enough to wage guerrilla warfare ! 
The problem is not whether one is born or is not born 
a natural revolutionary fighter. The problem is not whether 
revolutionaries are naturally suited to Africa, or Africa to 
revolutionary warfare. Predestination of this sort never 
exists. The fact is that revolutionary warfare is the key to 
African freedom and is the only way in which the total 
20 
liberation and unity of the African continent can be 
achieved. 
Foreign military preparedness 
In pursuing their aggressive aims and fulfilling the re-
quirements of military strategy, the imperialists have built 
up a system of military blocs and alliances which provide 
the framework for a pattern of military bases in strategically 
important positions all over the world. The African freedom 
fighters, while mainly concerned with enemy strength in 
Africa, must nevertheless study this world pattern if they 
are to assess correctly the true dimensions of their struggle. 
The anti-imperialist and neo-colonialist struggle will, in 
fact, be world-wide, since revolutionary warfare will occur 
wherever the enemy operates. 
A substantial part of the military, anti-revolutionary 
effort is channelled into four organisations: 
NATO—North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (1949) 
USA, Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Holland, 
Luxembourg, Canada, Iceland, Norway, Denmark, 
Portugal. Since October 1951 Greece and Turkey, and 
since 1954 West Germany. 
SEATO—South East Asia Treaty Organisation (1954) 
USA, Britain, France, New Zealand, Australia, 
Philippines, Thailand and Pakistan. 
ANZUS—Australia, New Zealand, United States Treaty 
(1951). The Pacific Pact. 
CENTO—Central Treaty Organisation (1959) 
Britain, Turkey, Pakistan and Iran. Emerged from 
the 1955 Baghdad Pact. USA in 1959 entered into 
bilateral defence agreements with Turky, Iran and 
Pakistan. 
In effect, this system of military blocs and alliances en- 
21


--- PAGE 20 ---
ables US imperialism to exert de facto leadership not 
only over the entire "western" world, but over extensive 
zones in Latin America and Asia. This is achieved through 
an external network of some 2,200 bases and installations 
manned by approximately a million troops in readiness for 
war. 
The US external forces of intervention may be grouped 
as follows. 
Group One : Against the USSR with bases in Western 
Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. 
Group Two : Against China with bases in Pakistan, 
South East Asia and the Pacific Ocean. 
Group Three : Against revolutionary movements in Latin 
America—the Organisation of American States 
(OAS) group with bases in Panama, the Bermudas 
and Porto Rico. 
In Africa, there are at present seventeen air bases owned 
and operated by members of NATO. There are nine foreign 
naval bases. Foreign military missions exist for example 
in Kenya, Morocco, Liberia, Libya, South Africa, Senegal, 
Niger, Cameroon, Chad, Gabon and Ivory Coast. In addi-
tion, there are three rocket sites and an atomic testing range 
in North Africa. 
The armed forces of foreign powers in various strategi-
cally-important parts of our continent present a serious 
threat but not an insurmountable obstacle in the African 
revolutionary struggle. For they must be assessed in con-
junction with the forces of settler, minority governments in 
Rhodesia and South Africa, and with imperialist forces in 
the few remaining colonial territories. 
The formation of NATO led to the signing of the Warsaw 
Treaty in 1954, by which the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, 
Hungary, German Democratic Republic, Poland, Ru- 
22 
mania, Czechoslavakia and Albania made arrangements 
to protect themselves against imperialist aggression. An 
attack on any one member would be regarded as an attack 
on all. Provision was made for: 
1. A political consultative body to take political decisions 
and to exchange information 
2. A united military command with headquarters in 
Warsaw. 
The need for Pan-African organisation 
In comparison, the Independent States of Africa are at 
present militarily weak. Unlike the imperialists and neo-
colonialists they have no mutual defence system and no 
unified command to plan and direct joint action. But this 
will be remedied with the formation of the All-African 
People's Revolutionary Army and the setting up of organi-
sations to extend and plan effective revolutionary warfare 
on a continental scale. 
We possess the vital ingredient necessary to win,—the 
full and enthusiastic support of the broad masses of the 
African people who are determined once and for all to end 
all forms of foreign exploitation, to manage their own 
affairs, and to determine their own future. Against such 
overwhelming strength organised on a Pan-African basis, 
no amount of enemy forces can hope to succeed. 
23


--- PAGE 21 ---
Chapter Two 
OUR OBJECTIVES 
Our objectives are defined by the three political compo-
nents of our liberation movement : 
1. Nationalism 
2. Pan-Africanism 
3. Socialism 
The three objectives of our struggle stem from our posi-
tion as peoples in revolt against exploitation in Africa. 
These objectives are closely inter-related and one cannot 
be achieved fully without the other. If one of the three com-
ponents is missing, no territory on our continent can secure 
genuine freedom or maintain a stable government. 
Nationalism 
Nationalism is the ideological channel of the anti-colonia-
list struggle and represents the demand for national inde-
pendence of colonised peoples. It is a concept most easily 
grasped by the population of territories where the low level 
of development of productive forces (and therefore of capi-
talist implantation), and the absence of indigenous elements 
in the spheres of political power, are factors that facilitate 
the formation of a united militant front, one of the primary 
conditions for a successful liberation movement. 
Colonised peoples are not highly differentiated from a 
social point of view, and are exploited practically without 
discrimination by the colonial power. Hence the slogan : 
"the nation must be freed from colonialism" is a univers- 
24 
ally accepted rallying cry whose influence is heightened by 
the fact that the agents of colonialism, exploiting the terri-
tory from within, are there for everybody to see. It is there-
fore the people as a whole who revolt and struggle as a 
"nation-class" against colonial oppression, and who win 
independence. 
The nationalist phase is a necessary step in the liberation 
struggle, but must never be regarded as the final solution 
to the problem raised by the economic and political exploi-
tation of our peoples. For nationalism is narrow in its appli-
cation. It works within the geopolitical framework pro-
duced by the colonial powers which culminated in the carve-
up agreed upon in 1884 at the Berlin Conference, where 
today's political maps of Africa were drawn. 
The various peoples of Africa cannot be, and historically 
never have been, confined behind rigid frontiers sealing off 
territories labelled "Nigeria", "Togo", "Senegal", and so 
on. The natural movements of the African peoples and of 
their societies have from time immemorial swept along ex-
tensive axes as for example from the Nile to the Congo, 
from Senegal to the Niger, and from the Congo to the 
Zambesi. 
The African "nations" of today, created artificially by 
foreigners for their own purposes, neither originate from 
ancient African civilisation, nor do they fit in with our 
African way of life or habits of exchange. They are not 
even, for the most part, economically viable. Yet they 
continue to struggle on, each one separately, in a pathetic 
and hopeless attempt to make progress, while the real 
obstacle to their development, imperialism, mainly in its 
neo-colonialist stage, is operating on a Pan-African scale. 
Already, huge zones of Africa have been integrated eco-
nomically in the exclusive interest of international finance 
25


--- PAGE 22 ---
capital. A study of the organisation and workings of most 
of the large trading firms, mining trusts and industrial 
cartels operating in Africa shows that they all function 
directly or indirectly on a continental scale. Many of them 
form part of a general network spreading over several 
continents. 
This monopolistic system of exploitation is the direct 
outcome of prolonged capitalist practice, the experience 
being that extended and unified industrial, commercial or 
mining units are less costly to maintain, are more efficient, 
and produce higher profits. 
It is time that we also planned our economic and political 
development on a continental scale. The concept of African 
unity embraces the fundamental needs and characteristics of 
African civilisation and ideology, and at the same time satis-
fies all the conditions necessary for an accelerated economic 
and technological advance. Such maximum development 
would ensure a rational utilisation of the material resources 
and human potential of our continent along the lines of an 
integrated economy, and within complementary sectors of 
production, eliminating all unnecessary forms of competi-
tion, economic alienation and duplication. The idea is not 
to destroy or dismantle the network of foreign mining com-
plexes and industrial companies throughout Africa, but to 
take them over and operate them in the sole interest of the 
African peoples. 
Finally, the limitations of "nationalism" may be seen in 
the experience of countries which have succeeded in casting 
off one imperialism only to be oppressed by another, or by 
a syndicate of imperialisms, as in Latin America. Merely 
to change masters is no solution to colonial poverty or neo-
colonialist strangulation, even if exploitation is subsequently 
practised in a more subtle way. 
26 
African unity gives an indispensable continental dimen-
sion to the concept of the African nation. 
Pan-Africanism 
The limitations of nationalism have already been acknow-
ledged by the most mature leaders of the liberation move-
ment; but wherever the conditions for the transition to a 
higher ideological level and a wider form of struggle were 
lacking, the necessary leap could not be made, and nationa-
lism was never transcended. 
The true dimensions of our struggle were outlined at the 
Fifth Pan-African Congress held in Manchester, England 
in 1945, when resolutions were passed specifying that the 
supreme objective of the national liberation movement was 
to pave the way to national reconstruction and to promote 
democracy and prosperity for the broad masses through 
an All-African struggle against colonialism and all the new 
manifestations of imperialism No reference was made to 
neo-colonialism as such, because this only developed on a 
massive scale in Africa after 1957. But the Pan-Africanism 
which found expression at the Manchester Congress (1945), 
and the All-African People's Conference (1958) was based 
on the age-old aspiration towards unity of all peoples of 
African origin exploited as workers and as a race. 
African unity therefore implies: 
1. That imperialism and foreign oppression should be 
eradicated in all their forms. 
2. That neo-colonialism should be recognised and elimi-
nated. 
3. That the new African nation must develop within a 
continental framework. 
However, the specific content of the new social order 
within the developing African nation remains to be defined. 
27


--- PAGE 23 ---
Socialism 
At the core of the concept of African unity lies socialism 
and the socialist definition of the new African society. 
Socialism and African unity are organically complemen-
tary. 
Socialism implies: 
1. Common ownership of the means of production, dis-
tribution and exchange. Production is for use, and 
not for profit. 
2. Planned methods of production by the state, based 
on modern industry and agriculture. 
3. Political power in the hands of the people, with the 
entire body of workers possessing the necessary gov-
ernmental machinery through which to express their 
needs and aspirations. It is a concept in keeping with 
the humanist and egalitarian spirit which character-
ised traditional African society, though it must be 
applied in a modern context. All are workers; and no 
person exploits another. 
4. Application of scientific methods in all spheres of 
thought and production. 
Socialism must provide a new social synthesis in which 
the advanced technical society is achieved without the 
appalling evils and deep cleavages of capitalist industrial 
society. 
Socialism has become a necessity in the platform diction 
of African political leaders, though not all pursue really 
socialist policies. We must therefore be on our guard against 
measures which are declared to be "socialist" but which 
do not in fact promote economic and social development. 
An example of muddled thinking about socialism is the 
attempt made in recent years to suggest the existence of an 
"African Socialism" peculiar to our continent. 
28 
There is only one true socialism and that is scientific 
socialism, the principles of which are abiding and universal. 
The only way to achieve it is to devise policies aimed at 
general socialist goals, which take their form from the con-
crete, specific circumstances and conditions of a particular 
country at a definite historical period. 
The socialist countries of Africa may differ in the details 
of their policies. There are different paths to socialism, and 
adjustments have to be made to suit particular circum-
stances. But they should not be arbitrarily decided, or sub-
ject to vagaries of taste. They must be scientifically 
explained. 
Only under socialism can we reliably accumulate the 
capital we need for our development, ensure that the gains 
of investment are applied to the general welfare, and 
achieve our goal of a free and united continent. 
The present stage of the liberation struggle 
An objective appraisal of the degree of success so far 
attained in our struggle leads to the consideration of three 
theses of major importance : 
1. The achievement of genuine independence by an 
African state is but a part of the over-all process of 
continental decolonisation. 
2. No independent state is immune to imperialist in-
trigue, pressure and subversion as long as imperialism 
under any guise is left free to operate on the African 
continent. 
3. The degree of completeness of our victory over im-
perialism has a determining influence on how far post-
independence reconstruction can go. In other words, 
the people will have no equitable share in national 
reconstruction and its benefits unless the victory over 
29


--- PAGE 24 ---
imperialism in its colonialist and neo-colonialist stages 
is complete. 
It therefore follows that the unity of the African people 
expressed in a Union Government is necessary : 
(a) to accelerate the liberation struggle in territories still 
under colonial domination. 
(b) for the security of already independent states, and 
particularly for those which have chosen to follow a 
line of total opposition to imperialism. 
(c) to protect the flanks of our drive towards socialist, 
domestic reconstruction. 
These considerations should be able to serve as : 
1. A basic formula to link up with all aspects of the anti-
imperialist struggle in Africa. 
2. A blue-print for the people's action. 
3. A yardstick for the evaluation of political develop-
ment and phases in the history of Africa. 
Accumulated experience of the African People's unity 
movement 
Equipped with a clear knowledge of our objectives, we 
are in a position to undertake a critical appraisal of recent 
developments in African history. This is necessary if we 
are to draw positive lessons from past experience, to deter-
mine both the area of deviation and the need for correction, 
and to devise a more effective strategy for the future. 
Shortly after Ghana achieved independence in 1957 there 
began a rapid succession of events caused by a great up-
surge of interest in the African people's movement towards 
emancipation and unity. The three most significant events 
which sparked off the process were : 
1. The first Conference of Independent African States 
held in Accra in April 1958. At that time there were 
30 
only eight independent states : Ethiopia, Ghana, 
Liberia, Libya, Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia and Egypt. 
The purpose was to : 
(a) discuss questions of mutual interest 
(b) explore ways and means of consolidating and 
safeguarding independence 
(c) strengthen the economic and cultural ties between 
the independent states 
(d) find ways of helping Africans still oppressed 
under colonial rule. 
The African leaders in attendance were resolutely and 
unanimously anti-imperialist, and agreed to co-
ordinate diplomacy, mainly at UN level. 
Pan-African conferences had hitherto been held over-
seas. In 1958, Pan-Africanism had moved to the 
African continent, where it really belonged. 
2. The All-African Peoples' Conference held in Accra 
in December 1958. Representatives of sixty-two 
African nationalist organisations attended and dis-
cussed the various aspects of the liberation movement. 
The organisation of unitary action between African 
political movements was then launched. 
3. The third All-African Peoples' Conference held in 
Cairo in March 1961, when the whole question of neo-
colonialism was brought to the forefront in discus-
sions on the African revolutionary struggle. 
The development of unitary, anti-imperialist action be-
tween struggling peoples, and at the level of the governments 
of independent states, constituted a two-pronged attack 
against imperialism. 
The imperialists acted accordingly : 
(a) through diplomatic pressure 
(b) by granting sham independence to a number of states. 
31


--- PAGE 25 ---
The trick worked well. However, a clear prefiguration of 
later events was to be enacted at the Sanniquellie Conference 
held in Liberia in July 1959. Two views were expressed on 
the question of African unity. The first advocated the 
tightest "binding together of our forces in political unity", 
while the second was in favour of a "formula flexible 
enough to enable each state to safeguard its national 
sovereignty and personal identity". 
The latter view fitted in only too well with the objectives 
of the imperialists who had already recognised the need to 
adapt their policies to the changing colonial situation. Hard 
pressed by the armed struggle of the FLN in Algeria 
and to avoid any further crystallisation of revolutionary 
awareness amongst "extremist" African leaders, they 
decided to play their own version of nationalism. 
Accordingly, between 1959 and 1960, thirteen indepen-
dent states emerged : eleven former French colonies, and 
Congo-Leopoldville and Nigeria. A close analysis of the 
specific conditions under which each one of the thirteen 
states became independent reveals that neo-colonialism was 
incipient during the movement for independence, and 
emerged fully once independence was acquired. 
Sham independence and the unity movement 
Few were deceived by such a deliberate and obvious 
stratagem. Imperialism was merely using the device of 
sham independence to prepare the African terrain to suit 
its own convenience, and to avoid a direct and costly 
confrontation with the liberation movements. 
It was therefore not surprising that the divisions of 
opinion on the question of unity expressed at Sanniquellie, 
were much more in evidence during the Second Conference 
32 
of Independent African States held in Addis Ababa in 1960. 
At this Conference : 
1. The pivot of African unity was seen no longer as a 
firm political union, but merely as a loose policy of 
co-operation between African states. Moreover, the 
concept of regional groupings between states was 
endorsed. 
2. The principle of a collective foreign policy as agreed 
upon in Accra in 1958 gave way to the principle of a 
separate foreign policy for each state. In this way, 
imperialists gained more room for manoeuvre, for 
infiltration and for stirring up difficulties between 
African states. 
3. It was agreed that assistance to the Algerian liberation 
struggle was to take the form of diplomatic pressure 
on France, but was to by-pass official recognition of 
the GPRA.* In plain words, diplomatic shilly-
shallying was to take the place of a genuine anti-
imperialist confrontation. 
Therefore, as early as 1960, a wide gulf developed 
between those independent states which favoured co-
operation with imperialism, and those which proclaimed an 
unflinching offensive against it. 
The emergence of conflicting trends was not fortuitous 
but a logical consequence of the state of tension between 
qualitatively different situations : 
1. Genuine independence, the product of a mass politi-
cal movement or an armed liberation struggle. 
2. Sham independence, established by imperialists in an 
attempt to arrest the progress of the people's move-
ment through a betrayal of its essential objectives. 
*Algerian Provisional Government 
33


--- PAGE 26 ---
It is important to note that it was not the moderate policy 
of co-operation with imperialism which created the "mod-
erate" African states. On the contrary, it was the deliberate 
creation of such states by imperialism which gave rise to 
moderation and co-operation. The will to compromise is 
but a reflection, at diplomatic level of the neo-colonialist 
character of certain African states; it is the external mani-
festation of the inner characteristics of neo-colonial regimes. 
African people's wars and imperialist escalation 
However, far from weakening the anti-imperialist struggle 
and the vanguard revolutionary states, such measures can 
only strengthen their vigilance and revolutionary deter-
mination. 
Since 1960, the struggle of the African people and the 
more or less latent state of crisis inside many African terri-
tories have reached maturity. To counter-balance the 
growing revolutionary character of the African situation, 
the enemy's reaction has become more open and direct. 
Both the Algerian and the Congolese wars were born of the 
people's determination to free themselves at whatever cost, 
the only difference being that the Algerian revolt developed 
in an essentially colonial context, whereas the Congolese 
struggle is being waged in a neo-colonialist setting, marked 
by major imperialist aggression throughout the African 
continent. 
From a practical point of view, the differences between 
the various segments of the liberation struggle in time and 
space are minimal. The only factors which render the 
Congolese, Angolese or Rhodesian struggles (to take these 
examples only) more violent than others are, first, the 
escalation of imperialist action; and secondly, the more 
advanced nature of the people's organisation, though the 
34 
actual level of readiness to revolt may be just as high else-
where. 
Significantly, it was the frenzy of imperialist repression 
against the Algerian and Congolese liberation struggles 
which led to the calling of the Casablanca Conference 
in  1961, to which the GPRA was invited. The 
"Casablanca" states, as they were subsequently named, (i.e. 
Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Libya, Egypt, Morocco), and the 
Algerian FLN called for decisive action on the part of the 
independent states to support the anti-imperialist struggle 
in Africa. Further, a strong appeal for unity was made. 
For "in unity lies strength. African states must unite or 
sell themselves out to imperialist and colonialist exploiters 
for a mess of pottage, or disintegrate individually". 
Meantime, two new groupings, alike in content and with 
similar policies, were being formed : 
1. The Monrovia group which met in Monrovia in May 
1961 consisting mainly of English-speaking states 
whose loyalties were basically Anglo-American. 
2. The Brazzaville group made up of French-speaking 
states mostly aligned to France. 
Both these groups adopted a "go slow" attitude towards 
African emancipation and unity, and pursued a policy of 
conciliation with imperialism. Their views were expressed 
at the Lagos Conference (January 1962) when twenty of 
Africa's twenty-eight independent states met to discuss ways 
in which co-operation could be achieved. They agreed that : 
(a) The absolute sovereignty and legality of each African 
state must be respected. 
(b) The union of one state with another should be effected 
on a voluntary basis. 
(c) There should be non-interference in each other's 
affairs. 
35


--- PAGE 27 ---
(d) Political refugees from one state should not be given 
asylum in another state. 
North Africa was unrepresented at the Lagos Confer-
ence because the Algerian Provisional Government was not 
invited. The Casablanca powers and the Sudan also 
declined to go for the same reason. 
Imperialist diplomacy appeared to have achieved its 
purpose admirably, in splitting up the independent states 
of Africa into separate and conflicting groups. The efforts 
of the militant Casablanca group were checked by a pro-
imperialist bloc, which was in its turn sub-divided into 
pro-French and pro-English branches. 
The Organisation of African Unity (OAU) 
The militant African forces did achieve a certain amount 
of success when all blocs and groups joined together to 
form the OAU at Addis Ababa in 1963. However, 
appearances are sometimes deceptive: the dissolution of 
pro-imperialist groups did not mean that the interests they 
represented had also vanished. 
On the contrary, an examination of recent events exposes 
serious weaknesses within the OAU. The Organisation 
failed to solve the crises in the Congo and Rhodesia : both 
of them test cases,—the former involving a direct challenge 
to neo-colonialism, and the latter open confrontation with 
a minority, settler government. In fact, the OAU is in 
danger of developing into a useful cover for the continued, 
sterile action of conflicting interests, the only difference 
being, that in the context of one big "brotherly" organi-
sation reactionary tactics are camouflaged and applied 
through the subleties of negotiation. 
This change of tactics works as strongly as ever against 
the fundamental interests of progressive forces in Africa, 
36 
since it hides concessions to imperialism. 
Negotiations are conducted behind closed doors and sur-
rounded by a mysterious cloak of diplomatic protocol, 
making knowledge of the proceedings inaccessible to the 
general public. 
However, four explosive issues discussed at the OAU 
Conference in Accra in 1965, alerted progressive opinion to 
the dangers of continued compromise : 
1. The crisis in Rhodesia. 
2. The struggle in the Congo. 
3. The treatment of African political refugees. 
4. The problem of South West Africa. 
In the first case, the African heads of state failed to agree 
on a practical way of checking Ian Smith's rebellion, and 
instead fell back on the futile policy of negotiations with 
Britain combined with diplomatic pressure at international 
and UN level. 
Similarly, in the Congo, the fundamental issue of the 
crisis was avoided in spite of the tense situation resulting 
from the gallant stand of the freedom fighters carrying on 
the struggle in the spirit of Lumumba. 
On the question of the status and treatment of African 
political refugees the OAU again failed to find a solution, 
and heads of state continued to regard them merely as out-
laws or barter-goods. 
The radical African states in the OAU were confronted 
with the difficulty of finding effective expression for the 
aspirations of the broad masses of the people. The struggle 
seemed to unfold in two different spheres : the one in the 
streets, villages, workshops and factories; and the other in 
the hushed and closed atmosphere of air-conditioned houses 
and offices. In this situation the genuine threat of imperia-
lism and its neo-colonialist agents tended to be under-esti- 
37


--- PAGE 28 ---
mated, and the progressive states placed too much reliance 
on the OAU. 
In the meantime, the pro-imperialist states, although 
pretending to rally to the revolutionary elements within the 
OAU in order to avoid a direct confrontation, had been 
creating and expanding an organisation after their own 
heart : the Organisation Commune Africaine et Malgache 
(OCAM), into a larger unit to include all French-
speaking African states under the name "Francophonie". 
As a result, the progressive states, failing to close their 
ranks, were left to fight inadequately and alone against the 
massive escalation of imperialism, and the active consolida-
tion of its position through plots and a series of coups d'état. 
Some essential features of the enemy's offensive 
1.  Externally 
Mounting imperialist aggression in Africa foreshadows a 
decline in the strength of imperialism since the use of 
violence to maintain imperialist rule invariably sparks off 
a stronger explosion of revolutionary activity among op-
pressed peoples, and experience has shown that such move-
ments can be neither destroyed nor contained. The Ameri-
can fiascos in Vietnam, Santo Domingo and Cuba illustrate 
the point. So, also do the resolutions condemning US 
imperialism passed by representatives from three continents 
(Africa, Asia and Latin America) when they met in con-
ference at Havana in 1966. Taken aback by the compelling 
reality of tri-continental solidarity, the US imperialists 
hastened to condemn the Havana resolutions as "subver-
sive" and resolved to take "appropriate preventive meas-
ures, including military action" against any popular move-
ment considered to be a danger to the "free world" under 
US leadership. At the same time, they predicted other 
38 
coups in Africa during the ensuing year, and immediately set 
to work, with or without the collaboration of European 
accomplices, to help this prediction to come true. 
It was evidently felt that the resort to quick action was 
necessary because of the uncompromising stand against 
imperialist action in the "hot" zones of the world, taken by 
progressive governments. The latter were succeeding in 
arousing world opinion against imperialist atrocities in Viet-
nam, and in drawing attention to the worsening crises in 
Rhodesia and the Congo, the South African military build 
up, NATO's assistance to Portugal in her colonial wars, 
and "interventions" in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
2.  Internally 
The capitalist imperialist states face serious economic and 
social difficulties. Rising prices, balance of payments prob-
lems, widespread and repeated strikes are only a few of 
the symptoms of the general malaise. In the United States, 
the grave domestic situation is aggravated by the massive 
counter-attacks of the African-American revolutionaries. 
Almost everywhere, behind the smoke screens, the social 
and economic situation is unhealthy, and particularly in the 
second class capitalist states. And these mounting economic 
crises mean heavier and heavier dependence on the exploi-
tation of the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
The need for self-critical objective diagnosis 
If imperialists are faced with so many external and dom-
estic difficulties, how then can they afford to step up their 
aggression in Africa? To answer this question, it is necessary 
to examine the internal factors which make our continent 
so vulnerable to attack, and particularly to look closely 
at the whole question of African unity. For this lies at the 
core of our problem. 
39


--- PAGE 29 ---
There are three conflicting conceptions of African unity 
which explain to a large extent, the present critical 
situation in Africa : 
1. The mutual protection theory: that the OAU serves 
as a kind of insurance against any change in the 
status quo, membership providing a protection for 
heads of state and government against all forms of 
political action aimed at their overthrow. Since most 
of the leaders who adhere to this idea owe their 
position to imperialists and their agents, it is not 
surprising that this is the viewpoint which really 
serves the interests of imperialism. For the puppet 
states are being used both for short-term purposes of 
exploitation and as spring-boards of subversion 
against progressive African states. 
2. The functional conception: that African unity should 
be purely a matter of economic co-operation. Those 
who hold this view overlook the vital fact that Afri-
can regional economic organisations will remain 
weak and subject to the same neo-colonialist pressures 
and domination, as long as they lack overall political 
cohesion. Without political unity, African states can 
never commit themselves to full economic integration, 
which is the only productive form of integration able 
to develop our great resources fully for the well-being 
of the African people as a whole. 
Furthermore, the lack of political unity places inter-
African economic institutions at the mercy of power-
ful, foreign commercial interests, and sooner or later 
these will use such institutions as funnels through 
which to pour money for the continued exploitation 
of Africa. 
40  
3. The political union conception: that a union govern-
ment should be in charge of economic development, 
defence and foreign policy, while other government 
functions would continue to be discharged by the ex-
isting states grouped, in federal fashion, within a 
gigantic central political organisation. 
Clearly, this is the strongest position Africa could 
adopt in its struggle against modern imperialism. 
However, any sincere critical appraisal of past activities 
and achievements of the OAU would tend to show that, 
as it is now constituted, the OAU is not likely to be able 
to achieve the political unification of Africa. 
This is obviously why imperialists, although against the 
idea of political union, will do nothing to break the OAU. 
It serves their purpose in slowing down revolutionary pro-
gress in Africa. This state of affairs is mirrored both in the 
discouragement of freedom fighters in the remaining 
colonial territories and South Africa, and in the growing 
perplexity amongst freedom fighters from neo-colonised 
territories. 
The struggle for African continental union and socialism 
may be hampered by the enemy within,—those who declare 
their support for the revolution and at the same time, by 
devious means, serve and promote the interests of imperial-
ists and neo-colonialists. 
Examination of recent events in our history, and of our 
present condition, reveals the urgent need for a new strategy 
to combat imperialist aggression, and this must be devised 
on a continental scale. 
Either we concentrate our forces for a decisive armed 
struggle to achieve our objectives, or we will each fall one 
by one to the blows of imperialism in its present stage of 
and desperate offensive. 
41


--- PAGE 30 ---
BOOK TWO 
STRATEGY, TACTICS AND TECHNIQUES 
PREFACE 
Revolutionary warfare is the logical, inevitable answer to 
the political, economic and social situation in Africa today. 
We do not have the luxury of an alternative . We are faced 
with a necessity. 
Throughout the world, the escalation of imperialist 
aggression is making the issues clear, and exploitation can 
no longer be disguised. In Africa, a point of explosion 
against imperialism has been reached. But only a massive 
and organised will to fight can spark it off. 
Time is running out. We must act now. The freedom 
fighters already operating in many parts of Africa must no 
longer be allowed to bear the full brunt of a continental 
struggle against a continental enemy. The collective and 
continental nature of our will and our space, the urgency 
of conquering the initiative and the protracted nature of a 
revolutionary war calls for a united All-African organisation 
of all freedom fighters on the African continent. 
We must co-ordinate strategy and tactics, and combine 
experience. Co-ordination requires organisation, and orga-
nisation can only be effective if each fighting unit is a dis-
ciplined part of the whole. Attack must be planned with 
diversion, retreat with consolidation, losses in one zone 
compensated for by gains in another, until the liberation 
42 
movement is finally victorious, and the whole of Africa is 
free and united. 
As a continental nation we are young, strong and resilient. 
The cohesive planning of our struggle and the combined 
strength of our will to win will do the rest. 
Africa is one; and this battle must be fought and won 
continentally. 
Chapter One 
ORGANISATION FOR REVOLUTIONARY WARFARE 
A. THE MILITARY BALANCE 
The dimension of our struggle is equal to the size of the 
African continent itself. It is in no way confined within 
any of the absurd limits of the micro-states created by the 
colonial powers, and jealously guarded by imperialist 
puppets during the neo-colonialist period. 
For although the African nation is at present split up 
among many separate states, it is in reality simply divided 
into two : our enemy and ourselves. The strategy of our 
struggle must be determined accordingly, and our conti-
nental territory considered as consisting of three categories 
of territories which correspond to the varying levels of 
popular organisation and to the precise measure of victory 
attained by the people's forces over the enemy : 
1. Liberated areas 
2. Zones under enemy control 
3. Contested zones (i.e. hot points). 
Liberated Areas 
These areas may present minimal differences due to the 
varying ways in which independence was obtained. How- 
43


--- PAGE 31 ---
ever, they can be collectively defined as territories where : 
(a) Independence was secured through an armed strug-
gle, or through a positive action movement represent-
ing the majority of the population under the leader-
ship of an anti-imperialist and well-organised mass 
party. 
(b) A puppet regime was overthrown by a people's move-
ment (Zanzibar, Congo-Brazzaville, Egypt). 
(c) A social revolution is taking place to consolidate 
political independence by: 
1. promoting accelerated economic development 
2. improving working conditions 
3. establishing complete freedom from dependence on 
foreign economic interests. 
It therefore follows that a liberated zone can only be 
organised by a radically anti-imperialist party whose duty 
it is : 
(a) to decolonise, and 
(b) to teach the theory and practice of socialism as app-
lied to the African social milieu, and adapted to local 
circumstances. 
The people's socialist parties take the necessary steps 
to transform the united but heterogeneous front which 
fought for independence into an ideologically monolithic 
party of cadres. 
Thus, in a truly liberated territory, one can observe : 
1. Political growth achieved as a result of discussions 
and agreements concluded within the party. 
2. Steady progress to transform theory into practice 
along the ideological lines drawn by the party. 
3. Constant improvement, checking and re-checking of 
the development plans to be carried out by the party 
and at state level. 
44 
4. Political maturity among party members, who are no 
longer content to follow a vague and general line of 
action. Revolutionary political maturity is the pre-
lude to the re-organisation of the party structure along 
more radical lines. 
However, no territory may be said to be truly liberated 
if the party leadership, apart from consolidating the gains 
of national independence does not also undertake to : 
( a) Support actively the detachments of revolutionary 
liberation movements in the contested zones of Africa. 
(b) Contribute to the organisation and revolutionary 
practice of the people's forces in neo-colonialist states, 
i.e. in zones under enemy control or in contested areas. 
( c) Effect an organic liaison of its political and economic 
life with the other liberated zones of the African 
nation. 
This implies a system of mutual servicing and aid be-
tween the various detachments of the liberation movements 
and the liberated zones, so that a continuous exchange of 
experience, advice and ideas will link the progressive parties 
in power with the parties struggling in the contested zones. 
Each liberated zone should be ready to offer the use of 
its territory to detachments of the liberation movements so 
that the latter may establish their rear bases on friendly 
soil, and benefit from the provision of communications, 
hospitals, schools, factories, workshops, etc. 
It is important to bear in mind that a liberated area is 
constantly exposed to the many forms of enemy action and 
attack. It is the duty of both the liberation movements and 
the liberated zones : 
1. To make objective and up-to-date analyses of the 
enemy's aggression. 
2. To take action to recapture any base lost to the 
45


--- PAGE 32 ---
enemy, and to help correct the mistakes which 
enabled the enemy to gain temporary victory. 
In fact, the liberated areas of Africa do not yet come fully 
up to all the standards required of them. For example, in 
certain liberated zones, the level of economic liberation is 
clearly inferior to the high level of revolutionary awareness. 
But the main criterion for judging them to be liberated is 
the actual direction in which they are moving, since our 
assessment is of changing, not static phenomena. 
Zones under enemy control 
The imperialists control such zones: 
(a) through an administration manned by foreigners. 
The territory is then externally subjected. 
(b) through a puppet government made up of local ele-
ments. The territory is then both internally and ex-
ternally subjected. 
(c) through a settler, minority government. In this terri-
tory, settlers have established the rule of a majoriy 
by a minority. There is no logic except the right of 
might that can accept such a situation. The predomi-
nant racial group must, and will, provide the govern-
ment of a country. Settlers, provided they accept the 
principle of one man one vote, and majority rule, may 
be tolerated; but settler minority governments, never. 
They are a dangerous anachronism, and must be 
swept away completely and for ever. 
A territory under enemy control therefore is governed 
against the interests of the majority. Such zones are eco-
nomically, militarily and politically alienated. It is precisely 
in these territories that the enemy has its military camps, 
aerodromes, naval establishments and broadcasting stations, 
and where foreign banks, insurance firms, mining, indust- 
46 
rial and trading companies have their headquarters. In 
other words, these zones are enemy nerve centres. 
Clear proof of the neo-colonialist and neo-liberated 
character of these states is seen in the refusal of their 
governments to allow liberation movements to open offices, 
establish bases or enjoy freedom of transit for troops and 
equipment on their way to the front. 
The strength of a territory under enemy control may be 
assessed by taking into account the following factors : 
(i) the level of organisation attained by the reactionary 
forces in control there 
(ii) the type and degree of repression exerted against the 
people's liberation movement 
(iii) the degree and modes of exploitation exerted upon the 
toiling masses 
(iv) the military means available to the reactionaries in 
power 
(v) the nature of the economic interests imperialism is 
out to promote in that territory and in neighbouring 
areas, (for example, strategic materials, important 
commercial and industrial complexes etc.) 
(vi) the over-all strategic advantages which imperialism 
hopes to gain from the subjugation of the territory. 
Such gains may be exclusively political. 
As far as our struggle is concerned, our most vital asset 
is the degree of revolutionary awareness attained by the 
workers and the masses in the zone under enemy control. 
The political maturity or immaturity of the masses con-
stitutes the main difference between an enemy-held zone 
and a contested zone. 
The revolutionary awareness of the broad masses in an 
enemy-held zone, must express itself in national boycotts, 
strikes, sabotage and insurrection. 
47


--- PAGE 33 ---
It would be a mistake to maintain that the total of areas 
under enemy control is exactly equal to the sum of neo-
colonialist and colonialist governments. Socio-political 
phenomena are less mechanical than that. In each case 
it is the level of the people's awareness and participation 
that counts. 
Contested zones 
A zone under enemy control can at any time become a 
contested area if the revolutionary forces in activity there 
are either on the verge of armed struggle or have reached 
an advanced stage of revolutionary organisation. In some 
cases, a spark is enough to determine the turning point 
from preparation to action. In other circumstances, the 
embers can smoulder underground for a much longer 
period. 
"Sham independence" zones, where the awakened 
masses have placed the enemy in such a precarious posi-
tion that a "single spark can start a prairie fire", can no 
longer be said to be "under enemy control". In such a 
situation, the enemy is only superficially in command, and 
relies exclusively on support in the police, civil service and 
the army, where it retains control only as long as the force 
of habit remains unchallenged. It is to be noted that the 
army and police are never homogeneous forces in Africa, 
and that this factor is of obvious tactical interest in a revo-
lutionary struggle primarily based on the workers and 
peasants, but also aiming to obtain the support of all other 
possible elements. 
In these zones of revolutionary transition, the population 
feels deeply in sympathy with the revolutionary forces in 
neighbouring areas, and often gives them invaluable 
assistance. 
48  
These transitional zones may : 
1. Either be used to organise the liberaton of another 
neighbouring territory which is economically more 
important and politically more mature, (for instance, 
where a party of revolutionary opposition is already 
operating against the government). 
2. Or, in case of strategic necessity, be directly seized 
from the enemy through the organisation and armed 
action of the dissatisfied masses. 
A careful study should be made of the range of possibili-
ties offered by a territory under puppet, neo-colonialist 
control. Full investigation will disclose that the puppet 
government is not homogeneous, and that it is therefore 
vulnerable. It will also be found that the people are often 
virtually liberated but that they are not aware of it because 
no one has organised them to act purposefully to seize what 
is their due (i.e. political control and the control of 
economic wealth). 
Between a zone under enemy control where the masses 
are awakening and a hotly-contested zone, there is only 
one missing link: a handful of genuine revolutionaries 
prepared to organise and act. 
There are many more contested zones than liberated 
ones. In fact, the total area of contested zones covers most 
of the African continent. All the more reason why we should 
take vigilant care of our liberated territories. 
A contested zone is not only a zone of revolutionary acti-
vity, but it is also an area in which a people's party works 
underground or semi-clandestinely to organise the over-
throw of a puppet government. For there is no fundamental 
difference between armed struggle as such and organised 
revolutionary action of a civil type. The various methods 
of our struggle, and the changing from one method to 
49


--- PAGE 34 ---
another should be determined mainly by the circumstances 
and the set of conditions prevailing in a given territory. 
The forces struggling in the contested zones are in the 
front line of the revolutionary liberation movement. They 
must receive material support from the liberated zones in 
order to carry their mission through to a successful end. 
This involves a development of the struggle until a people's 
insurrectionary movement is able to assume power. 
A political party operating in a contested zone may be 
said to be truly revolutionary if : 
1. It is actively organising the people, training cadres, 
etc. 
2. Its essential objective is the total destruction of the 
puppet government or the colonial power, in order 
to build in its place the organs of the people's political 
power based on mass organisation and mass 
education. 
The latter objective can only be achieved through a policy 
of direct confrontation with the enemy, and not through 
devious negotiations and compromise. This is the only 
correct approach to the African situation if the problem of 
the revolution is to be studied in depth and from the people's 
point of view. 
Retarding Factors 
However, certain factors have retarded the final un-
leashing of anti-imperialist action and the unfolding of a 
people's revolution throughout the African nation : 
1. The readiness of imperialists to exploit any cracks in 
our armour. 
2. The undue emphasis placed on diplomatic procedure 
and negotiations to provide solutions. 
3. The varying degrees of isolationism practised by the 
50 
cadres of ruling parties in spite of their recognition, 
on a theoretical level, of the necessity for a conti-
nental, anti-imperialist struggle and reconstruction. 
4. The tendency manifested by certain ruling parties in 
the liberated zones to indulge in a slack, wait-and-
see policy, merely toying with progressive ideas, and 
neglecting to analyse, handle and resolve national 
problems in a positive way. This has created a dan-
gerous climate of uneasiness, confusion and dis-
couragement for African revolutionaries, and fertile 
ground for neo-colonialist intrigue and attacks. 
5. The existence of a more or less conscious opportunism 
amongst some leaders of the liberation movement 
both in the liberated and contested territories, which 
is symptomatic of a low level of ideological convic-
tion. 
High Command 
Africa will he liberated sooner or later against all odds. 
But if it is to be soon, by an accelerated revolution of the 
people, and a total war against imperialism, then we must 
establish a unified continental high command here and 
now, to plan revolutionary war, and to initiate action. 
If we fail to do this, and to lead the people's revolution, 
we are likely to be swept away one by one by imperialism 
and neo-colonialism. It is no longer feasible to take a mid-
dle course. The time for reform, however progressive, is 
past. For reforms cannot hold the enemy at bay, nor can 
they convince the silent, internal agents of neo-colonialism, 
eliminate the puppets, or even destroy the capitalist struc-
ture and mentality inherited from colonialism. The cancer-
ous growths are proliferating at the very heart of our parties 
and territories whether they emerge under the cloak of con- 
51


--- PAGE 35 ---
stitutionalism, parliamentarianism, bureaucratic etiquette, 
an imposing civil service, officers trained in western "a-
political" tradition to maintain the bourgeois-capitalist 
status quo by means of military coups, or if they appear in 
the more obvious guise of corruption and nepotism. 
The people's armed struggle, the highest form of poli-
tical action, is a revolutionary catalyst in the neo-colonia-
list situation. 
Peaceful political action to achieve liberation has been 
proved ineffective 
(a) with the accession of the majority of African states 
to independence and the advent of neo-colonialism 
on a massive scale 
(b) with the increasingly continental dimension of our 
struggle. 
Pacific political action was, in general, potent during the 
national phase of the liberation movement, and mainly in 
sub-Saharan Africa, where independence often developed 
in a chain reaction. However, even then there were signifi-
cant exceptions. In Kenya for example, where recourse 
to peaceful political action was denied to the masses, the 
people's movement resorted to more direct and concentrated 
action in the form of Mau Mau. In Algeria, a seven year 
armed liberation struggle was needed. Elsewhere, the in-
dependence movement pushed beyond the fringe of paci-
ficism, as in Ghana and Guinea where "positive action" 
was employed. 
The crystallisation of a more concentrated form of poli-
tical action is in fact to be found in the development of 
almost all African independence movements. The reason for 
this was the need to establish a new social order after nomi-
nal independence has been achieved, and the escalation of 
imperialist action. The latter appeared in : 
52 
(i) the corruption of independence through neo-colonial-
ism and puppet regimes. 
(ii) direct  imperialist aggression against liberation 
forces, for example in the Congo. 
(iii) increased multilateral and bilateral imperialist sup-
port to : 
(a) remaining colonial powers (Portugal, Spain) 
(b) fascist-racist regimes (Rhodesia, South Africa) 
(c) puppet regimes and local reactionaries to assist their 
infiltration and attempts to suppress progressive and 
revolutionary forces throughout the continent. 
In less than three years, from 1960, the armed form of 
struggle became a necessity of the African anti-colonial 
liberation movement, and the same process may he ob-
served in most neo-colonialist situations. 
From 1961 onwards, the armed form of political action 
reached another turning point with the creation of a united 
front co-ordinating the struggle of freedom fighters in all 
the "Portuguese" colonies. This organisation (CONCP) 
links up the politico-military struggle of 12,400,000 
inhabitants over an area of some 2 million square 
kilometres. 
In effect, then, anti-imperialist pacifism is dying, and 
on a continental scale, because : 
1. The political action which led to independence devi-
ated to become the sole monopoly and privilege of 
a reactionary "élite" which deprives the masses of 
the right to political action, even in its pacific and 
constitutional form. 
2. Neo-colonialism has created a situation whereby the 
masses are exploited beyond the "safe" limits of 
exploitation. 
The ensuing massive explosion of pent-up discontent 
53


--- PAGE 36 ---
can be nothing but violent. The masses seize back 
their right to political action and make maximum use 
of it. 
3. Imperialist action is escalating 
(a) to consolidate its positions (military coups d'état 
in neo-colonialist states) . 
(b) to gain ground and recapture lost initiative (re-
actionary coups d'état in progressive states) . 
4. Imperialism constantly infiltrates revolutionary oppo-
sition groups with agents, "special police", and 
others, compelling such groups to arm even before 
they have attained the organisational stage of armed 
struggle. 
5. Whenever the pseudo-democratic institutions inheri-
ted from colonial rule are not used by its inheritors 
to build capitalism but are gradually remodelled or 
suddenly re-structured towards a socialist line of 
development, imperialists intervene violently. 
6. Violence clears the "neo-colonialist fog" and reveals 
the invisible enemy and the subtle methods of camou-
flage employed by neo-colonialists. The issues are 
made clear. 
As soon as the initial revolutionary units emerge, the pup-
pet regime is doomed. A chain reaction begins. The puppets 
are compelled to break the promises they have made. They 
had survived in the teeth of opposition only because they 
uneasily preserved an outward appearance of progressive 
action. Now, they have to suppress and kill openly in order 
to survive. Once the first drop of patriotic blood is shed in 
the fight the puppet regime is irrevocably condemned. 
Guerrilla points spread like oil stains. Not only have the 
internal contradictions of neo-colonialism fully ripened 
but the African masses have attained such a degree of poli- 
54 
tical awareness that they literally force the struggle to break 
out into the open. 
The Need for Co-ordinated Revolutionary Action 
The international balance of forces, and more particu-
larly the existence of powerful socialist states, gave rise 
to the theory that in certain territories dominated by im-
perialism on our continent it was possible to take a pacific 
road to socialism. But such reasoning is based on the false 
premise that the question of co-ordinating revolutionary 
action in Africa and the world has already been solved and 
that therefore imperialism is no longer able to concentrate 
its forces to act decisively against the most threatening 
parts of the popular liberation front. 
In reality, the situation is quite different : 
1. Imperialists are waging an all-out struggle against the 
socialist states, and the revolutionary liberation move-
ments through military means, and through insidious 
but powerful methods of psychological warfare 
(propaganda). 
2. Imperialists have formed an international syndicate 
of military and economic forces to achieve its aggres-
sive aims. 
3. Imperialists have, in recent years, assisted in the 
establishment of numerous puppet governments in 
Africa. 
The historical experience of the people of Asia, Latin 
America and of Africa has shown that imperialism has often 
forcefully intervened to prevent the peaceful achievement 
of socialism. In the case of Ghana a coup occurred at the 
very time a decisive turning point in socialist development 
was about to be reached. 
The continental scope now attained by popular insur- 
55


--- PAGE 37 ---
rection in Africa is a reality. It remains for us to devise 
effective co-ordinating machinery. 
Our accumulated experience has shown that only prac-
tical and planned co-ordination on a continental scale will 
prevent the enemy from concentrating its forces on isolated 
and therefore  more vulnerable targets. In our war, isolation 
is one of the greatest dangers. 
We have already been able to outpace the enemy in 
certain ways by : 
(i) increasing our means or production 
(ii) bringing a higher level of organisation to the people 
(iii) spreading the essential features of the African 
people's revolution 
(iv) unmasking neo-colonialism and its puppets. 
We have succeeded in accummulating energy and will-
power. But it is also true that we have not yet defeated 
either the external, or the internal enemy. For victory, a 
politico-military organisation must be established to 
provide the machinery for a qualitative conversion of 
revolutionary action in Africa. 
B. POLITICO-MILITARY ORGANISATION 
The following measures should be taken : 
1. The formation of the All-African People's Revolu-
tionary Party (AAPRP) to co-ordinate policies and 
to direct action. 
2. The creation of an All-African People's Revolutionary 
Army (AAPRA) to unify our liberation forces and to 
carry the armed struggle through to final victory. 
AAPRP and the All-African Committee for Political 
Co-ordination (AACPC). 
The formation of a political party linking all liberated 
56 
territories and struggling parties under a common ideology 
will smooth the way for eventual continental unity, and will 
at the same time greatly assist the prosecution of the All-
African people's war. To assist the process of its formation, 
an All-African Committee for Political Co-ordination 
(AACPC) should be established to act as a liaison between 
all parties which recognise the urgent necessity of conduct-
ing an organised and unified struggle against colonialism 
and neo-colonialism. This Committee would be created at 
the level of the central committees of the ruling parties and 
struggling parties, and would constitute their integrated 
political consciousness. 
The AACPC as the political arm of AAPRA would fulfil 
the following functions : 
1. Ensure co-operation between the ruling parties of the 
liberated territories building socialism, and enable 
them to support each other in the fight against the 
internal enemy. 
2. Promote widespread and collective ideological training 
for the cadres of parties teaching the theory of anti-
colonialist and anti-neo-colonialist struggle, the case 
for African unity and for the building of socialism. 
This would be done in AACPC schools or in political 
training camps throughout the liberated territories. 
3. Co-ordinate and harmonise all political effort and 
assistance given to the revolutionary movements in 
colonised or apartheid areas, and to the progressive 
forces in all the neo-colonised areas. 
4. Provide an organic link with the peoples of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America who are struggling against 
imperialism (Organisation of Solidarity with the 
Peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America 
(OSPAAL) .) 
57


--- PAGE 38 ---
5. Ensure permanent relations with the socialist states 
of the world. 
6. Maintain and create links with all workers' move-
ments in the capitalist-imperialist states. 
Thus the AACPC would emerge as the organisational 
instrument of a united struggle, and a centralising and dis-
ciplinary organ providing permanent contact with the masses 
and with the scattered centres of their revolutionary activi-
ties. Such co-ordination would unify revolutionary action 
of the vanguard African territories and would enable them 
to exert decisive influence on the revolutionary liberation 
movement by allowing them to participate actively in it. 
The All-African People's Revolutionary Army (AAPRA) 
Members of AAPRA will be the armed representatives of 
the African people's socialist parties struggling against colo-
nialism and neo-colonialism. They will be the direct product 
of the African revolutionary, liberation movement, and will 
be organised as in Chart 5 (Page 64). 
These revolutionary armed forces will be under the direc-
tion of a high command made up of the military leaders 
(AAPRA) of the various revolutionary movements in Africa. 
This in its turn will come under the All-African Committee 
for Political Co-ordination (AACPC) which represents the 
political leadership of the entire revolutionary movement. 
Thus the military, i.e. the armed forces, will always be 
subordinate to, and under the control of, the political lead-
ership. 
AAPRA headquarters 
The headquarters of the high command of AAPRA will 
be located in a liberated territory where : 
1. The people's power is firmly entrenched. 
58 
2. Economic development is advanced enough to enable 
the territory to provide maximum resistance against 
imperialist aggression in whatever form it might 
occur. 
3. There are adequate communications, hospitals, 
printing presses and other essential facilities. 
The territory must be in a condition of permanent 
preparedness for war, all its material and human resources 
being mobilised to make the area impregnable. 
As far as the mobilisation of the people is concerned, 
trained and armed workers should be organised into mili-
tias. Likewise in the agricultural sector, modern agricultural 
production should be organised along strategic lines. Co-
operatives and state farms and other farmers' organisations 
will constitute the nuclei of self-defence throughout the terri-
tory and will be located strategically. Miners, industrial 
workers, transport employees and others, will be organised 
into disciplined, self-defence units and will receive military 
training. Membership of militias will be voluntary and 
selective. 
The militant front thus created will struggle : 
1. For a rapid transformation of the old order 
2. Against internal and external enemies 
3. For the building of socialism. 
The struggle will entail hardship and suffering, but it is 
a phase through which we must pass if we are to accelerate 
the achievement of a radical, qualitative transformation of 
the liberation movement. 
Such measures will result in : 
(i) the reinforcement of political rectitude and moral 
strength 
(ii) the abolition of apathy and inertia 
(iii) the achievement of a higher capacity of resistance 
59


--- PAGE 39 ---
throughout the population 
(iv) an improvement of discipline in work and conse-
quently an increase in productivity. 
Thus in base areas, it is essential to use the armed forces 
in conjunction with the masses in order to defeat the enemy. 
This can best be done through the creation of people's self-
defence units (militia) trained to form a broad, united front 
against imperialism ready to operate anywhere in Africa. 
If armed militia are not organised the masses cannot 
manifest their power in the struggle against the enemy. 
In general, a comparatively large territory will provide 
the best conditions for AAPRA headquarters if it contains 
a variety of physical features such as mountains, rivers, 
lakes, forests, plains and even deserts giving partisan de-
tachments room to manoeuvre. Usually, the best base areas 
are in the mountains or near rivers, lakes and estuaries. 
Those in the plains are generally of a more temporary 
nature. 
AAPRA regional operational commands will be located 
in appropriate regions of the contested zones. 
The AACPC and our revolutionary strategy 
The High Command of AAPRA will work in close co-
ordination with AACPC, and the smoothness of the 
liasion will be ensured by the fact that the leaders of the 
revolutionary movements animating the high command 
will also be members of AACPC. The programme and 
the strategy of the revolutionary forces will therefore be 
drawn up at High Command—AACPC level, on the basis 
of surveys of the political, economic and military situation 
in the contested zones and in the enemy-held territories of 
the continent. Special account will be taken of the objective 
60 
conditions favouring the liquidation of the oppressive regime 
in a particular zone or territory. 
A study will be made of the pro-revolutionary forces in-
side the society under investigation, and an assessment made 
of the socio-political importance of the workers, peasants 
and members of the co-operative movement. This assess-
ment will be based on the position occupied by the workers 
in the socio-economic context, the level of their class con-
sciousness, and their degree of organisation. In other 
words, the quality of the group will be a more important 
criterion than its numerical size. 
Investigation along these lines is vital because in order 
to win a revolutionary war, a prolonged campaign for the 
support of a crucial social group must be carried out. Like-
wise, no socio-economic programme for the winning over 
of social groups can be drawn up without a clear under-
standing of the healthy and strategic elements of the country 
to be liberated. 
Based on attentive study and investigation our revolu-
tionary strategy will take into account and exploit the most 
determinant factors : 
A. The existence in Africa of five, broadly differentiated 
zones : 
(a) North 
(b) West 
(c) South 
(d) Central 
(e) East 
These zones differ widely in climate, natural resources, 
industrial potential, and in the general pattern of their 
social and political development. 
B. The existence within one zone of varying levels of 
productive development and of political maturity. For ex- 
61


--- PAGE 40 ---
ample, note the difference between conditions in the 
Republic of South Africa and in South-West Africa, although 
they are geographically neighbours and are both under 
enemy control. There is a gap between the productive forces 
of the Mali—Niger—Dahomey—Togo zone and those of 
territories like Ghana and Nigeria; but at the same time, 
the level of political awareness is almost identical amongst 
the people of Mali, Niger, Ghana, Nigeria and Cameroun. 
C. The existence, on the continent, and even inside one 
zone, of industrial "patches" and of powerful portuary 
complexes. These represent highly strategic targets for our 
struggle, and this is why, in certain areas, more attention 
should be paid to mobilising the proletariat while in other 
parts attention should first be paid to the rural workers. 
For example the socio-political lever in one province of a 
state may be different from the one in another although the 
same revolutionary struggle is being waged throughout the 
country as a whole. 
Our revolutionary strategy will, therefore be adapted 
suitably to the variations between zones and territories 
endowed with important patches of industrialisation, and 
areas where feudal and patriarchal rural institutions pre-
dominate. Again, it will distinguish between territories with 
a vertical class structure, denoting low development of pro-
ductive forces but with an embryo of industrialisation, and 
territories with a strong modern proletariat force, part of 
which may be working outside the African continent. The 
latter may, if organised cohesively, play an important part 
in the liberation movement by means of sabotage and sub-
version at the very core of the capitalist-imperialist states. 
The study in depth of the objective situation, and the 
elaboration of a revolutionary strategy are tasks to be under-
taken jointly by AAPRA and the AACPC in order to 
62 
ascertain our own situation at all levels, as well as that of 
the enemy. The deepening of our knowledge will enable us 
to avoid wasting our energy in useless skirmishes and 
battles. 
Once the strategic targets and the points of maximum 
anti-imperialist resistance are determined, the revolutionary 
forces will know exactly which parts to avoid for the time 
being, and which to attack first. 
There will be no question of AAPRA violating "sover-
eignty" when entering a national territory for the purpose 
of liberating and uniting Africa, since all African territory 
belongs to the African people as a whole, and the will of 
the African people is expressed in the African revolution. 
The army corps 
On the basis of our revolutionary strategy the liberation 
forces of AAPRA will be divided into five armies : 
Northern 
Western 
Southern 
Central 
Eastern 
The divisions constituting the various army corps will be 
formed from the following sources : 
1. Troops allocated to AAPRA by the ruling parties in 
the liberated territories. 
2. Volunteers. 
3. Freedom fighter units already in existence. 
The creation of our continental people's militia is the 
logical consequence of the unfolding of the African libera-
tion struggle, and it is the essential condition for the 
emergence of a people's free and united Africa. 
63


--- PAGE 41 ---
AAPRA's structure and strategy 
Since the objectives of the armed liberation forces are 
both political and military, AAPRA's structure is devised 
accordingly, with separate chains of command and machi-
nery for co-ordination (Chart 5). 
AAPRA divisions C may be used to follow up and com-
plete the political and insurrectionary work developed by : 
(i) the political committees which prefigure the new form 
of administration to be established in the newly- 
liberated zone. 
I ii) the guerrilla units B 
Therefore, AAPRA forces C will act in support of the 
armed people's struggle and not precede it, although in 
certain extreme cases, specialised sections of AAPRA 
can serve as generators of the people's armed struggle by 
supplying equipment and cadres to the partisan units still 
lacking such material. 
As the people's revolutionary struggle advances, profes-
sional armies as such will gradually disappear, until with 
the achievement of total African liberation and unity, and 
the establishment of an All-African Union Government they 
will vanish completely. The defence of Africa will then rest 
entirely on the continental people's militia. 
During the preliminary stag' of the liberation of a parti-
cular territory, AAPRA divisions will be stationed in a base 
area in a nearby liberated zone. However, once the people's 
struggle has begun inside the contested zone the supporting 
divisions of AAPRA will camp along the borders of the 
contested zone. This movement is to be co-ordinated at the 
level of the regional or zonal army staff and the regional 
or zonal partisan command, in order to begin the campaign 
in co-ordination with the territorial partisan command con-
cerned. This step is to be decided upon at the level of the 
64 65


--- PAGE 42 ---
Army and Divisional Staff. The result is a vice-like move-
ment closing in on the enemy in the contested zone, with 
the guerrilla units and political committees always ahead 
of the visible front line. (Chart 6). 
Equipment and composition of the armed forces 
AAPRA will be a force ready to operate in any part of 
Africa. It must therefore be equipped with the most modern 
aircraft, vehicles and weapons, emphasis being placed on 
firing power, speed, mobility and lightness. 
AAPRA will also include specialised, technical units. For 
example : 
(a) Mass psychology teams and units spreading audio-
visual and written propaganda by means of radio, 
films, news-sheets etc. 
(b) Social service specialists trained to conduct literacy 
campaigns, to promote child care, public hygiene and 
other social welfare services. 
(c) technicians specialising in agriculture and in rural 
processing industries 
(d) cattle raising and fishery specialists 
(e) medical officers 
(f) cultural experts. 
Members of AAPRA are not to be considered primarily 
as professional soldiers, but as civilians trained in arms, 
highly qualified fighters who are at the same time efficient 
workers. They will act to serve, not to subjugate, the broad 
masses. 
Our war is not a war of conquest, it is a war of revolu-
tionary liberation. We fight not only in self-defence  but to 
free, unite and reconstruct. 
67


--- PAGE 43 ---
Recruitment 
It is from the broad masses of the people that the revo-
lutionary liberation movement is born, and it is therefore 
from among the peasants, workers, members of co-opera-
tives and youth that AAPRA will draw its main strength. 
In recruiting volunteers, preference will initially be given 
to members of organisations of an All-African character: 
(i) peasants' organisations 
(ii) trade unions 
(iii) progressive students' organisations 
(iv) youth organisations 
(v) women's organisations 
(vi) co-operative movements. 
These forces will be supplemented by volunteers 
allocated to AAPRA by progressive and militant African 
68  
parties and governments. (Chart 7). 
Before enrolling a volunteer, the Commission of Control 
and Recruitment will investigate : 
(a) his social origin 
( b) his qualities as a worker and as a man 
(c) his ideological orientation. 
He will then undergo tests to assess his character, 
intellectual capacity, moral fibre and physical fitness. 
Enemy agents and adventurers of all kinds will attempt 
to join AAPRA. We must be constantly on the alert to 
recognise them and prevent them from infiltrating our 
revolutionary armed forces. For this reason, particular 
attention will be paid to tests designed to discover if the 
volunteer is ideologically sound, and if he has given a true 
account of his origin and previous place of employment. 
As the armed liberation struggle develops and expands, 
whole units of African troops at present being used by the 
enemy (on their principle of "let African fight African"), 
will desert and want to join the AAPRA forces. These troops 
will be welcomed and given every encouragement. But as 
soon as possible they will be "screened" individually in 
accordance with regular AAPRA procedure, and will 
receive ideological instruction. 
General principles of training 
Since members of the revolutionary armed forces have 
social, political and military responsibilities, recruits will 
go through various levels of training in these three spheres. 
The aim of our training is not to turn our men into killing 
machines or mercenaries, but into mature and progressive 
men intellectually and materially equipped for their revolu-
tionary tasks. 
The quality and training of recruits for revolutionary 
units is of particular importance: 
69


--- PAGE 44 ---
(a) because our effective strength will, at the start, be 
much lower than the enemy's numerical strength, 
(often as low as ten to one). 
(b) because by the very nature of his performance, and 
because our initial effective force is comparatively 
small, the African revolutionary fighter must be a 
highly specialised soldier. 
Thus, the initial military imbalance between ourselves 
and the enemy will be compensated for by our technical and 
moral superiority. 
All recruits will receive the same basic training, and will 
then proceed to specialist courses to prepare them for the 
specialised units of AAPRA. 
Commanders of revolutionary armed units will constantly 
bear in mind the need to carry out frequent checks on all 
members of AAPRA : 
(i) to make sure that the highest standard of work and 
performance of duty is maintained 
(ii) to test morale (the will to fight). 
They will also see that organisational machinery is tightly 
consolidated, and that ideological training is thoroughly 
and regularly pursued. 
It is not the object of our education and training to turn 
out men who are servilely obedient, but men who respect 
discipline and are efficient and active because they are fully 
committed to the revolutionary struggle. 
Instead of promoting hierarchic, coercive and follow-like-
sheep relationships, our training will seek to develop 
an intelligent, egalitarian, critical and self-critical outlook 
within the armed forces. Our fighters will be self-disciplined, 
revolutionary men and women. 
Training courses (social-political-military) will be given 
in training centres located in a base area in an already con- 
70 
solidated, liberated zone. It is necessary to have several 
centres operating in different territories or regions. Such 
centres must remain secret. 
Before the volunteers are sent to the centres they will 
be put under observation in schools where they will receive 
basic education and political instruction, and pursue courses 
designed to develop their faculties of observation and de-
duction. During this stage, the final process of screening 
and recruiting will be applied, and the unsuitable volun-
teers rejected. 
At the end of the basic course, the successful recruits will 
be directed to primary training centres. 
Physical training 
The body and its physical endurance must be weathered, 
strengthened and developed by exercise and by exposure 
to many varied conditions. 
For example : 
(i) marching under conditions of duress 
(ii) camping in difficult terrain 
(iii) subsisting on short rations for limited periods 
(iv) enduring periods of isolation in small groups cut off 
from base 
(v) carrying out rigorous individual initiative and en-
durance tests. 
Daily exercises will help to promote both physical and 
moral stamina. 
Our troops must be trained to operate equally effectively 
face to face with the enemy, and in various guises, behind 
the enemy lines. They should be taught the art of imperso-
nation, and how to conduct themselves if captured and 
interrogated. 
The development of speed and skill is of the greatest 
71


--- PAGE 45 ---
importance in practising : 
(i) attacks 
(ii) dispersion 
(iii) regrouping 
(iv) encircling 
(v) retreating 
(vi) close combat 
(vii) commando-type manoeuvres 
(viii) sabotage 
Technical training 
The aim of the primary training centres is not to form a 
military élite, but to help our men to establish contact with 
the concrete realities of the struggle, and to maintain this 
contact. 
The centres will therefore be self-sufficient, and the men 
will engage in farming, plantation work and cattle-raising 
on adjacent plots of land as part of their daily tasks. They 
will be taught to set up small handicraft and processing 
industries to manufacture uniforms and equipment, (shoes, 
cartridge belts, ammunition, light arms, etc.) This will 
enable the AAPRA budget to concentrate on the purchase 
of military and transport equipment which cannot be manu-
factured locally, while leaving the major part of provis-
ioning and clothing to the men themselves. 
Military training 
The practice of shooting will be given special emphasis, 
for "marksmanship is the core of apprenticeship." In this 
field, the guerrilla-fighter must be very skilled for it is 
necessary to use a minimum of ammunition. 
Recruits will be taught to use a varied range of arms, 
72 
and to shoot with deadly accuracy at fixed and moving 
targets. 
The use of explosives will also be taught. Apart from 
acquiring a thorough knowledge of all kinds of AAPRA 
arms and equipment, pupils of the training centres must: 
(a) study and be familiar with equipment used by the 
enemy 
(b) recognise the different types of aircraft the enemy 
uses or is likely to use in the various regions of our 
national territory 
(c) learn to make full use of any supplies captured from 
the enemy. 
Political education 
Every fighter must know : 
1. Against whom he is fighting 
2. Why he is fighting. 
Political education should centre on the key motive for 
the war—the will to be free. Our essential objective is to 
build a socialist society promoting better living and working 
conditions for all—a socialist society under a Union 
Government of Africa. 
Each recruit will, during the course of his training, 
attend classes in which the ideological aspects of our 
struggle will be explained and discussed. He will study such 
subjects as, for example: 
(i) African history 
(ii) Pan-Africanism 
(iii) Socialism tin Africa and in the world context) 
(iv) Imperialism and neo-colonialism. 
Teachers will encourage recruits to express their own 
views, and to discuss any current political, social, economic, 
or religious problems which may interest them. Discussions 
73


--- PAGE 46 ---
between recruits from different parts of Africa will be parti-
cularly valuable in stimulating mutual understanding and 
dedication to the common ideal of continental liberation and 
unity. 
Leadership 
The egalitarian nature of AAPRA forces should elimi-
nate or reduce to a minimum the hierarchic partitioning 
of ranks. Instead, our forces will be characterised by a well-
planned division of revolutionary labour between intelli-
gent and purposeful men. Intimidation and bossing must 
be relentlessly fought against because it is based on a hier-
archic, pyramid-like conception of authority which is merely 
a useful screen for the rise to power of ambitious and petty-
minded men. 
However, it is vital that certain men should assume 
command, and in this connection useful reference may be 
made to the solution provided by the Cuban revolution 
where ranks are only introduced from lieutenancy upwards, 
and revolutionary fighters pass directly from the rank of 
ordinary soldier to that of lieutenant, but only as a result of 
acts of initiative and courage shown in the course of the 
struggle. 
Our revolutionary fighters must be so highly-trained and 
self-reliant that each one of them is capable of assuming 
responsibility if the need arises. 
Authority and subordination are required in the organi-
sation of any collective effort, and this applies particularly 
in military affairs where discipline is essential. But the 
idealisation of leaders must be guarded against. The general 
must be seen not in isolation from the masses, but as 
inseparable from them. 
No general, however skilled, can be successful without 
74 
the loyal support of inspired, disciplined men who have a 
thorough knowledge of the issues at stake in the war, are 
prepared to make any sacrifice required of them, and have 
confidence in his leadership. 
The people are the makers of history and it is they who, 
in the final analysis, win or lose wars. 
Thus, the leaders of our armed forces will be the repre-
sentatives of the political leadership of our great liberation 
struggle, and will express the basic interest of the entire 
African nation. 
C. OUR HUMAN FORCES 
African society cannot be divided into clearcut, sharply-
differentiated classes because : 
1. Too many complex and varying factors criss-cross and 
interact rendering the socio-economic groups fluid and 
interdependent. 
2. The level of development of the means of production 
is still too low. 
Nevertheless, there does exist an emerging pattern of 
social groups, some of which are more developed than 
others. Most of them are potentially revolutionary. But in 
sharp contrast, there is a surface "scum" of puppets, 
opportunists and local reactionaries. 
It must be our aim to bring out the revolutionary poten-
tials of all sections of African society, though our initial 
campaign must be directed towards peasants and workers 
and members of co-operative movements where revolution-
ary awareness is high. 
The structure of AAPRA-AACPC, the politico-military 
organisation of our united revolutionary front, will be 
animated by : 
(a) the peasants 
75


--- PAGE 47 ---
(b) the workers in industries, mines and trade 
(c) the enlightened elements of the petty bourgeoisie, i.e. 
the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie, some of whom 
will help to organise and canalise the people's insur-
gency against imperialist aggression into a real revo-
lutionary struggle. 
(d) students 
(e) certain anti-imperialist elements of the local bour-
geoisie, i.e. the patriotic bourgeoisie 
(f) co-operative and farmers' movements 
(g) nationalist bureaucratic bourgeoisie 
(h) revolutionary outsiders, i.e. those elements who have 
dissociated themselves from the conservative ideology 
connected with their class origin. These are usually 
young men and women with a certain educational 
background. 
Some of these forces may be temporarily oppressed and 
weakened; and their level of economic, cultural and educa-
tional development may be heterogeneous. 
The peasants 
Our liberation struggle must be based on the immense, 
revolutionary potential of the peasantry : 
1. Because the peasants form the overwhelming majority 
of our population 
2. Because the revolutionary units live in their midst and 
depend on their assistance to survive, and on their 
active participation in order to develop. 
The winning over of the peasant sector is in fact, a funda-
mental necessity. 
We must first make a careful investigation of the 
condition of our peasantry, the traditional patterns and 
relationships of production, and the basic problems of 
agricultural development. There is urgent need for: 
76 
(a) an improvement of existing farming and irrigation 
(b) more widespread use of fertilisers 
( c) a co-ordinated programme of pest control 
(d) greater research facilities 
(e) technical training. 
In short, we are faced with, 
(i) an educational problem 
(ii) a problem of capital investment 
(iii) the need to rationalise the use of the existing means 
of production, and to introduce new methods. 
The task of the revolutionary cadres is therefore not pri-
marily to satisfy land hunger but to awaken the peasants to 
the realities of their economic potential, and to win them 
over to a new form of organisation of agricultural produc-
tion and distribution. 
These forces are from the bread masses, are in absolute 
majority, and must be matured, organised, trained and 
drawn into the struggle against exploitation and poverty 
throughout the continent. 
The rural proletariat 
The agricultural labourers who are the quickest to grasp 
the problems of the revolution and the inevitability of the 
struggle are mainly those who produce such goods as cotton, 
sisal, cocoa, coffee, rubber, citrus fruits, etc., in other 
words those employed within the orbit of international trade 
and industry. It is precisely in this sector that our agri-
cultural workers are massively absorbed, and it is these 
workers who are in daily contact with modern economic 
realities and exploitation. 
They are the strategic links in the chain of exploitation 
of our material and human resources which we are deter-
mined to break. 
77


--- PAGE 48 ---
The task will not be difficult since agricultural wage-
earners (plantation workers, cattle farmers, African 
farmers working in a family or semi co-operative system of 
agricultural production) are the easiest to persuade that the 
ending of exploitation is the prerequisite of : 
(a) modernisation and accelerated development in 
agriculture 
(b) improvement of working conditions for all workers 
and peasants and that conditions (a) and (b) are the 
necessary prelude to the industrialisation of our 
territories, and a full possibility of self-realisation. 
Neo-colonialist control over the advanced sectors of 
production. 
It must be remembered, however, that imperialism in its 
neo-colonialist stage, and particularly in Africa, draws the 
bulk of its profits from its grip over the advanced sectors 
of production: 
(a) mining 
(b) manufacturing 
(c) commerce 
(d) retail trade 
(e) transport 
(f) fisheries (either through direct control over open-sea 
fishing enterprises or through indirect control over 
the production of ice, indispensable for the conserva-
tion of fish). 
Enterprises in the above-mentioned sectors attract about 
90% of all western capital invested in Africa, and are there-
fore the main areas of neo-colonialist expansion. Conversely, 
imperialism is increasingly withdrawing from the agricul-
tural sector, leaving its exploitation to indigenous elements. 
There is nothing magnanimous about the imperialists' with- 
78 
drawal from this sector : they are simply placing their stakes 
in the sectors best suited to their own interests. 
Indeed, although agriculture absorbs the majority of the 
African working population : 
(i) the agricultural sector is, in general, not highly pro-
ductive because modern techniques have not been 
widely applied 
(ii) the promotion of agricultural production requires 
heavy capital investment which is recoverable only 
on a long term basis. For example, irrigation schemes, 
the construction of training centres, use of fertilisers, 
purchase of agricultural machinery, involve large 
capital outlay and a high degree of organisation. 
(iii) the unpopular equation: plantation = settling= colo- 
nialism has remained anchored in the minds of too 
many progressive Africans for neo-colonialists to ven- 
ture back into agricultural exploitation. No foreigners 
can now afford to revert to the old pattern of rural 
slavery used in the time of old-fashioned colonialism. 
In certain states, where no revolution took place to make 
a clean sweep of the settlers, as in Algeria, foreign settlers 
are either trying to re-orientate their activities into sectors 
which are less dangerous from a psychological point of 
view; or are trying to sell their plantations to high-ranking 
nationals in order to retire abroad with their ill-gotten 
fortunes. The explosive situation existing in some African 
countries where the crucial problem of land still under 
foreign control has remained unsolved in the post-indepen-
dence period is enough to discourage any enterprise in this 
direction by new-style colonialists. 
The present nature of imperialist objectives shows up 
clearly in the fact that over two-thirds of the capital injected 
into Africa by the major capitalist countries (USA, Great 
79


--- PAGE 49 ---
Britain, West Germany, France, Italy, Japan) goes to South 
Africa, Rhodesia and Katanga. This trend is not coinci-
dental, nor is it due to any marked preference for the type 
of government in power in these territories. Western capital 
pours into them because they are the wealthiest mineral, 
industrial and strategic nucleii on our continent. The second 
important magnetic pole for imperialist interests is northern 
Sahara, with its oil, gas, manganese and iron. The remain-
der of western capital is directed towards commercial busi-
ness and various other projects where the line between 
orthodox procedure and corruption and subversion, is al-
most impossible to draw. 
The huge turnover figures of important trading firms 
(SCOA, UTC, UAC, PZ, etc.) implanted in Africa, are ex-
pressed in the soaring graphs published in company reports. 
The reason here is that the opportune relaxation of the 
colonial grip has enabled many Africans to quench freely 
an increasing craving for capitalist, habit-forming consumer 
goods introduced by colonialism as the status symbols of 
"civilisation" and "modernity" associated with the prestige 
of political power. 
We may therefore conclude that : 
1. It is as correct as ever to base our struggle on the 
mobilisation of the majority, i.e. the workers and 
peasantry 
2. We must, at the same time, penetrate the very heart 
of imperialist and neo-colonialist centres of exploita-
tion by winning the workers to our side. 
We must have every inch of our land and every one of 
our mines and industries. 
Workers in the mines, industries and trade 
The industrial proletariat is indispensable to our struggle 
80 
because workers in this sector are : 
1. The essential labour force for the continued existence 
of neo-colonialism, i.e. of the continued exploitation 
of Africa by alien economic interests 
The human lever of the economic and social revolu-
tion which is the constructive aspect of our war against 
imperialism. 
The importance of winning over the workers in the key 
sector of our economy and of integrating them as powerful 
forces in our revolutionary struggle is recognised and accep-
ted by all genuinely progressive Africans. Yet in recent 
years a certain amount of confusion has been caused by 
the spread of myths denying the existence of a working 
class in Africa. Those who spread these myths are generally 
African political "personalities" often in government cir-
cles, who have an opportunist petty bourgeois outlook and 
a deep-seated fear of the masses. It is not that they are 
blind to realities, but they deliberately ignore the existence 
of a social force whose development might lead to the 
destruction of the very clique from whom they receive 
income and privilege. 
Even before the advent of puppets, the imperialists did 
all in their power to avoid the emergence of an organised 
African working class: 
(a) for a long time, the French prevented the workers 
in their colonies from forming trade unions 
(b) the English integrated "TUC advisers" into their 
colonial administration to set up trade unions 
tailored to western capitalist standards. 
Later, the puppets and their local reactionary partners 
continued to refuse to recognise the existence of the ex-
ploited classes which had emerged in African society, in 
order to avoid exposing the class of exploiters of which 
81


--- PAGE 50 ---
they themselves were the leaders. 
They refuse to see the workers because they believe 
they can thus prevent the workers from seeing them and 
tearing them to pieces. But not even a so-called "élite" can 
bury its head in the sand for very long. 
Consequently, African reactionaries were soon compelled 
to make certain concessions to reality to avoid being en-
gulfed by the rising tide of discontent. They resorted to the 
well-known ritual of setting up puppet trade unions to stifle 
the workers' movement by creating 
(i) employers' trade unions 
(ii) clerks' trade unions controlled by a swarm of white-
collared employees who are not directly involved in 
the productive process, and who poison the workers' 
movement 
(iii) unions dominated by corrupted leaders. 
The high degree of attention paid to the workers by neo-
colonialists indicates their crucial importance in the revolu-
tionary struggle. They are paid comparatively high wages, 
and led to believe that if the imperialists withdraw they will 
be unemployed. In some cases, they are given houses at 
reduced rents and "amenities" to keep them happy while 
they are being exploited, and to lull them into a false sense 
of security and well-being. The object of this attention is 
to instil into them the idea that they have something to 
gain by a continuance of the imperialist way of life, and 
everything to lose by a revolution. 
This kind of indoctrination makes the task of drawing 
the workers into the ranks of our liberation struggle some-
what difficult. But then nothing is easy in a revolutionary 
situation, and already, hundreds of thousands of African 
workers are aware of their true position and are ready to 
act. 
82 
Neo-colonialist attempts at integration 
Probably the most insidious of the enemy's attempts to 
win the African workers to their side is the campaign to 
"integrate" them into the neo-colonialist, capitalist sys-
tem of exploitation. This is the so-called solution of 
"Africanisation", made palatable by the promise of wages 
and salaries equal to those of foreign workers. 
The main problem for our workers is not that an African 
earns three, five or ten times less than his western counter-
part, but that he, like they, is exploited, and will never be 
able to achieve full self-realisation within the imperialist, 
capitalist system. 
Far from constituting a serious challenge to the system, 
Africanisation harmonises and attempts to rationalise it 
so that its running is more smooth and efficient, and there-
fore more profitable for the enemy. 
The truth behind the salaries 
In South Africa, where African workers live in conditions 
close to slavery, the fascist-racist regime is obliged to give 
its mining and industrial workers comparatively better 
salaries than those usually paid in the rest of Africa for a 
similar job. However, this fact does not prove that workers 
have something to gain from the apartheid regime, or that 
they occupy a - privileged" position in relation to the rest of 
the African workers. On the contrary, such salary scales are 
a clear indication that the enemy cannot do without this 
labour force, and this is true both in the colonised and neo-
colonised territories in Africa. For example, if all African 
miners in South Africa withdrew their labour the country's 
economy would be paralysed and political power within 
their grasp. Such is the potential and, as yet, unrealised 
strength of our workers. 
83


--- PAGE 51 ---
At present, it might appear that African workers are only 
ready to strike for increases in salary. If this is the case, 
it can only mean one of two things : 
1. That they are unable to attempt any other form of 
action in the conditions prevailing at their places of 
work 
2. Or that they are not yet aware that there is something 
else to be done. 
The first alternative is due to measures taken by the 
enemy. The second, is the result of both enemy measures 
and revolutionary deficiencies : 
(a) The enemy both needs and fears the African labour 
force, and therefore does its utmost to arrest the in-
tellectual and professional development of the workers 
by keeping them in the unskilled category for life. 
(b) African revolutionaries have not yet been successful 
in explaining to the workers the crucial part they can 
play in the liberation struggle. 
In certain extreme cases, the purely economic form of 
struggle has definite positive aspects. But it is becoming 
increasingly true that in Africa, particularly in the zones of 
intensive mining and industrial activity, this form of 
struggle can only achieve very limited results, and does not 
match up to the urgency of the situation. 
Being forced to abandon working-sites so strategically 
and economically indispensable to the enemy cannot be a 
solution for the workers. But the presence of African 
workers inside neo-colonialist strongholds opens up 
interesting possibilities for a quick and thorough liquidation 
of the enemy. 
It is essential for the leaders of the revolutionary libera-
tion movement : 
1. To bring the truth out into the open 
84 
2. To establish close and active contact with the African 
workers 
3. To link the African workers' movement organically 
to the struggle by determining specific intermediary 
objectives so that whatever progress is achieved in 
the workers' struggle will mean progress in the whole 
anti-imperialist movement, and the promotion of 
socialism on a continental scale. 
The failure of imperialist tactics 
To prevent the workers from realising their true position, 
and to avoid the immense strength of the African workers 
from being unleashed inside the strongholds of neo-colonial-
ism, the enemy does its utmost to disintegrate the workers' 
movement, rendering it spineless and isolating the workers 
from the realities of African society, and above all from the 
revolutionary movement, during the whole of the time they 
spend on the working-sites. 
However, the enemy can never manage to cut them off 
completely, for one of the essential features of African 
labour is its mobility. 
The workers' movement and revolutionary strategy 
Even in territories under intense enemy control no worker 
in the modern economic sector : 
(i) is totally isolated from the broad masses 
(ii) or permanently established on his working-site under 
enemy surveillance. 
Inside enemy strongholds and in key positions, African 
workers remain part of a vast mobile force. They come from 
the reserves, villages, rural areas and neighbouring 
territories to work for a stipulated period of time in the 
factories, mines, plantations, harbours or transport centres. 
85


--- PAGE 52 ---
Once the contract is terminated they return to their homes 
either permanently, or to stay for a while before once again 
setting out to obtain work. 
The permanent mobility of the African labour force was 
encouraged, and even deliberately organised in places, by 
the enemy, in order to avoid confrontation with a corporate 
and fully-constituted African proletariat. But this very 
mobility has proved of great value to the revolutionary 
movement. Mobile workers establish an active liaison be-
tween the rural population and the centres of neo-colonialist 
strength. They penetrate the innermost strongholds of the 
enemy and are becoming qualified to take them over. 
Therefore, if our revolutionaries are faced with major 
difficulties in their attempts to educate and organise the 
workers on the working-sites, they must seek their : 
1. original points of departure 
2. transit points. 
It is at the points of departure, and along the lines of 
transit that political education must be emphasised. Once 
the workers' trajectories have been determined, mobile 
teams specialised in propaganda work and in political agi-
tation, may even infiltrate into the circuit, enabling revolu-
tionaries and revolutionary ideas to penetrate the very 
bloodstream of the enemy's economy. (Chart 8). 
Therefore, the integration of the workers in the revolu-
tionary struggle may be achieved through various means 
and at different levels,—methods and arguments varying 
according to conditions and circumstances. Any action 
taken by workers to advance their position is an integral 
part of our revolutionary struggle. For example : 
(i) in an enterprise under foreign capitalist control, when-
ever the workers claim a rise in pay 
(ii) in an enterprise under indigenous capitalist control, 
86 87


--- PAGE 53 ---
whenever the workers go on strike 
(iii) in a nationalised or state enterprise whenever the 
workers demand better working conditions, or rebel 
against an inefficient or corrupt administrator. 
These isolated battles must be fought as part of the great 
revolutionary, liberation struggle, and within the frame-
work of our politico-military organisation (AAPRA-
AACPC). 
The role of students 
The youth belong to the Revolution. Our universities, 
colleges and schools in enemy-held and contested zones can 
become centres of revolutionary protest. Students should 
establish close links with the workers and provide the 
spark needed to set in motion demonstrations, strikes, boy-
cotts and armed insurrection. Effective student-worker co-
operation can paralyse a reactionary power structure and 
compel change. 
In liberated areas, students must constantly guard and 
revitalise the revolution. On our youth depends the future 
of Africa and the continent's total liberation and unity. 
The nationalist bourgeoisie 
These anti-imperialist elements of the local bourgeoisie 
form a relatively small, though important part of our lib-
eration movement, particularly in the contested zones and 
in areas under enemy control. They are, for example, often 
in a position to undermine a puppet regime by exposing its 
imperialist masters, and by supporting anti-imperialist 
movements. 
Their social position and their genuine patriotism will 
command respect, but at the same time they may be thought 
to be "armchair revolutionaries", since they represent a 
"privileged" sector of the population known to be out of 
88 
sympathy with our socialist objectives. This should not dis-
courage our revolutionary cadres from drawing them into 
the main stream of our movement since they can be of 
inestimable help in achieving our first two objectives of 
liberation and continental unity, and many of them may, 
in the course of the struggle become convinced of the need 
for socialism. 
Revolutionary outsiders 
These include : 
1. Africans who have dissociated themselves from the 
ideology connected with their class origin 
2. Men and women of African descent living overseas 
3. Foreigners who for various reasons have become 
interested in the African revolution, and wish to 
take an active part in the revolutionary struggle. 
There is room for all these people in our great struggle. 
For our objective remains the same throughout, to mobilise 
all the human forces at our disposal in order to create a 
decisive, revolutionary, flexible and multiform striking 
force. 
The role of women 
The women of Africa have already shown themselves to 
be of paramount importance in the revolutionary struggle. 
They gave active support to the independence movement 
in their various countries, and in some cases their coura-
geous participation in demonstrations and other forms of 
political action had a decisive effect on the outcome. They 
have, therefore, a good revolutionary record, and are a 
great source of power for our politico-military organisation. 
Maximum use must be made of their special skills and 
potentialities. 
First, it is necessary to examine the nature of the African 
89


--- PAGE 54 ---
woman's resources in terms of the revolutionary struggle, 
and then to determine how these can best be used and 
developed. 
The following is a proposed questionnaire of some 
essential points to be studied by our revolutionary cadres, 
concerning the position of women in African society. 
(i) In statistical and qualitative terms, how has the 
African woman assimilated the two-fold experience of 
our traditional, communalistic society? That is, how 
does she stand in relation to the Euro-Christian 
experience of colonialism and neo-colonialism, and to 
the Islamic experience? 
(ii) What is the nature of her links and/or dependence 
on the imperialist oppressor? How can these links be 
used to the advantage of our revolution? 
Sometimes these links are predominantly economic, 
for example in the relationship between the super-
mammies and the foreign trading firms. In other 
cases, the links may be purely personal. Prostitution 
in the colonial and neo-colonial context combines 
personal and economic dependence on the monied 
class, with political links in the form of espionage and 
collaboration. 
(iii) To what extent is the African woman's revolutionary 
role a prolongation, a modification, or a total 
departure from her traditional communalistic milieu 
and her duties, rights and general position? How does 
it affect her subjective views of emancipation and 
happiness? 
(iv) To what extent did she formerly take part in produc-
tive work? 
(v) Is she entitled to the fruits of her labour? In what 
proportion? 
90 
(vi) How far is the practice of polygamy synonymous 
with feudalism? And to what extent does this practice 
mean that the African woman is exploited? 
(vii) In which specific cases can it be said that women 
in Africa are exposed to a two-fold exploitation as 
workers (i.e. class exploitation in the Marxist sense 
of the term), and as women? 
In the case of each social-ethnic group under analysis, 
the final ratio of the positive answers to the negative ones 
will determine the nature of the efforts to be made to ful-
fil the final objective which is the same throughout Africa : 
the revolutionary mobilisation of African women. 
Women in enemy-held zones 
Women in zones under enemy control must participate 
fully in the work of political education and organisation. 
The influence of women over the youth of the country, and 
the fact that they are the wives, sisters, and mothers of 
future freedom fighters must be utilised to the full by the 
revolutionary cadres. 
The degree of a country's revolutionary awareness, may 
be measured by the political maturity of its women. 
They are in a particularly strong position to infiltrate 
the enemy ranks since they can exploit the lack of austerity, 
the mercenary state of mind, and the feeble sense of pur-
pose which are characteristic of the counter-revolutionary 
soldier. 
Women in the bases and liberated areas 
The majority of women in these areas, particularly 
mothers and older women, can ensure the continuity of the 
consolidation process and the growth of self-sufficiency and 
91


--- PAGE 55 ---
preparedness, while the men within the action units remain 
essentially in preparedness for war. 
Their main tasks, inside the liberated zones where 
creative work can begin, is to ensure self-sufficiency, 
stability and resistance on all levels. 
The training of women 
If they satisfy the physical, social and ideological 
recruitment standards determined by the Commission of 
Control and Recruitment of AAPRA, women may join the 
training centres on the same basis as men, and be eligible 
for the same responsibilities and authority. They will 
receive similar political, military and social training as men, 
the courses being adapted to their capacities and physical 
strength. 
Comparatively more emphasis will be placed on : 
a.  Political instruction 
1. Propaganda techniques. The following tasks can be 
usefully fulfilled by women in the bases: 
(i) the production and reproduction of leaflets 
(ii) the distribution and explanation of newspapers, 
news-sheets, slogans and instructions to the local 
population. 
(iii) dramatisation of repressive incidents; the organisa-
tion of victim's funerals with a political dimension; 
demonstrations of passive resistance; the production 
of placards, banners and other insignia. 
Intelligence work. For example, women "petty" 
traders and "market" women can use the mobility 
required by their trade as a cover for the carrying of 
messages, arms and intelligence reports. 
3. Interpreting and liaison duties. Women who can speak 
92 
more than one language will be invaluable as inter-
preters, and for the interrogation of prisoners. 
4. Administrative, judicial and secretarial activities. 
For example, women should be trained to replace 
men in local government. Reliable and efficient secre-
taries will be needed to ensure the smooth running of 
the AAPRA-AACPC organisation, to keep records and 
to carry out other essential office work. 
b.  Education 
A nursery and primary school should be attached to each 
production unit, workshop or medical centre organised by 
women. These will absorb : 
(a) the children of the women workers 
(b) AAPRA orphans and freedom fighters' children 
(c) children of the local population 
Trained infant and primary school teachers will be 
assisted by working mothers taking turns to help in the 
general duties of caring for the children. 
Likewise, each production unit should elect its literacy 
campaigning group to persuade adults to study after work-
ing hours. Incentives may be usefully employed; and a 
moderate degree of competitiveness between the various 
groups will also help to encourage maximum effort. 
The close network of secondary schools, which it should 
be the ultimate goal of every liberated zone to possess. 
should be utilised for evening lectures and class discussions. 
c.  Medical training 
Hospitals, first aid posts, infant and child welfare cen-
tres, and birth control clinics will be set up in the base 
areas, and will be staffed largely by women. 
Nurses with suitable guerrilla training will be attached as 
regulars to the action units. 
93


--- PAGE 56 ---
d. Driving instruction 
We cannot afford to waste a single fighting man on non-
combat duties. Women should, therefore, be trained to 
drive the many different vehicles used within the AAPRA-
AACPC organisation, cars, lorries, jeeps and so on. 
e. The provisioning of AAPRA forces 
1. Food. In view of the increasing involvement of men 
in part-time or full-time guerrilla activities, the 
responsibility of producing and distributing sufficient 
food for all will belong mainly to the women. In areas 
not yet liberated, freedom fighters in action units will 
encourage the local women to take over food produc-
tion duties from the men, so that more local men can 
be recruited into the permanent guerrilla force. 
Farming, fishing, food stocking and preservation will 
be increasingly done by women. 
Interest in food preservation techniques, and time-
saving methods involving minimum expense should be 
encouraged. Dependence on provisions from external 
allies should be lessened to promote local qualities of 
autarchy. 
The local population as a whole is the main pro-
vider of food, but since it is the primary objective of 
guerrilla activities to absorb increasing numbers of 
local men into the action units, the women will 
remain as the only permanent, full-time producers 
and distributors of food. 
Women in the bases and liberated areas will set up 
permanent or mobile distribution centres, canteens and 
people's shops. They will supervise the rationing of 
scarce commodities, and organise barter activities in 
regions where the use of the enemy's currency is 
barred. 
94 
2. Clothing. Women will be trained to set up and operate 
workshops for the manufacture of uniforms, covers, 
canvas bags, shoes and other equipment needed by 
the freedom fighters. 
D. PROPAGANDA 
Propaganda is a means of liberation, an instrument of 
clarification, information, education and mobilisation. 
It serves two different but essential functions in our war : 
1. To subvert the enemy 
2. To awaken and mobilise our people. 
Propaganda to subvert the enemy. 
An indispensable preliminary to battle is to attack the 
mind of the enemy, to undermine the will to fight so that 
the result of the battle is decided before the fighting begins. 
The revolutionary army attacks an irresolute and demora-
lised army. 
This type of propaganda must have two main objectives: 
(a) to undermine the morale of non-African troops, ex-
posing the injustice of their cause and the certainty 
of their defeat. 
(b) to encourage African troops who have been misled 
into fighting for the enemy, to desert and join 
AAPRA. 
The main problem in both cases is the difficulty of access, 
or communication, particularly in enemy-held zones. Broad-
casts, the distribution of leaflets, and the holdings of secret 
meetings and discussions are some of the methods most 
likely to produce results. 
In contested zones, where revolutionaries operate more 
freely, all the various media of propaganda can be used, 
(e.g. radio, television, cinema, press, exhibitions). 
95


--- PAGE 57 ---
Propaganda addressed to the people 
The object of this propaganda is to : 
(i) denounce enemy action to the people 
(ii) explain our cause 
(iii) mobilise the masses so that they break free from inertia 
and participate actively in the revolutionary struggle. 
This can be done on two levels : 
1. Theoretically, by accelerating the political awaken-
ning of the majority. Such an awakening often occurs 
in phases with the spread of : 
(a) the idea of an independent existence (anti-colonial-
ism, nationalism) 
(b) the idea that "something is rotten" (the awakening 
to neo-colonialist exploitation) 
(c) the idea that the situation can change (i.e. a conscious 
anti-neo-colonialist attitude) 
(d) the idea that victory can be achieved only by action 
(the need to use force; the will to fight). 
2. On a practical level, by integrating our educational 
work within the politico-military organisation 
(AAPRA-AACPC), and providing the actual means 
for carrying out our revolutionary aims. 
The suggested mechanism of our revolutionary struggle 
is illustrated in detail in Chart 5 on page 64. 
Chart 9 (page 97) is a simplified plan to show the nature 
and functions of the triple chain of command. 
Structure A, the political executive, is to carry out 
intensive and extensive political education. This structure 
branches out to village level in the rural areas, and to wards 
in the townships. A will gradually provide the oppressed. 
exploited and dissatisfied masses with political organisation 
and education. The people will thus become an informed. 
organised and determined force. 
B comes into being as a result of the successful work 
achieved by A in co-ordination with the Military Executive 
which specialises in the practical organisation of the 
revolutionary units. 
When action is initiated, through the joint decision of 
the Political Executive, the Military Executive and the 
Army General Staff, chain B assumes foremost importance. 
In the meantime A pursues its organisational work and 
even reinforces it, since the action of B will often be carried 
out on the basis of the preliminary work done by A or on 
the strength of information provided by A. 
A runs a system of propaganda and of intelligence which 
has certain links with the B structure, though it never 
completely merges with it. In other words, various types of 
97


--- PAGE 58 ---
agents attached to A will never be known to B. B itself 
will have its own propaganda section and network of agents 
of an essentially operational character, but these will never 
be completely merged with A, or even with the equivalent 
bodies of C, the conventional armed forces. Therefore, if : 
(i) B suffers reverses 
(ii) the progress of B is not uniform 
(iii) certain guerrilla units are disintegrated 
(iv) B is forced by particularly unfavourable circum-
stances to go temporarily underground, 
the organs and cells of A will continue to function. This 
arrangement ensures that there will be no void, gap or 
lapse in the revolutionary struggle. 
Once action is launched at the level of B and C final 
victory is assured, and any retreat or loss will represent 
only a momentary ebb of the revolutionary wave. 
To sum up, general preparations for action are made by 
the structure as a whole and with chains A, B and C 
co-ordinating with each other. Fieldwork begins with A 
which creates the conditions for the setting up of B, whose 
activity is co-ordinated with C. 
A, B and C constitute a huge, well-equipped ideologi-
cally formed and physically trained force. But the complex 
is initially set in motion by propaganda A. 
The type of propaganda needed is first and foremost 
organisational and ideological. It is therefore necessary to 
have a clear conception of the essential features of the 
propaganda we need, and a carefully selected and highly 
trained corps of agents to spread it. 
Our propaganda covers the entire field of revolutionary 
political education. It is the subjective vector of the 
struggle and is based on a chain of constants : 
clarifying—denouncing—explaining 
98 
clarifying—denouncing—explaining—solving  
clarifying—explaining--solving— mobilising 
The chain of propaganda tasks does not vary, but 
different degrees of emphasis will be laid on one link in the 
chain rather than on another according to : 
(i) the level of the audience (national forces or an inter-
national public) 
(ii) the specific situation it treats 
(iii) the stage reached in the struggle and the various 
circumstances conditioning it. 
Propagandists will also vary their techniques and themes 
to suit conditions in the various types of territory they are 
operating in. For example: 
(a) a liberated territory, where the people's power must 
be consolidated 
(b) a contested territory, where the liberation movement 
must be supported, where popular consensus must be 
achieved, and where the enemy must be demoralised 
(c) an enemy-held territory, where it is essential: to ana-
lyse and denounce enemy action; to show the breaks 
in his armour; to show why and how the people's 
forces must be organised and led to victory. 
Propaganda is spread through various media: 
(a) Radio 
(b) Television 
(c) Press (newspapers, pamphlets, leaflets) 
(d) Cinema (documentaries, news reels) 
(e) Conferences, discussions, debates 
(f) Exhibitions (using posters, slides, maps, charts, 
photographs, documents). 
Media a, b, c and d are generally more easily available in 
liberated zones or bases. 
Media c, e and f are adaptable anywhere provided 
99


--- PAGE 59 ---
capable cadres and appropriate means are available. The 
cadres can be trained in AACPC schools. 
The ways of producing written propaganda change 
according to prevailing conditions. In areas where propa-
ganda can be openly produced, printing presses are used. 
In a clandestine situation, portable duplicating machines 
with their compact accessories are suitable. 
There are two main kinds of clandestine publications: 
1. Leaflets which deal with immediate on-the-spot 
news, and which spread slogans, rallying-cries and 
watchwords 
2. Bulletins or newspapers. 
However, all propaganda media must convey the follow-
ing ideas, encouragement and information: 
(i) the struggle to the death against imperialism and neo-
colonialism, its agents and all reactionaries 
(ii) African liberation and unity, and the construction of 
a socialist society 
(iii) news of the problems, progress and achievements of 
other socialist countries 
(iv) information about the progress of AAPRA forces 
(v) practical advice and directions of all kinds for the 
fighters, workers, peasants, students, women, etc. 
Our propagandists must leave no problem untackled, no 
mistake unexposed. Truth must always be told. It is a proof 
of strength, and even the hardest truth has a positive 
aspect which can be used. 
Finally, our propaganda must promote self-induced 
morality, that is, self-reliance, self-education, self-disci-
pline and self-criticism. These qualities are basic in the 
revolutionary guerrilla fighter who is by nature and training: 
(a) courageous 
(b) skilful 
100  
(c) disciplined 
(d) loyal. 
Our propaganda should undertake to illustrate and 
demonstrate the necessity of cultivating and consolidating 
these four qualities, not only subjectively, but scientifically. 
The revolutionary fighter must by the very nature of his 
highly specialised performance and the speediness of his 
action, adopt a scientific attitude in all fields. Superstition, 
magic or irrational beliefs, fatalism and wishful thinking 
must be fought against. 
Suggestions for propaganda items 
A. Blueprint for a monthly AAPRA review 
B. Blueprint for a weekly of: 
(i) the armed forces 
(ii) the military executive 
(iii) the political executive 
C. Blueprint of a local revolutionary newspaper or 
bulletin dealing with various themes: 
(i) the preliminary phase of the formation of cells 
(ii) the prelude to insurrection 
(iii) the unfolding struggle (victories and reverses 
expressed in figures, etc.) 
D. Blueprint for leaflets: 
(i) denouncing the enemy for political and economic 
reasons 
(ii) addressing the various sectors of the population 
Since intensive and extensive political education is 
pioneering work (i.e. preparing the ground for action), and 
constitutes the mainstay of action, the political activists in 
charge of propaganda must be well-grounded in the rules 
and general principles of action. They must always bear 
in mind the essential objective, the take-over by the 
101


--- PAGE 60 ---
people and workers of: 
(i) the civil administration 
(ii) the police 
(iii) the armed forces 
and control over : 
(i) industry 
(ii) agriculture 
(iii) mining 
(iv) transport 
Hence the need for the organisation and mobilisation of 
the : 
(i) workers 
(ii) peasants 
(iii) members of co-operatives 
(iv) students 
(v) youth 
(vi) women 
with specific rules, suggestions and programmes for each 
sector and in accordance with the supreme objective : 
—African unity and socialism— 
To conclude, prop-, nda must: 
(a) prepare for the organisation of popular insurrection 
(b) spread dissension and subversion amongst the enemy's 
ranks, and undermine morale 
(c) expose the enemy's propaganda, and attempts to 
misinform and mislead 
(d) spread information, intelligence etc. 
These basic tasks constitute the necessary prelude to 
action, the condition for the smooth unfolding of our 
struggle, and its final guarantee of success,—the achieve-
ment of a Union Government of Africa. 
102 
CHAPTER TWO 
BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES OF 
GUERRILLA WARFARE 
The main part of the armed revolutionary struggle will be 
carried out by centrally-directed guerrilla forces. These will 
receive expert and rigorous training in base camps where 
the most modem fighting methods will be taught. The object 
of the final part of this Handbook is therefore, merely to 
provide a source of ready reference to some of the funda-
mental elementary principles and techniques of guerrilla 
warfare. 
A. ORGANISATION OF A GUERRILLA ARMY 
A guerrilla army, although operating in small, widely-
dispersed groups needs centralised direction and co-ordina-
tion. The following sections must be established : 
1. Recruitment 
See the section on recruitment for AAPRA forces pp. 68-
69. 
2. Information 
It is the task of this section to provide information about 
anything which may have a bearing on the struggle in a 
particular place. 
(a) inhabitants : those who are supporters of the revolu-
tionary struggle, those who are enemies, and those who 
are indifferent 
(b) physical features of the country : rivers, forests, 
mountains, valleys, etc. 
103


--- PAGE 61 ---
(c) strategical position of towns, roads, bridges, rail-
ways, airfields, etc. 
(d) attitude of members of the armed forces and the 
police; behaviour of freedom fighters and of those 
who wish to join them. 
The information section is also responsible for : 
(i) drawing maps 
(ii) espionage and counter-espionage 
(iii) compiling and keeping dossiers on every freedom 
fighter in the zone 
(iv) coding and decoding of messages 
(v) liaison and co-operation with information sections in 
other zones. 
3. Operations 
This section must authorise all operations by guerrilla 
groups. All chiefs of zones must be consulted so that 
tactics and every aspect of each operation can be discussed. 
The leader of the guerrilla group which is to carry out the 
operation will of course take part in the discussions. 
4. Sabotage 
This is one of the most important sections of guerrilla 
organisation. The officer in charge must see that the 
most modern techniques and equipment are employed, that 
saboteurs are constantly active, and that the enemy's weak 
points are pin-pointed and attacked and his economic life-
lines destroyed. 
5. Instruction 
The officer commanding this section will be in charge of 
the training camps for freedom fighters. He will also pro-
mote the education of peasants and supervise all other 
aspects of education in the region. 
6. Armament 
This section is responsible for the purchase and storage 
104 
of all fighting equipment, arms and ammunition, and for 
its distribution among the guerrilla forces. 
7. Provisions 
It is the task of the officer in charge of this section to see 
that revolutionaries are provided with adequate food, uni-
forms and other supplies. 
8. Health 
Qualified doctors and nurses will generally be in base 
camps and hospitals, and may not be able to attend 
guerrillas who fall sick or who are injured while on opera-
tional duties. All members  guerrilla groups will re-
ceive first aid instruction in the training camps, and will 
carry basic essential medical supplies. The officer in charge 
of the Health section will ensure that guerrilla groups 
are adequately equipped medically, and that all sick and 
wounded brought back to base areas receive prompt medi-
cal attention. He will also keep an eye on all health prob-
lems in his area, particularly concerning himself with the 
prevention of any epidemic spreading to the guerrilla 
forces. 
9. Propaganda 
See Book Two, Chapter One, section D. It is parti-
cularly important in guerrilla warfare, where military 
action is usually unpublicised, that the propaganda section 
issues communiques to spread news of revolutionary vic-
tories. This will raise the morale of revolutionary groups, 
and demoralise the enemy. 
10. Volunteers 
The officer in charge of this section should see that volun-
teers are given non-combat duties and remain unarmed 
until reliable information is obtained about them. The 
normal recruitment processes of AAPRA will apply to both 
men and women volunteers. Where a district or zone has 
105


--- PAGE 62 ---
more volunteers than it needs, the central command should 
be informed, so that arrangements may be made for volun-
teers to be transferred to where they are most needed. 
11.  Communications 
Courses in radio telegraphy and in the use of all com-
munications media will be given in the training camps. It 
is the task of the communications section, therefore, to 
organise and supervise the whole communications network 
of the revolutionary movement, and to see that the latest 
and best equipment is made available to the guerrilla units. 
Guerrilla units 
These should normally consist of 10-25 men, though the 
precise number of men in a unit will depend on fighting 
conditions and local circumstances. In general, small units 
are easier to operate, and are often more effective, than 
larger ones. Members of each unit should be friends, true 
brothers who are ready to give their lives in the revolution-
ary struggle. Numbers of small guerrilla units may form 
part of a larger guerrilla group under a group commander. 
Guerrilla unit and group leaders 
Leaders should be: 
(i) highly-trained, efficient fighters 
(ii) able to command obedience and to make correct and 
rapid decisions 
(iii) patient, and never unjust. 
Each guerrilla must know the hierarchy of his unit and 
group so that when there are casualties, the leadership is 
never in doubt. 
Training 
A guerrilla must be : 
(a) absolutely clear in his mind about what he is fighting 
for 
106 
(b) convinced of the justness of his cause 
(c) a skilled soldier 
(d) of strong moral fibre 
Every guerrilla should be able to : 
(i) shoot with a rifle, revolver and machine gun 
(ii) handle and throw a knife well 
(iii) make and throw bombs 
(iv) march continuously for long periods with very little 
(v) ride a bicycle, paddle a canoe and row a boat 
(vi) climb walls and surmount obstacles with the aid of 
ropes 
(vii) change and mend wheels on bicycles and cars, and 
carry out other elementary repairs 
(viii) read and understand maps and know how to make 
use of them 
(ix) send and receive messages in the morse code. 
Not every soldier will be accomplished in all these tasks 
but the more education and knowledge he has, the greater 
the chance he has of becoming a good revolutionary fighter. 
Equipment 
Apart from arms and ammunition, every guerrilla 
unit should carry certain basic equipment such as first aid 
supplies, compass, watch, whistles, torches, files, saws, 
fishing line and hooks, water bottles, etc. In addition, each 
guerrilla must always carry a rope of about 2 metres, 
or some other substitute (e.g. palm tree fibres tied together). 
This rope can prevent a comrade from becoming separated 
from other members of his unit on a dark night, when 
comrades can tie themselves to each other. It can also be 
useful, for example, for crossing rivers, and for securing 
prisoners. 
107


--- PAGE 63 ---
B. STRATEGY AND TACTICS 
The tactics of guerrilla warfare must be subordinate 
to the strategy of the revolutionary war. Tactics will, there-
fore, vary according to the particular phases of the struggle, 
and the activity and actions of the enemy. Attack is the 
first principle, though there are times when defence is both 
necessary and useful. These two methods—attack and 
defence—are therefore closely linked, and basic in guerrilla 
tactics. 
Mobility 
According to necessity the guerrilla unit must be able 
to move in a few minutes from the field of battle, and 
in a few hours even from the region of struggle. For this 
reason it must change its front continually and avoid en-
circlement—the most dangerous tactic employed by the 
enemy. 
It is the task of guerrilla units to surprise the enemy, 
to inflict casualties and destruction, and to disappear with-
out loss. This is the tactic of surprise attack and rapid 
disappearance. 
Three days is the longest time a guerrilla unit should 
remain in any one place. On arriving at a new hiding place, 
tracks and paths must be covered up and no noise made. 
Marches should be carried out at night. There should 
be no talking or smoking. The feet should be lifted  high 
at each step to avoid tripping on stones, branches and other 
obstacles. During the day, the guerrillas should sleep 
(in turns), study maps of the region, do special section 
work, and so on. 
By rapid manoeuvre, guerrilla units are able to : 
(i) retreat from unfavourable battle conditions, and in 
this way avoid losses 
(ii) link up with other guerrilla units to draw the enemy 
108  
out to cause the greatest material and human damage 
possible. 
Concentration and dispersal of forces 
The enemy is numerically superior and better armed than 
the guerrilla army. Guerrilla units must overcome this dis-
advantage by knowing when to concentrate their forces 
and when to disperse them. They must concentrate their 
forces, by linking up with other units and by reinforce-
ments, when the enemy is in a weak position and can be 
attacked. They must disperse forces when confronted by 
large confrontations of enemy units, when there is danger 
of encirclement, and where the terrain is unfavourable. 
Bases 
A base must be established before a guerrilla move-
ment can begin. A village, a section of liberated territory, 
for example, can serve as a base. It is of vital importance 
to make the correct choice of site. It must be strategically 
placed, defensible and secret, and be in an area where the 
masses solidly support the revolutionary struggle. 
Where geographical conditions make the formation of 
a base impossible, a circle of civil collaborators must be 
formed . 
Choice of objectives for attack 
Communications, above all, railways, airfields and roads 
are some of the most suitable objectives for guerrilla 
attack. Military transportation, for example, columns of 
vehicles, troops on the march, convoys of lorries carrying 
provisions are obvious targets. 
The guerrilla unit will occupy positions inaccessible 
to the enemy, favourable for mobile defence, and which lie 
in the direction from which the enemy is expected. 
109


--- PAGE 64 ---
The primary condition for the success of an attack is a 
profound knowledge of the terrain, the exploitation of this 
knowledge, and careful preparation of the action. 
Combat in favourable terrain 
In favourable terrain, such as mountains and forests, it 
is possible to form and train large numbers of guerrillas 
to construct bases, repair units, dispensaries, education 
centres, arms depots and so on. Conditions are also 
favourable for the establishment of contingency forces. 
With contingency forces, the leader must take into account 
the terrain, quantity of arms and ammunition at his dis-
posal, and the problem of reinforcements. 
The sphere of activity of a partisan unit must be as large 
as conditions permit, and co-ordinate with the activities of 
neighbouring units. If units mobilise at night, the journey 
must not be longer than five or six hours from the safe 
place. Small groups can be sent out of the safe place to 
reconnoitre, but so as not to alert the enemy, they must 
not engage in battle before the main force arrives. Where-
ever possible, similar arms and ammunition as that used 
by the enemy should be employed. 
Food supplies are difficult to obtain in inaccessible ter-
rain. It is necessary, therefore, to form strong liaison with 
local suppliers to ensure that there is always sufficient. It 
should be remembered that there are arms and other 
supplies needed by the guerrilla forces, in enemy supply 
depots. These depots must be raided and the supplies seized. 
Guerrilla units must maintain regular liaison with 
the leaders of the liberation struggle by means of a network 
of people who are trustworthy, and who will hide pro-
visions and emissaries in their houses. Internal liaison must 
be carried out by radio and various technical means. 
110 
Combat in unfavourable terrain 
Plains, unforested areas, etc. are, in general, unfavour-
able terrain for the operation of guerrilla forces. In 
these areas, attention must be focussed on the destruction 
of the enemy's means of communication. It is here that the 
saboteurs can operate effectively in blowing up bridges, 
cutting telephone and telegraph wires and so on. 
A guerrilla unit in unfavourable terrain should con-
sist of from 10 to 15 men, since speed and mobility are 
vital. For a particular operation, guerrilla units may 
unite. But they should disperse again immediately after-
wards. 
Unfavourable terrain usually means dense habitation and 
farms. This is good country for supplies. Guerrillas must 
make contact with trustworthy people who will help to 
supply the unit. 
In these circumstances it is not possible to have the 
amenities of base camps. But guerrillas will be able 
to depend on support from among the local population. A 
dense population allows guerrillas to pass information, 
but at the same time there is greater risk of betrayal. Im-
portant messages must be written in code, or sent orally. 
Villages 
The group of village revolutionaries is responsible for the 
struggle in their own particular village. The group consists 
of politically-aware villagers who live side by side with the 
other inhabitants, but who maintain contact with the 
guerrilla units operating in the region. 
A group of village revolutionaries can be established only 
when the area borders on a zone occupied by the liberation 
movement. A village group must be small, and the leader 
must be under orders from the leader of the region. The 
111


--- PAGE 65 ---
activities of the group are concerned mainly with espionage, 
sabotage and propaganda. Members of the group have arms 
and explosives, but the objectives of their military opera-
tions are determined by the commander of the guerrilla 
units in the region. 
The group must help the guerrilla units in the region, 
give them information, and provide supplies. It is night 
work; and during the day members of the group must live 
like other villagers. 
Towns 
Guerrillas may infiltrate the outlying areas of towns 
and form special freedom fighter units. Their task is 
sabotage, propaganda and the acquiring and passing on 
of information. Attacks can be carried out at night on soli-
tary members of the enemy forces and police. It is the re-
sponsibility of members of town freedom fighter units to 
back up the revolutionary struggle by paralysing the 
economic life of the centre. 
Discipline 
There must be no abuse of power of any kind. A free-
dom fighter who steals, loots, rapes or commits any other 
crime against the community must be tried and severely 
punished. It should be explained that such a breakdown 
in discipline endangers the whole revolutionary movement. 
Discipline comes from inner conviction. It is not a gift, 
but can be acquired by education, exercise and life in the 
guerrilla unit. 
A suspected traitor should be tried by a military court 
and given every chance to defend himself. If found guilty, 
he must be shot. 
112 
Reconnaissance 
This must be carried out ceaselessly so that the most 
up-to-date information is obtained about the enemy's 
position and strength. Information can be collected by : 
(a) observation 
(b) the tapping of enemy telephone and radio messages 
(c) questioning local inhabitants 
(d) interrogating deserters and prisoners 
(e) reconnoitre in combat, i.e. the ambushing of an 
enemy unit and the seizing of equipment and 
prisoners 
(f) making use of the network of secret collaborators. 
Information obtained from local inhabitants and from 
deserters and prisoners must always be verified, since the 
enemy uses agents to spread false information. Prisoners 
should be interrogated by the unit commander or an ex-
perienced member of the revolutionary, political organisa-
tion. Interrogations should be conducted in secret and in-
dividually. 
Prisoners 
The question of prisoners, particularly during the initial 
stages of revolutionary warfare poses a number of prob-
lems. A small unit of guerrillas, sometimes without even 
a base camp, cannot spare time, energy or supplies in 
looking after them. It is sometimes necessary to abandon 
them after seizing their weapons and supplies. In general, 
they should be treated as humanely as possible. If the 
enemy retains the hope that he can save his life by sur-
rendering, his will to fight will be considerably reduced. 
On the other hand, if the enemy is unaware of the moderate 
and humane treatment given by guerrillas to prisoners, he 
113


--- PAGE 66 ---
will fight with greater fury, in the belief that there is no 
escape. 
When the revolutionary forces have liberated a consider-
able area, and have safe base camps, prisoners can be 
taken, and made to do useful work. 
Camouflage 
The use of effective camouflage is of supreme importance, 
since the guerrilla's first duty is to remain hidden, and 
his camps, fortifications, arms depots etc. must be con-
cealed both from land and from the air. Branches, grass, 
canes, straw and similar local materials should be used. 
Each terrain has a dominant colour which must deter-
mine the colour of the guerrillas' clothing and equipment. 
Acquisition of arms 
At the start of guerrilla warfare, each unit acquires arms 
for its own use by : 
(a) purchasing them 
(b) raiding arms depots 
(c) disarming enemy soldiers and police 
(d) making them themselves 
(e) obtaining them through workers in munitions factories. 
For the acquisition of arms it is often sufficient to use 
rudimentary weapons such as knives, axes, assegais, 
sharpened canes, sabres etc.In this way, the guerrilla unit 
arms itself little by little, and prepares the conditions for 
the acquisition of more arms. 
Storage of arms 
Arms should be stored in boxes lined with tin, and buried 
deeply in widely dispersed areas. The places where arms 
114 
are stored should be known only to very few people, for 
example, unit and group leaders. 
Arms and equipment should be regularly inspected and 
all metal parts protected against rust. A badly preserved 
weapon, or its loss, can cause the failure of an operation, 
and endanger the lives of every member of the unit. 
Espionage 
A spy serving the revolution is a comrade who pretends 
to be a friend of the enemy, and obtains and passes informa-
tion of use in the waging of the revolutionary struggle. 
Information should be sent via a third party, and if it is 
of crucial importance and urgent, by word of mouth. 
The revolutionary double agent has a very important 
and difficult task. He must deceive the enemy and be un-
suspected even by his closest friends. He must be in a posi-
tion to obtain vital secret information about the enemy's 
strength and his plans, and know how to convey the in-
formation safely to the revolutionary forces. Where a coun-
ter-spy is a member of the enemy army he can give details 
of the enemy's battle units, the disposition of troops, their 
morale, equipment and tactical and strategic plans. A very 
important part of the help they can give is by leaving stra-
tegic points undefended in battle (e.g. with little ammuni-
tion or in charge of a coward) so that these points can be 
easily captured. An officer in the enemy army who is a 
double agent, could be worth more than ten officers in the 
revolutionary forces. 
Enemy spies and infiltrators 
These must be tried by a military court, and if found 
guilty, sentenced to death. Each case must be thoroughly 
115


--- PAGE 67 ---
and carefully investigated before sentence is passed. Revo-
lutionary intelligence agents may be mistaken for enemy 
spies and the danger of their condemnation must be guarded 
against. 
Enemy attack 
When fired on, comrades must immediately fall to the 
ground. Then, as soon as possible, each one should run in 
a separate direction, look for a safe hiding place, and await 
calmly for the night. 
In the darkness, contact can again be made through 
specially-arranged signals (animal and bird cries, drum-
ming, etc.) with the rest of the unit, and a new hiding 
place sought. 
No attempt should be made to fight back. Only under 
very special conditions, when it is certain that casualties 
can be inflicted on the enemy, without the guerrillas 
suffering any loss, should a counter-attack be made. It 
must never be forgotten, that it is the task of the guerrilla 
not to fight or to provoke a fight, but to carry out the 
operation assigned to him, and then to disappear. 
In general, the guerrilla shoots to demoralise the enemy 
and to keep him constantly on the alert. The enemy must 
not be allowed to rest. 
After an enemy attack, one or two comrades should stay 
behind to keep an eye on the enemy. If the enemy en-
camps, the unit should be informed so that at night it may 
be fired on. Constant harassment of the enemy is the pri-
mary task of the guerrilla forces. 
Sabotage 
The enemy may be sabotaged in a number of ways, apart 
from the more obvious blowing up of bridges, railways, 
116 
and key industrial points. For example: 
(i) Post Office employees can delay mail, "lose" official 
correspondence either by sending it to the wrong des-
tination, or by preventing it from being delivered. 
They can scrutinise mail, and pass on important in-
formation to the guerrillas. 
(ii) Telephone company employees must listen in to all 
calls likely to be of interest in the revolutionary 
struggle, and see that any useful information is made 
known to the guerrillas. 
(iii) Garage attendants should adulterate petrol by adding 
sugar to it, put sand into the tanks of enemy army 
vehicles, and remove vital tools and spare parts. 
(iv) Drivers should cause accidents without arousing 
suspicion. 
(v) Teachers should tell their pupils that every one has 
a right to be free. They should explain the present 
African situation and the working of colonialism and 
neo-colonialism. Reference should be made to the 
liberated areas of Africa, and the progress being made 
there. 
(vi) Workers should stay away from work as often as they 
can, feigning illness. They should constantly seek 
ways of undermining the economic strength of the 
enemy. 
(vii) Civil servants should be as slack as possible in the 
carrying out of their duties. While pretending to be 
loyal to the oppressors they should continually criti-
cise their policies to subordinates, and spread des-
pondency and lack of confidence in the way the 
country is being administered. 
(viii) Tradesmen, engineers, etc., should block drains and 
117


--- PAGE 68 ---
pipes, cause electrical failures, etc., in the homes and 
offices of the enemy. 
(ix) Every member of the community can assist in the 
spreading of rumours, the creation of a general atmos-
phere of discontent and unease, and in the under-
mining of the enemy people's morale by making it 
apparent that they are unwelcome in the country and 
that they will shortly be ejected. 
Attacking a village 
Before an attack, as much information as possible should 
be obtained about the village and the local terrain. For ex-
ample : 
(a) Where the cables are (telegraphic and telephonic) 
(b) How many people are armed 
(c) If no-one is armed, how far away are the nearest armed 
men 
(d) If there is a radio transmitter, or an amateur radio 
transmitter 
(e) The names and whereabouts of traitors and colonial-
ist agents. 
(f) The location of bridges, roads, airfields, etc. 
Once all this data has been collected, the appropriate 
files should be given to the operations section, and only 
after every detail has been examined should a decision be 
made whether or not to attack. 
When an attack is decided upon the timing must be fixed, 
and the men chosen to carry out the attack, so that the 
operation may be carried out efficiently and successfully, 
each group acting independently from each other. One 
group will cut the telephone wires; a second, the telegraph 
cables; a third one will, with the help of villagers, search 
houses where there are arms and seize them. A fourth group 
will capture traitors and policemen. All these tasks should 
118 
be carried out swiftly so that, apart from anything else, 
the guerrillas may impress the enemy with their efficiency, 
discipline and moral conviction. When the operation is 
concluded, the guerrilla forces must rapidly disappear from 
the village and hide once more in neighbouring territory. 
Dead and wounded 
If time allows, the dead should be buried. The wounded 
should, if possible, be carried to a safe place for treatment. 
Arms and equipment of dead and wounded must be 
retrieved immediately. 
Defence of an occupied village 
Each house should be regarded as a fortification to be 
connected with the next one by a trench about a metre 
deep. Revolutionaries should be able to pass safely from one 
house to another, protected from enemy fire. Barricades 
(made from bricks, stones, logs, furniture, etc.) should be 
prepared and ready to be put into position in streets where 
an enemy attack is imminent. In all houses, there should 
be holes made (just over the height of a man), through 
which the enemy may be fired on. To shoot, comrades 
should stand on a bench, box or stool in order to reach the 
necessary height. Enemy bullets entering through these 
holes when the guerrilla is moving around the room will 
be too high to do any damage. Villagers who are not pre-
pared to assist in the fight should be compelled to leave the 
village. 
Large villages where a considerable number of guerrillas 
are operating, should be divided up into zones, each zone 
being the responsibility of one leader. There should be one 
leader in supreme command. 
If the enemy captures a house, smoke must be used, to 
halt the advance and provide cover by setting alight pre- 
119


--- PAGE 69 ---
pared old rags and other inflammable material soaked in 
petrol or oil. 
In the course of the revolutionary armed struggle it will 
be necessary at times to destroy some of the country's 
assets, such as bridges, crops, buildings, airfields and tele-
phone and telegraphic networks. Obviously no more de-
struction will be carried out than is strictly necessary for 
the success of military operations. 
Once colonialism and neo-colonialism have been totally 
defeated, and freedom attained, it will be comparatively 
easy, inspired by love of country, to rebuild what has been 
destroyed and for the people to advance to complete fulfil-
ment. 
Relations between revolutionaries and civilians 
The guerrilla should always show gratitude for the food 
he eats in villages and homes. He should explain to the 
donor that the help he is giving to the guerrillas is assisting 
the progress of the revolutionary struggle which is liberating 
the people from colonialism and neo-colonialism. 
Where possible, the guerrilla should help with house-
work, farming and any other work needing to be done. At 
all times, the guerrilla must set an example of respect, hard 
work and devotion to the revolutionary cause. 
Political work 
Guerrilla forces are invincible because of their liaison 
with the masses. Propagandists must explain the revolu-
tionary movement to the people, and see that they are 
informed of guerrilla victories. They should be people who 
have authority and influence in the region, particularly 
among the workers. Pamphlets, newspapers, broadcasts 
can all carry the message of the revolution. Discussion 
groups and meetings can be organised. 
120 
The more efficacious the propaganda work, the more 
rapidly will the public conscience be aroused. This in turn 
will greatly affect revolutionary operations by ensuring mass 
support. 
Those organising and carrying out guerrilla activities 
must be supplied with information of a political nature: 
(i) the political composition of the area in which they 
are operating--political parties, aims, leadership, and 
the possibility of infiltration 
(ii) the reaction of the masses to the economic situation 
(iii) the degree of the people's collaboration with the 
enemy 
(iv) the morale of urban and agricultural workers 
(v) the response of the masses to revolutionary activities 
(vi) the centres of political life in the town or village 
(vii) the composition and strength of trade unions and 
such like organisations. 
Civilian organisations 
These play an important part in the liberation movement. 
Their duties are manifold. They arrange the collection of 
contributions and taxes, maintain supplies, and spread 
propaganda. In enemy-held areas, civilian organisations 
must be clandestine. 
In liberated areas it is necessary to establish administra-
tive organs which should be responsible for the formula-
tion of laws, rules and regulations for the administration 
of the zone. The establishment of political, economic and 
social instruments and their organisational techniques over 
the whole of the Continent must be built up on the basis of 
scientific socialism. The organs of the people's administra-
tion are vital factors in the liberation movement, and must 
121


--- PAGE 70 ---
be so organised as to become the nucleii from which the 
people's revolutionary states and the All-African Union 
Government will crystallise. 
C. MATERIALS FOR DESTRUCTION 
The manufacture and uses of destructive materials such 
as T.N.T., plastic bombs, dynamite, gunpowder, incen-
diary bottles, detonators and lighting fuses, form part of 
the basic training of the freedom fighter. Recruits will be 
taught in the base training camps and workshops how to 
make them and the other many and varied weapons used 
by guerrilla units and by saboteurs operating within 
enemy-held positions. 
The fully-trained guerrilla is armed both ideologically 
and physically for the revolutionary struggle. The tactics 
of guerrilla warfare rest in the main with him. With the 
support of the masses, and with unified direction of the 
revolutionary party, he is invincible. 
People of Africa, arise! 
Defeat imperialism, neo-colonialism and settler domination. 
Stand together and unite in the revolutionary struggle. 
Forward to victory. 
We shall conquer. 
122  
I NDEX 
Accra, 31, 33, OAU Conference in, 37. 
Addis Ababa, 33, 36. 
Africa, 5, 6, 25, 26, 27, 30, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40-43, 48, 51, 52, 55, 
56, 60, 61, 67, 73, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 84; contested zones 
of, 45; defence of, 65; foreign bases and missions in, 22; history 
of, 73; independent states of, 36; liberated areas of, 43-46, 
117; liberation forces in, 5, 16, 21; non-liberated zones of, 7; 
peoples of, 25, 26, 28, 34, 40, 57, 63; political advance 
of, 18; political unification of, 1, 40-41; revolutionary struggle 
in, 1, 20, 42; socialist countries of, 29; women of, 89-95. 
African-Americans, 39. 
African nation, 27, 43, 45, 50, 75. 
African revolution, 63, 77, 89. 
"African socialism", 17, 28. 
African unity, 26, 27, 30, 32, 33, 35, 39, 40, 57, 63, 65, 74, 89, 
100, 102. 
Aid, 9, 15, 17. 
Albania, M. 
Algeria, 3, 5, 32, 79; liberation struggle of, 33, 34, 35, 52; 
Provisional Government of (GPRA), 33, 35, 36. 
All-African Committee for Political Co-ordination (AACPC), 
56-58, 62, 64 (Chart 5), 75, 88, 93, 94, 96, 97 (Chart 9), 100. 
All-African People's Conference (Dec. 1958), 27, 31. 
All-African People's Revolutionary Army (AAPRA), 23, 56, 57, 
58-59, 62, 63, 64 (Chart 5), 66 (Chart 6), 69, 75, 88, 92, 93, 
94, 95, 96, 97 (Chart 9), 100, 101, 105; equipment and com-
position of, 67; leadership of, 74-75; political education of, 
73-74; recruitment of, 68-69; regional operational commands 
of, 60; structure and strategy of, 65-67; training of, 69-74. 
All-African People's Revolutionary Party (AAPRP), 56. 
All-African Union Government, 30, 65, 73, 102, 121. 
Angola, 10. 
Apartheid, 57, 83. 
Arms, acquisition of, 114; storage of, 114-115. 
Asia, 5, 6, 22, 38, 39, 55, 57; liberation movement in, 16; non-
liberated zones of, 7. 
Australia, 21. 
Baghdad Pact, 21. 
Barricades, 119. 
Bases, 109, 110, 114. 
Belgium, 21. 
Berlin Conference, 25. 
Bermuda, 22. 
Black Power, Author's Note, 39. 
Brazzaville, group of states, 35. 
Britain, 21, 37, 79-80. 
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 17. 
Bulgaria, 22. 
Cairo, 31. 
Cameroon, 22, 62. 
Camouflage, 114. 
Canada, 21. 
Capitalism (capitalist), 2-3, 5, 6, 9, 54, 86; structure of, 51; system


--- PAGE 71 ---
INDEX- continued 
of exploitation, 4, 26. 
Capitalist states, 2, 13, 14, 62, 79; system of exploitation, 2, 83. 
Caribbean, 39. 
Casablanca Conference (1961), 35; powers, 36. 
Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO 1959), 21. 
Chad, 22. 
China, 2, 5, 6, 22. 
Civilian organisations, 121. 
Civilians, 120. 
Client state, 8, 10; government of, 14, 15. 
Collective imperialism, 4, 5-7. 
"Cold War", 6. 
Colonialism, 13, 18, 24-25, 27, 51, 57, 79, 80, 90, 117, 120; anti-
colonialist struggle, 57, 96. 
Colonial powers, 8, 10, 11, 25, 42, 50. 
Colonies, 2, 3, 5. 
Combat, in favourable terrain, 110; in towns, 112; in unfavourable 
terrain, 111; in villages, 111-112. 
Commission of Control and Recruitment, 68, 69, 92. 
Communications, 106, 109. 
Communism, 4, 9. 
CONCP, 53. 
Conference of Independent African States (April 1958), 30. 
Congo, 7, 25, 32, 36, 39, 53; liberation struggle of, 34, 35, 37. 
Congo-Brazzaville, 44. 
Co-operative movement (co-operatives), 59, 61, 68, 75, 76, 78, 102. 
Contested zones, 43, 45, 47, 48-50, 51, 60, 65, 88, 95, 99. 
Convention People's Party (CPP), 2. 
Counter-revolutionary soldier, 91. 
Coup d'etat, 11, 12, 38, 52, 54. 
Cuba, 5, 38, 74 
Czechoslovakia, 23. 
Dahomey, 62. 
Dead, the, 119. 
Denmark, 21. 
Deserters, 113. 
Discipline, 112. 
Egypt, 5, 31, 35, 44. 
Enemy (ies), 43, 45-46, 48, 50, 56, 60, 63, 70, 71, 83, 84, 85, 86, 
94, 95, 96, 99, 101-105 passim, 108-119 passim, 121; agents, 
69; attack, 88, 116; external, 56, 59; incontested zones, 67; 
internal, 56, 57, 59; know the, 1-4; spies and infiltrators, 
115-116; strategy, 1-5, 83; zones (areas) under enemy control, 
43, 46-48, 49, 60, 62, 88, 91, 95, 99. 
England (see also Britain), 27. 
Espionage, 90, 104, 112, 115. 
Ethiopia, 31. 
Europe, 6, 7. 
European Common Market (EEC), 7. 
Exploitation, economic, 1-5, 16. 
Fascism (fascist), 4, 13, 83. 
Fifth Pan-African Congress, 27. 
France, 21, 33, 80. 
INDEX- con tinued 
Francophonie, 38. 
Freedom fighters, 19-20, 21, 37, 41, 42, 53, 63, 91, 94, 95, 104, 
112, 122. 
FLING, 10. 
FLN (Algeria), 82, 35. 
Gabon, 22. 
Geneva, 17. 
German Democratic Republic, 22. 
Ghana, 2, 5, 18, 30, 31, 35, 52, 55, 62; coup, 55. 
Greece, 21. 
Guerrilla(s), 72, 94, 100, 105, 108-114 passim, 116, 117, 119, 120, 
121; qualities of, 106-107; training of women, 93; units 
(groups), 65, 67, 98, 104-114 passim, 122. 
Guerrilla army, 109; bases, 109; equipment of, 107; leadership of, 
106; mobility of, 108-109; organisation of, 103-107; recruit-
ment of, 103; training of, 106-107. 
Guevara, Che, 20. 
Guinea, 5, 35, 52. 
Guinea-Bissao, 10. 
Havana, 38. 
Health, 105. 
High command, 51; AAPRA, 60. 
Holland, 21. 
"Hot War", 6. 
Hungary, 22. 
Iceland, 21 
Imperialism (imperialist), 1, 3, 11, 18, 25, 26, 27, 30, 32, 33, 34, 
37, 40-41, 46, 51, 55, 67, 73, 78, 80, 81, 82, 90, 100; 
aggression of, 1, 7, 11, 21-22, 23, 29, 34, 38, 39, 41, 53, 55, 
59, 76; anti-imperialist struggle, 21, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 50, 51, 
60, 63, 85, 88; escalation of, 34-36, 38, 42, 52-54; failure of 
tactics of, 85; inter-imperialist assistance, 7; in zones under 
enemy control. 46-48; objectives of, 79; orthodox, 2; strategy 
of, 1-5, 9, 11, 20; subversive organisations of, 17; victory over, 
29-30; wars of, 2, 6. 
Independence, 4, 16, 31, 32, 33, 43, 44, 45, 52, 53, 89-90. 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 
7. 
International Development Association (IDA), 7. 
International finance capital, 3, 5, 8, 13, 25-26. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 7. 
Iran, 21. 
Italy, 21, 80. 
Ivory Coast, 22. 
Japan, 80. 
Jehovah Witnesses, 17. 
Johnson, President of USA, 15. 
Katanga, 80. 
Kennedy, John, 15. 
Kenya, 2, 17, 22, 52. 
Lagos Conference (Jan. 1962), 35, 36. 
Latin America, 2, 5, 6, 22, 26, 38, 39, 55, 57; liberation movement


--- PAGE 72 ---
INDEX- continued 
in, 16, 22; non-liberated zones of, 7. 
Leadership (see also AAPRA, leadership of), 119. 
Liberated areas, 43-46, 51, 57, 58, 63, 65, 71, 92, 94, 99, 109, 
117, 121. 
Liberation movement (struggle), 1-5, 8, 9, 10, 24-25, 27, 29, 30, 
31, 32, 34, 42-43, 46, 49, 51, 52, 53, 55, 58, 59, 62, 64, 68, 
69, 75, 76, 82, 84, 88, 99, 110, 111, 121; artificial, 10; 
attempts to destroy, 1-5, 16-21; in Africa, 16; in Asia, 16; in 
Latin America, 16. 
Liberia, 22, 31. 
Libya, 22, 31, 35. 
Lumumba, Patrice, 37. 
Luxembourg, 21. 
Mali, 5, 35, 62. 
Manchester, 27 
Mau Mau, 52. 
Mercenaries, 69. 
Middle East, 22. 
Military training (see also AAPRA, training of), 92. 
Militia, 60; continental people's, 63, 65. 
Monopoly capital, 7. 
Monrovia Conference (May 1961), 35. 
Moral rearmament, 17. 
Morocco, 22, 31, 35 .  
Moumié, 17. 
Nationalism, 9, 16, 24-27, 32, 96. 
Nationalist bureaucratic bourgeoisie, 76, 88-89. 
Neo-colonialism (neo-colonialist), 4, 6, 8-15, 16, 18, 19, 27, 31, 32, 
34, 36, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 73, 81, 82, 85, 86, 90, 100, 117, 120, 
aggression of, 1, 51, 54, 78-79; attempts at integration, 
83; control over advanced sectors of production, 78-80; ex-
ploitation of, 13, 15, 26, 80, 83, 96; in zones under enemy 
control, 47-48; strategy of, 12; the struggle against, 1, 15-16, 
21, 57, 96. 
Neo-colonies (neo-colonialist states), 2, 7-12, 45, 49, 54, 57. 
New Zealand, 21. 
Niger, 22, 62. 
Nigeria, 25, 32, 62. 
Nile, 25. 
North Africa, 22, 36. 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), 21, 22, 39. 
North Korea, 5 
Norway, 21. 
One man one vote, 46. 
One party state, 11. 
Organisation Commune Africaine et Malgache (OCAM), 38. 
Organisation of African Unity (OAU), 36-38, 40-41; Accra Con-
ference of, 37. 
Organisation of American States (OAS), 22. 
Organisation of Solidarity with the Peoples of Africa, Asia and 
Latin America (OSPAAAL), 57. 
Pacific Pact (ANZUS), 21. 
Pacific Ocean, 22.  
INDEX- con tinued 
Pakistan, 21, 22. 
Pan-Africanism, 23, 27, 31, 73; conferences, 31. 
Panama, 22. 
Parti Démocratique  de Guinée (PDG), 2. 
Patriotic bourgeoisie, 76. 
Peace corps, 17. 
Peasants, 48, 61, 68, 75, 76-77, 78, 80, 100, 102, 104. 
Philippines, 21. 
Physical training (see AAPRA, training of), 69-74. 
Pio Pinto, 17. 
Poland, 22. 
Political education (training), (see also AAPRA, training of), 86 
91, 92, 96, 98, 101. 
Puerto Rico, 22. 
Portugal, 21, 39, 53. 
"Portuguese" colonies, 2, 53. 
Positive action, 52. 
Prisoners. 107, 113-114. 
Propaganda (propagandist), 8, 9, 16-21, 55, 86, 95, 97, 98, 112, 
120, 121; addressed to the people, 95-101; suggestions for 
propaganda items, 101-102; techniques, 92; to subvert the 
enemy, 95. 
Psychological warfare, 16-21, 55. 
Puppet states, 4, 40, 49, 53, 54, 56, 75, 88; government of, 10, 15, 
16, 46, 49, 50, 53, 55. 
PZ, 80. 
Rassemblement Démocratique  Africain (RDA), 2. 
Reconnaissance, 113. 
Recruitment, (see AAPRA). 
Rhodesia, 22, 36, 37, 39, 53, 80; liberation struggle of, 34. 
Revolutionary outsiders, 76, 89. 
Revolutionary petty bourgeoisie, 76, 88. 
Revolutionary struggle (movement), 16, 19, 48, 62, 65, 70, 76, 81, 
84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 96, 98, 103, 106, 109, 112, 115, 117, 120; 
in Africa, 1, 5, 31; in Asia, 5; in Latin America, 5. 
Revolutionary warfare, 1, 20, 21, 23, 42, 51, 61, 67. 
Rumania, 22. 
Rural proletariat, 77-78. 
Sabotage (saboteur), 8, 47, 62, 72, 104, 111, 112, 116-118, 122. 
Sahara, 80. 
Sanniquellie Conference (July 1959), 32. 
Santo Domingo, 38. 
SCOA, 80. 
Second Conference of Independent African States (1960), 33. 
Second World War, 2, 6. 
Senegal, 22, 25. 
Settlers, 46, 79. 
Sham independence, 7-8, 31, 32-34; zones of, 48. 
Smith Ian, rebellion of, 37. 
Socialism (socialist), 11, 28-29, 44, 55, 57, 59, 73, 85, 88, 89, 100, 
102; scientific, 29. 
Socialist states (countries), 55, 58, 100. 
South Africa, 22, 41, 53, 62, 80, 83; military build up of, 39.


--- PAGE 73 ---
INDEX— con tinued 
South East Asia, 22. 
South East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), 21. 
South Korea, 7. 
Spain, 53. 
Spanish colonies, 2. 
South West Africa, 37, 62. 
State farms. 59. 
Strategy, 15; and tactics of guerrilla army, 108-113; of imperialism 
and neo-colonialism, 1; of revolutionary forces, 60-63. 
Subversion, 62. 
Sudan, 31, 36. 
Syndicalisation, 6. 
Tactics, choice of objectives for attack, 109-110; concentration 
and dispersal of forces, 109. 
Technical training, (see AAPRA). 
Thailand, 21. 
Togo, 25, 62. 
Towns, 112. 
Trade Unions, 68, 82, 121. 
Tunisia, 31. 
Turkey, 21. 
United Africa Company (UAC), 80. 
United Nations  Organisation (UNO), 7, 31, 37. 
United States of America (USA), 5, 6, 79; aggression of, 15; anti-
revolutionary effort of, 21-23; European post-war alliance of, 
6; financial institutions of. 7; imperialism of, 6, 22, 38; mili-
tarisation of, 6; policy in Korea and the Congo, 7. 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), 2, 5, 6, 22. 
UPA, 10. 
UTC, 80. 
Vietnam, 2, 5, 16, 38, 39. 
Village(s), (villagers), 85, 96, 109, 111, 112, 120, 121; attacking of 
118-119; defence of, 119-120. 
Voice of America, 17. 
Voice of Germany, 17. 
Volunteers, 105-106. 
Warsaw, 23. 
Warsaw Treaty, 22. 
West Germany, 7, 21, 80. 
Welfare state, 4-5, 12-13. 
Women, 100, 102; in enemy-held zones, 91; in the bases and 
liberated areas, 91-92; organisations, 68; the role of, 89-91; 
training of, 92-95. 
Workers, 2, 6, 28, 47, 48, 59, 61, 67, 68, 75, 78, 80, 86, 87 (Chart 
8), 88, 91, 100, 102, 117, 120, 121; exploitation of, 4; in 
agriculture, 77-78; in the mines, industry and trade, 76, 80-
85; movement of, 3, 6, 85-88; neo-colonised, 13, 14; organisa-
tions of, 2, 4, 58. 
Wounded, 119. 
Zambesi, 25. 
Zanzibar, 44.

