=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: How-Black-Awakening-in-Capitalist-America-Laid-the-Foundation-for-a-New-Internal-Colonialism-Theory.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 14
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:29:25.438744
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
 
“How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the 
foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory” 
Pinderhughes, Charles. (2010, June 22). How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation 
for a New Internal Colonialism Theory The Free Library . (2010). Retrieved July 29, 2011 from 
http://www.thefreelibrary.com/How Black Awakening in Capitalist Amer ica laid the foundation for a... -
a0233963295 
 MY FIRST EXPERIENCE with Robert L. Allen's Black 
Awakening in Capitalist America: An Analytic History was 
in 1971 after my participation in the Black Panther Party 
(BPP). I was Lieutenant of Information in the New Haven, 
Connecticut chapter in 1969 -70, and af ter I had separated 
from the organization, I had the foolish audacity to draft and 
send "A Letter of Criticism and Suggestion to Huey P. 
Newton and the Central Committee of the Black Panther 
Party" intending to make suggestions about party line, policy 
and practice (Pinderhughes). I became an Anti -colonial 
Marxist in the process of writing that "letter," which turned 
out to be eighty -five pages, since I was also processing the 
rest of my previous eight years experience in the Civil 
Rights and Black Power mo vements. Black Awakening was 
one of the key books I read, in addition to looking for quotations in Mao's Little Red Book and 
then reading myself back through the citations all the way to Hegel. Of course, the BPP didn't 
listen.  
  
My first use of Black Awak ening in a class was in 1973 at Tufts University's Experimental 
College in a course co -sponsored by the Afro -American Cultural Center. The course, "Black 
Survival as a Political Science," was very well -received by the students, but of course the 
counter-insurgents in the administration and at the Center considered it way too radical. Thus, it 
was actually replaced the next term by a course in African textiles and basket weaving! They 
weren't taking any chances. Thereafter, as a community organizer, at every  political education 
opportunity, I continued to use it. Of course, I've also assigned it in the classroom for appropriate 
courses.  
These remarks referencing Black Awakening draw upon the theoretical dissertation that I'm in 
the process of completing.  
THERE IS a 180-year-old tradition of black activists viewing African America as a "nation with 
a nation." The slogan is notable in the national black convention movement's first call to unite in 
1830, as it responded to the pogrom against the blacks of Cinci nnati in 1830 (Aptheker, 102). 
Martin Delany utilized it in his colonization appeals (320). In 1853, Frederick Douglass 
embraced the formulation in his call to black national consciousness (Foner -1999, 253). Cyril


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
Briggs employed it in his Amsterdam News a ssessment of the 
contradiction between the African  American condition and President 
Wilson's World War I peace proposals (Haywood, 124). And it was the 
title of W.E.B. Du Bois's call in 1935 to sidestep Jim Crow segregation 
during the Great Depression wit h a cooperat ive economic program (Du 
Bois). 
 
In the 1960s, first among progressive activists and then scholars, this 
perspective became codified as Internal Colonialism Theory. What I term 
Academic Internal Colonialism Theory was established in conjunction 
with a range of scholars who chronicled the experiences of various 
internally colonized peoples (Carmichael & Hamilton, Clark, Cotler, 
Cruse, Frank, Gonzalez Casanova, Havens & Flinn, Stavenhagen). 
 
In the title of this essay, I've used the term "New" Internal Colonialism 
Theory, in reference to my own re -assessment of Internal Colonialism 
Theory. The aim of my framework is a renaissance in the use and 
applicability of Internal Colonialism Theory. I consider the Internal 
Colonialism Theory articulated during the 1960s and 1970s as "Classic." 
Among the foundational works of classic Internal Colonialism Theory, I 
include Black Awakening, Robert Blauner's Rac ial Oppression in America, and Mario Barrera's 
Race and Class in the Southwest. Although thirty to forty years old, the books of Allen, Barrera, 
and Blauner together still represent the key modern sociological statements to date of Academic 
Internal Colonialism Theory as it applies to the US.  
 
A LEADING WORK in this genre, Allen's groundbreaking and foresight -full volume has 
presented the most incisive application of Internal Colonialism Theory (1) to African America 
published to date. Released almost simu ltaneous to the publication of Robert Blauner's article 
"Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt," (2) Black Awakening assessed internal colonialism 
from a very different angle from Blauner's. Allen presented a colonized people's academic 
perspective on the  subject, writing about African America as an organic intellectual, a scholar 
who maintained strong roots in his community, including cultivating connections with then 
current struggles and issues. He asserted:  
   The fact of black America as a semicolony, or 
   what has been termed domestic colonialism, lies at 
   the heart of this study. It is at one and the same 
   time the most profound conclusion to be drawn 
   from a survey of the black experience in America, 
   and also the basic premise upon which an 
   interpretation of black history can be constructed. 
   (Italics in original, 2) 
 
 
Allen provided a succinct historical background about black Americans that exposed their many 
Related Reading: 
 
African-Americans as an 
Internal Colony: The Theory of 
Internal Colonialism 
Note: This article appears in a book 
edited by John Whitehead and Cobie 
Kwasi Harris, Readings in Black 
Political Economy


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
commonalities with the coloniz ed from external colonial experiences, including African 
Americans' long history of embracing various formulations of Black Nationalism. Allen assessed 
several key features of African American oppression historically, through the 1960s, as well as 
the then  newly developing feature of neo -colonial control of colonized Black America. In 
appraising the internal colonialism framework, he stated:  
 
   It is the central thesis of this study that black 
   America is now being transformed from a colonial 
   nation into a neocolonial nation; a nation 
   nonetheless subject to the will and domination of 
   white America. In other words, black America is 
   undergoing a process akin to that experienced by 
   many colonial countries. The leaders of these 
   countries believed that they were being granted 
   equality and self-determination, but this has 
   proved not to be the case. (13-14) 
 
 
ALLEN advanced Academic Internal Colonialism Theory in two major ways: 1). he documented 
the major move from direct to indirect rule of black American colonial subjects, delineating 
some of the neo -colonial instruments being used for managing internally co lonized black 
communities, and 2). he evaluated the various class interests within the African American 
community that operated in contention around that oppression. Allen also clearly defined the 
black bourgeois and petty bourgeois class interests which w ere hijacked by corporate 
imperialism to carry out these internal colonial management functions.  
 
 
Historically, Allen noted:  
   [A]s with other colonial peoples, the colonized 
   blacks were prevented from developing a strong 
   bourgeois middle class which could engage in 
   widespread economic activity and compete with 
   the white masters. Instead, the blacks were 
   restricted to providing unskilled labor in the production 
   of raw materials [e.g. cotton] for 
   "export" to northern mills and foreign customers. 
   (11) 
 
 
In Allen's class schema, since the American Civil War, the major classes within the black 
community have been primarily black workers along the with a very weakened black 
bourgeoisie, which he defined as including the black petty bou rgeoisie as well as a few, mostly 
subordinated, black capitalists. Because "colonial rule is predicated upon an alliance between the 
occupying power and indigenous forces of conservatism and tradition," this black bourgeoisie 
was constantly pressed to coll aborate and attempt to exert control over the majority of the 
African American population (11). For many decades, this arrangement reduced the need for 
White America to use physical force to maintain domination and control. However, with 
segregation also s trongly limiting the black bourgeoisie, demands for change as represented by


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
the Civil Rights and Black Power movements retained a vigorous cross -class appeal.  
 
 
But as the urban rebellions of the 1960s raged, Allen saw that in between these uncompromising 
demands for ending systemic black oppression, and the militaristic right -wing response of more 
cops, more jails, more weapons and tougher laws:  
 
   [T]here has arisen a third force: the corporate 
   capitalist, the American businessman. He is interested 
   in maintaining law and order, but he knows 
   that there is little or nothing to gain and a great 
   deal to lose in committing genocide against the 
   blacks. His deeper interest is in reorganizing the 
   ghetto "infrastructure," in creating a ghetto 
   buffer class clearly committed to the dominant 
   American institutions and values. (194) 
 
MUCH of Black Awakening is devoted to revealing details of how "a program of domestic 
neocolonialism is rapidly advancing" (17). Created out of fear of the economic and social 
consequences for the US of the black rebellions of the 1960s, "this program was formulated by 
America's corporate elite --the major owners, managers, and directors of giant corporations, 
banks, and foundations which increasingly dominate the economy and society as a whole" (17). 
This project "to co-opt the black power movement" was dependent on the corporatists connecting 
with a "new, militant  black middle class which became a significant social force following 
World War II" (17-18). One of the program's goals was "the creation of a class of capitalists and 
corporate managers within the black community." Why? "A black capitalist class would ser ve 
thereby as a means of social control by disseminating the ideology and values of the dominant 
white society throughout the alienated ghetto masses" (212).  
 
 
In addition to heightening ideological manufacture, an expanded new black bourgeoisie was 
needed to supervise the institutions of government directly --including welfare, education and 
public safety (police, courts and prisons) --where mostly white functionaries had previously 
operated. For this, "The black student is crucial to corporate America's ne ocolonial plans. It is 
the educated and trained blacks who are slated to become the new managers of the ghetto, the 
administrators of the black colony" (262).  
 
 
ALLEN not only documented corporate capitalism's use of "the rhetoric of black nationalism in 
helping itself establish neocolonial control of the black communities." He also examined "how 
some black militant groups have used the nationalist sentiment of the black masses to advance 
the class interests of the black bourgeoisie" (212).  
 
 
Allen viewed this approach as a neo -colonial strategy very similar to that carried out by the US 
and Europe in the developing world. He noted that "in the long run, this strategy cannot help but 
intensify class divisions and class conflicts within the black communities." (245)


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
 
 
However, while many sociologists have referenced or argued with Blauner, Allen's work has 
received much less attention. More widely cited that Allen or Barrera, Blauner, achieved his 
status (3) in part because of the compactness of his article , "Internal Colonialism and Ghetto 
Revolt," (4) which was more explicitly directed toward the then race-backward field of sociology 
than Allen's book (in addition to being authored by a white "expert" instead of a "movement" (5) 
participant and recent blac k graduate student). As noted above, Allen actually offered a more 
advanced approach to Internal Colonialism Theory than Blauner, but Allen's book was almost 
systematically ignored by mainstream sociology even as Blauner's appraisal was read widely yet 
looked at askance by most of the discipline.  
 
 
Still, regardless of the actual level of his acknowledgment among mainstream sociology, Allen 
advanced the development of Academic Internal Colonialism Theory through his assessment of 
the neo -colonial stage of internal colonialism for African America as well as the through 
demonstrating the necessity for clear class analysis as a key part of apprehending internal 
colonial conditions.  
 
 
Allen thus significantly advanced the development of Academic Internal Colon ialism Theory 
while laying the foundation for what I think will be its revitalization in the form of a New 
Internal Colonialism Theory.  
 
 
Denial and Dismissal 
  
 
IT MUST BE SAID, however, that since the publication of the three foundational texts of Allen , 
Barrera and Blauner, Internal Colonialism Theory has become frequently discounted and often 
ignored. What has hindered its full development and consistent use since the 1970s?  
 
There was a major lack of a strong, ardent, and consistent defense, and a fa ilure to respond to 
flawed evaluations. While Allen's application of Internal Colonialism Theory to African America 
seems to have been mostly avoided by sociological critics intent on attacking Internal 
Colonialism Theory, those Internal Colonialism Theory  analysts actually critiqued did not 
consistently respond, thus creating the illusion that the theory "is now largely discredited," to 
reference A Dictionary of Sociology as of April 6 2009 (Scott & Marshall, Oxford Reference 
Online).  
 
Most often, these sociological detractors have selectively targeted their criticisms by focusing on 
Blauner, who has stated that he gave up using Internal Colonialism Theory in the mid-1970s. But 
more interesting is that most of critics' claims of the weaknesses of Internal Colonialism Theory 
are clearly rebutted by the focus of Allen's work. (These include, but are not limited to, the 
critiques of Bonilla-Silva-2001, Burawoy, and Omi & Winant.) Moreover, the ignoring reactions 
are typical of "mother country" colonial scholar ship--the refusal by mainstream intellectuals to


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
acknowledge distinctive and insightful work by intellectuals from the colonized population when 
that work does not embrace the status quo --especially on questions of race and power. These 
forms of denial and dismissal were most systematically directed at the groundbreaking sociology 
of W.E.B. Du Bois and Oliver Cox (Steinberg, 12). 
  
 
In addition, there are other elements that have contributed to this hindrance of full development 
and consistent use of Internal Colonialism Theory in contemporary sociological analyses of race. 
In my view, these factors include inconsistency of advocates in applying a class analysis, and a 
mistaken use of the superexploitation frame by some analysts.  
 
 
Allen and Barrera used a class framework and Blauner acknowledged Allen's contribution 
concerning class, (6) while some other advocates have avoided including a class analysis, a few 
in the name of race or group unity (Carmichael & Hamilton, Prager, Staples). However, I view a 
competent and comprehensive analysis of internal colonialism as incomplete without including a 
class framework.  
 
 
CONCERNING the concept of superexploitation, I see it as a poorly chosen shorthand reference 
to exploitation by both class and by race. In my wo rk, I point out that both internal and external 
colonies have functions in the division of labor of the dominant country's economic system. 
Profit is achieved by the operation of the whole, not exclusively by the role of an individual part. 
While major pro fits may result cumulatively for the dominant power from its overall economic 
network, internal colonies are not necessarily the direct source. For example, internal colonies 
may be used as major repositories for the reserve army of labor; black Americans have had much 
experience with this form of economic subjugation.  
 
 
So what is this New Internal Colonialism Theory? This next-generation theory:  
 
1). Defines colonialism as a geographically-based pattern of subordination of a differentiated 
population with each separate territory as its own colony;  
 
2). Utilizes a class analysis to help diagram historical sociological dynamics;  
 
3). Describes the continuous developmental course of a colonized people, primarily from early 
European colonization through to the present;  
 
4). Allows inclusion of other dimensions of social oppression, such as gender and sexual 
orientation;  
 
5). Outlines a division of labor for a colony in its relationship to the economy of the dominant 
power, country or people;  
 
6). Defines three major means of ending the existence of an internal colony: assimilation, ethnic


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
cleansing, and positive abolition;  
 
7). Seeks commonality with other sociological theories of oppression, especially racial;  
 
8). Articulates a framework for discussions and critiques of Internal Colonialism Theory. 
  
 
I define internal colonialism as a geographically -based pattern of subordination of a 
differentiated population --the colonized (that is, differentiated by race, ethnicity, religion, or 
clan/tribal/national affiliation) within the dominant power or country. This subordination by a 
dominant power has the outcome of systematic societal inequality expressed in the policies of a 
variety of social and economic institutions, including systems of education, public  safety (police 
and prisons), employment, cultural production and finance. 
  
 
THIS NEW APPROACH to Internal Colonialism Theory includes the recognition that both 
Native Americans and African Americans were colonized peoples under the English -governed 
thirteen colonies. It defines a colony as consisting of settler -confiscated land and the land on 
which the colonized reside. For any setter colony, its independence decolonizes the colonizer but 
not necessarily the colonized. After a settler colony moves to ind ependent status, when these two 
noted categories of land still remain, internal colonies are thereby created. For example, for both 
Native Americans and African Americans, colonized conditions actually intensified after the 
American Revolution. In fact, th e entire US, except for its internal colonies of color, has 
consisted of, and still consists of, settler -confiscated territories. Also, since the colonies proper 
were located where the colonized reside, as the colonized moved, or were moved, between 
segregated territories within the boundaries of the now dominant nation -state, the communities 
of the colonized re -formed and grew, indicating a portable feature of internal colonies.  
 
Historically, many advocates (7) have argued for defining all of African Ame rica, the entire 
domestic diaspora inside the US, as a single collective colony. For example, the Black Panther 
Party proclaimed in its 10-Point Platform and Program:  
 
 
10). We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace. And as our major 
political objective, a United Nations-supervised plebiscite to be held throughout the black colony 
in which only black colonial subjects will be allowed to particip ate for the purpose of 
determining the will of black people as to their national destiny. (Foner 1995, 3 -4; Hayes & 
Kiene, 162)  
 
 
WHILE THIS APPEALS to the nationalist side f many classic Internal Colonialism Theory 
supporters, I view this definition (one  single diasporic colony) as not a functional one. This 
conceptual single "diasporic" colony does not have a singular geographic location, and thus is 
alleged to exist anywhere within the US simultaneously. This formulation contains the 
implication that se rf-determination as a nation can be sought by this collective entity. But a 
nation's self-determination requires the option of national independence which is not possible for


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
a conceptual, single diasporic colony. One basic problem with not having an ident ifying 
geographic location is that there is no place, no locale in which to carry out full national and 
independent democratic reforms and administrative transformation. Requiring contiguous 
geographic location as a key element for the existence of an inte rnal colony allows for these 
adjustments. And, since there is no actual political advantage to claiming all US black 
communities are a single nation, I contend that we should view each individual location of such 
concentration as its own internal colony. O f course, advocating for collective (national) policy 
changes within the political framework of the oppressing country is still very important.  
 
This new rendering of Internal Colonialism Theory explores African American class formation 
utilizing an adapt ation of Manning Marable's Four Racial Domains as context historically 
through to the present. These domains, and their corresponding approximate dates of existence, 
are:  
 
 
* Slavery Racial Domain 1619-1865  
 
* Jim Crow Racial Domain 1865-1970  
 
* Colonial Ghetto Racial Domain 1910-1970  
 
* Neocolonial Ghetto Racial Domain 1970-present.  
 
 
USING MAJOR Marxist class categories, I briefly trace the development in African America of 
the Slave Class, Farmers (Peasants), Working Class, Petty Bourgeoisie, Bourge oisie (8) and the 
Underclass (Lumpenproletariat).  
 
I also note the differences between ending a colony through 1). assimilation: that is, the outcome 
of a spontaneous process driven by external social forces, 2). ethnic cleansing, or 3). positive 
abolition: the result of conscious assertive action within the political framework of the 
dominating power or country.  
 
This analysis defines assimilation of an entire colony as the elimination in a spontaneous social 
process of systemic and systematic discrimina tion or differential treatment such that an equality 
of life outcomes, i.e., an equality of result exists between a culturally differing nationality and 
the dominant power population. 
  
ETHNIC CLEANSING is commonly understood as the systematic harassment a nd/or 
discrimination through internment, expulsion, or killing of members of an oppressed group by a 
dominant group to seek ethnic homogeneity in a territory controlled by that dominant population.  
 
The positive or proactive response is to abolish an inte rnal colony using conscious assertive 
action through a systematic set of policies that actively transform the inequality of the internal 
colony's inhabitants, resulting in a genuine equality of condition and outcome among its 
populace that correspond to at  least those of the general population of the dominating country.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
 
I see Internal Colonialism Theory as quite practically fitting harmoniously within several 
differing conceptualizations of American racial relations. Internal Colonialism Theory should be 
included within Critical Race Theory (as noted by Blauner [200]). It is without conflict with, and 
therefore can be inserted within, some frameworks such as Omi & Winant's Racial Formation 
Theory, Bonilla -Silva's Racialized Social System Framework, and Fea gin's Systemic Racism 
(Feagin has already accepted Internal Colonialism Theory [1986]). Also, I do not see any conflict 
with World -Systems Analysis or other noneconomic reductionist forms of Marxist social 
analysis.  
 
FINALLY, as an analytical framework fo r debating Internal Colonialism Theory, I assert that:  
 
1). Any serious critique of the application of Internal Colonialism Theory to the US should 
engage an historical sociological framework in the process of answering questions such as:  
 
Were African A mericans and Native Americans colonized during the time of the thirteen 
colonies?  
 
Were Chicanos colonized as a result of the Mexican-American War?  
 
Assuming these groups were colonized, when did they cease to be colonized peoples? What was 
the process b y which their colonized existence was abolished? What is a comprehensive 
alternative evolutionary paradigm of their oppression from the claimed end of their North 
American colonized existence to the present? What is an alternative explanation for what appe ar 
to be the continuing symptoms of being currently colonized in these present day populations?  
 
If it is alleged that these groups were not ever colonized, describe a comprehensive alternative 
evolutionary paradigm of their oppression from the beginning of that oppression in North 
America to the present. 
  
 
2). Can Internal Colonialism Theory, the classic or the new version, fit within the alternative 
assessment framework offered? Why, or why not?  
 
 
By elaborating this paradigm of a new Internal Colonial ism Theory, I hope to heighten the 
quality of debate around Internal Colonialism Theory in application not only to the US, 
especially African America, but also internationally to other plural or dual economy societies 
with geographically based unequal rela tions between culturally differing populations as well as 
to other, now independent, settler colony societies. 
  
 
However, this new approach to Internal Colonialism theory very clearly stands on the shoulders 
of Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America. In sum, Black Awakening laid the foundation 
for a new Internal Colonialism Theory by:


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
1). sharply defining the colonial and neocolonial stages of internal colonialism;  
 
2). clearly linking early African American colonized experience to the present;  
 
3). incisively applying class analysis of African America;  
 
4). irrefutably demonstrating that class analysis is integral to a comprehensive understanding of 
the dynamics of internal colonial administration; and  
 
5). forcefully presenting a substantially un-rebutted perspective on the validity and application of 
internal colonialism theory.  
 
 
 
 
Works Cited  
 
Allen, Robert L. 2005. "Reassessing the Internal (Neo) Colonial Theory," The Black Scholar. 
Spring 2005, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 2-11.  
 
--. 1990. Black Awakening in Capitalist America. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.  
 
Aptheker, Herbert, (ed.). 1963. A Documentary History of the Negro People in the United States: 
From Colonial Times Through the Civil War. New York: The Citadel Press.  
 
Barrera, Mario. 1979. Race and Class in the Southwest. South Bend, IN: University of Notre 
Dame Press.  
 
Blauner, Robert. 2001. Still the Big News: Racial Oppression in America. Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press.  
 
1993. "'But Things Are Much Worse for the Negro People': Race and Radicalism in My Life and 
Work," pp. 1-36 in John H. Stanfield (ed.) A History of Race Relations Research: First 
Generation Recollections. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  
 
--. 1972. Racial Oppression in America. New York: Harper & Row. (1969).  
 
--. "Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt," Social Problems, 16, no.4 (Spring 1969), pp.393-
408.  
 
--. 1969. Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt (pamphlet reprint). Indianapolis IN: Bobbs-
Merrill. Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2003. Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the 
Persistence of Racial Equality in the United States. Lanham, MD: Rowrnan & Littlefield 
Publishers, Inc.  
 
--. 2001. White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era. Boulder, CO: Lynne


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
Rienner Publishers.  
 
Bracey, John H., August Meier, & Elliott M. Rudwick. (eds.) 1971. Conflict and Competition: 
Studies in the Recent Black Protest Movement. Belmont CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co.  
 
Burawoy, Michael. 1974. "Race, Class, and Colonialism," Social and Economic Studies, 23:4 
(1974: Dec) pp. 521-550.  
 
Carmichael, Stokely & Charles V. Hamilton. 1967. Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in 
America. New York: Random House.  
 
Clark, Kenneth. 1965. Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social Power. New York: Harper & Row.  
 
Cotler, Julio. 1970. "The Mechanics of Internal Domination and Social Change in Peru, in Irving 
Louis Horowitz (ed.) Masses in Latin America. New York: Oxford University Press.  
 
Cruse, Harold. 1968. Rebellion or Revolution? New York: William Morrow & Co.  
 
Delany, Martin R. 2003. Levine, Robert S. (ed.) Martin R. Delany: A Documentary Reader. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina.  
 
Du Bois, W.E.B. "A Negro Nation Within the Nation," Current History, June, Vol. 42, pp. 265-
270.  
 
Farberman, Harvey A. and Erich Goode (eds.) 1973. Social Reality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.  
 
Feagin, Joe R. 2006. Systemic Racism: A Theory of Oppression. NY: Routledge.  
 
--. 1986. "Slavery Unwilling to Die: The Background of Black Oppression in the 1980s." Journal 
of Black Studies, Vol. 17, No. 2.  
 
--. The Economic State of Black America. (Dec., 1986), pp.173-200.  
 
Foner, Philip S. (ed.) 1999. Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings. Chicago: 
Lawrence Hill Books,  
 
--. (ed.) 1995. The Black Panthers Speak. New York: Da Capo Press.  
 
Frank, Andre Gunder. 1970. Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America. New York: 
Monthly Review Press.  
 
Frucht, Richard. (ed.) 1971. Black Society in the New World. New York: Random House.  
 
Gonzalez Casanova, Pablo. 1965. "Internal Colonialism and National Development," Studies in 
Comparative International Development. 1:4 (1965) pp. 27-37.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
 
Havens, Eugene & William Flinn (eds.) Internal Colonialism and Structural Change in 
Columbia. New York: Praeger, 1970.  
 
Hayes, Floyd W. & Francis A Kiene. 1998. "All Power to the People: The Political Thought of 
Huey P. Newton and the Black Panther Party," pp. 157-176, in Charles E. Jones (ed.). 1998. The 
Black Panther Party [Reconsidered]. Baltimore: Black Classic Press.  
 
Haywood, Harry. 1978. Black Bolshevik: Autobiography of an Afro-American Communist. 
Chicago: Liberator Press.  
 
Mao Tse-tung. 1966. Quotations from chairman Mao Tse-tung. Peking: Foreign Languages 
Press.  
 
Marable, Manning. 2002. The Great Wells of Democracy: The Meaning of Race in American 
Life. New York: Basic Civitas Books.  
 
Meister, Richard J. (ed.) 1971. The Black Ghetto: Promised Land or Colony? Lexington, MA: 
Heath.  
 
Omi, Michael & Howard Winant. 1994. Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s 
to the 1990s. New York: Routledge.  
 
Pinderhughes, Charles "Cappy." 1971. "A Letter of Criticism and Suggestion to Huey P. Newton 
and the Central Committee of the Black Panther Party," unpublished paper.  
 
Prager, Jeffery. 1972-73. "White Racial Privilege and Social Change: An Examination of 
Theories of Racism." Berkeley Journal of Sociology, 1972-73, pp. 117-50.  
 
Scott, John & Gordon Marshall. 2005. A Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford University Press 
Oxford Reference Online 4/6/2009: <http://www.oxfordreference. 
com.proxy.bc.edu/views/ENTRY.html?subview=Main &entry=t88.e323>.  
 
Sellers, Cleveland. 1990. The River of No Return: The Autobiography of a Black Militant and 
the Life and Death of SNCC. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.  
 
Skolnick, Jerome J. & Elliott Currie. (eds.) 1970. Crisis in American Institutions. Boston: Little, 
Brown.  
 
Staples, Robert. 1976. "Race and Colonialism: The Domestic Case in Theory and Practice." The 
Black Scholar, June 1976, pp. 37-48.  
 
Stavenhagen, Rudolfo. 1970. "Classes, Colonialism, and Acculturation: A System of Inter-Ethnic 
Relations in Mesoamerica," in Irving Louis Horowitz (ed.) Masses in Latin America. New York: 
Oxford University Press.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
Steinberg. 2007. Race Relations: A Critique. Stanford: Stanford University Press.  
 
Woodard, Komozi. 1999. A Nation Within a Nation: Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones) and Black 
Power Politics. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.  
 
Endnotes  
 
(1.) The term Allen used was "domestic colonialism." The terms internal colonialism, domestic 
colonialism and semi-colonialism appear to this author to be used interchangeably in literature 
(published since 1960) interpreting the experience of African Americans as "colonized".  
 
(2.) "Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt" first appeared in Social Problems, 16, no. 4 
(Spring 1969), 393-408, and was later revised as a chapter of Blauner's Racial Oppression in 
America, pp.82-110.  
 
(3.) While viewing the ISI Web of Knowledge, I found some 360 citation sources for Racial 
Oppression in America, and another 129 for Blauner's Social Problems article "Internal 
Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt." In contrast, Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist 
America drew a total of fifty-two citations, and Mario Barrera's Race and Class in the Southwest 
garnered some 186 citations in the same index.  
 
(4.) First published in 1969, in the journal Social Problems, a revised version of "Internal 
Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt" was published as a chapter in his books, Racial Oppression in 
America [1972] and Still the Big News: Racial Oppression in America [2001]. The article was 
also reprinted in no less than five anthologies in addition to a standalone pamphlet published by 
Bobbs-Merrill (Bracey, Meier & Rudwick; Farberman & Goode; Frucht; Meister; Skolnick & 
Currie).  
 
(5.) The Civil Rights and Black Power movements were often referred to by participants as "The 
Movement." As a result, the name was also used for a monthly California newspaper that 
chronicled left political activity during the 1960s.  
 
(6.) In a footnote to his reprinted essay "Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt" in his 1972 
book, Blauner stated, "At the time of writing this article, unfortunately, I did not have available 
Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1970), 
which analyzes ghetto revolts in terms of a conception of internal colonialism similar to my own. 
Allen, however, deals much more thoroughly with the history and the dynamics of the black 
movement, class divisions in the black community, and the neocolonial strategies of corporate 
capitalism" (Blauner-1972, 82n).  
 
(7.) Since the 1960s, these advocates have included: Robert L. Allen, Robert Blauner, 
Carmichael & Hamilton, the Congress of African People (Woodard), Harold Cruse, and SNCC 
(Carmichael, Sellers). All of these proponents used the singular "colony" when speaking about 
the colonized condition of African Americans.  
 
(8.) Many observers of African American class dynamics use differing categories. For example,


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 14 
 
How Black Awakening in Capitalist America laid the foundation for a New Internal Colonialism Theory 
Pinderhughes, Charles (2010, June 22)  
along with Allen, both E. Franklin Frazier (in Black Bourgeoisie) and Manning Marable (in 
Great Wells of Democracy) reference the black bourgeoisie when they seem to be mainly 
speaking of the black petty bourgeoisie (small business persons, professionals and managerial 
personnel within major businesses). This approach may be informed by the vernacular in the 
black community of "bougie" by which is meant a life style, rather than a specific relation to the 
means of production.  
 
The Black Scholar, 2010

