=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Imhotep.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 159
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:52.927015
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
IMHOTEP


--- PAGE 4 ---
I. IMHOTEP AS A DEMIGOD


--- PAGE 5 ---
IMHOTEP 
I The Vizier and Phvsician of 
KING ZOSER 
and afierwards 
THE EGYPTIAN GOD 
OF MEDICINE 
BY 
JAMIESON B. HURRY, M.A., M.D. 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
HUMPHREY MILFORD


--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---
IN HONOUR 
OF 
IMHOTEP 
' The first Figure of a Physician to stand out dearly 
from the Mists of Antiquity.'-SIR W. OSLER.


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
THE PROLOGUE 
T 
HIS Monograph is consecrated to the 
memory of a distinguished magician-physi- 
cian and sage who first appears on the stage of 
Egyptian history in the reign of King Zoser of 
the IIIrd Dynasty, and reappears at intervals on 
that stage during a period of over three thousand 
years. His record therefore extends over a large 
part of the history of ancient Egypt. 
We shall attempt to trace the fortunes of 
Imhotep both during the period of his human 
activity and also during the subsequent periods 
when he was looked upon first as a demigod and 
finally as one of the full deities of Egypt. We 
shall also seek to analyse the forces which resulted 
in such an exceptional occurrence as the deification 
of an ordinary mortal, i. e. of one who had never 
been a king. 
The subject is one which will interest various 
groups of readers. In the first place it will 
appeal to the lover of archaeology who is fascinated 
by the early story of our race and by every detail 
which throws light on its evolution. There is 
a glamour in the study of the earliest pages of


--- PAGE 10 ---
X THE PROLOGUE 
liberal scale, so that the reader may be fur- 
nished with the authority on which statements 
are founded. 
An abstract of this Monograph was contributed 
to the Fourth International Congress of the 
History of Medicine which met last year in Geneva. 
Since, however, the short time allotted to indi- 
vidual contributions forbade the submission of 
more than a portion of the following study, it has 
been thought well to publish the work in extenso. 
My cordial thanks are due to various authorities 
who have given facilities in connexion with illus- 
trations. 
The Director of the MusCe des AntiquitCs 
Egyptiennes at Cairo has kindly permitted the 
reproduction of Figs. I and V ; the Ministry of 
Public Works in Egypt the use of Col. Lyons's 
photographs of Philae. The authorities of the 
Wellcome Historical Medical Museum have given 
facilities in regard to Fig. VII ; those of the 
Staats-Museum of Berlin in regard to Fig. VI ; 
those of the British Museum in regard to Figs. X 
and XI ; the Illustrated London News in regard to 
Fig. 11 ; Messrs. Methuen & Co. in regard to 
Fig. XII ; the Egyptological Department of the 
Liverpool University in regard to Fig. XVII. To


--- PAGE 11 ---
THE PROLOGUE xi 
the late Dr. R. Caton, C.B.E., special thanks are 
due for the loan of blocks used in Figs. 111, IV, 
and XIII-XVI. 
Various friends have also given generous assis- 
tance in connexion with hieroglyphic readings and 
otherwise. Amongst them must be mentioned 
Sir E. A. Wallis Budge, Professor T. E. Peet, Miss 
Murray, Mr. C. J. S. Thompson, and Mr. W. R. 
Dawson. The latter has further been good 
enough to read through the proof sheets. I desire 
also to thank Dr. Alan H. Gardiner for his kind- 
ness in allowing the use of his new fount for the 
hieroglyphs included in this volume. 
The story of Imhotep adds a fresh chapter to 
the History of Medicine which is gradually being 
compiled, thanks to the collaboration of workers 
all the world over. 
J. B. H.


--- PAGE 12 ---



--- PAGE 13 ---
CONTENTS 
The Prologue 
I. Introduction . 
11. Imhotep as Contemporary of King 
Zoser . 
A. The Vizier . 
B. The Architect 
C. The Chief Lector Priest or 
Kheri-heb . 
D. The Sage and Scribe . . 
E. The Astronomer . 
F. The Magician-Physician . 
111. Imhotep as Medical Demigod . 
IV. Imhotep as God of Medicine . 
V. Ancient Egyptian Medicine . 
VI. Honour to whom Honour is due . 
vii 
The Epilogue.


--- PAGE 14 ---
xiv CONTENTS 
Appendixes : 
A. Bibliography . 93 
B. The name ' Imhotep ' and its 
Variants . 95 
C. The Pedigree of Imhotep . 98 
D. Statuettes of the Demigod 
Imhotep . . 101 
E. Mural Pictures of the Deity 
Imhotep . . 104 
Index . . 111


--- PAGE 15 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS 
I. Imhotep as a Demigod Frontispiece 
11. King Zoser . fmacz%! 4 
111. The Step-Pyramid of Sakkarah ,, 10 
IV. The Temple of Edfu . ,, 12 
V. Imhotep as a Demigod . ,, 30 
VI. Imhotep as a Demigod . ,, 32 
VII. Imhotep as a Demigod . 77 34 
VIII. Imhotep as Deity of Medicine page 40 
IX. Imhotep as Deity of Medicine ,, 41 
X. Imhotep as Deity of Medicine facing 42 
XI. The Triad of Memphis: Ptah, 
Imhotep, and Sekhmet 7, 44 
XII. The Island of Philae . page 45 
XIII. The Temple of Imhotep, Island 
of Philae. (Ground Plan) ,, 47 
XIV. The Temple of Imhotep, Island 
of Philae. (Front View) facing 48


--- PAGE 16 ---
xvi ILLUSTRATIONS 
XV. The Temple of Imhotep, Island 
of Philae. (Western wall of 
Temple, and Entrance) 
between 48-49 
XVI. The Temple of Imhotep, Island 
of Philae. (Eastern wall of 
Courtyard) . facing 50 
XVII. Amulet of Imhotep . ,, 52


--- PAGE 17 ---
INTRODUCTION 
I 
N the childhood of the world Egypt was the 
pioneer country as regards the evolution of 
medicine. To her belongs the high honour of 
having raised the healing art to a level far ex- 
ceeding that hitherto attained. Both in diagnosis 
and in therapeutics astonishing progress was 
made. Even pathology attracted widespread 
interest ; the Edwin Smith Papyrus suggests that 
dissection of the human body was systematically 
practised in ancient times. 
The medical schools of Egypt, closely associated 
with her priestcraft and temples, were famous far 
and wide, her specialist physicians being sum- 
moned to attend royal and other personages in 
distant 1ands.l For a physician to have been 
educated in Egypt was in itself a passport to 
success. This high reputation is acknowledged 
by Homer when he says : ' In Egypt the men are 
more skilled in medicine than any of human 
kind .' 
Most of the ancient races of the world have 
found a place in their theology for one or more 
deities of medicine to whom were attributed 
miraculous powers in restoring sick and apparently 
1 Herodotus, ii. 84 ; iii. I, 129. 2 Odyssey, iv. 227. 
3I21 B


--- PAGE 18 ---
2 IMHOTEP 
dying persons to health. Such deities were wor- 
shipped amongst the Persians, Hindus, Chinese, 
Babylonians, Aztecs, and Phoenicians inter alios ; 
many of them had shrines which were resorted to 
by suffering men and women, whether afflicted 
mentally or physically. 
The ancient Egyptians also had numerous deities 
to whom were attributed the invention of various 
arts and sciences, including medicine. Amongst 
those most generally referred to in this connexion 
are the falcon-headed sun-god Re, the wonder- 
working Isis with her son the sun-god Horus, 
Ptah, the ancient God of Memphis: and the ibis- 
headed moon-god Thoth, the reputed author of 
religious and scientific works including treatises 
of medicine. Less important medical members of 
the Egyptian pantheon were Khnum with rams' 
horns and the lion-headed goddess Sekhmet, 
who were worshipped as the tutelary deities of 
procreation and ~hildbirth.~ All these deities, 
however, were probably mere mythical creations 
of the imagination and lack the fascination asso- 
ciated with a human personality. 
Ptah was the deity of healing in Memphis, just as each 
local deity was the creator and healer of his own people. 
Khnum was thus the healer at Aswan, and Sekhmet preceded 
Ptah, and consequently Imhotep, at Memphis. 
a Other deities were closely associated with childbirth. 
Cf. Maspero, Popular Stories of Ancient Egypt, 1915, P. 36.


--- PAGE 19 ---
INTRODUCTION 3 
Of outstanding interest, therefore, is the famous 
Imhotep, who first appears on the stage of history 
as the vizier-physician of King Zoser m: 
and who so impressed his fellow countrymen with 
his skill in healing disease that he was eventually 
raised first to the status of medical demigod and 
eventually to that of full deity of medicine. 
Unfortunately we cannot trace his history from 
the beginning ; all that can be done is to collect 
and arrange such biographical details as have 
survived. Happily recent research allows of a 
more coherent account than was formerly possible. 
Imhotep, the earliest physician of &horn his- 
torical details have survived, lived in the reign of 
a famous Egyptian king named Zoser (p/=I'j 
(Fig. II), a Pharaoh of the IIIrd Dynasty (ca. 2980- 
2900 B. c.).~ 
Unhappily we know nothing of his early history. 
No glimpse is allowed us of his birthplace or 
childhood ; there is no record of his appearance 
1 According to Manetho, King Athothis of the 1st Dynasty 
practised medicine and wrote anatomical books. No bio- 
graphical details, however, have survived and the entire story 
may be legendary. 
2 Fig. 11 represents the life-size statue of King Zoser 
recently found at Sakkarah, and inscribed with his name as 
King of Upper and Lower Egypt. The figure wears the 
sacred wig covered with the Nemes head-dress. 
The chronology adopted in this work is that of Professor 
Breasted's History of Egypt.


--- PAGE 20 ---
4 IMHOTEP 
in the flesh, nor is anything told us of the steps by 
which he reached the highest post open to an 
official in Egypt. 
Descended from a distinguished architect named 
Kanofer h KI-nfr, and from a mother named 
Khreduonkh j Urdw-rnb, Imhotep appears 
to have received a liberal education, so far as such 
was possible in those far-off days. At any rate 
he grew up an erudite, versatile man, a sort of 
Aristotelian genius, who took all knowledge for 
his province. He was distinguished for his vast 
learning as well as for some striking achievements, 
and in the course of ages became generally recog- 
nized as the Egyptian god of medicine. His name 
Imhotep jh* signifies ' he who cometh in 
peace ',l a most appropriate name for a healer of 
the sick and one which must have brought solace 
and courage to many an anxious patient. 
It will be convenient to divide his career into 
three periods and to consider in order : 
I. IMHOTEP AS CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 
(ca. 2980 B. C.) 
11. IMHOTEP AS A MEDICAL DEMIGOD 
(ca. 2850 B. C.-Reign of Mycerinus) 
111. IMHOTEP AS FULL DEITY OF MEDICINE 
(ca. 525 B. C.-Persian Period) 
For the construction and meaning of the name, cf. Ap- 
pendix B.


--- PAGE 21 ---
11. KING ZOSER


--- PAGE 22 ---



--- PAGE 23 ---
IMHOTEP AS CONTEMPORARY OF 
KING ZOSER 
I 
MHOTEP devoted his life to various activities 
which may be grouped as follows : 
A. Grand Vizier. 
B. Architect. 
C. Chief Lector Priest or Kheri-heb. 
D. Sage and Scribe. 
E. Astronomer. 
F. Magician-Physician. 
A few details will be given under each of these 
headings : 
A. IMHOTEP AS VIZIER 
The office of vizier to the ruling Pharaoh was 
one of high dignity and responsibility. The 
occupant of the post was a sort of Joseph, whose 
jurisdiction extended over the various depart- 
ments of state.l Although no specific duties of 
We owe to K. Sethe a valuable monograph, throwing 
a flood of light on the history of Imhotep and marshalling the 
evidence that he was actually a contemporary of King Zoser. 
K. Sethe, Imhotep, der Asklepws der Aegypter : Ein vergotteter 
Mensch aus der Zeit des Konigs DoJer. Untersuchungen zur 
Geschichte und Altertumskunde Aegyptens, 1902, vol. ii. The 
author accepts Sethe's evidence as settling the question, 
although a few Egyptologists, e. g. G. Foucart, remain uncon- 
vinced.


--- PAGE 24 ---
6 IMHOTEP 
the office under King Zoser are on record, many 
details of the duties of viziers under later Egyptian 
kings are known, and we may fairly conclude that 
similar duties were carried out by Imh~tep.~ 
The following list of titles in itself indicates the 
manifold responsibilities of the office : ' chief 
judge,' ' overseer of the King's records,' ' bearer 
of the royal seal,' ' chief of all works of the King,' 
' supervisor of that which Heaven brings, the 
Earth creates and the Nile brings,' ' supervisor of 
everything in this entire land.' Amongst some of 
the departments of his office are mentioned the 
Judiciary, the Treasury, War (Army and Navy), 
the Interior, Agriculture, and the General Execu- 
tive. A prodigy of efficiency must have been 
required to carry out such multifarious duties. 
The name of the vizier was sometimes actually 
followed by the royal salutation ' Life, Prosperity, 
Health ', and in his judicial capacity he was re- 
garded by the people as one who could not do 
wrong. Three of the greatest sages and authors 
of proverbial wisdom, Imhotep, Kegemni, and 
Also known as Tcheser, Doser or Tosorthros. 
2 Breasted, in his Ancient Records of Egypt, 1906, records 
many details of the duties of viziers. Cf. especially vol. i, 
pp. 122, 158,212 ; vol. ii, pp. 268 ff. A famous vizier of the 
XVIIIth Dynasty, Rekhmire, has left a long inscription in his 
tomb at Thebes detailing the duties of the vizier. Cf. New- 
berry, Life of Rekhmara, pp. 22 ff.


--- PAGE 25 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 7 
Ptah-hotpe, held the office of vizier in the Old 
Kingdom. 
An interesting incident associated with Im- 
hotep and King Zoser is recorded in what is 
known as the Legend of the Seven Years' Famine, 
which describes a period of terrible starvation 
caused by the failure of the Nile for seven consecu- 
tive years to reach its usual flood level and thus to 
irrigate the land sufficiently? The result was that 
grain grew very scarce and almost everything 
needed for food came to an end.2 The famine was 
attributed to the King's neglect to pay due honour 
and worship to the god Khnum 0&'$4 who 
was one of the deities controlling the sources of 
the Nile. 
The King, in his distress at the calamity which 
had befallen his country, turned to his counsellor 
Imhotep and questioned him about the birthplace 
This legend is inscribed on a granite rock on the island of 
Seh&l near Aswan, and dates from the Ptolemaic period, 
although in its earlier form it may be as old as the IIIrd Dy- 
nasty. For further details cf. Sethe, Imhotep, p. 11 ; Sir E. A. 
Budge, The Legends of the Gods, pp. lx, 120 (with text and 
translation). 
Another view is that it was fabricated by priests in order 
to prove the generosity of the ancient Pharaohs and to enlist 
a similar generosity. Cf. Maspero, The Dawn of Civilization, 
1894, p. 240. 
2 A similar seven years' famine in Egypt is recorded in 
Genesis xli. 54.


--- PAGE 26 ---
8 IMHOTEP 
of the Nile and the god who ruled there. Unable 
to answer the King's questions at once, Imhotep 
requested leave of absence that he might consult 
the sacred books on the subject. After a brief 
absence he revealed to the King ' the hidden 
wonders, the way to which had been shown to no 
King for unimaginable ages '.l On receiving this 
report, King Zoser at once wrote to the Viceroy 
of Nubia, a nobleman called Meter, asking for his 
advice and assistance in abating the grievous state 
of affairs. ' I go back,' he wrote, ' in my mind to 
the days when I had an adviser, to the time of the 
gods, to the ibis-god (Thoth >), and to the chief " \\ 
Kheri-heb priest Imhotep, the son of Ptah 
South of his Wall.' He then proceeded to inquire 
what god or goddess presided over the Nile and 
could replenish his granaries with grain, so that 
the deity might be visited and propitiated. 
Eventually, the King paid a personal visit to 
the temple of the god Khnum in order to make 
G. Steindorff, The Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, 
p. 101. 
The title 'son of Ptah ', here given to Imhotep, is an 
anachronism to be explained by the fact that this legend dates 
from Ptolemaic times, when the god Ptah had been assigned 
to Imhotep as a divine father. Sethe, Imhotep, p. 12. 
3 This title of Ptah ' South of his Wall ' is derived from the 
fact that, in one of his forms, that deity was worshipped in 
a temple on the south side of Memphis. E. A. Budge, Gods 
of the Egyptians, 1904, i, p. 514.


--- PAGE 27 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 9 
prayers and supplications before him, and to 
propitiate him with offerings. In response, the 
god Khnum appeared to the King in a dream, 
and promised that the Nile should rise and never 
fail again : ' It shall spread its water out, and cover 
all the land satisfactorily. Plants shall bend be- 
neath their produce. . . . Want shall cease, and the 
emptiness of the granaries shall come to an end.' 
In gratitude for Khnum's intervention, King 
Zoser made a decree, and endowed the temple 
of the god with lands and valuable gifts? Gold, 
ivory, ebony, spices, precious stones and woods 
were all tithed so as to supply rich offerings for 
the temple. This is the prototype of temple 
endowments, which were doubtless used for the 
manifold wants of the god, for the maintenance 
of a sacerdotal staff, and for building operations. 
B. IMHOTEP AS ARCHITECT 
Imhotep, ' the chief of all the works of the 
King,' was also a notable architect, and in all 
probability designed for his royal master the well- 
' By the advice of the learned Imhotep, Zoser had once 
presented this god Khnum with twelve tracts of land on both 
sides of the river, with all their revenues and taxes, in order 
that he should once more send a rich Nile into the country 
which was suffering from its seventh year of scarcity.' 
A. Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion, p. 201. Cf. also 
K. Sethe, Untersuchungen z. Geschichte und Altertumskunde 
Aegyptens, ii. 3. 
3x21 C


--- PAGE 28 ---
10 IMHOTEP 
known Step-Pyramid of Sakkarah (Fig. III), near 
Memphis, and familiar to every tourist who 
ascends the Ni1e.l This pyramid, a transition 
between the mastaba tombs of the earlier kings 
and the true pyramid form which is met with 
later, was constructed by the superimposition of 
five successively smaller mastabas on an original 
large one. The east and west sides of the base 
measured 396 feet in length, and the north and 
south sides 352 feet, while the height was about 
195 feet. The six gigantic steps measure in height 
38,36,34&, 32, 3 I, and 29* feet respectively, while 
the width of each step is from 6 to 7 feet. Within 
the building, which was constructed of blocks of 
limestone, the halls and corridors were lined with 
blue and green glazed tiles of inlaid faience, 
bearing the King's names and  title^.^ This 
pyramid is the earliest large stone structure known 
to history, and was destined to become the tomb 
of King Zo~er.~ 
The Arab name ' Sakkarah ' is probably a corruption of 
an older Egyptian word Sokari (Socharis), the name of an 
early god of the dead at Memphis. 
a An illustration of one of these halls decorated with tiles 
is given by Maspero, Manua of Egyptian Archaeology, 1914, 
P. 303- 
Zoser began by building a mastaba tomb at Bet-Khallaf 
near Abydos, and subsequently abandoned this scheme in 
favour of the more ambitious pyramid which was constructed 
of hewn stone instead of bricks.


--- PAGE 29 ---



--- PAGE 30 ---



--- PAGE 31 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 11 
The Step-Pyramid of Sakkarah l is further an 
index of a high state of civilization. There must 
have been wealth in the Pharaonic exchequer, 
stable government by the vizier and other officials, 
experience in the organization of labour, aptitude 
in the keeping of complex accounts, technical 
skill in the quarrying, dressing, and transportation 
of stone. In all these indications of economic 
prosperity we may see in part at least the genius 
of the vizier Imhotep. Nor can we doubt that 
the triumphant completion of the first pyramid, 
the earliest large monument constructed of hewn 
stone, must have paved the way for the yet 
mightier pyramids that were soon to follow. 
The name of Imhotep is also associated with 
the first temple of Edfu which was said to have 
been constructed according to a plan dropped 
down from heaven to earth near the city of Mem- 
phis. ' The master craftsman was Imhotep, the 
son of Ptah, the great god of Memphis, and father 
The conception of the terraced pyramid of Sakkarah 
appears on first thoughts a stroke of genius on the part of 
King Zoser and his architect Imhotep. There are, however, 
somewhat similar square monuments in India and Mesopo- 
tamia of remote antiquity known as Stupas, Topes, or Dago- 
bas, which may have suggested the idea of Sakkarah. There 
may well have been occasional communications between 
Egypt and the East even under the early Dynasties. Cf. 
W. Simpson, ' The Tower of Babel, and the Birs Nimroud, 
Transactions of the S. of Biblical Archaeology, 1893, ix, p. 307.


--- PAGE 32 ---
IMHOTEP 
and son united their powers and produced the 
first temple at Edfu in one of the earliest periods 
of Egyptian history.' 
The present splendid temple (Fig. IV) was 
begun during the reign of Ptolemy I11 Euer- 
getes I, 237 B. C., and finished in 57 B. c. The 
inscriptions in the temple describe Imhotep ' as 
the great priest Imhotep the son of Ptah, who 
speaks or lectures '.2 
As we shall see in greater detail farther on, 
Imhotep appears to have been the second member 
of a long pedigree of architects, commencing with 
his father Kanofer (cf. Appendix C), and ending 
with Khnum-ib-re, who was chief minister of 
works for the whole country, and architect of 
Upper and Lower Egypt from the twenty-seventh 
to the thirtieth year of King Darius I (ca. 490 B. C.). 
Imhotep held the important office of Kheri- 
heb her tep, 1118, or first lector prie~t.~ In 
E. A. Budge, A History of Egypt, 1902, viii, p. 49. 
2 De RougC, Inscriptions et Notices du Temple dJEdfou, 
, PI. 89. Cf. also Appendix E. According to Naville, Textes 
relatifs au Mythe d'Horus ci Edfou, 1870, p. 15, this is the only 
monument which contains the signature of the artist who made 
its plan. 
3 An excellent account of the Egyptian priesthood by A. M.


--- PAGE 33 ---



--- PAGE 34 ---



--- PAGE 35 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 13 
this capacity his duty was to recite from the holy 
books, and since according to the Egyptian faith 
these religious texts possessed magical powers, 
the common people regarded the Kheri-heb as 
a magician. 
The Kheri-heb took an important part in cere- 
monies known as the ' Liturgy of Funerary 
Offerings ' dealing with the presentation of gifts 
to the dead, the formula which was pronounced 
over each element being supposed to change it 
into a divine and spiritual food, which was par- 
taken of by the souls of the departed. The 
material elements of the offerings were eaten by 
the priests and by the relatives of the deceased, 
who were thus brought into communion with the 
blessed dead and with the gods? Although the 
formulas in the liturgy were recited by the Kheri- 
heb priest, who held in his hands a roll of papyrus 
and directed the assistant priests, most of the 
ceremonies were performed by the Sem priest, 
/h&, assisted by several ministrants. 
In the other series of ceremonies known as 
' The Opening the Mouth ', y, the object was 
Blackman will be found in the Encyclopaedia of Religrgrm at;d 
Ethics, X, p. 294. E. A. Budge (Gods of the Egyptians, i, 
p. 525) states that Imhotep was attached to the priesthood 
of Re, the sun-god. 
E. A. Budge, The Liturgy of Funerary Offerings, pp. ix, 
41 E.


--- PAGE 36 ---
14 IMHOTEP 
to restore to the inert corpse the functions of 
which it had been deprived by death and embalm- 
ment. The mouth was symbolically opened that 
the mummy might speak, and the eyes touched 
that they might see. A bull was slaughtered in 
order to provide food, while other ceremonies 
were intended to enable clothes, unguents, &C., 
to be used, in fact to cause the mummy in all 
respects to resemble a living human body. The 
end in view was also aimed at by the recitation of 
appropriate formulas and by touching the mummy 
case with a wand shaped like the hieroglyph 1. 
When these ceremonies had been performed the 
body was lowered into the grave and the approach 
closed, a funeral feast being held in the ante- 
chamber of the tomb. 
Here also the Kheri-heb was responsible for the 
order of ritua1,l although he had various assis- 
tants, especially the Sem who in many respects 
played the principal part. In brief the Kheri-heb 
E. A. Budge, The Book of Opening the Mouth, p. 11 and 
passim. In both these series of ceremonies the details date 
mainly from the XVIIIth Dynasty ; but most of them were 
certainly of much earlier origin. 
In the ceremony of ' The Opening of the Mouth ' at the 
tomb of Amenemhet the principal part is played by the Sem 
priest, the role of the Kheri-heb being that of prompter to 
his companions. Cf. A. H. Gardiner, The Tomb of Amenemh~t, 
191 5, pp. 57 E. ; Maspero, Btudes de Mythologie et d'ArchPo- 
logie, i, pp. 283-324.


--- PAGE 37 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 15 
was held in great honour throughout Egypt. By 
the common people he was regarded as the 
mediator between the King and the unseen 
powers of the universe, and was supposed to 
influence the final destinies of the dead.l 
There is an interesting reference to Imhotep in 
- 
the Ritual of Embalmment. After the statement 
that the deceased sees Arnmon, the text goes on to 
say to him : 
' Thy soul unites itself to Imhotep whilst thou art 
in the funeral valley, and thy heart rejoiceth 
because thou dost not go into the dwelling of 
Sebek? and because thou art like a son in the 
house of his father, and doest what pleaseth thee 
in the city of Thebes.' 
To Imhotep were also attributed in later times thewords 
of power which protected the dead from all kinds of enemies 
that awaited them in the Underworld or Duat (Tuat) 3ck A. 
Without such words of power poor persons who could not 
purchase even cheap amulets or afford costly funerals might 
be unable to continue their way through the later stages of 
the Underworld. E. A. Budge, Gods of the Egyptians, i, 
PP. 261, 523- 
The Crocodile god Sebek was associated in certain of his 
aspects with the idea of death and destruction. This allusion 
therefore probably means that the deceased would escape 
annihilation. 
Maspero, Mhoire sur quelques Papyrus du Louvre, 1875, 
pp. 24, 80. The papyrus is written in hieratic and is of late 
(Graeco-Roman) date.


--- PAGE 38 ---
I 6 IMHOTEP 
Imhotep enjoyed the reputation of being ' one 
of the greatest of Egyptian sages ' ; l his fame for 
wisdom made so deep an impression on his 
countrymen that it endured as a national tradition 
for many centuries. 
As regards his literary activities, he is said to 
have produced works on medicine and archi- 
tecture, as well as on more general subjects, and 
some of his works were extant at the dawn of 
the Christian era. His proverbs, embodying the 
philosophy of life which experience had taught, 
were handed down from generation to generation, 
and were noted for their grace and poetic diction, 
their author being described as a ' master of 
poetry '. We shall see later on that his eminence 
as a man of letters led him to be recognized as the 
' patron of scribes '. 
An interesting song, or rather dirge, known as 
the ' Song of the Harper ',2 has survived in which 
E. A. Budge, Short History of Egypt, p. 91. 
A complete copy of the song occurs in the Harris Papyrus, 
No. 500 in the British Museum, and a copy was also 
inscribed on the walls of the Theban Tomb of Pa-aten-em- 
hab (XVIIIth Dynasty) of which the remaining fragments 
are now at Leiden. (Leemans, Monuments, Pt. 111, PI. XII ; 
conveniently reproduced in Breasted, History of Egypt, 1919, 
p. 208.) A similar song is inscribed on the walls of the


--- PAGE 39 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 17 
the names of Imhotep and Hordedef l are linked 
together and in which these two sages dilate on 
the uncertainty and brevity of life, and enforce 
the doctrine that as man is so soon gone and for- 
gotten, he should enjoy his life to the full. The 
philosophy is that of those persons who in all ages 
of the world have said : ' Let us eat and drink, 
for to-morrow we die.' This poem was evidently 
a great favourite. The oldest version that has 
survived was written in the tomb of the Theban 
King Antuf near the figure of the harper, and 
was doubtless sung during the funeral feast for 
the entertainment of the guests. The object was 
to remind them of the brevity of life, even while 
they were enjoying it.4 The following version 
Theban tomb of Neferhotpe. Both have been studied in 
detail and published by Maspero, Etudes Egyptiennes, i, pp. 
172 ff. 
Hordedef was a prince of the IVth Dynasty and probably 
n son of Khufu (Cheops) (eF&] , the builder of the 
great pyramid of Gizeh. He also was one of the wise men of 
Egypt and figures in the famous story of Khufu and the 
magicians. 
2 I Corinthians xv. 32. 
King Antuf (Intef) was one of the kings of the XIth 
Dynasty. There were some other kings Antuf in the XVIIth 
Dynasty. 
Herodotus (ii. 78) thus describes this striking custom 
among the Egyptians : ' In the social banquets of the rich, 
as soon as the feast is ended, a man carries round a wooden 
figure of a corpse in its coffin, graven and painted so as to 
7121 D


--- PAGE 40 ---
I 8 IMHOTEP 
conveys a good impression of this poem and 
indicates the feeling and rhythm met with in 
Egyptian literature, although there are no rhyming 
lines : 
Soxg of the House of the Blessed King Antuf, 
which is written in front of the Harper.l 
ALL hail to the prince, the good man, 
Whose body must pass away, 
While his children remain for aye. 
The gods of old rest in their tombs, 
And the mummies of men long dead ; 
The same for both rich and poor. 
The words of Imhotep I hear, 
The words of Hordedef, which say : 
' What is prosperity ? tell ! ' 
Their fences and walls are destroyed, 
Their houses exist no more ; 
And no man cometh again from the tomb 
To tell of what passeth below. 
resemble the reality as nearly as possible, from one to two 
cubits long. And as he shows it to each of the guests, he says, 
" Look on this, and drink, and be merry ; for when thou art 
dead, such shalt thou be." ' 
H. R. Hail, Cambridge Ancient History, i, p. 324 ; Erman, 
Life in Ancient Egypt, p. 386 ; W. Max Miiller, Die Liebes- 
poesie der alten Aegyptev, pp. 29, 35. 
This allusion to the walls and house of Imhotep is 
peculiarly effective. Although he was the famous architect 
of King Zoser, yet his own tomb has so entirely disappeared 
that ' the place thereof knows it no more '.


--- PAGE 41 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 19 
Ye go to the place of the mourners, 
To the bourne whence none return ; 
Strengthen your hearts to forget your joys, 
Yet fulfil your desires while ye live. 
Anoint yourselves, clothe yourselves well, 
Use the gifts which the gods bestow, 
Fulfil your desires upon earth. 
For the day will come to you all 
When ye hear not the voices of friends, 
When weeping avails you no more. 
So feast in tranquillity now, 
For none taketh his goods below to the tomb, 
And none cometh thence back again. 
It would of course not be fair to judge of 
Imhotep's philosophy from so slender a basis as 
that presented by the ' Song of the Harper '. As 
his reputation was so enduring, there were doubt- 
less precepts and proverbs enjoining a higher 
morality. His name is sometimes linked with 
those of two other famous Egyptian sages, i. e. 
Kegemni who lived in the reign of Huni, last 
king of the IIIrd Dynasty, and Ptah-hotpe, 
vizier of King Assa, of the Vth Dynasty, both 
of whom have bequeathed precepts of singular 
beauty. 
We append one gem from the ' Instruction of 
Ptah-hotpe', which teaches the virtue of humility : 
' If thou be great, after being of none account, 
and hast gotten riches after squalor, being fore-


--- PAGE 42 ---
20 IMHOTEP 
most of these in the city, and hast knowledge 
concerning useful matters, so that promotion is 
come to thee ; then swathe not thine heart in 
thine own hoard, for thou art become the steward 
of the endowments of the god.' l 
It is delightful to have voices speaking across 
so long a span of years and recalling the philosophy 
held by the wise men of an ancient nation, whose 
glory has now departed. 
If the references to Imhotep in Hermetic 
literature can be trusted, he was also interested 
in astronomy and astrology, although no special 
observations are associated with his name. Sethe 
gives various references to that literature, showing 
that Imhotep was reputed to have been associated 
with the god Thoth (Hermes) in astronomical 
 observation^.^ Doubtless he was a believer in 
the influence exerted by the heavenly bodies on 
the welfare of men, as was the fashion in the 
Pharaonic period. 
The faith that stars in their courses powerfully 
affected human destiny was wellnigh universal, 
and this faith led to a close study of the move- 
ments of the heavenly bodies, of eclipses, of the 
l B. Gunn, The Iminrction of Ptah-Hotep, and the In- 
struction of Kegemni: the Oldest Books of the World, p. 54. 
Sethe, Imhotep, p. 22.


--- PAGE 43 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 21 
precession of the equinoxes, of occultations of the 
planets, of the length of the sidereal year, as well 
as to the identification of the sun, moon and stars 
with the principal deities in the Egyptian pan- 
theon. Both the sun and moon were the objects 
of divine worship by the royal family and the 
nobles, as some of the grandest of natural objects.' 
No wonder that the fundamental laws of astro- 
nomy were discovered and brought into intimate 
association both with national events and with 
the ordinary occurrences of life. 
As Diodorus Siculus says : ' There is no 
country where the positions and movements of 
the stars have been observed with such accuracy 
as in Egypt. Registers in which these observa- 
tions are recorded have been kept during an 
incredible number of years.' 
Imhotep enjoyed a high reputation both as 
magician and as physician. He was ' a famous 
priest and magician of Memphis ',3 while his 
The common people worshipped their local gods. 
Diodorus Siculus, Book I, c. L, LXXXI. Cf. Herodotus, 
ii. 4. Of the native Egyptian records of the movements of the 
heavenly bodies, the most celebrated are those in the royal 
tombs at Thebes. Cf. Le Page Renouf, Life-Work, iii, 
PP. 97 ff. 
3 E. A. Budge, The Literature of the Ancient Egyptiam, p. 84.


--- PAGE 44 ---
subsequent apotheosis as the god of medicine 
testifies to his skill as a healer of the sick. We may 
briefly refer here to the twin offices of magician 
and physician, leaving a fuller discussion of the 
subject to an excursus on early Egyptian medicine. 
Magic and medicine were closely allied in the 
time of the Pharaohs. Magic is generally re- 
garded as the older of the two and never lost hold 
on her offspring. By magic actions are implied 
such actions as persons perform for their own or 
others' benefit and which demand certain mys- 
terious and miraculous powers for their perform- 
ance. According to the Egyptian belief, wizardry 
could work all kinds of wonders which were not 
possible by simple means.l 
The operations of magic related to all the 
events of daily life. It might be prophylactic of 
evil, curative of disease, prognostic of calamity, 
sometimes benevolent towards others, at other 
times malevolent. One common characteristic 
was the use of a mystic incomprehensible gib- 
berish to convey an impression of wisdom behind 
it. It is difficult to draw any hard-and-fast line 
between religion and magic, since the latter was 
in large measure a form of applied religion (religio 
privata). Practitioners of magic kept a box of 
materials and instruments always ready so as to 
Cf. the article on ' Magic ' by A. H. Gardiner, Encyclo- 
paedia of Rekion and Ethics, viii, p. 262.


--- PAGE 45 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 23 
apply their art to any special circumstances that 
ar0se.l 
In the Westcar Papyrus allusion is made to 
a wonderful feat of magic performed by the chief 
Kheri-heb or lector priest of King Zoser, who, it 
has been suggested, may well have been Imh~tep.~ 
The full details are not told, but the allusion 
occurs in a speech made to the King Khufu 
(Cheops) by one of his sons as having occurred 
in the days of King Zoser and performed by his 
chief lector priest. 
Although Imhotep was a noted magician, it 
appears that medicine was the mistress he most 
zealously wooed ; it is his eminence as a healer 
of the sick that has given him imperishable fame, 
and that led eventually to his deification. For a 
time he was court physician to King Zoser, whose 
vizier he had been ; evidently he moved in the 
highest social circles. 
Doubtless magic and medicine were closely 
associated in his treatment of the sick, the remedy 
most suited to the malady in question being 
Magic was practised in England not so many years ago and 
even to-day is not extinct. Cf. Elworthy, The Evil Eye, 1895, 
pp. 53, 56 ; C. K. Sharpe, Witchcraft in Scotland, 1884, p. 21. 
Erman, Die Marchen des Papyrus Westcar, i, p. 7. The 
Westcar Papyrus contains in the form of a popular romance 
an account of the wonders wrought by magicians for the 
entertainment of King Khufu (Cheops). 
Sethe, Imhotep, p. 25.


--- PAGE 46 ---
24 IMHOTEP 
selected. Magical papyri are leavened with 
medical prescriptions, while medical papyri, such 
as the Ebers Papyrus, are constantly interspersed 
with incantations. 
Unhappily, nothing is known of his special 
work as a physician. The important office of 
vizier must have added prestige to his name and 
inspired confidence in his patients. But the fact 
that he later on received divine honours-a rare 
event except in the case of a king-proves him 
to have been a man of rare distinction. A fine type 
of scholar-physician, he evidently rendered service 
both to the bodies and spirits of the sick and 
afflicted to whom it was his privilege to minister. 
As regards Imhotep's relations, a few details 
have come down to us (cf. Appendix C). His 
father was a famous court architect or master- 
builder named Kanofer K]-nfr. This we 
learn from an inscription found in the Wadi 
Hammamat, a valley leading from Coptos down 
to the Red Sea, and giving a genealogical tree 
of the ancestors of the architect Chnem-eb-re 
(Khnum-ib-re). 
Much less is known about Imhotep's mother 
Khreduonkh Nrdw-rnb and his wife Ronpe- 
nofret {i&jJ Rnpt-nfrt. After his apotheosis, his 
mother Khreduonkh was looked upon as the 
mother of a god, and was represented with a


--- PAGE 47 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 25 
human head, adorned with the hood of a vulture 
and with double feathers? His wife Ronpe-nofret 
likewise after the apotheosis of her husband be- 
came the wife of a god. 
The Egyptians appear to have found no diffi- 
culty in regarding Imhotep as the son of the god 
Ptah, while his mother, wife and other relations 
were but ordinary  mortal^.^ Such double filiation 
was possible since deities could borrow a human 
body so as to enable a woman to bear them a son. 
Imhotep could thus be the son both of Ptah and 
of Kanofer. 
We have no information as to the length of 
Sethe, Imhotep, pp. 4, 24. 
The names Imhotep, Kanofer, and Ronpe-nofret were 
not uncommon under the Old Kingdom, while that of Khre- 
duonkh does not appear till the Graeco-Roman period. One 
of the Pharaohs was named Imhotep, although the date of his 
~eign is uncertain. At Berlin is preserved the stela of a man 
named Imhotep, who in one picture is seen praying before 
Osiris, in another before Osiris-Apis. A. Erman, Handbook 
of Egyptian Religion, p. 2 17. 
The mastaba-tomb of another man named Imhotep, a 
famous official of one of the XIIth Dynasty kings named 
Sesostris (Senusert), was discovered at the South Pyramid of 
Lisht in 1914. Ancient Egypt, 1915, p. 146. 
Another Imhotep, who bore the titles ' Royal Scribe ' and 
' Child of the Nursery ',lived at Thebes in the reign of Arneno- 
phis I11 (ca. 1410-1375 B. C.). Persons of the same name 
are also mentioned by Brugsch, 2. f. Agyptische Sprache, 1884, 
xxii, pp. 118 ff. 
In ancient Egypt there appears to have been a fortress 
called the ' Gate of Imhotep '. Erman and Ranke, Aegypten, 
3121 E


--- PAGE 48 ---
26 IMHOTEP 
Imhotep's life or the date of his death. As far 
as history goes he was a man of high and un- 
sullied character, with a wide outlook on life, 
as well as a tender heart towards suffering 
humanity. We may therefore well be confident 
that when, after a career devoted to the public 
service, to the healing of the sick, and to his many 
other interests, he was at length laid to rest, 
a great concourse of mourners joined in the 
funeral procession and accompanied the mummy 
to its last home. Moreover, with the knowledge 
we possess of the funerary ceremonial in the early 
dynasties, and with a little imagination, we can 
readily picture to ourselves the various episodes 
on the way to the vast necropolis of Memphis. 
After the embalmment of the body, a process 
which occupied several weeks, the corpse would 
be placed in a four-sided somewhat plain coffin 
which was then covered with flowers and ferried 
across the Nile on a richly decorated barque, 
accompanied by several other boats filled with 
friends and relations. Meanwhile the funerary 
priest, i.e. the Kheri-heb, made offerings and 
burnt incense before the mummy, and conducted 
his official recitations and invocations to the g0ds.l 
1923, p. 628. Roeder suggests that this may perhaps have 
been built by the subject of this monograph (Pauly, Real- 
fincyclopadie, ix. I 213). 
1 Many details and illustrations of funeral ceremonies will


--- PAGE 49 ---
CONTEMPORARY OF KING ZOSER 27 
The river safely crossed, the coffin together 
with its barque was transferred to a sledge and 
drawn by oxen to the already constructed mastaba, 
every stage of the journey being accompanied by 
a complicated ceremonial. Egyptian mourners 
were highly demonstrative and in the case of 
Imhotep doubtless there was pathetic wailing of 
his friends and relations, as well as of the sick 
and afflicted patients to whom he had formerly 
ministered. Especially affected would be the 
women who with bare breasts uttered impassioned 
cries, slapped their faces, and scattered ashes on 
their heads, everything being done to glorify the 
deceased and to indicate the grievous loss and 
solitude of the survivors. 
Imhotep's mastaba, which will doubtless some 
day be unearthed, was probably situated in the 
desert just outside the city of Memphis, near to 
the Serapeum and the modern village of Abusir. 
It was therefore also close to the famous pyramid 
which the deceased had built for his patron and 
royal master 2oser.l Near to this spot was later 
on situated the Pi-f-m-hotp-si-ptah ?&==AQn aOln 1 
be found in Erman and Ranke, Aegypten, 1923, pp. 34.4 ff. 
Cf. also Maspero, gtudes ggyptiennes, 1886, i, pp. 81-194. 
Since these pages have been in the press, excavations 
carried on at Sakkarah by Mr. C. M. Firth, of the ' Service 
des AntiquitCs ', have brought to light some remarkable 
buildings constructed by Imhotep. They consist of a wall


--- PAGE 50 ---
28 IMHOTEP 
' the temple of Imhotep, son of Ptah ',l which the 
Greeks called ' the Asklepieion '.2 
As we shall see in the next Chapters it was not 
Imhotep's destiny to lie forgotten in one of the 
numerous mastabas in the necropolis of Memphis, 
in which repose so many notable Egyptians. A 
far higher distinction awaited him than any 
Pharaoh could confer, for posterity raised him 
to the rank of the Egyptian deity of medicine, and 
gave him a place among the immortals whose 
name will be held in everlasting honour. Non 
moritur cujus fama vivit. 
500 yards long by 300 yards wide, enclosing the Step-Pyramid, 
together with a beautiful colonnade about 85 yards long, 
which appears to have formed the main entrance to the pyramid 
enclosure. There are 48 columns of white limestone arranged 
in pairs, the shafts being carved so as to imitate a bundle of 
reeds. Further details, as well as an illustration of the 
colonnade, will be found in The Times of January 16th, 1926. 
Brugsch, Dictionnaire Gkographipue, p. 1098. 
An ancient writer, Mercur, states that Asklepios, sc. 
Imhotep, was buried at a town called Crocodilopolis, which 
was probably close to GebelCn, a few miles north of Esnah. 
By far the strongest evidence, however, points to Sakkarah as 
the place of sepulture, where the Step-Pyramid of King Zoser 
is situated. Weigall, on the other hand, does not wholly 
discredit the Gebelbn suggestion. ' If the hills of GebelCn ', 
he writes, ' contain Imhotep's tomb, their interest to the 
visitor will not be lessened by the fact that they hold the bones 
of the earliest philosopher and wise man known to the world's 
history.' A. E. Weigall, Guide to the Antiquities of Upper 
Egypt, 1913, p. 298.


--- PAGE 51 ---
IMHOTEP AS MEDICAL DEMIGOD 
F 
OR many years Egyptologists have been 
puzzled to explain why Imhotep, who lived 
in the days of King Zoser, ca. 2900 B.c., was not 
ranked among the full gods of Egypt until the 
Persian period, dating from 525 B. c. The apo- 
theosis of a man, however distinguished, so many 
centuries after his life on earth seems indeed 
mysterious. The explanation appears to be that 
first suggested by Erman, viz. that Imhotep, at 
any rate during a large part of the interval, was 
regarded as a sort of hero or demigod and re- 
ceived a semi-divine worship. Erman suggested 
that this rank of demigod was bestowed on him 
at the time of the New Kingdom, i.e. about 
1580 B.c., but more recent evidence seems to 
indicate that this demigod stage was reached at 
a much earlier period. 
In one of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, written in 
Greek, and dating probably from the second 
century A. D.,~ we read that King Mycerinus 
(a], the son of Khufu (Cheops) of the 
l Grenfell and Hunt, Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part XI (1915). 
Cf. also Ancient Egypt, 1916, p. 41. This Papyrus, itself 
a copy, was found in the temple of Imhotep in the time of 
Nectanebo. It possesses great interest, although opinions


--- PAGE 52 ---
30 IMHOTEP 
IVth Dynasty, established temples and endow- 
ments for Imhotep the son of Ptah and other 
pers0ns.l Consequently, if this Papyrus is to be 
trusted, Imhotep was worshipped as early as the 
IVth Dynasty, and his temple was resorted to 
by sick and afflicted persons. 
The writer of the Papyrus, named Nechautis, 
worked up the story of Imhotep from the record 
found in his temple, with the object of showing 
that he, the writer, was the proper person to hold 
the office of priest of Imhotep with power to 
bequeath that position to his po~terity.~ He 
further states that he had resolved to honour 
Imhotep by translating into Greek an ancient 
Egyptian work he had before him, but that he 
feared to undertake the task lest he might prove 
unable to do justice to the merits of the deity. 
He hoped that, when older and more experienced, 
he might be better equipped for the work. Then 
may differ as to its reliability as an historical document ; attri- 
butions of great antiquity to religious foundations must be 
accepted with reserve. On the other hand, Grenfell and Hunt 
write : ' So far as it goes, the evidence of this Papyrus favours 
the view that the worship of Imhotep began in the early days 
of Egyptian History.' 
The other persons are Horus son of Hermes, and Kaleoi- 
bis son of Apollo ; it is not known who these were. 
Some offices in the priesthood were hereditary and 
attached to certain families. Cf. Erman and Ranke, Aegypten, 
1923, P. 331.


--- PAGE 53 ---
V. IMHOTEP AS A DEMIGOD


--- PAGE 54 ---



--- PAGE 55 ---
MEDICAL DEMIGOD 3 1 
follows the story of a vision in which Imhotep 
(Asklepios) appears to a devotee, which throws 
such a vivid light on the Egyptian temple as a 
resort of the sick and on the practice of incu- 
bation that it is worth reproducing at some 
1ength.l 
The story relates to the mother of Nechautis 
who was attacked with quartan ague, which 
induced her friends to seek assistance at the temple 
of Imhotep. This deity appeared to the sick 
woman in dreams and cured her by ' simple 
remedies ', for which both mother and son 
showed their thanks by sacrifices. 
Nechautis himself subsequently also fell ill, 
with pain in his right side, violent fever, loss of 
breath and coughing, associated with the pain 
in his side. He too, in his turn, and accompanied 
by his mother, hastened to the shrine and lapsed 
into half-unconscious sleep. Meanwhile his 
mother, wide awake, suddenly perceived in a 
vision a being of superhuman ~tature,~ clothed 
in shining raiment and carrying a book, who 
regarded the patient intently from head to foot 
and then vanished. When the mother had re- 
For fuller details reference must be made to Grenfell 
and Hunt's translation. An excellent rksume' of the story 
appears in the Lancet, 1915, ii, p. 1204. 
When a deity appeared to a mortal his divinity was shown 
by his superhuman stature.


--- PAGE 56 ---
IMHOTEP 
covered from her surprise at the vision, she woke 
up the invalid and found that his fever had 
departed, leaving him in a profuse perspiration. 
As soon as the invalid was able to speak he began 
to recount what he had seen in a dream, i.e. the 
same vision that his mother had witnessed whilst 
awake. The pains in his side soon ceased, the 
god having given him an ' assuaging cure '. 
The mother and son at once proceeded to 
express their gratitude by the customary sacrifices 
and, it may be presumed, ' donaria '. Imhotep, 
however, notified that such were not the recom- 
pense and signs of gratitude he required. He 
wished Nechautis to fulfil the promise made 
years ago to re-edit the ancient Egyptian book 
in Greek. 
The writer then goes on to say that, since the 
divine master regretted the non-composition of 
the divine book, which invoked his providence 
and was filled with the story of his divinity and 
inventiveness, he set about the dutiful task, which 
he thus describes : 
' Since thou hadst once noticed, Master, that 
I was neglecting the divine book invoking thy 
providence and filled with thy divinity, I hastened 
to the inspired task of the history. And I hope 
to extend by my proclamation the fame of thy 
inventiveness ; for I unfolded truly by a physical 
treatise in another book the convincing account


--- PAGE 57 ---
VI. IMHOTEP AS A DEMIGOD


--- PAGE 58 ---



--- PAGE 59 ---
MEDICAL DEMIGOD 33 
of the creation of the world. Throughout I have 
filled up defects and struck out supeduities. . . . 
Hence, Master, I conjecture the book has been 
completed in accordance with thy favour, . . . 
suiting thy divinity. As the discoverer of this 
art, Asclepios,l greatest of Gods and my teacher, 
thou art distinguished by the thanks of all men. 
For every gift of a votive offering or sacrifice 
presently perishes, but a written record is an 
undying meed of gratitude, renewing its youth 
in the memory. Every Greek tongue will tell 
thy story and every man will worship the son of 
Ptah, Imouthes.' 
The address closes with the following procla- 
mation : 
' Assemble all ye benevolent and good persons ! 
Depart all wicked and godless ones ! Assemble 
all ye . . . who have been cured of diseases through 
serving the god, all ye who practise the healing art, 
all ye who zealously strive after a virtuous life, ye 
who in the past have been blessed with abundance 
of good things, ye who have been delivered from 
the perils of the sea ! For every place has been 
penetrated by the saving grace of the god.' 
The text then proceeds to recount the history 
l i.e. Imhotep. This is an illustration of the concealment 
of an Egyptian deity under a Greek name. The quotation 
also throws an interesting light on the system of propaganda 
practised by the devotees of Imhotep. Every effort was 
made, both by word of mouth and by written records, to 
broadcast any marvellous cures, in order further to enhance 
the prestige of the god of healing. Cf. W. Schubart, Agypten 
von AIexander dent Grossen bis auf Mohammed, p. 314. 
3121 F


--- PAGE 60 ---
34 IMHOTEP 
of Asklepios (Imhotep), son of Hephaestos,' and 
the manner in which he told Mycerinus to busy 
himself with his tomb. It is clear that though 
Imhotep was not yet recognized as a full deity, 
he was to some extent worshipped in the same 
manner as a god.2 
Until the Oxyrhynchus Papyrus described 
above was discovered showing that Imhotep was 
worshipped in the time of King Mycerinus his 
elevation to the status of demigod had been 
associated with the religious revival that occurred 
at the advent of the New Kingdom, i.e. 1580 
B. One result of this revival was a resuscitation 
of ancient beliefs and cults accompanied by a more 
elaborate and magnificent ritual at the services. 
The gods came to be enthroned in palatial 
temples that glistened with costly sacramental 
vessels, the ceremonies being supported by 
wealthy endowments, while the high priests 
enjoyed wellnigh royal rank and power. 
This increase in the magnificence and wealth 
of the great Egyptian gods led more and more 
to their estrangement from the common people. 
The fact that Hephaestos is here equated with Ptah 
indicates the late date of the Papyrus. Milne states that there 
is a mixed Graeco-Egyptian coin-type of Ptah-Hephaistos 
(History of Egypt U& Roman Rule, 1924, p. 193). 
K. Sethe, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vi, p. 647. 
Cf. Erman, A Handbook of Egyptian Reli-, 1907, p. 56, 
Ch. on ' Religious Beliefs and Customs of the New Kingdom '.


--- PAGE 61 ---
VII. IMHOTEP AS A DEPllIGOD


--- PAGE 62 ---



--- PAGE 63 ---
MEDICAL DEMIGOD 35 
The humble peasant felt that he could no longer 
approach his deity with his daily petitions for 
body and soul, as he used to do in more primitive 
times. Yet the common people seem as much as 
before to have needed a superhuman helper and 
friend in sympathy with the troubles and pro- 
blems of life and accessible to their personal needs. 
Thus came about the introduction of new and more 
popular deities, or rather of demigods, heroes, or 
saints, who could be worshipped and invoked by 
the common people, and these were often selected 
from amongst the national heroes of past ages. 
Among them was the wise and good 1mhotep.l 
These popular demigods were probably re- 
garded somewhat as the Greeks later on revered 
their hero-gods to whom was rendered a semi- 
divine wor~hip.~ 
These popular deities (Sondergiitter-German) later on 
obtained important places in the Pantheon. Cf. A. Wiede- 
mann, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vi, p. 276. 
A parallel may be cited in the case of the Pharaoh Arneno- 
phis I (XVIIIth Dynasty), who was deified after his death 
and considerably later became the local patron of that quarter 
of Thebes in which the necropolis workmen lived. These 
men resorted to this deified king for help and advice in all 
their troubles. 
a An excellent summary of the question is given by K. 
Sethe (Imhotep, p. 4, and in the Encyclopaedia of Relkion and 
Ethics, vi, p. 650). It is interesting to note that both in Greece 
and in Rome a ' demigod ' stage was recognized on the way to 
full apotheosis. Julius Caesar became a demigod before being


--- PAGE 64 ---
IMHOTEP 
Errnan writes : 
' Out of this esteem for the ancient wisdom 
there arose the veneration manifested at this late 
time for those who had been leaders of the nation 
in the primitive period. They had previously 
been looked upon as people of renown, now some 
of them were regarded as demigods. . . . Among 
them is Imhotep, a man who belonged to the 
court of Zoser, one of the earliest of the Kings 
of Egypt, and who was remembered by the people 
as the celebrated royal architect, and as the author 
of ancient literature.' 
This view of the demigod stage being deferred 
till the New Kingdom depends, however, on the 
opinion that is formed of the trustworthiness of 
the Oxyrhynchus Papyrus referred to above. 
It is also during this demigod stage, in the 
XVIIIth Dynasty (Amenophis 111), that arose 
the custom amongst Egyptian scribes of pouring 
a libation out of their water-bowl to ' that most 
famous of scribes ' Imh~tep.~ A. H. Gardiner 
thus refers to this custom : 
' That Imhotep should have been so distin- 
guished from other Egyptian celebrities by a 
enrolled amongst the gods. Smith, Dictionary of Greek and 
Roman Antiquities, IYI, i, pp. 140--I. 
1 A. Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Relkion, 1907, p. 173. 
Cf. also Erman and Ranke, Aegypten, 1923, p. 378, where 
Erman speaks of ' the demigod Imhotep, the son of the 
goddess Sechmet '. 
a 2. f. Agyptische Sprache, xxxvi, 1898, p. 147 ; xl, 1902-3, 
p. 146.


--- PAGE 65 ---
MEDICAL DEMIGOD 
special rite, not the common funeral offering 
accorded to others, is surely sufficient to warrant 
the epithet demigod, not denied him at a later 
date.' 
In the numerous bronze statuettes (Figs. I, V- 
VII) representing the demigod stage of his 
career l Imhotep presents obvious signs of his 
human origin (Appendix D). He appears in the 
figure of an ordinary man, clothed in the simple 
garments of primitive days, without sceptre or 
ankh or the peculiar beard worn by the gods.2 
He looks like a sage and is generally seated on a 
throne or chair, rarely standing, and with a roll of 
papyrus on his knees or under his arm ; he may 
either be reading or appear to be buried in 
thought. 
This appearance forms a striking contrast to 
that met with after his apotheosis, as we shall see 
in the next Chapter. 
Figs. I, v, VI, v11 represent Imhotep as a demigod. 
Nos. I and v are taken from the Catalogue &S Antiquitks 
ggyptiennes du Mwbe du Caire : Statues de Divinitbs, i, p. 17 ; 
ii, P1. IV. No. VI is a statuette preserved in the Wellcome 
Historical Medical Museum, London, and is remarkable for 
the row of uraei arranged round the seat as a decoration. 
No. VII is in the Berlin Staats-Museum. 
Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion, 1907, p. 174.


--- PAGE 66 ---
THE APOTHEOSIS OF IMHOTEP AS 
GOD OF MEDICINE 
T 
HE full apotheosis of Imhotep (Figs. VIII, IX, 
and X) appears to have taken place in the 
Persian period,l somewhere about 525 B. C., the 
year in which Egypt was conquered by Cambyses 
and became a Persian pr~vince.~ To this new 
The three Figs. VIII, IX, and X represent Imhotep as the full 
deity of medicine. No. v111 shows the god in the standing 
posture and carrying the uas sceptre in one hand and the ankh 
in the other ; it is taken from the temple of Ptah at Karnak 
(p. 57). NO. IX shows him in a sitting posture and is taken 
from the temple of Medinet Habu (p. 57). NO. X is a 
mutilated bronze statuette preserved at the British Museum. 
It shows the figure of Imhotep carrying an ankh in his left 
hand, while the broken-off right arm is extended and appears 
as if it originally held a sceptre. This appears to be the only 
known statuette showing Imhotep as a full deity. Its date 
has been conjectured to be the XXVIth Dynasty. But the 
variations in the figure from the conventional XXVIth to the 
Ptolemaic Dynasties, such as the style of the skirt and the 
coarseness of the legs, point almost certainly to the Roman 
period. 
a According to Sethe (Imhotep, p. I), the earliest monument 
that refers to Imhotep as a deity and that can be approximately 
dated appears to be the statue of one of his priests named 
Amasis which is now in the Berlin Museum (No. 14765), and 
which belongs to the Persian period, ca. 525 B.C. According


--- PAGE 67 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 
Egyptian god is now assigned a divine father 
Ptah, in place of his human father Kanofer, and 
he becomes a member of the great triad of Mem- 
phis (Fig. XI), which includes Ptah, Sekhmet, and 
Imhotep? His mother Khreduonkh and his 
to the inscription on this monument, the great-grandfather 
of the priest Amasis who was called Neferebre had filled the 
office of third prophet of the house of Imhotep, the son of 
Ptah. As this Neferebre is mentioned in conjunction with 
the titles King Psammetich 11, 594-589 B. C., and must 
therefore have been born at latest during his reign, Sethe 
concludes that the worship of Imhotep as a deity dates from 
the reign of King Arnasis (57-525 B. C.). The elevation of 
Imhotep to divine rank was probably a gradual process and 
unaccompanied by any ceremonial. For the elaborate rites 
performed at the deification of Alexander the Great, cf. the 
article ' Comment Alexandre devint dieu en ggypte ', by 
Maspero, gtudes de Mythologie et d'drchklogie ggyptiennes, 
1912, vi, p. 263. 
Fig. XI. The three figures here shown form the triad of 
Memphis : Ptah, Sekhmet, and Imhotep, and are reproduced 
from statuettes at the British Museum. 
At an earlier period this triad comprised Ptah, Sekhmet, 
and Nefertem, but Imhotep appears eventually to have 
usurped the place of the latter. The members of Egyptian 
triads varied at different times and places. Thus Ptah, Nut, 
and Imhotep sometimes form a triad, while in Thebes Ptah, 
Mut-Hathor, and Imhotep formed a similar body. Cf. Roscher, 
Lexicon, ii (i), p. 125. 
According to Brugsch, Imhotep through his association 
with Ptah, who in the view of some authorities is one of the 
forms of Show (Shu), becomes linked up with the great 
Ennead. Cf. Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der alten 
Aegypter, pp. 508, 526.


--- PAGE 68 ---
VIII. IMHOTEP AS DEITY OF MEDICINE


--- PAGE 69 ---
IX. IMHOTEP AS DEITY OF MEDICINE 
3121 G


--- PAGE 70 ---
IMHOTEP 
wife Ronpe-nofret are in their turn raised to the 
rank of the mother and the wife of a god. The 
Graeco-Egyptians called Imhotep Imouthes or 
Asklepios and gradually assimilated him with 
their own deity of medicine.l 
The Imhotepian cult was probably at first 
associated with his tomb, which, as already 
mentioned, was situated outside the city of Mem-. 
phis on the edge of the desert to the west of 
Memphis. As time went on his cult spread far 
and wide through the land of Egypt and even 
into Nubia. More and more generally was 
Imhotep accepted as the deity of medicine, and 
worshipped throughout the land, as on a level 
with the full gods of Egypt. 
A similar process of gradual elevation to the rank 
of demigod and finally of full deity occurred in the 
case of another noted sage, viz. Amenophis, the 
son of Hapi, and vizier to King Amenophis 111. 
The names of these two sages had lingered for 
many centuries in the popular imagination as. 
national heroes who had in course of time come 
to be regarded as superhuman in nature and 
l This is one of the numerous cases in which under the 
influence of Hellenism a fusion took place between Greek and 
Egyptian deities. It has even been suggested that the deifi- 
cation of Imhotep was due to Hellenistic influence. Cf. 
J. G. Milne, Encyclopaedia of Rel+ and Ethics, vi, p. 380 ; 
Biasing, Deutscke Literaiurzeitung, 1902, col. 2330.


--- PAGE 71 ---
X. IMHOTEP AS DEITY OF MEDICINE


--- PAGE 72 ---



--- PAGE 73 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 43 
therefore entitled to divine honours. Probably 
in both cases their burial places became centres 
of pilgrimage, and, at any rate in the case of 
Imhotep, especially for the sick and suffering. 
This Arnenophis was in many respects the 
counterpart of Imhotep. What the latter was 
at the outset for Memphis, Arnenophis was for 
the Thebans down to the latest times. His 
deification probably took place in the reign of 
King Ptolemy Euergetes 11.1 
At least three temples are known to have been 
built in honour of Imhotep. The first one was 
at Memphis and became a famous hospital and 
school of magic and medi~ine.~ Doubtless count- 
less numbers of sick, maimed, and blind persons 
resorted to that shrine, and returned to their 
simple mud hovels nestling under the date palms 
or amongst the millet fields, full of gratitude for 
renewed health and strength. This beloved priest- 
physician was eventually laid to rest near to the 
temple where he had spent his days in relieving 
pain and prolonging life. For him we cannot 
doubt that sedare dolorem divinum opus. 
l H. Brugsch-Bey, History of Egypt under the Pharaohs, 
1881, i, p. 485 ; K. Sethe, Encyclopaedia of Rel2hn and 
Ethics, vi, p. 651. 
Other medical schools existed at Thebes, Sais, and On 
(Heliopolis). The head priest of Sais bore the title ' Greatest 
of the Physicians '.


--- PAGE 74 ---
44 IMHOTEP 
This temple was called by the Greeks the 
Asklepieion, ~i, rpi,s MiP+~v pea 'ACTKX~ITLE~OU, 
and was situated close to the Serapieion. In fact 
the worship of Imhotep was to some extent con- 
nected with that of Serapis, so much so that there 
were stone altars sacred to him in the Serapieion 
itself, on which daily libations were 0ffered.I 
Another temple of Imhotep existed at Philae 
(Fig. XII) ; of this, a glorious specimen of Egyptian 
architecture, a large portion has survived to this 
day, in spite of its immersion in a vast re~ervoir.~ 
Some of the halls (Figs. XIII-XVI) which were 
used for clinical purposes thousands of years ago 
are e~tant.~ 
S. Birch, Archaeologia, 1863, xxxix, p. 315. 
2 Fig. XII shows a Plan of the Island of Philae and the 
position of Imhotep's temple on the island. The temple lies 
to the south of the much larger temple of Isis which was the 
principal sanctuary on the island and dedicated to Isis and 
her son Harpocrates. 
Figs. XIII-XVI show the plan and three views of Imhotep's 
temple. In No. XIII is seen the ground-plan ; in No. XN the 
front of the temple ; in No. xv the Western wall and the 
entrance to the courtyard ; in No. XVI the Eastern wall of the 
courtyard. It is pleasant to think that Imhotep was wor- 
shipped in this famous island, sometimes called the ' Holy 
Island ', so rich in its associations with religion, with history, 
with architecture and painting. Kings, conquerors, priests, 
and travellers without number have been enchanted with its 
beauty, and have left records of their victories, of their acts of 
adoration, of their offerings to the deities whose temples still 
adorn this hallowed spot.


--- PAGE 75 ---



--- PAGE 76 ---



--- PAGE 77 ---



--- PAGE 78 ---
IMHOTEP 
This temple was built under the Ptolemies, 
the hieroglyphic inscriptions being those of 
Ptolemy IV Philopator, while the Greek text over 
the door, dedicating the building to the Greek god 
Asklepios, was placed there by the command of 
Ptolemy V Epiphanes? From one of the former 
we obtain the following address to Imhotep : 
' Great One, Son of Ptah, the creative god, made 
by Thenen, begotten by him and beloved by him, 
the god of divine forms in the temples, who giveth 
life to all men, the mighty one of wonders, the 
maker of times (?), who cometh unto him that 
calleth upon him, wheresoever he may be, who 
giveth sons to the childless, the chief Kheri-heb, 
the image and likeness of Thoth the Wise.' 
The best guide to the temple of Imhotep is the 
long East Colonnade leading from the temple of 
l An admirable view of this temple from the south, showing 
several figures of the deity Imhotep, is given by H. G. Lyons 
in his Report on the Island and Temples of Philae, P1. X. Cf. 
also Mahaffy, History of Egypt under the Ptolemaic Dynasty, 
p. 184. As a rule when the Ptolemies erected a temple in 
honour of their Egyptian gods, its style and ornamentation 
were purely Egyptian. The Greek inscription at Philae 
supplies an interesting example of the identification of 
Imhotep with Asklepios. Budge, History of Egypt, viii, p. 133. 
Brugsch, Thesaurus, p. 783 ; Religion und Mythologie der 
alten Aegypter, p. 527. After his deification Imhotep is 
sometimes designated as Ibis, i.e. the sacred bird of Thoth. 
Sages who were raised to the status of divinity were in some 
measure regarded as incarnations of that god. K. Sethe, 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vi, pp. 650-1.


--- PAGE 79 ---
GROUND PLAN OF 
TEMPLE OF IzEMzHOTEP PHUE 
East Colonnade 
N 
XIII. THE TEMPLE OF IMHOTEP, ISLAND OF PHILAE 
GROUND PLAN


--- PAGE 80 ---
IMHOTEP 
Arsnuphis to the Great Pylon, a colonnade con- 
sisting of seventeen columns. Through this wall - 
are cut seven doorways, the first five of which 
lead out to the court in which stands the ruined 
chapel of Mandulis. The sixth leads to the small 
temple of Imhotep? As the visitor passes through 
this doorway he finds himself in a little court, on 
the north side of which is the entrance to the 
temple. There are figures of Imhotep and other 
deities on both sides of the entrance which 
Weigall thus describes : 
' On the left side is seen King Ptolemy V 
Epiphanes before Imhotep. On the right side 
he is shown before Khnum, Satis and Anukis, 
and before Unnefer, Isis and Imhotep. Around 
the doorway are small panels of reliefs showing 
Osiris, Isis, Khnum, Hathor, Ptah, Thoth and 
Idotep being adored by the King. On either 
side of the jambs of the door the King's titles are 
inscribed, and reference is made to Isis, while he 
is said to be beloved of Imhotep and Ptah.' 
There was also a small temple at Thebes, but 
it appears to have been less important than that 
at Philae. In Thebes, as already mentioned, Ptah, 
Mut-Hathor and Imhotep in later times formed 
A good plan of these buildings will be found in Baedeker's 
Egypt, 1914, P. 365. 
A. E. Weigall, Antiquities of Lower Nubia; 1907, p. 42. 
There are also references to Imhotep and the deities coupled 
with him on pp. 40,43, and 50. Cf. also Weigall's Antiquities 
of Upper Egypt, '9'3, P. 475.


--- PAGE 81 ---



--- PAGE 82 ---



--- PAGE 83 ---
IMHOTI 
ce to the l'emple ot lmhotep IS seen on the right between the hrst ar 
The western wall of the Temple (with medieval Coptic doorway) occupies me centre or tne plcture


--- PAGE 84 ---



--- PAGE 85 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 49 
a triad, which thus differs from the Memphitic 
triad referred to above, in which Sekhmet formed 
the third member.l 
Apart from the temples of Imhotep we have 
records of a sanatorium which was situated in 
the upper terrace of the temple of Hatshepsowet 
at Deir-el-Bahari, and which was given up to the 
worship of Imhotep and of the other deified hero 
Arnenophis the son of Hapi, both of whom figured 
at this period as patrons of healing. Under their 
auspices Deir-el-Bahari seems to have become 
a regular resort for invalids who scratched or 
painted numerous invocations to these deities on 
the walls of the temple.2 
Amongst common grafiti are the following : 
' the homage of M. to the lord god Asklepios ' ; 
' N. came to worship the great god Asklepios '- 
usually with the addition of the name Amenothes, 
and often with that of Hygieia, to Asklepios ; 
sometimes the writer associated his wife, his 
family, or his friends in his act of worship. 
Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der altm Aegypter, 
pp. 526-8 ; W. H. Roscher, Lexicon der Griechischen und 
Rcmischen Mythologie, ii, p. 123. In the period of its glory 
(XVIIIth-XXth Dynasties) the triad of Thebes consisted of 
Amon, Mut, and Khons. 
J. G. Milne, J. of Egyptian Archaeology, 1914, i, p. 96. 
Cf. also C. R. Piers, J. of Hellenic Studies, 1899, xix, p. 13 ; 
J. G. Milne, Encyclopaedia of Relkion and Ethics, vi, p. 382. 
Amenothes is a Greek variant of the more frequent Amenophis. 
3121 H


--- PAGE 86 ---
IMHOTEP 
A graflto quoted by Milne is of special interest, 
as it has been twice improved upon by later com- 
mentators. The first entry ran ' Eugraphios 
offers his homage before the lord god Asklepios 
and Amenothes and Hygieia : be mindful of us 
and grant us healing ' ; at the end of this, one 
Pesubis, presumably a Gnostic who desired some 
credit to be ascribed to the weird spirits whom he 
worshipped, wrote ' with the help of Cherstapane 
and Phritob ' ; finally a Christian, grieved to find 
so many deities evoked, added his correction above 
the errors of previous centuries : ' It is the One 
God who helps you.' 
An interesting story has survived which illus- 
trates the practice of incubation at Imhotep's 
temples. We shall follow here the popular 
version as emended by Maspero'l while readers 
wishing for a more exact translation are referred 
to F. L1. Griffith's transliterati~n.~ 
The story relates to a man named Satmi 
Khamuas, the son of the Pharaoh Usermares, 
who had no man-child by his wife Mahftuaskhit ; 
this afflicted him greatly in his heart, and his wife 
1 G. Maspero, Popular Stories of Ancient Egypt, 1915, 
P. '44- 
a F. L1. Griffith, Stories of the Hgh Priests of Memphis, 
1900, PP. 42, 143. Griffith prefers ' Setme ' to ' Satmi ', 
' Meh-wesekht ' t6 ' Mahituaskit ', and ' Si-osiri ' to ' Seno- 
siris '.


--- PAGE 87 ---



--- PAGE 88 ---



--- PAGE 89 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 51 
Mahituaskhit was greatly afflicted with him. 
One day, when he was more depressed than usual, 
his wife Mahituaskhit went to the temple of 
Imiithes, son of Ptah, and prayed before him, 
saying : ' Turn thy face towards me, my lord 
Imiithes, son of Ptah ; it is thou who dost work 
miracles, and who art beneficent in all thy deeds ; 
it is thou who givest a son to her who has none. 
Listen to my lamentation and give me conception 
of a man-child.' 
Mahituaskhit, the wife of Satmi, slept in the 
temple and she dreamed a dream that same night. 
One spake with her, saying : ' Art thou not 
Mahituaskhit, the wife of Satmi, who dost sleep 
in the temple to receive a remedy for thy sterility 
from the hands of the god ? When to-morrow 
morning comes, go to the bath-room of Satmi 
thy husband, and thou wilt find a root of colocasia 
that is growing there. The colocasia that thou 
meetest with thou shalt gather with its leaves ; 
thou shalt make of it a remedy that thou shalt 
give to thy husband, then thou shalt lie by his 
side, and thou shalt conceive by him the same 
night .' 
When Mahituaskhit awoke from her dream 
after having seen these things she did everything 
according to that which had been told her in her 
dream ; then she lay by the side of Satmi, her


--- PAGE 90 ---
52 IMHOTEP 
husband, and she conceived by him. When the 
time came she had the signs of pregnant women, 
and Satmi announced it to Pharaoh, for his heart 
rejoiced greatly thereat ; he bound an amulet 
upon her (Fig. XVII),~ and recited a spell over her. 
Eventually she gave birth to a remarkable boy 
named Senosiris, who later on performed many 
wonders in the land of Egypt. 
A similar story of sterility being cured by 
Imhotep is told in a famous stele of the Ptolemaic 
Period, now in the British MuseumO2 The story 
relates to a lady named ' Thet Imhotep ', who 
belonged to a family that reckoned among its 
members several princes of Memphis and high 
priests of Ptah. She was born in the ninth year 
of the reign of Ptolemy XIII, about 71 B. C., and 
when fourteen years old she was married to her 
half-brother, the priest P-Shere-en-PtahO8 Dur- 
ing the first twelve years of her married life she 
l This is an interesting reference to the use of an amulet, 
which was a figure or ornament possessing magical power 
and worn as a preservative against sickness or misfortune. 
Amulets associated with Imhotep are not frequently met 
with. Fig. XVII represents a specimen preserved in the 
Egyptological Museum of the Liverpool University. 
British Museum, Egyptian Sculpture Gallery, Bay 29, 
No. 1027. Cf. E. A. Budge, Guide to the Egyptian Collec- 
tions in the British Museum, 1909, p. 274. 
His stela is also in the British Museum, Egyptian Sculp- 
ture Gallery, Bay 27, No. 1026.


--- PAGE 91 ---
XVII. AMULET OF IMHOTEP


--- PAGE 92 ---



--- PAGE 93 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 
gave birth to three daughters, but had no son, 
which caused her husband great grief. She and 
her husband prayed to the god Imhotep, the son 
of Ptah, for a son ; in response, the god, appearing 
to P-Shere-en-Ptah in a dream, promised to grant 
his prayer provided that he carried out certain 
works in connexion with the temple. When the 
priest awoke, he caused the works to be taken in 
hand, and soon after they were completed his 
wife gave birth to a son who was named Imhotep, 
and surnamed Pedi-Bast? 
Incubation sleep in the temples was resorted 
to for many forms of sickness, suggestive intima- 
tions being given by the deity during natural or 
drug-produced dreams and interpreted by the 
priests. Doubtless in many cases a cure was 
effected through the awakening of an expectation 
of cure in the sleeper himself. Thus the temple- 
sleep was used as a form of faith-healing. Sug- 
gestions received during dreams that a cure had 
been effected were found to have achieved their 
British Museum, 1. C., Bay 27, No. 1030. 
Incubation was by no means confined to the shrines of 
Imhotep. For example, at the temple of Medinet Habu night 
oracles were received through incubation from Thoth who was 
wont to descend on the temple each night in the form of an 
ibis. P. Boynan, Thoth the Hermes of Egypt, 1922, p. 168. 
Cf. also G. Foucart, on ' Dreams and Incubation ' in the 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, v, p. 34.


--- PAGE 94 ---
54 IMHOTEP 
purpose when the sufferer aw0ke.l The more 
emotional and highly strung the patient, the 
greater the probability of cure. 
As the centuries rolled by, the worship of 
Imhotep spread more and more widely, until 
eventually he became recognized all over Egypt 
as the god of medicine. Indeed the learned 
magician-physician of the time of King Zoser 
became one of the most popular deities, as we 
learn from the eulogistic appreciations that have 
been handed down to us. Thus he is described 
as ' the good physician of gods and men, a kind 
and merciful god, assuaging the sufferings of those 
in pain, healing the diseases of men and giving 
peaceful sleep to the restless and suffering '. 
Elsewhere he is spoken of as ' the god who 
protects human beings, who gives to him who 
calls upon him, who gives life to men and women, 
and who gives life to all who are bounden to 
him '. At other times he is described as the ' god 
who looks after the sick ' and ' the worshipful or 
holy god who gives a son to him who has none '. 
Another fine testimony says that he visits the 
Incubation dreams were also used for propaganda, 
devotees being urged to build further temples and spread the 
cult of the deity. Priests also appeared during the night, 
apart from dreams, and, acting on behalf of the deity, indicated 
the path to recovery. W. Schubart, Agrpten vm Alexander 
dem Grossen & auf Mohammed, 1892, pp. 3 14 ff.


--- PAGE 95 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 55 
suffering ' to give them peaceful sleep and heal 
their pains and diseases '? The popularity of 
Imhotep will cause no surprise, since he both 
healed the sick, protected from accident and gave 
children to those who had hitherto been sterile. 
As Breasted has well said : 
' The great wise man Imhotep was one of King 
Zoser's chief advisers. In priestly wisdom, in 
magic, in the formulation of wise proverbs, in 
medicine, in architecture, this remarkable figure 
of Zoser's reign left so notable a reputation that 
his name was never forgotten. The people sang 
of his proverbs centuries later, and 2,500 years 
after his death he had become a god of medicine 
whom the Greeks, who called him Imouthes, 
identified with their own Aesculapius.' 
In fact during the Hellenistic period the sage 
Imhotep, now deified, appears to have become 
the principal god worshipped at Memphis, and 
to have wellnigh superseded Ptah. 
Brugsch says that after recovery the patients used to 
dedicate to the god a model of the diseased member, such as 
an eye, an ear, a foot, &c. Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie 
der alten Aegypter, p. 527. Some specimens of Egyptian 
votive offerings in wood, bronze, and blue glazed ware may be 
seen in museums of Egyptology. 
Breasted, A History of Egypt, 1919, p. 113. Just as the 
Greeks identified Imhotep with their own deity of medicine, 
i.e. Asklepios, so the Egyptians also equated him with 
Eshmun, the Phoenician god of healing. Cf. W. A. Jayne, 
The Healing Gods of Ancient Civilizations, 1925, p. 138.


--- PAGE 96 ---
56 IMHOTEP 
But apart from the temples specially associated 
with him, Imhotep was also worshipped in various 
other temples. Amongst them is the temple of 
Deir-el-Bahari where the Ptolemaic Chamber l 
was dedicated to two men who had both been 
deified, Imhotep the son of Ptah and Amenophis 
the son of Ha~i.~ On the wall of this Chamber is 
a fine representation of the deity Imhotep carrying 
a sceptre in his right hand and an ankh in his left. 
Close to the god is the inscription : ' I have given 
thee life combined with health and protection. 
I am thy protector.' 
Other inscriptions describe Imhotep as ' the 
great Kheri-heb, the first chief one of the Ibis, 
Imhotep, the son of Ptah, south of his Wall, who 
listens to him who implores him, on the Western 
side of Thebes, who does good to its inhabitants, 
giving life, strength and joy to its dwellers, and 
enriching the land '. Behind the picture of 
Imhotep is a goddess having some resemblance 
to Hathor. Naville suggests that this figure is 
the mother of Imhotep who has also been deified 
and says : ' I give thee life ; I join to it health ; 
my protective power, Imhotep, is guarding thee.' 
This chamber dates from about 140 B. C., in the reign of 
Ptolemy IX Euergetes 11. 
E. Naville, The Temple of Deir-el-Bahari, 1906, Part V, 
p. 11 and P1. CXLIX.


--- PAGE 97 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 57 
Another shrine in which Imhotep was wor- 
shipped was the temple of Ptah at Thebes.l This 
temple was built by Tuthmosis I11 and restored 
by several of the Ptolemies. Here were wor- 
shipped Ptah, his wife Sekhmet, and their son 
Imhotep, together with Amenophis the son of 
Ha~i.~ 
Another small Ptolemaic temple known at the 
present day as the Qasr-el-Agouz (Kasr el-Agouz) 
was erected by Euergetes I1 to the god Thoth. 
In the second hall may be seen the King sacrificing 
to Thoth, Imhotep, and the deified sage Ameno- 
phis. This temple stands south-west of the 
Colossi of Memn~n.~ 
Yet another temple in which Imhotep and 
Arnenophis were jointly worshipped was Medinet 
Habu, lying directly west of the Col~ssi.~ Evi- 
dently the two famous sages of Egypt who had 
both been accorded divine honours were often 
worshipped in the same shrines. 
The same applies to the temple of Deir el 
Medineh, which lies north-west of the Colossi. 
Baedeker's Egypt, 1914, p. 277 ; Plan of Karnak, p. 264. 
2 G. Maspero, Ancient Sites and Modern Scenes, pp. 444-5. 
Pictures of Ptah and Imhotep are sculptured on the walls of 
the temple. 
Baedeker's Egypt, 1914, p. 330, Plan, p. 280. 
Ibid., p. 330. 
3121 I


--- PAGE 98 ---
58 IMHOTEP 
This temple was originally the grave of Arneno- 
phis and was converted by Ptolemy IV into 
a shrine to the gods of the dead? In it both he 
and Imhotep were worshipped in company with 
the full gods of Eg~pt.~ 
Apart from these public temples there appear 
to have been in Ptolemaic times many small 
shrines or altars which individuals erected in 
their own homes in honour of their tutelary deity 
Imhotep and in the hope of securing his protec- 
tion against all sorts of misfortunes. In other 
cases such shrines were hired out by their owners 
in return for money payments contributed by 
sick persons or such as needed some oracular 
guidance in a difficulty. Such shrines were 
dedicated both to Isis and Asklepios (sc. Imhotep), 
the latter, however, being the principal god of 
healing .3 
The interesting discovery has recently been 
made that under the Ptolemies regular festivals 
were celebrated in honour of the god Imhotep 
in much the same way as was done in the case 
A. Erman, A Handbook of the Egyptian Religion, p. 
175. 
In several of these temples may be seen some of the mural 
reliefs of Imhotep mentioned in Appendix E. 
3 W. Schubart, Agypten von Alexander dem Grossen bis auf 
Mohammed, 1922, p. 300.


--- PAGE 99 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 59 
of other traditional deities.l It is well known 
that festivals and fasts played a leading part in 
the religious life of the Egyptians and were 
celebrated with vociferous demonstrations of 
joy-processions accompanied by banners, singing, 
dancing, and sacred emblems. Pilgrimages and 
banquets also formed part of the festival, which 
might extend over several days or even weeks.2 
Doubtless in the case of Imhotep there would 
be abundant expressions of gratitude by his 
former patients for the wonderful cures he had 
performed. 
This discovery has been made by means of an 
inscription on the recently found carved pedestal 
of a lost statue, now in the British M~seum.~ 
The inscription begins with an address to his 
lord Imhotep, son of Ptah, from his divine friend, 
the prophet and scribe Pedi-Bast : ' I am thy 
son, perfect in the service of thy Ka on all thy 
festival days, at the commencement of the 
seasons and on all festivals taken together.' 
H. Gauthier, ' Un Nouveau Monument du Dieu Im- 
hotep ', Bulletin de l'lnstitut Frangais d7Archt!ohgie Orientale, 
1918, xiv (i), p. 33. 
For further details compare the article by Foucart, 
' Festivals and Fasts ', in Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
v, p. 853. Cf. also 2. f. Agyptische Sprache, 1886, xxiv, 
PP. 20, 24-5. 
Southern Egyptian Sculpture Gallery, Bay 29, No. 347.


--- PAGE 100 ---
IMHOTEP 
There were six festivals in all, celebrated on 
the following dates : 
Day of Egyptian 
Festival Month Date 
16th day Epiphi. 31st May. 
3rd month of spring. 
I rth day Mekhir. 27th Dec. 
2nd month of winter. 
9th day MesorC. 23rd June. 
4th month of spring. 
17th day Mesord. 1st July. 
4th month of Shemu. 
~3rd day MesorC. 7th July. 
4th month of Shemu. 
4th day Paoni . 19th April. 
and month of Shemu. 
It will be observed these festivals are not 
arranged in the chronological order of the months 
of the year ; their order corresponds to certain 
events in the life of the god Imhotep which they 
are intended to commemorate. 
A. First festival. 
' The day on which was born Imhotep of 
his father Ptah and his mother Khreduonkh ; 
the heart of the great god, the father of the 
gods, is pleased at seeing him.' 
B. Second festival. 
' The day of the first festival of Imhotep ; 
H. Brugsch, Matkriaux pour le Calendrier des Anciens 
Egyptiens, p. SO.


--- PAGE 101 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 61 
he appears before his father Ptah and 
Sekhmet, the great one, beloved of Ptah. 
She ordains . . . and glorifies his image.' 
C. Third festival. 
' The day of the slaying of the vile Asiatics 
by Sekhmet, the great one, beloved of Ptah. 
She tears off their limbs whilst burning 
them. She capsizes their boats in the 
region of the land of the Red Lake.' 
D. Fourth festival. 
' The day of lamentation of his father Ptah 
for Imhotep when he (?) died . . . his body . . . 
his spirit when it was re-united (?) ' (prob- 
ably an allusion to the separation of spirit 
and body at the moment of the death of 
the god). 
E. Fifth festival. 
' The day on which Imhotep reposes before 
his father after his death : he enters and 
goes out before the great god : the re-union 
of his spirit with his body takes place and 
he rests in the great Dehan, a cavern dear 
to his heart.' 
F. Sixth festival. 
' The day on which the spirit of Imhotep 
departs towards the great place of sojourn 
of this god upon the whole earth.' 
No doubt at these festivals the Imhotepian


--- PAGE 102 ---
62 IMHOTEP 
devotees would bring their offerings to the 
sanctuary, some of them being given as thank- 
offerings for recovery from illness or accident, 
others in anticipation of such benefits in future 
years.l 
Some interesting details have survived of the 
allowances made to the priests who were associated 
with the Egyptian temples during the second 
century B. These allowances, known as 
the (TVW~~ELF (TLTLKCL~, appear to have consisted 
of wine, milk, oil, and bread ; the two forms of 
oil were sesame and kiki (i. e. castor) oil: while 
the loaves were made of spelt, i. e. a form of wheat 
(Triticum spelta) . 
At the Asklepieion at Memphis, in addition to 
the ordinary priests, a form of lower priesthood 
seems to have been in existence, represented by 
the so-called twin-sisters (618~~~~). These twin- 
sisters (i~~68ovAo~) received daily for their services 
In the Cairo Museum is preserved a Orl~avpk or money- 
box, derived from the temple of Asklepios and Hygieia at 
Ptolemais, and intended to receive donations from worshippers. 
Such money-boxes were commonly used in Egyptian temples 
of the Graeco-Roman period ; the Cairo specimen is sur- 
mounted by a serpent's head, doubtless as a symbol. 2. f. 
Bgyptische Spy&, 1902-3, xl, p. 140. 
W. Otto, Priester und Tempel im Helhistischen Agypten, 
1908, i, PP. "7, 373. 
This was the Ricinus communis, a common plant in 
Egypt. Rawlinson, History of Herodotw, ii. 94.


--- PAGE 103 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 
at the Asklepieion l four loaves a day, called 
cyllQtis (KUIXX~CTLS). 
On what grounds did Imhotep receive the very 
rare honour of being raised to the full rank of 
divinity ? Only a few other instances in which an 
ordinary mortal receives apotheosis are known in 
the whole of Egyptian hi~tory.~ During his life 
King Zoser bestowed on him the highest office 
in the State, that of vizier ; but posterity con- 
ferred an even greater honour when it placed 
him among the deities of Egypt. 
Maspero attributes this signal favour to the 
cumulative qualifications of architect, physician, 
sage, and magician, but attributes the apotheosis 
mainly to his skill in magic. ' It is ', he says, ' in 
virtue of his powers as a magician that Imhotep 
was deified.' 
There can be no question that in Egypt magic 
exerted an enormous influence in the life both of 
the individual and of the nation. It was invoked 
RawIinson, History of Herodotus, ii. 77. 
This of course does not apply to the Pharaohs, since 
these were never looked upon as ordinary mortals. Sethe 
enumerates eight instances of the deification of individuals 
not of royal rank. Cf. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vi, 
p. 650. 
G. Maspero, gtudes de Mythologie et d'Archkologie 
ggyptiennes, 1916, viii, p. 134. Cf. also his article on the 
deification of Arnenophis : ' How an Egyptian Statesman 
became a God ', in New Light on Ancient Egypt, 1908, p. 189.


--- PAGE 104 ---
64 IMHOTEP 
in all questions of life and death, of love and 
hatred, of health and sickness. But this potent 
influence does not prevent the reputation of 
Imhotep being also due to exceptional skill in the 
use of the rich materia medica at his disposal, for 
it must have been chiefly in psycho-neuroses that 
magic was successful. Physical as well as psychical 
therapeutics may well have been used in co- 
operation, and by combining their forces have 
raised him to a position of rare eminence. Doubt- 
less after his death his reputation led to pilgrim- 
ages to his tomb, when incubation sleep in his 
adjoining temple was followed by many recoveries. 
Every successful cure would confirm the public 
confidence that the former magician-physician 
still possessed superhuman powers. Fame would 
grow into veneration and eventually into true 
worship. 
The deification of Imhotep proves that the 
Egyptians believed it possible for gods to be 
evolved out of common mortals. Speaking 
generally, an ordinary individual was not supposed 
to have any right to immortality, but the part of 
him which persists and which is called his Ka or 
double might be kept alive, provided it was 
unceasingly nourished and comforted by actual 
bread, meat, and drink and other necessary 
supplies.


--- PAGE 105 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 65 
When the Ka of a deceased was thus supported 
by his descendants or by devotees, the moment 
of his dissolution could be indefinitely postponed. 
Even the gods, although less perishable than 
mortals, were subject to like infirmities as were 
the latter, e.g. to disease, senility and death, and 
needed liturgies and incantations as well as 
material sustenance if their continued existence 
was to be assured. Thus the difference between 
a deity and an ordinary mortal was merely one 
of degree. Provided therefore that the descen- 
dants of a deceased person continued to support 
him by generous gifts and endowments in the 
same manner as was done in the case of a god, his 
continued existence would be assured. In Mas- 
pero's words, ' mortal men would have manu- 
factured a new immortal '. The generous gifts 
provided by his devotees would at the same time 
enhance his prestige ; this prestige would bring 
further gifts and thus increase his chances of 
attaining immortality. Such seems to have been 
the sequence of events which led to the apotheosis 
of one who had originally been an ordinary man 
of flesh and blood. 
Long before the Greek conquest of Egypt by 
Alexander, Imhotep had become generally recog- 
nized as the deity of medicine. The Greeks who 
called him Imouthes amalgamated him with their 
3121 K


--- PAGE 106 ---
66 ZMHOTEP 
own Asklepios (Aesculapius), so that for some 
centuries the Egyptian deity of medicine may be 
described as in some measure a fusion of the 
ancient Imhotep and the much more modern 
Asklepios. Frequently, indeed, the identity of 
Imhotep is concealed under the name Asklepios? 
During the Ptolemaic period there seems to 
have been some relation between the worship of 
Imhotep and that of the sacred bull of Ptah named 
Apis. Ammianus Marcellinus, referring to the 
time of Julius Augustus (63 B. C.-A. D. 14), thus 
describes the association of Apis with the temple 
of Imhotep at Memphis. When the Apis bull 
had died, ' another is sought amid great public 
mourning ; and if one can be found distinguished 
by all the required marks, he is led to Memphis, 
a city of great renown, and especially celebrated 
for the patronage of the god Aesculapius. And 
after he has been led into the city by one hundred 
priests and conducted into a chamber, he is looked 
upon as consecrated and is said to point out by 
evident means the signs of future events. Some 
also of those who come to him he repels by un- 
favourable signs ; as it is reported he formally 
rejected Caesar Gennanicus when he offered him 
Imhotep was also at times assimilated with other deities 
that were associated with him, e. g. Harpokrates in Thebes, 
and Khnum in Elephantine. Pauly, Real-Encyclopddie, ix (ii), 
col. 1217.


--- PAGE 107 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 67 
food ; thus portending what shortly happened.' l 
Doubtless Apis was taken into the inner sanctum 
of Asklepios (sc. Imhotep) in order that he might 
be touched and thus consecrated by the statue 
of the deity. 
An interesting question arises as to how late 
the worship of Irnhotep lasted on during the 
Christian era. The palaeography of the grafiti 
at the sanatorium at Deir-el-Bahari which relate 
to Imhotep indicates that they probably belong 
to the second century A. D., but not much beyond 
it." There was, however, a special local reason 
for their discontinuance. The raids of the bar- 
barian tribes of Nubia in the middle of the third 
century would doubtless interfere with security 
of life, frighten away invalids, and check pilgrim- 
ages to the shrine. Probably, therefore, Deir-el- 
Bahari ceased to be a health resort for the Greeks 
and Romans soon after A. D. 200. 
In the north of Egypt, on the other hand, there 
is evidence that the worship of Imhotep continued 
considerably later, and indeed that his reputation 
as the deity of medicine gradually grew in com- 
parison with that of the other Egyptian gods, 
until in the fourth century he had come to be 
l Arnmianus Marcellinus, tr. by C. D. Yonge, xxii, 14, 
p. 306. 
a Milne, J. of Egyptian Archaeology, 1914, i, p. 98.


--- PAGE 108 ---
68 IMHOTEP 
regarded as the leading divinity of Memphis.l As 
Otto says : ' It is very remarkable that the 
deified Imhotep, who was probably not acknow- 
ledged as a god until the Saite period, and did not 
receive his fullest recognition as god till the 
Ptolemaic period, by the time of Ammianus 
Marcellinus had come to be the chief deity of 
Memphi~.'~ Thus his worship evidently ex- 
tended well into the Roman period, to the time 
when profound changes had taken place in the 
internal and external economy of Egypt. The 
country in fact had become part of a new world. 
Her glorious history-one of the most momentous 
epochs in the history of man-had closed, and 
she was living an artificial life in which she no 
longer played an active part. 
The collapse of ancient Egyptian civilization 
was due to a variety of causes acting cumulatively. 
One of these causes was the passing of the country 
under the guardianship of Rome in the year 
30 B. C. Henceforth she became a vassal of the 
Roman Empire and was governed by its represen- 
1 Imhotep appears still to have retained his reputation as 
a patron of magic, as the alchemist Zosimos (3rd c. A.D.) 
entitled one of his works 'IPo;B, i. e. Imhotep. Pauly, Real- 
Encyclopadie, ix (ii), col. 1217. 
2 Ammianus Marcellinus lived ca. A. D. 330-400. 
3 W. Otto, Priester und Tempel im Helhistischen Agypten, 
1908, ii, p. 214.


--- PAGE 109 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 69 
tative. The steady drain involved by the annual 
tribute of corn to feed the hungry Romans, 
combined with the extortions of her governors, 
depleted the supply of capital wealth. The 
bucolic rebellion of A.D. 172 was a symptom of 
the national distress and aggravated the ex- 
haustion of the country. From this period down 
to about A. D. 300 the land became more and more 
impoverished. 
Another potent influence at work in the dis- 
integration of the ancient rbgime was the spread 
of Christianity, whose doctrines were well estab- 
lished in Alexandria in the second century and 
were gradually being diffused throughout the 
country. In spite of persecutions the number of 
churches steadily grew, so that by about A. D. 300 
many towns on the Nile were provided with places 
of Christian worship. The conversion of the 
Emperor Constantine (ca. A. D. 288 to 337) to 
Christianity gave a further impetus to the new 
religion and caused many worshippers of the gods 
of Egypt to transfer their devotion to an austere 
form of Christianity. Indeed, during the next 
two centuries these converts did their best to 
root out the native forms of worship. Mean- 
while the national faith in the ancient deities had 
weakened almost to a vanishing point, and with 
that weakening the associated priesthood and


--- PAGE 110 ---
70 IMHOTEP 
ritual would naturally disappear? Associated 
with the progress of Christianity was the growth 
of Christian monasticism, which, while it had 
sprung from Egyptian monasticism, had in course 
of time become an important adjunct to the new 
religion. These monasteries indeed frequently 
occupied buildings that had previously been 
Egyptian temples, and naturally brought all native 
religious observances to an end. So numerous 
had the monks become that in the fourth century 
the Emperor Valens (A. D. 364-378) sent three 
thousand troops into the desert of Nitria to compel 
the able-bodied ascetics who had retired there to 
enlist in the imperial armies. In that desert alone 
there lived no less than five thousand monks? 
Further, a large amount of labour was withdrawn 
by the monasteries from the economic resources of 
the country and devoted to ecclesiastical purposes. 
Thus, deprived of an important productive ele- 
ment in its population and drained of many of its 
W. Otto, Priester und Tempel im Hellenistischen Agypten, 
1908, ii, p. 214. Other references to the priests of Imhotep 
(sc. Asklepios) during the early Christian era will be found in 
Hieronymus, Vita S. Hilarionis, cap. 21 (Migne, Patrol. 
Latina, xxiii, p. 38) ; Clement of Alexandria, Strom., i, 
cap. 21, 399. 
An account of early Christianity in Egypt is given by 
W. Scott, Hermetica, i, pp. 65 ff. 
E. Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 
chaps. xxv and xxxvii.


--- PAGE 111 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 71 
material resources, the nation sank to a low 
economic level, so low indeed that the available 
capital was insufficient to support the miserably 
debased coinage. By A. D. 370 taxes were paid 
in kind and commerce was reduced to barter. 
A third factor in the general disruption was 
the introduction of Greek culture and science, 
including Greek medicine. Ever since the found- 
ing of Alexandria in 331 B. c. Hellenic influences 
had gradually been permeating and undermining 
the ancient methods of treating the sick, based 
partly on experience and partly on magic, that 
had held sway for many centuries. The Egyptian 
magician-physicians had been content to use 
prescriptions that had been handed down for 
many generations, rarely testing their results by 
means of experiment, while, on the other hand, 
the patient was still encouraged in the old belief 
that the magic formulas which were recited, 
whenever a potion was swallowed, were able to 
placate the evil spirits that had caused the disease 
and were at least as potent as the physical remedy. 
This antiquated procedure now gave way under 
the influence of a spirit of inquiry and experiment, 
rapid progress being made in anatomy, physiology, 
materia medica, and pathology? The result was 
that the primitive system of medicine which had 
1 An excellent summary is given by E. A. Budge in his


--- PAGE 112 ---
IMHOTEP 
been in vogue since the days of Imhotep passed 
into oblivion, the old order changing and giving 
place to new. 
Lastly, amongst the forces which brought the 
ancient civilization of Egypt to an end were the 
hostile incursions into Egypt during the Roman 
period. Both the Blemmyes of the Eastern 
desert and the Nobadae of the Western desert 
harassed the Roman conquerors at intervals during 
the first three centuries of the Christian era, and 
the Emperor Diocletian (284-305) was obliged 
to put an end to their invasions by an annual 
subsidy. 
The story of the political and religious dis- 
turbances that raged during these early centuries 
of our era is too long and complex to be told 
here ; suffice it to say that they combined to 
render the foreign occupation a period of stress 
and turmoil in which the constituent elements 
of early Egyptian civilization broke asunder. 
Indeed the final collapse of Egypt was largely 
due to the purely military government of the 
Introduction to the Syrian Anatomy, Pathology and Thera- 
peutics, 1913, i, pp. mii ff. Cf. also F. H. Garrison, History 
of Medicine, 1921, p. 93 ; K. Sudhoff,Studien x. Geschichte der 
Medizin (Puschmann-Stiftung), 1909, Nos. 5, 6. The first 
great medical school of antiquity was established at Alex- 
andria, where there were extensive laboratories, clinics and 
libraries.


--- PAGE 113 ---
GOD OF MEDICINE 73 
Romans, who did little to prevent the inroads 
of savages and allowed the country to lapse into 
barbarism. The Egyptian people had lost all 
desire for independence and did nothing to 
resist the oppressive alien government. Thus 
the Moslem conquest of the country in A.D. 639 
became easy, and for over three centuries Egypt 
became a province of the Eastern Caliphate. 
The worship of Imhotep at Memphis seems 
to have lingered on until the process of national 
dissolution was far advanced. Doubtless the 
traditions of his skill in the ars medendi, dating 
from the glorious days of the early Dynasties, 
kept alive the popular confidence in him, even 
when faith in many of the other deities had faded 
away. All through his long career since the days 
of the Pharaoh Zoser he played a worthy part 
on the stage of history ; for ever will his name 
be held in grateful remembrance. 
To Imhotep, indeed, may truthfully be applied 
the words of Virgil, written not many years 
before the Roman conquest of his country : 
' Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque 
manebunt .'


--- PAGE 114 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 
SHORT excursus may be permitted in order 
A to indicate the extraordinary development 
of the healing art that had been reached by the 
time of Imhotep. The full story is a fascinating 
one, but it cannot be told here. With scarcely 
a trace of infancy, the ars medica suddenly emerges, 
exhibiting an unparalleled stage of evolution in 
Egypt when compared with any other country. 
In the words of Foucart : ' The Egyptian science 
of healing constituted from the very beginning 
a system several thousand years in advance of 
the rest of human society.' At the same time 
medicine was closely interwoven with magic, each 
of these elements acting and reacting on the 
other. The briefest survey of what had been 
achieved in the Pyramid age must suffice. 
It will be convenient in the first place to sum- 
marize the progress made in the ars medendi, 
and then to deal with the elements of magic and 
occultism which were closely interwoven with it. 
1 Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, iv, p. 752.


--- PAGE 115 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 75 
Fortunately a considerable number of medical - 
documents have survived written in the hieratic 
script on rolls of papyrus. The most important 
of these is the Ebers Papyrus which was actually 
written in the early XVIIIth Dynasty, ca. 1550 
B.c., but which was evidently compiled from one 
or more other books many centuries earlier. 
Indeed the document itself states that some 
portions date from the 1st Dyna~ty,~ and therefore 
were in part at least in existence during Imho- 
tep's lifetime. The Papyrus contains a long list 
of prescriptions for numerous named ailments 
and specifies the remedies to be used, as well 
as their doses and the mode of administration. 
Evidently considerable progress had been made, 
especially in clinical examination, diagnosis and 
therapeutics. Further, there was an accurate 
knowledge of the skeleton and of the method of 
treating fractures successfully. The position and 
The other important medical papyri are the Hearst 
Papyrus about as ancient as the Ebers, the Berlin Medical 
Papyrus written somewhat later, the Kahun Medical Papyrus, 
which is surely of the XIIth Dynasty, i.e. considerably 
earlier than the Ebers, the London Medical Papyrus, the 
Edwin Smith Papyrus, and another papyrus at Berlin, which 
contains a collection of spelIs and prescriptions for mothers 
and their babies. 
For an excellent rksumd of the subject cf. W. R. Dawson's 
paper ' Medicine and Surgery in Ancient Egypt ', Nm York 
Medical Times, Feb. 1925.


--- PAGE 116 ---
IMHOTEP 
function of the stomach and intestines were 
known, as well as the fact that the great blood- 
vessels run from the heart to every part of the 
body. Some of the glosses in the Edwin Smith 
Papyrus reveal an acquaintance with anatomy 
which could only have been acquired by dissec- 
tion? 
In the Ebers Papyrus lengthy descriptions are 
given of the vascular system, and the wide- 
spread influence of a disordered cardiac action is 
recognized, the heart being described as ' the 
beginning of all the members '.2 There is also 
some inkling of a circulation of the blood ; 
pulsation was perceived although the actual 
pumping action of the heart was not understood. 
On the other hand, the relation of the pulse to 
the heart was well recognized. Thus the Papyrus 
says : ' When the heart is diseased its work is 
imperfectly performed : the vessels proceeding 
from the heart become inactive, so that you 
cannot feel them ; they become full of air and 
water.' This latter statement is explained by 
the belief that the arteries contained air instead of 
J. H. Breasted, Recueil Champollion, 1922, p. 425. 
Papyrus Ebers, 99, I. W. Max Miiller discovered some 
pictures which he believed to represent surgical operations 
(2500 B. C.). Egyptological Researches, Carnegie Institution, 
Washington, 1906. Cf. also Walsh, J. American Med. Ass., 
Aix, PP- '593-5.


--- PAGE 117 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 77 
blood, an erroneous conclusion based on the 
condition observed at post-mortems. 
The conception of air reaching to every part 
of the body was familiar, although the air was 
supposed to travel by the arteries. The breath 
when entering the nostrils was believed to pene- 
trate to the heart and internal organs, and to 
supply the whole blood abundantly. 
Surgery was not highly developed. The knife 
and cautery were familiar, and simple operations 
were regularly performed on the head, neck and 
extremities, although surgeons never went so 
far as to open the abdomen. Fractures were 
treated with splints made of fibre, and many 
observations on mummies show that union with 
but little displacement was secured. More compli- 
cated operations were performed on the domestic 
animals than on man. 
The custom of mummification, although not 
connected with medicine either in purpose or 
practice, exercised a profound influence on the 
growth of that science. Not only did the opening 
of the abdomen and the removal of the viscera 
familiarize the Egyptians with the form and 
position of many internal organs, but it reconciled 
the people of Egypt for more than thirty centuries 
to the idea of cutting the dead human body. 
Thus it overcame the popular prejudice against


--- PAGE 118 ---
78 IMHOTEP 
systematic dissection which prevented Greek 
physicians from acquiring a knowledge of prac- 
tical anatomy in their own country. 
It is, however, in the realms of diagnosis and 
therapeutics that the most astounding advance 
had been made,indicating a real interest in disease. 
Knowledge was admittedly empiric, but the 
accumulated experience of remedies employed 
during many centuries had borne rich fruit. At 
least 15 distinct diseases of the abdomen, 11 of 
the bladder, 10 of the rectum and anus, 29 of the 
eyes, 6 of the ears, 18 of the skin were diagnosed 
and treated on definite principles. From the 
symptoms described in the papyri about 250 
different kinds of disease can be differentiated. 
Evidently the physicians who practised on the 
banks of the Nile possessed in some measure 
the scientific spirit, were capable of accurate 
clinical observations, and competent to co-ordinate 
and interpret symptoms. In fact so minute 
a classification of disease implies considerable 
scientific advance. 
Herodotus in the following quotation refers 
to the prevalence of specialism as a feature of 
Egyptian medicine : ' The art of medicine is 
thus divided : each physician applies himself 
to one disease only, and not more. All places 
abound in physicians ; some are for the eyes,


--- PAGE 119 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 79 
others for the head, others for the teeth, others 
for the intestines, and others for internal dis- 
orders.' Recently discovered medical papyri, 
however, throw considerable doubt on such 
specialism, every part of medicine being appar- 
ently practised by physicians. Moreover, the 
Westcar Papyrus indicates that midwifery was 
not regarded as a department of medicine as was 
formerly belie~ed.~ Veterinary medicine was 
not overlooked, and a papyrus (that of Kahun) 
devoted to that branch of the healing art has 
survived. Further evidence of the advanced state 
of Egyptian medicine may be found in the 
extensive materia medica which formed the 
armamentarium medici. 
The Edwin Smith Papyrus also reveals to us 
that there were in early Egypt medical practitioners 
who carried out dissection of the human body, 
organized their observations, and based con- 
clusions on facts they had observed. Evidently 
they acted on the principle nec silet mors. A large 
number of the drugs used several millennia ago 
still figure in modern Pharmacopoeias. The flora 
of Egypt was rich in medicinal herbs, as Homer 
1 Herodotus, ii. 84. The passages of medical interest in 
Herodotus have been collected by W. R. Dawson. Cf. 
Annals of Medical History, 1924, vi, NO. 3, pp. 183 ff. 
G. Maspero, Popular Stories of Ancient Egypt, 1916, 
PP. 36 ff.


--- PAGE 120 ---
points out: and evidently their therapeutic pro- 
perties were carefully studied and utilized. 
Amongst vegetable products frequently men- 
tioned are castor oil, opium, aloes, coriander, cara- 
way, gentian, turpentine, myrrh, juniper, fennel, 
henbane, linseed and peppermint ; but recent 
research throws much doubt, at least in some 
cases, on their correct identification. On the 
other hand, iron, soda, lime, salts of lead, sulphate 
of copper, magnesia were certainly amongst the 
mineral products in use. Other drugs were 
derived from the animal body, such as gall and 
blood from the ox, lion and hippopotamus, as well 
as fats from these and other animals ; even 
coprotherapy was ~ommon.~ It is interesting to 
observe that the use of the secretions and parts 
of the animal body as remedies, now a world- 
wide practice, was first introduced by Egyptian 
physicians .3 
' Earth the grain-giver yields herbs in the greatest plenty, 
many that are healing in the cup, and many baneful.' 
2 Many such fanciful remedies were prescribed in this 
country so recently as the seventeenth century and even later. 
Cf. the Pharmacopoeia of the Royal College of Physicians of 
London, A. D. 1651. 
3 According to Osler the use of magic and of the secretions 
and parts of the animal body as remedies form two world- 
wide methods of practice that found their earliest illustrations 
in ancient Egypt. W. Osler, The Evolution of Modem Medi- 
cine, p. 13.


--- PAGE 121 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 81 
It is pleasant to think that even in those far- 
off days opium was used to relieve poor suffering 
humanity, and Pliny states that among the herbs 
given to Helen of Troy was nepenthes, which 
caused ' oblivion of sorrow '. 
Even the forms in which remedies were 
administered showed some clinical insight into 
pathological processes. Gargles, salves, lozenges, 
inhalations, snuffs, suppositories, pills, capsules, 
enemata, fumigations, poultices and plasters were 
all employed. Ingredients were added for the 
purpose of disguising nauseous drugs. 
The large number of remedies and prescrip- 
tions mentioned in the Ebers Papyrus prove con- 
clusively that therapeutics were carefully studied. 
The same Papyrus shows that remedies were 
classified into special groups, amongst which 
were sedatives, narcotics, hypnotics, antispas- 
modic~, mydriatics, myotics, expectorants, tonics, 
emetics, carminatives, purgatives, astringents, 
cholagogues, anthelmintics, diuretics, diaphoretics, 
emmenagogues, oxytocics, galactagogues, haemo- 
statics, emollients, disinfectants, antidotes, and 
so forth. In brief, while scientific medicine was 
still in its infancy, empiric therapeutics were 
highly advanced. 
No sketch of the Egyptian knowledge of 
medicine, however, is complete without reference 
3121 M


--- PAGE 122 ---
82 IMHOTEP 
to the prevailing faith in magic. Magic was the 
mother of medicine and never ceased to influence 
its offspring. In fact any eulogy of Egyptian 
therapeutics is heavily discounted when the 
ever-present accompaniment of magical formulas, 
amulets and incantations is taken into con- 
sideration. Disease was generally attributed, 
not to a disturbance of normal functions, but to 
a malign spirit or god who had entered the body 
and attacked it furiously. Unless this evil spirit 
could be expelled before irreparable damage had 
been done, recovery was hopeless. The evil 
spirits or demons insinuated themselves into the 
individual by the nostrils, mouth or ears, and 
once inside devoured his vital substance. The 
character and termination of the resulting disease 
depended on the progress made in the destructive 
activity of the invading spirit, its virulence 
depending also on times and seasons of the year, 
on lucky and unlucky days and similar contin- 
gencies. The physician-priest-magician who 
treats the sick person must first of all discover 
the nature and if possible the name of the evil 
spirit in possession, and then seek to expel it by 
every means in his power. He must be expert 
in magic, knowing suitable incantations, and 
skilful in making amulets adapted to the occa- 
sion. As opportunity presents he must resort to


--- PAGE 123 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 83 
invocations and impressive ritual. Material 
remedies must also be tried, and recourse had 
to the rich pharmacopoeia which the experience 
of centuries had accumulated. The best practi- 
tioners were in some measure rationalistic, and 
carefully diagnosed between those cases for which 
magic and exorcisms were most suited, those for 
which incubation in the temple promised the 
best results, and those which called for incanta- 
tions accompanied by drugs? 
The following is a specimen of an incantation 
which had to be recited during the preparation 
of a medicine in order to endow it with the right 
power : ' That Isis might make free, make free. 
That Isis might make Horus free from all evil 
that his brother Set had done to him when he 
slew his father Osiris. 0 Isis, great enchantress, 
free me, release me from all evil red things, from 
the fever of the god and the fever of the goddess, 
from death, and death from pain, and the pain 
which comes over me ; as thou hast freed, as thou 
hast released thy son Horus, whilst I enter into 
the fire and go forth from the water ', &c2 
A different formula was recited as the invalid 
swallowed his dose : ' Welcome, remedy, wel- 
come, which destroyest the trouble in this my 
G. Maspero, Life in Ancient Egypt and Assyria, p. I 19. 
Papyrus Ebers, i. 12 ff.


--- PAGE 124 ---
84 IMHOTEP 
heart and in these my limbs. The magic of Horus 
is victorious in the remedy.' 
Another common magical practice was to write 
down an incantation on papyrus, to wash it off 
into the medicine, and then to administer the 
latter to the patient, as is still commonly done in 
Eastern countries2 Instead of such a simple 
phrase as ' Prescription for curing such a disease ' 
the expression ' Prescription for expelling or 
terrifying such a disease ' would be adopted, with 
the evident implication of demoniacal possession. 
This view of the nature of disease naturally 
had a fundamental and blighting influence on 
therapeutics. Disease caused by the pernicious 
influence of an indwelling spirit must be combated 
by magic, incantations and spells, although 
remedies might also relieve symptoms and abolish 
pain. Rational therapeutics and magic were thus 
closely interwoven in the practice of the magician- 
physician, who had to distinguish between diseases 
' 
curable by drugs and those requiring psycho- 
therapy. In the early days superstitious and 
sacerdotal measures probably predominated, while 
as time passed on exact observation and thera- 
peutics more and more gained the upper hand, 
sorcery yielding to science. The choice between 
Papyrus Ebers, ii. 1-2. 
W. Max Miiller, Egyptian Mythology, p. 199.


--- PAGE 125 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 85 
theurgical or rational methods of treatment would 
also largely depend on the philosophical views of 
the physician, and we have evidence that much 
less magic was used in some cases than in others. 
Probably magic ceremonies were resorted to as 
a last resource when the skill of the physician 
was baffled. The malade imaginaire was doubtless 
as common a phenomenon as he is to-day ; many 
faith cures took place at famous shrines. 
It may seem strange that such an apparently 
absurd occult force as magic retained a potent 
influence through all the centuries of ancient 
Egyptian history. On the other hand, it must 
be remembered that sick persons, even if they 
belong to the educated class, have some excuse 
for fantastic actions and beliefs. They are ab- 
normally emotional and suggestible, and readily 
clutch at any remedy, even if irrational, that 
presents itself, especially if powerfully supported 
by tradition and authority. As is well known, 
the benefits conferred by medicaments depend 
largely on the confidence felt in the physician 
and in his prescriptions. 
We cannot doubt that Imhotep, with his wide 
outlook on life, his experience of men and human 
affairs, and his interest in astronomy and other 
sciences, inclined to the side of scientific medicine. 
Indeed, as Erman says, ' the son of the goddess


--- PAGE 126 ---
IMHOTEP 
Sechrnet, the demigod ImhGtep, was in later 
times considered to be the creator of medical 
knowledge '.' 
The advanced state of hygiene also proves 
a high stage of civilization. The Egyptians 
boasted that they were the healthiest of all mortals, 
and regulated the sanitation of the town, of the 
dwelling, and even of the person, while the priests 
set up a high standard of cleanliness by their 
frequent ablutions and the immaculate purity 
of their ~lothing.~ The homes of the people 
were fumigated from time to time to keep them 
sweet, suitable precautions being taken to prevent 
the annoyance of wasps and mosquitoes. There 
was also some knowledge of antiseptics, since the 
virtues of extreme dryness and of certain chemicals 
like nitre, common salt and alcohol as preserva-. 
tives were recognized. Evidently the importance 
of sanitation was well understood. Even in those 
far-off days experience had taught the lesson that 
6y~aive~v Gp~arov 2miv. The value of preventive 
medicine was also well recognized. The Egyp- 
A. Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt, p. 357. 
In order to preserve their purity of body, the priests 
washed themselves fkm head to foot in cold water twice 
every day and twice every night.


--- PAGE 127 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN MEDICINE 87 
tians probably knew that the majority of diseases 
proceed from indigestion and excess of eating, 
and these evils they avoided or combated by 
frequent days of abstinence, by emetics, gentle 
aperients, and other means of relieving the system. 
The superiority of prophylaxis as compared with 
therapeutics was evidently appreciated. ' The 
whole manner of life ', says Diodorus, 'was so 
evenly ordered that it would appear as though it 
had been arranged according to the rules of health 
by a learned physician, rather than by a law-giver.' 
These few facts will suffice to indicate in outline 
the extraordinary interest that was taken in 
remedies in ancient Egypt, and the progress that 
had been made. But it cannot be claimed that 
Egyptian medicine ever developed into a scientific 
system. Rather should its stage be described as 
one in which superstition and science struggled 
for mastery. Which indeed of us can say that 
this perennial conflict has, even to-day, been 
finally won by either combatant ?


--- PAGE 128 ---
HONOUR TO WHOM HONOUR IS DUE 
S 
TRANGE it is that the claims of Imhotep to 
be recognized as the tutelary deity of medicine 
have been so neglected. Many centuries before 
the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt: long 
before the recognition of Asklepios by the Greeks 
as their legendary god of medicine: long before 
the days of Homer: long before the birth of 
Hippocrates,4 there lived in Egypt a magician- 
physician so famous for his skill in healing disease 
that he became recognized eventually as the 
Egyptian god of medicine. To him surely 
belongs the highest place in our hagiology ; to 
him should physicians all the world over look up 
The Exodus from Egypt is believed to have taken place 
ca. 1230 B. C. Cf. Encyclopaedia Britannica, iii, p. 868. 
The cult of Asklepios appears not to go back farther than 
the time of Homer when Asklepios was still but a Thessalian 
hero and clever leech, and the father of two heroes, Machaon 
and Podaleirus, who fought before Troy and became famous 
physicians. And yet on the strength of such a trivial claim 
Asklepios has been for centuries our emblematic god of 
medicine, the reputed healer of men. His figure appears in 
countless diplomas, coins and seals associated with hospitals 
and medical societies in every civilized country. 
Ca. 850 B. c. * Ca. 460 B.C.


--- PAGE 129 ---
HONOUR DUE TO IMHOTEP 89 
as the patron spirit of the ars medendi, as the 
emblematic god of medicine. 
The reason for the neglect of Imhotep doubt- 
less lies in the fact that it is only since Champollion 
deciphered the hieroglyphs about a century ago 
that the civilization of ancient Egypt has become 
known to the learned world ; until then all con- 
temporary records, whether depicted in the 
temples or tombs, or inscribed on papyri, were 
undecipherable. Meanwhile Greek and Roman 
scholarship had for many centuries been familiar, 
with the result that the mythological lore relating 
to the classical deity of the healing art has 
become interwoven with the history of medicine 
in all civilized countries to the exclusion of the 
much older Egyptian deities. 
Surely the time has come to do justice to the 
' 
venerable figure described in the above pages, 
and to elevate Imhotep to the place of honour 
which is his due? 
The Reading Pathological Society, the oldest Pathological 
Society in the United Kingdom, has recently adopted Im- 
hotep, the Egyptian deity of medicine, as its Badge. This 
Badge shows the figure of the god executed in blue enamel 
and enclosed in a gold frame, and was presented to the 
Society by Sir Stewart Abram, as a souvenir of his Presidency. 
This is probably the first recognition by a Medical Society of 
the claims of Imhotep to be recognized as the patron spirit 
of the healing art.


--- PAGE 130 ---
THE EPILOGUE 
W 
E have now completed the story of the 
venerable physician, whom Sir W. Osler 
calls ' Dr.' Imhotep, from the time of his dramatic 
appearance as vizier and magician-physician of 
King Zoser to his elevation to the rank of one of 
the full Egyptian deities. The contemplation 
of a career so varied in its pursuits, so notable in 
its achievements, so trusted by suffering humanity, 
so glorified in its final apotheosis must call forth 
a tribute of admiration. The worship of Imhotep 
extended well into the Roman period, at any rate 
as late as the fourth century of our era, so that 
his career, one of unique interest, extends over 
a period of about three thousand years. His name 
deserves to be held in everlasting remembrance 
as one of the few men of genius recorded in the 
history of ancient Egypt ; he is one of the fixed 
stars in the Egyptian firmament. His influence 
still remained dominant when the Egyptian 
civilization had long passed its meridian, and the 
country had become the vassal first of Greece and 
eventually of Rome. The grasti of the rich 
Greeks and Romans who visited the ruined


--- PAGE 131 ---
EPILOGUE 9 1 
temples and tombs still record the homage paid 
to our hero and the widespread faith in his power 
to heal the sick devotees who flocked to his 
shrines. 
During the Greek and Roman periods of 
Egyptian history, Imhotep, alias Imouthes, be- 
came more and more closely identified with 
Asklepios or Aesculapius the Greek and after- 
wards the Roman god of medicine. Ultimately 
indeed Imhotep was entirely merged in the latter 
deity.' 
In Egypt, as everywhere else, ' the old order 
changeth, giving place to new.' In the course 
of the intervening centuries time's eroding finger 
and the vandalism of man have wrought strange 
transformations in the temples where the beloved 
Imhotep formerly reigned as the beneficent deity 
who gave life and health to the sick and suffering. 
His chief temple at Memphis is now a scene of 
desolation. Where once the sacred aisles and 
pillars echoed to the march of priest and wor- 
shipper, all is silence, save for bats and owls 
and scarabs. The impressive ceremonial, the 
magic rites and incantations that ministered to 
the healing art have ceased for ever. 
No longer do the seekers after health crave 
permission to sleep within the precincts of his 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, xxiv, p. 681.


--- PAGE 132 ---
IMHOTEP 
temple in the hope that the deity would appear 
to them in dreams and reveal the panacea for 
their sickness. No longer do devoted patients 
sing and dance before his shrine with hearts 
bursting with gratitude for a new lease of health 
and life. 
The smaller sanctuary at Philae is submerged 
in a vast reservoir destined to bring material 
blessings to the country in lieu of the healing 
virtues formerly associated with the temple. The 
glory has also departed from the other shrines 
linked with Imhotep's worship which have been 
alluded to above. 
Let us, however, be thankful that even to this 
day there survive some material and visible 
memorials of the immortal Egyptian physician. 
The terraced Pyramid of Sakkarah, the ruins at 
Philae, at Deir-el-Bahari and elsewhere will long 
remain as imposing reliquiae recalling the part 
he played on the stage of history ; and even when 
pyramid and temple have crumbled into dust his 
name will still be held in undying remembrance. 
Deep are the footprints he has left on the sands 
of time, and physicians all over the world will 
ever revere him as one of the pioneers of their 
ancient profession, as one whose name ' on fame's 
eternal1 beade-roll is worthie to be fyled '. Medice 
immortalis, in perpetuum ave !


--- PAGE 133 ---
APPENDIXES 
A. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
BIRCH, S. 'TWO Egyptian Tablets of the Ptolemaic 
Period.' Archaeologia, vol. xxxix. 
BISSING, W. V. Deutsche LiteratwZeitung, 1902, col. 2330. 
BREASTED, J. H. A History of Egypt, 1909, p. 112. 
British Museum Publications. Guides to the Egyptian 
Galleries. * 
BRUGSCH, H. Rel* und Mythologie dm alten Aegypter, 
1890, p. 526.* 
Dictionnuire Gkographique, p. 1099. 
Die Biblischen Sieben Jahe Hungermoth, 1891 
(with facsimile of Inscription). 
A History of Egypt under the Phmaohs, 1879, ii, p. 299. 
BUDGE, E. A. W. The Gods of the Egyptians, i, p. 522.* 
CATON, R. The Harveian Oration,2 1904.* 
DARESSY, G. Catalogue des Antipuitks I?,gyptiennes du 
Mude du Caire : Statues de Divinitks, i. 17 ; ii. 
PI. IV, v.* 
ERMAN, A. Handbook of Egyptian Religio7, pp. 76,173 .* 
FOUCART, G. ' Imhotep.' Revue de l'Hktoire des 
Rel&im, 1903, xlviii, p. 362. 
GAUTHIER, H. ' Un Nouveau Monument du Dieu Im- 
hotep.' Bulletin de I'Institut Frangais d'Archdo- 
logie Orientale, 1918, vol. xiv. 
1 Volumes marked with an * contain illustrations of 
Imhotep. Less important references are given in the notes 
ap ended to the text. 
l~lso published in the Lancet, lgoq, i, p. 1769 ; British 
Medical Journal, 1904, i, p. 1473.


--- PAGE 134 ---
94 IMHOTEP 
GRENFELL, B. P., and HUNT, A. S. Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 
1915, Part XI, p. 221. 
Lancet, Th, 1915, ii, p. 1204. 
JAYNE, W. A. The Healing Gods of Ancient Civilisation., 
1925, p. 62.* 
LANZONI, R. V. DiXiOnario di Mitologia Egiza, ii, 
p. 151, P1. L.* 
LEPSIUS, C. R. Denkmiiler aus Aegypten U. ~thiopien, ix, 
Part IV, P1. 15, 18, 19, 25.* 
MASPERO, G. ' La 1110 Dynastie ManCthonienne et le 
Dieu Imouthb.' gtudes de Mythologie 'et 
d'ArcMologie Bgyptiennes, 191 6, viii, pp. I 24 ff. 
NAVILLE, E. Temple of D& el Bahari, Part V, p. 11, 
P1. cXL1x.* 
PAULY, A. F. Real-Encyclopadie der Classischen Alter- 
tumswissenschaft, 1916, ix, col. 1213. 
PI ERR ET,^. LePanthdonggyptien, 1881,pp.77,86,101.* 
ROSCHER, W. H. Lexicon der Griechischen und Rhischm 
Mythologie, ii (i), p. 125. 
SETHE, K. Imhotep, der Asklepios der Aegypter. Unter- 
suchungen xur Geschichte und Altertumskunde 
Aegyptens, ii. 
STRAUSS and TORNEY. Entstehung und Geschichte des 
Altagyptischer Gotterglaubes, 1889, i, pp. 426-7. 
WIEDEMANN, A. Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, I 897, 
P. 139.* 
WILKINSON, J. G. Manners and Customs of the Ancient 
Egyptians, 1878, iii, p. 204.*


--- PAGE 135 ---
APPENDIXES 
B. THE NAME IMHOTEP AND ITS 
VARIANTS l 
The name Imhotep may be spelt either ]hen, 
44 A- +D or ]z and may be transliterated Ij-m-htp. 
The usually adopted modern vocalization is Imhotep, 
which the Greeks rendered as 'Ipov'Brls. 
Personal names ending in the word htp and com- 
pounded with the names of certain, but not with all, 
gods, were common in Egypt in all periods. Thus we 
find RE-hotep, Ptah-hotep, and similar compounds with 
the divine names Amen, Aah, Khons, Khnum, Mut, 
Min, Mont (Menthu), and others.2 In these names the 
word htp is the ' pseudo-participle '-or ' old perfective ' 
tense of the verb &p ; the names therefore mean ' Re is 
satisfied ', ' Ptah is satisfied', &C., and they are more 
correctly rendered-Re-btpe or Re-btp, &c. The verb 
htp means to satisfy, and its use as a noun conveys the 
notion ' that which satisfies ', ' satisfier '. Its commonest 
use as a noun is with the meaning ' offerings ', as these, 
pm excellence, in a primitive concept, are what bring 
satisfaction to a god. Its almost equally common signifi- 
cance ' peace ' is derived from the same series of ideas 
and refers to the state of the god's mind when due 
offerings have been made to him. 
The name Imhotep, however, is quite differently 
constituted from the above God + htp compounds. In 
this case htp is a noun and means ' peace ' or ' satis- 
1 I am indebted to Mr. W. R. Dawson for some notes on 
the name Imhotep. 
2 Certain divine names are never found combined in this 
way, e. g. Osiris, Isis, Nephthys.


--- PAGE 136 ---
96 IMHOTEP 
faction '. The translation ' he who comes in peace ' is 
the generally accepted one, although 4 may be either 
the participle ' He who comes ' or the imperative 
' Come '. The em or m can be either the preposition 
' in ' or a particle meaning ' as ' or ' in guise of '. The 
name therefore means either ' one who comes in peace ' 
or ' a comer in peace '.l 
The Egyptian hieroglyphs, like most of the Semitic 
scripts, do not indicate vowels, nor indeed do they 
always accurately represent the consonantal skeleton. For 
these reasons there is no certainty how words were 
actually sounded, and a multiform transliteration, largely 
based on conjecture, has resulted. The following list 
of variants, which does not profess to be complete, will 
suffice to indicate the existing confusion and the urgency 
of some international agreement on the ~ubject.~ 
Aiemapt S. Birch, Egypt from the Earliest Times to 
300 B.C., p. 29. 
Aiemhetp Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, 1878, iii, 
p. 204. 
Names beginning with g are not uncommon in the Old 
and Middle Kingdoms, e.'g. 4244 I-MERY ' come, be- 
loved ', g& (I I.M.SNB ' come in health '. 
2 Variants in which only small differences occur, such as 
the use of either the simple ' h ' or the guttural ' h ', have 
not been included. Sethe discusses in detail the question of 
vocalization and accepts Imhotep as a satisfactory representa- 
tion (Sethe, Imhotep, p. I). 
In the Catalogue of the Demotic Papyri in the John Rylands 
Library, iii, p. 437, F. L1. Griffith gives the ways in which 
' Imhoter, ' was written in the time of PsammCtik I, Ahmasi 11, 
Darius, and the early and late Ptolemies.


--- PAGE 137 ---
APPENDIXES 97 
Aiemhotep 
I-em-hotep 
Iemhotpe 
Ihotep 
Imhitpou 
Im-hetep 
Imhoten 
Imhotep 
Imhothb 
Imhotp 
Imhotpe 
Imhotpou 
Imhotpii 
ImhoutpC 
Imhutep 
Imopth 
Imothts 
Imutep 
Iu-em-hept 
Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, 1878, iii, 
p. 204. 
Budge, An Egyptian Hieroglyphic Diction- 
ary, P. 30. 
Petrie, A History of Egypt, i, p. 30. 
Maspero, gtudes de Mythologie et d'Archb- 
Zogie Sgyptbnes, 1916, viii, p. 124. 
Breasted, Ancient Times, 1914, p. 737. 
Budge, Gods of the Ancient Egyptians, i, 
p. 522. 
Caton, Harveian Oration, 1904, p. 5. 
Weigall, History of the Pharaohs, i, p. 6. 
Pauly , Real-Encyclopadie, ix, p. 1214. 
Maspero, gtudes, &C., viii, p. 124. 
Wiedemann, ~~~ptische Geschichte, 1880, 
p. 220. 
Wall, Sex and Sex Worship, p. 406. 
Encyclopaedia Britannb, xxiv, p. 681. 
Revue de l'Histoiredes ReEigions,xlviii, p. 362. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, xiii, p. 245. 
Encyclopaedia of Rel%ion and Ethics, xii, 
p. 780. 
Maspero, Life in Ancient Egypt and Asyia, 
p. 120. 
Maspero, Dawn of Civilization, p. 105. 
Maspero, gtudes de Mythologie et d'Archko- 
logie ggyptiennes, 1916, viii, p. 124. 
Sethe, Die Aegyptologie, p. 7. (Der Alte 
Orient, 1923, xxiii.) 
Records of the Past, iv, p. 117. 
Revue de Z'Histoire des Rel@ns, xlviii, p. 367. 
Sethe, Imhotep, p. 12. 
A. B. Gosse, Civilization of the Ancient 
Egyptians, p. I I 2. 
0


--- PAGE 138 ---
98 IMHOTEP 
Yemhatpe H. R. Hall, The Observer, Jan. 24, 1926. 
Pmhetep Lady Amherst, A Sketch of Egyptian His- 
tory, p. 68. 
Y@6tep A. Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt, 1894, 
p. 386. 
Ymhothphe H. R. Hall, The Observer, Jan. 24, 1926. 
C. THE PEDIGREE OF IMHOTEP 
In the Wadi Hammamat, the valley which runs down 
from Coptos to the Red Sea, the architect Khnum-ib-re 
(Chnem-eb-re), who between the years 495-491 B. C.' 
was occupied in quarrying stones for the Public Works 
Department, has left us an inscription which records 
the names of his ancestors, and in which Kanofer the 
father of Imhotep appears first and Imhotep holds the 
second place. The pedigree contains a list of twenty-five 
architects, all of whom are consecutively fathers and sons. 
Moreover, they are all master-builders.2 
In this pedigree the earliest known ancestor is de- 
scribed as ' the chief of works, both of the South- and of 
of the North-land, governor of the capital and vizier, 
chief ritual priest of Zoser, the King of Upper and Lower 
Egypt, the son of Kanofer, chief of works of the South- 
and of the North-land '. 
This master-builder, or chief of all the King's works, 
who was also chief ritual priest of King Zoser, must 
almost certainly have been Imhotep. The office of 
Master of the King's Works was evidently held in high 
honour, as was indeed the building industry in Egypt. 
i. e. from the 26th to the 30th year of the reign of Darius. 
a Breasted uses the following expressions to indicate this 
office : ' master-builder ', ' chief of works ', ' leader of works ', 
' master of works ', ' overseer of works '. Cf. his Ancient 
Records of Egypt, vol. v, Index V.


--- PAGE 139 ---
APPENDIXES 99 
The following pedigree is reproduced from the list as 
given by Brugsch.1 
KA NOFER : Architect of S. and N. Egypt. 
1 
IMH~TEP : Architect of S. and N. Egypt ; 
chief burgomaster, a high func- 
tionary of King Z'a-sar (lived 
in the time of the IIIrd Dy- 
nasty). 
R'A-HOTEP : Prophet of Amon-ra, king of the 
l 
gods ; secret-seer of Heliopolis ; 
architect of Upper and Lower 
Egypt ; chief burgomaster. 
BOK-EN-KHUNSU : Chief burgomaster. 
I 
I 
UZA-KHUNSU : Architect ; chief burgomaster. 
I 
I 
NOFER-MENNU : Architect : chief burgomaster. 
I 
MI (0; AI ?) : Architect ; chief burgomaster. 
1 
SI-UER-~NEN-HIB : Architect. 
I 
PEPI : Architect ; chief burgomaster. 
I 
AMON-HIR-h-MESH'A : znd, 3rd and 4th prophet and high- 
I 
priest of Amon, king of the gods ; 
chief burgomaster. 
I 
HOR-EM-SAF : Chief burgomaster. 
I 
l H. Bmgsch-Bey, A Hisfury of Eg~t wrde* the Phmaohs, 
1879, ii, p. 299. In this list, in order to avoid confusion, 
Brugsch's spelling of the personal names is retained, even 
when it is inconsistent with that employed elsewhere in this 
volume.


--- PAGE 140 ---
IOO IhlHOTEP 
MERMER : Architect ; commander. 
I 
HOR-$M-SAF : Architect ; commander. 
I 
ZA-HIB : Architect ; commander. 
I 
NASSAUNU : Architect ; commander. 
I 
i 
ZA-HIB : Architect ; commander. 
I 
I 
NASSHUNU : Architect ; commander. 
I 
ZA-HIB : Architect ; commander. 
I 
NASSHUNU : Architect ; commander. 
I 
ZA-N-HIBU : Architect of Upper and Lower 
I Egypt ; commander. 
I 
NASSHUNU : Architect. 
I UAH-AB-R'A-RAN-UER : Architect. 
I 
'ANKH-PSAMTHIK : Architect of Upper and Lower 
I Egypt. 
A'mMA SI-NIT : Architect of Upper and Lower 
(m. Sit-Nofer-tum) Egypt. 
I 
KHNUM-AB-R'A : Chief minister of works for the 
whole country ; architect of 
Upper and Lower Egypt in the 
27th to 30th years of King 
Darius I (about 490 B.c.).


--- PAGE 141 ---
APPENDIXES 
D. STATUETTES OF IMHOTEP AS 
MEDICAL DEMIGOD 
In most museums of Egyptology may be seen one or 
more bronze statuettes representing a somewhat diminu- 
tive dolichocephaIic person who is evidently a learned 
scribe and who has on his knees an unrolled papyrus 
which he is reading attentively.1 
These statuettes, usually from 12 to 20 cm. high, repre- 
sent Imhotep as demigod, and belong to the Saite or Greek 
period.2 The best of these statuettes are executed with 
unusual grace and delicacy, the face being well moulded 
and an excellent example of saitic art. Amongst the 
finest images are those at Cairo, the British Museum and 
the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum in London ; 
there are also excellent specimens at Paris, Berlin, 
Marseilles and Leiden. Many figures are enriched 
with gold, silver, and precious stones ; in other cases the 
inscriptions are inlaid with gold. 
Although most of the statuettes are in solid bronze, 
some are made of glazed ware, steatite, imitation lapis- 
lazuli, electron, basalt or marble ; at Cairo two speci- 
mens are of bronze with wooden seats (acacia and cedar). 
There are also amulet figures of glazed ware in London 
A statuette in the Cairo Museum (No. 38063) shows 
a scribe's palette lying on the papyrus near the left hand. 
Cf. Daressy, Statues a!e DivinitLs, i. 
' All the bronze figures of the god belong to a period 
subsequent to the XXIInd Dynasty.' E. A. Budge, Gods of 
the Egyptians, i, p. 525. According to Sethe (Imhotep, p. I) 
these figures date from the period 700-332 B. C. 
A basalt statue 45 cm. high is preserved (ca. 660 B. C.) 
at the Louvre in the Salle des Monuments Religieux. 
At the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum.


--- PAGE 142 ---
IMHOTEP 
and in Liverpool. The costume worn is usually that of 
a priest, a finely pleated apron hanging down over the 
knees and legs ; at other times the latter are bare. In 
one specimen at Cairo the legs are bandaged ; occasion- 
ally there is nudity.2 A closely fitted cap usually covers 
the head, although in other cases this is bald. A hand- 
some necklace with four or more rows of beads is worn 
in many instances ; occasionally a pectoral is suspended 
by a cord. Although the sitting posture is usual, a few 
standing figures are known, where the roll of papyrus is 
held in the hand or under the arm. In rare cases the 
right hand grasps a pen, the left a roll of papyrus. In 
one instance a cynocephalus ape is held up.3 
At the Cairo Museum of Antiquities are exhibited 
twenty-one statuettes, some of them of a highly artistic 
character. The British Museum possesses ten statuettes 
in a sitting posture. At the Wellcome Historical Medical 
Museum are thirty-three specimens, including two standing 
ones. The Ashmolean Museum at Oxford possesses three 
statuettes. At Berlin are three seated figures and one 
standing. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
possesses six standing images and one sitting. The Louvre 
has about fifty specimens. Turin possesses five statuettes, 
four in bronze and one in blue glazed ware. At the 
Hermitage Museum, Petrograd, there are nine bronze 
images and one of glazed ware. 
In many cases dedicatory inscriptions are added on the 
base, giving the name of the donor, who was probably 
G. Maspero, The Dawn of Civilization, p. 105. 
A. Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Rel*ion, p. 174. 
S As Imhotep was regarded as the god of learning he 
became associated with the animals sacred to Thoth, e.g. 
the ibis and cynocephalic ape. In later times he absorbed 
the duties of Thoth, as ' scribe of the gods '.


--- PAGE 143 ---
APPENDIXES 103 
a sick person seeking health, or a grateful patient who had 
been cured. Thus the statuettes are votive in character. 
The following is the inscription on one of the figures 
at Cairo, and gives the name of the donor followed by 
that of his father : ' Imhotep son of Ptah, born of Khre- 
duonkh : Imhotep endowed with life ; Penek son of 
Uahibra.' Another inscription at Cairo (No. 38064) 
includes a specific prayer asking for ' great length of 
days and a great and happy old age '. 
At the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum two 
figures bear the following inscriptions : ' Mes-son of 
Pedu-Ptah ' (Ptolemaic Period, ca. 300 B. C.) and ' Petea- 
mensamtau '. At the British Museum, one figure is 
dedicated to Imhotep by Ptah-mm, and another by a de- 
votee who is also called Imhotep. In the same collection 
is a figure of the god in the form of an ape reading a 
papyrus. This is probably a survival of animal worship, 
the ape being sacred to Thoth. At University College, 
London, is a figure dedicated by Wenamon son of Ta- 
Khred-Khons. At New York two open papyrus scrolls 
on the lap of the images have the following inscriptions : 
' Imhotep, son of Ptah, born of Khreduonkh ' and 
' Imhotep, son of the living Ptah '. One figure at Berlin 
(No. 2517) bears the inscription : ' Every scribe pours 
out to you a libation from his water bowl.' 
The form of seat occupied by sitting figures is usually 
plain ; in other cases elaborate mouldings are added, 
while in one of the finest examples at the Wellcome 
Historical Medical Museum the top of the seat is adorned 
with a row of about twenty uraei. 
The human appearance of the figure represented in 
these statuettes is regarded by Erman as proving that 
1 Kiinigliche Museen zu Berlin, Ausftihrliches Verzeichniss 
der Aegyptischen Alteriiimer, p. 299.


--- PAGE 144 ---
IMHOTEP 
they belong to the period in which Imhotep was still 
regarded as a demigod and had not yet attained to the 
full status of deity.1 These bronze figures form a striking 
contrast with his pictures dating from the Graeco-Roman 
period, when the deified man wears the costume and 
beard of a full deity, and holds the symbol of life in his 
hand. 
E. MURAL FIGURES OF IMHOTEP AS DEITY 
On the walls of various Egyptian and Nubian temples 
may be seen mural representations of the deity Imhotep 
carrying the uas sceptre and the ankh. In some cases 
the god is in a standing, in other cases in a sitting, posture. 
All these mural figures belong to the later Dynasties 
and correspond to the period of deification referred to 
above. 
The figures are usually accompanied by inscriptions 
addressed to Imhotep. For instance, the inscription 
attached to the picture in the temple of Kasr el-Agouz 
referred to below reads thus : ' Son of Ptah, beneficent 
god, begotten by the god of the South Wall: giver of life, 
who bestows gifts on those he loves, who listens [? to those - 
who call upon him], who provides remedies for all 
diseases.' 
I. THEBES 
(a) Karnak. 
In the temple of Ptah and Hathor at Karnak, Imhotep 
with Ptah and his consort Hathor are seen sculptured on 
the walls and worshipped by King Tuthrnosis 111. 
A. Erman, Aegypten, ii, p. 477 ; Sethe, Imhotep, p. 4. 
2 i. e. Ptah. 
D. Mallet, Le Km El-Agoliz, 1909, p. 38.


--- PAGE 145 ---
APPENDIXES 
Arnenophis, the son of Hapi, was also worshipped in this 
temple.1 
Ptolemy IV Philopator I, 222 B. C. 
(b) Deir-eI-Bahan. 
In the temple of Hatshepsowet a standing figure of 
Imhotep is seen by the side of that of the deified sage 
Amenophis? who was also regarded as a patron of healing. 
Ptolemy IX Euergetes 11, 147 B. c. 
(c) Medinet Habu. 
In this temple Imhotep is represented in company with 
several other gods of healing. Thus there is Thoth, 
a deity enjoying the reputation both of a magician and 
of a god of medicine. Another god of healing, named 
Teos, was also honoured. Lastly comes Amenophis. 
Imhotep, Amenophis, and Teos were all deified sages 
and appear as paredroi of Thoth, the Hermes of Egypt.3 
(d) Deir el-Medineh. 
In this small though graceful mortuary temple the 
deified Imhotep is again represented by the side of the 
deified sage Amenophis. The two figures may be seen 
1 A. E. WeigaI1, Guide to the Antipities of Upper Egfit, 
1913, p. 106. Cf. also G. Maspero, Egypt, Ancient Sites and 
Modern Scenes, p. 14 ; Lepsius, Denkmah, ix, Part IV, 
P1.15 d. Imhotep appears only as a god with the Memphite 
deities, the Osiris group, and Amenophis, son of Hapi ; 
never with the Sun-deities. It will be observed that in most 
of the figures here described Amenophis appears as a sort 
of pendant to Imhotep. This association is somewhat sur- 
prising seeing the great dynastic interval between the two 
men. On the other hand, both were famous sages as well 
as architects and had filled the office of vizier to their respective 
kings. Cf. Piehl, 2. f. Agyptische Sprache, 1887, xxv, p. 117. 
E. Naville, D& el-Bahari, Part V, p. 11 and PI. cxtxx. 
Cf. also J. of Egyptian Archaeology, 1914, i, p. 96. 
Lepsius, Denkmak, ix, Part IV, Pi. 32 c; P. Boylan, 
Thoth, the Hermes of Egypt, 1922, pp. 166-8. 
3121 P


--- PAGE 146 ---
IMHOTEP 
on two pillars with elaborate capitals just beyond the 
first court.1 This temple was begun by Ptolemy IV, 
continued by Ptolemy VII, and finished by Ptolemy IX. 
Hathor was regarded as its tutelary deity. 
(e) Kasr el-Agouz. 
In this temple, which was erected to the god Thoth and 
is sometimes called after that deity, Imhotep is represented 
as seated behind King Ptolemy Euergetes I1 and Thoth. 
Imhotep is seen wearing a short shenti like that of Thoth, 
while Amenophis the son of Hapi sitting behind Imhotep 
is wearing the longer shenti of cerem~ny.~ 
Ptolemy IX Euergetes 11, I 16 B. C. 
Brugsch (2. f. ~~~ptische Sprache, 1887, xxv, p. I 17) 
states that Imhotep with Amenophis as a sort of pendant 
also appears on the wall of the temple of El-Assasif, 
a short distance to the E. of the temple of Deir-el-Bahari. 
The large-scale map of the Theban Necropolis, however, 
published by the Survey Department, 1924, shows no 
temple at Assasif. 
On the Pylon of Imhotep's temple at Philae are five 
figures of the god, three of which are standing and two 
sitting. In one instance King Ptolemy V is offering 
incense to the god ; in another the same king is offering 
an image of the goddess Maat ; in a third he is offering 
wine to Imhotep as well as to other deities. In the fourth 
case the king offering incense and libations, while in 
l A. E. Weigall, Guide to the Antiquities of Upper Egypt, 
1913, p. 277 ; Baedeker, Egypt, 1914, p. 317, 
D. Mallet, Le Km El-Agoriz, 1909, p. 38. Other reliefs 
of Imhotep probably also existed in this temple. Cf. Mallet, 
I.c., p. 35.


--- PAGE 147 ---
APPENDIXES 107 
the last case he is seen grasping a club and standing in 
the presence of the god.' 
At the entrance to the temple is another standing figure 
of the god Imhotep associated with Isis and Osiris and 
belonging to the same period.2 
Ptolemy V Epiphanes, 205 B. c. 
Lastly, in another part of the same temple at Philae 
the god is shown standing and associated with Isis and 
Harpocrates, all three being worshipped by eight cyno- 
cephalic apes.3 
Ptolemy V11 Philometer I, 173 B. c. 
A representation of Imhotep occurs on the inner west 
aspect of the surrounding wall of the temple of Edfu. 
He is wearing the leopard skin, as was usual for chief 
priests, and reading from a scroll the history of a civil 
war waged between the adherents of Horus and those of 
Set, which culminates in the two great defeats of the latter 
at Heliopolis and Ha or Hat.4 
It is from the mythological fight between Homs and 
Set, in which Horus lost an eye, that is derived the sign 
which still figures at the head of our present-day medical 
prescriptions, viz. v, and which in its original form 
resembled a human eye.5 
l Lepsius, Denkmcih, ix, Part IV, PI. 18. Cf. also 
H. G. Lyons, Report on the Island and Temples of Phi&, 
P1. X ; A. E. Weigall, Guide to the Antiquities of Upper Egypt, 
1913, p. 475. According to Sethe (Imhotep, p. 4), the mother of Imhotep, Khreduonkh, is seen with a human head and the 
hood of a vulture and double feathers. 
Lepsius, Denkmah, ix, Part IV, PI. 19. 
S Lepsius, 1. C., PI. 25. 
4 A. E. Weigall, A Hhtory of the Phmaohs, i, p: 6. 
6 Cf. J. D. Comrie, Edinburgh &led. J., 1909,11, p. 119.


--- PAGE 148 ---
IMHOTEP 
In this scene a priest called the menhu or slaughterer 
is seen cutting to pieces an animal which may be either 
a pig or a hippopotamus, representing Typhon (Set). 
Meanwhile Imhotep, the Khn'-hh, clad in a leopard's 
skin and wearing a sort of helmet reads the justification 
of Horus. Close by is the following inscription : 
BB-mfQi4 h-h??: K 
' Chief priest, scribe of the god, Imhotep, the great one, 
son of Ptah.' 
Naville thus refers to the scene : ' This priest, Imhotep 
uer si Ptah, interests us particularly, not because he is 
invested with one of the chief sacerdotal posts in the 
temple of Edfou, but because he was also its architect ; 
at least he directed the construction of certain parts of 
the edifice. This is the only monument where we find 
the signature of the artist who made its plan.' 
Imhotep proclaims Horus justified in the usecht, i.e. 
in one of the great halls of the temple. 
IV. NUBIA 
(a) DCbBt. 
In this temple Imhotep is represented three times, 
once in the temple itself, and twice in the chapel of the 
Nubian king Azkheramon.2 
Weigall thus describes one of the scenes : 
' As one enters the roofless pronaos the reliefs on the 
inner sides of the doorway are seen to represent Horus 
and Thoth pouring a vessel of holy water over the 
approaching worshipper, while behind them " the Chief 
l E. Naville, Textes relatif.. au Mythe d'Horus, recueillis 
dam le temple d'Edfou, 1870, p. 15, P1. XI. 
G. Roeder, Les Temples immergks de & Nubie, I g I I, i, pp. 
47,52,53 ; ii, Pis. 12, 13, M.


--- PAGE 149 ---
APPENDIXES 109 
Reader-priest, the Chief Scribe of the North and South ", 
the demigod Imhotep, sees that the necessary ritual is 
said.' 
(b) Dakkah. 
Here there are two scenes in which Imhotep  appear^.^ 
? Ptolemy IX Euergetes 11. 
(c) Kalabshah. 
Imhotep is here represented as receiving a gift of 
incense from the Emperor Aug~stus.~ 
? Ptolemaic Period. 
(d) Meroe. 
It is possible that a relief in one of the pyramids of 
Meroe (No. 12) is intended to represent Imhotep, but no 
positive assertion can be made on the subject. The 
reliefs in the chapel concerned are reproduced by Lep- 
sius,4 and the drawing in question shows a figure similar 
to that of the deified Irnhotep, but without ankh, and 
only holding an ordinary staff instead of the uas sceptre. 
Budge describes the scene as that of ' The deceased - 
adoring an ancestor (or I-em-hetep) '.5 
l A. E. Weigall, Guide to the Antiquities of Upper Egypt, 
1913, p, 492 ; Antiquities of Lower Nubia, 1907, p. 58. 
Bulletin de I'lnstitut Frangais d'Archblogie Orientale, 
1918, xiv, Fasc. I, p. 40. 
H. Gauthier, Les Temples immergks de la Nubie, 1911, i, 
p. 88, P1. XXVII b. Imhotep is wearing a uraeus and is carrying 
a sceptre and an ankh. 
Lepsius, Denkmdler, X, Part V, P1.26. 
6 E. A. Budge, The Egyptian Sudan, i, p. 400.


--- PAGE 150 ---



--- PAGE 151 ---
INDEX 
(PERSONS, PLACES AND SUBJECTS) 
A 
Abram, Sir Stewart . 89 
Abusir . . . . . 27 
Abydos . . . . . 10 
Aesculapius . 55,66,91 
Alexander the Great 39,65 
Alexandria . . . 71,72 
Allowances to priests . 62 
Amasis, king . . 39,96 
-, priest . . . 38939 
Amenemha, tomb of . 14 
Amenophis I, king . 35 
- 111, king . 25,36,42 
- son of Hapi, 42, 43, 49, 
56 f., 63, 105, 106 
Ammanus Marcellinus 66,68 
Arnmon (Amon) . 1549 
Amulets of Imhotep, 52,101, 
Fig. xvii 
-use of . . . 52,82 
Ankh, the . . . 38, 109 
Antuf, king . . 17, 18 
Anukis.. . . . 48 
Ape, cynocephalic 102, 103 
Apis, the bull . . 66,67 
Apotheosis of Imhotep, 38 f., 
89, 90, 104 f. 
Architect, Irnhotep as, 9 f., 99 
Architects, pedigree of 
the ..... 99 
Ashmolean Nluseum, 
the . . . . . 102 
Asklepieion 28,44,62,63 
Asklepios, 31, 34,42,46, 49, 
50,559 58,629 66,679 88s 91 
Assa,king . . . 19 
Astronomy, Egyptian 
knowledge of . . 20 
Aswan . . . . . 2,7 
Athothis, king . . 3 
Augustus, emperor 86, log 
Azkheramon, king . . 108 
Aztecs, deities of medi- 
cine amongst . . 2 
B 
Babylonia, deities of 
medicine in . . . 2 
Badge of Imhotep . 89 
Basalt statue of Im- 
hotep. . . . . IOI 
Berlin Medical Papyrus 75 
- Museum, 25, 37, 38, 75, 
101 f. 
Bet-KhalIAf . . . 10 
Bibliography . . . 93 
Blemmyes, the . . . 72 
Breasted, J. H. . 3,55 
British Museum, 16, 38, 39, 
52, 53, 59, 101 f. 
Bronze statuettes of 
Imhotep . . .37, IOI f. 
Brugsch, H. . 55,99,106 
Budge, E. A., 13,7I, 101,109 
C 
Caesar Germanicus . 66 
-, Julius . . . . 35 
Cairo . . . 62, 101 f. 
Cambyses . . . . 38 
Castor oil . . . 62


--- PAGE 152 ---
112 
Champollion . . . 89 
Cheops (Khufu), king, 17,23, 
29 Cherstapane . . . 50 
Chief lector priest : cf. 
also Kheri-heb . . 12 f. 
Childbirth, deities as- 
sociated with . . 2 
China, deities of medi- 
cine in . . . . 2 
Chnem-eb-re . 24,98, IOO 
Chriitianityin Egypt . 69 
Coin-type of Ptah- 
Hephaistos . . . 34 
Colocasia, root of . . 51 
Colossi of Memnon . 57 
Constantine, emperor . 69 
Coprotherapy . . . 80 
Coptos . . . . . 98 
Crocodile god, the . . 15 
Crocodilopolis . . 28 
Cyllbtis . . . . 63 
Cynocephalic ape 102,103 
D 
Dagobas in India . . I 1 
Dakkah . . . . . 109 
Darius I, king 12,96,98, loo 
Dawson, W. R. 75,79, 95 
Dead, gifts to the . . 13 
DCb6t . . . . . 108 
Dehan, the great . . 61 
Deification of Alexan- 
der the Great . . 39 
- of Amenothis son of 
Hapi, 42,438 49, 56 f-, 63, 105, 106 
- of Imhotep . 38 f., 63 f. 
- of individuals . . 63 f. 
Deir-el-Bahari, 49,56,67,92, 
105,106 
Deir el-Medineh . 57, 105 
INDEX 
Demigod, Imhotep a, 3,29 f., 
42, IOI f., Figs. i, v, vi, vii 
Demigods in Greece 
and Rome . . . 35 
Diagnosis, progress in, 78,80 
Diocletian, emperor . 72 
Diodorus Siculus . 21,87 
Dissection in ancient 
Egypt 1,76,79 ' Donaria ' . . . . 32 
Drugs, list of Egyptian 80 
Duat, the . . . . 15 
E 
Eben Papyrus, the, 24, 75, 
76,81 
Edfu (Edfou), 11, 12, 107, 
108, Fig. iv 
Edwin Smith Papyrus, 
the . . I, 75,76,79 Egypt, close of civiliza- 
tion in . . . . 68 f. 
-, deities of medicine 
in. . . . 1,71,74 
-, magic in ancient, 22, 63, 
64, 7!, -74,. 80 f. 
-, mediclne m . 71, 74 f. 
El-Assasif . . . . 106 
Elephantine . . . 66 
Embalmment, ritual of 15 
Emperor Augustus . 109 
- Constantine . . - Diocletian . . . 69 
72 - Valens . . . . 70 
Ennead, the Great . 39 
Eman, A. 29,36785,103 Eshmun, the Phoem- 
cian god of healing . 55 Esnah . . . . 28 
Exodus, ;be . . . 88 
Eye of Horus in medical 
prescriptions . . 107


--- PAGE 153 ---
INC 
F 
Faith cures . . . 53985 
Famine for seven years 7 
Festivals in honour of 
Imhotep . . . 58 f. 
Figures of Imhotep, 
mural . . . . 104f. 
Foucart, G. . . 5, 74 
Funeral ceremonies 26,27 
G 
Gardiner, A. H. . xi, 36 
' Gate of Imhotep ' . 25 
Gebelen . . . . 28 
Gizeh, pyramid of . . 17 
God of medicine, Im- 
hotep as, 38f., 89, go, 
104 f,, Figs. viii, ix, X, XI 
GraBti relating to Im- 
hotep . . . 49~90 
Greek culture . . . 71 
-demigods . . . 3 5 
- medicine . '. 71 
Grenfell and ~unt, 
Messrs. . . . . 29f. 
Griffith, F. L1. . . 50,96 
H 
Ha or Hat . . . . 107 
' Harper, Song of the ' 16 f. 
Harpocrates . ++,66,107 
Harris Papyrus, the . 16 
Hathor . . . 48,56,104 
Hatshepsowet, queen, 49,105 
Hearst Papyrus, the . 75 
Helen of Troy . . . 81 
Heliopolis . . . 43,107 
Hellenism . . . 42,71 
Hephaestos . . . . 34 
Hermes of Egypt, the, 20,105 
Hermitage Museum, 
Petrograd . . . 102 
Herodotus . . 17,78,79 
Hieronymus . . . 
Hippocrates . . . E 
' Holy Island ', the . 44 
Homer . . . I, 79,88 
Hordedef . . . 17,18 
HONS, 2,30,83,84,107,108 
Horus, eye of, in Medi- 
cine . . . . . 107 
Huni, king . . . . 19 
Hygieia . . 49,50,62 
Hygiene, knowIknge of 86 
Ibis, the . . 46,53,102 
Imhotep, activities of 5 f. 
-, amulet of . 52, Fig. xvii 
-, apotheosis of, 38 f., 89, go, 
I04 f. 
- as architect . . . 9 f. 
- as astronomer . . W 
- as chief lector priest, 5, 8, 
12 f., 46,56, 108 
- as contemporary of 
king Zoser . 3,5,29 
- as demigod, 3,29 f.,42,86, 
IOI f., Figs. i, v, vi, vii 
- as god of medicine, viii, 
38 f., 40,41, 88, Figs. viii, 
ix, X, xi 
- as Khai-hb, 5, 8, 12 f., 
46,56,108 - as magician, 21,63,64,68, 
88 
- as ' master of poetry ' 16 
-as physician, viii, 21, 24, 
63, 64, 88 - as sage and scribe 16 f. 
- as vizier . . . 5 f., 63 
-,badge of . . . 89 
-, basalt statue of . IOI 
-, creator of medical 
knowledge . . . 86 
I


--- PAGE 154 ---
114 IN: 
Imhote , continued. 
-, deifation of 38 f., 63 f. 
-,'Dr.*. . . . 90 
-, eulogies of . . . 54 f. 
-,festivals of . . . 58 f. 
-, Gate of . . . 25 
-, meaning df the 
name . . . . 4,95 
-, other persons 
named . . . . 
-,pedigree of . . . 98 2i! 
-, philosophy of . . 19 
-, relations of . .4,24, 99 
-, shrines erected to . 58 
-, statuettes of 37, IOI f. 
-9 temples of* 28, 43 f.? 47, Figs. xi-xvi 
-, the Pharaoh . . 25 
-,tomb of . . 27,28 
-, variants in spelling 95 f. 
Imoutha, 33,42, 51, 55,659 
91 ~ncantations, use of . 82 f. 
Incubation 31,51? 53,54 
India, deities of medl- 
cine in . . . . 2 
Individuals, deification 
of private . . . 63 f. 
Intef,king. . . . 17 
Isis, 2,44,48,58,839 95, 107 Israelites, exodus of the 88 
K 
Ka, the . 59,648 65 
Kahun ~eiicai Papy- 
rus,the . . 75979 Kalabshah . . . . 109 
Kaleoibis, son of Apollo 30 
& .. 38,IoJ 
Kasr el-Agouz 57,104, I 
Kegemni . . 6,19 
Kherduanki . . . 103 
Hmi-hb, the, 5,8,12 f., 23, 
26,46, 56, 108 
Khnum . . 2,7f., 48,66 , 
Khnum-ib-re, 12,24,98,1oo 
Khons . . . . . 49 
Khreduonkh, 4, 24, 39, 60, 
Khu IO& (Cheeps), Io7 king, 17,23, 
29 King Amasis . . 39,96 
- Amenophis I . . 35 
- Amenophis I11 25,36,42 
-Antuf . . . 17,18 
-Assa. . . . . 19 
-Athothis . . . 3 
- Azkherarnon . . 108 
- Darius I 12,96,98, ~oo 
-Huni . . . . I9 
- Mycerinus . . 29, 34 
-Psamm&ikI . . 96 
- Psammetik I1 . . 39 
- Ptolemy I11 . . 12 
- Ptolemy W, 46, 58, 105, 
106 
- Ptolemy V Epi- 
phanes . 46, 8,106,107 
- Ptolemy V11 d hilo- 
meter . . . 106, ~q 
- Ptolemy IX Euer- 
getes 11, 43, 56, 57, '05, 
106,109 
-PtolemyXIII . . 52 
- Tuthmosis 111, king, 57, 
i 104 
- Usermares . . . 50 
I - Zoser, 18, 23, 28, 29, 36, 
1 54,55,63,73,9', Fig. ii


--- PAGE 155 ---
INDEX 1 15 
Legend of Seven Years' 
Famine . . . . 7 
Leiden . . . . 16, IOI 
Leopard skin worn by 
priest . . . 107, 108 
Lepsius, R. . . . 109 
Libations to Imhotep, 36,103 
Lisht, Pyramid of . . 25 
Liturgy of funerary 
offerings . . . . 13 
Liverpool Museum . 102 
London Medical Papy- 
NS..... 
London, University 75 
College . . . . 103 
Louvre, the . . 101,102 
Lyons,H.G. . . . 46 
Maat, the goddess . . 106 
Machaon . . . . 88 
Magic, Egyptian, 22, 63, 64, 
7',74,80 f.984 -m England . . . 23 
Magician-physician, 
Imhotep as, 21, 24,63,64, 
68,88 
Mahituaskhit . 50951 
Mandulis, chapel of . 48 
Manetho . . . . 3 
Marseilles . . . . IOI 
Maspero, G. . 50,63,65 
Materia mdica, Egyp- 
tian 64,7', 74,79 
Medicine, Egyptian 71,74 f. 
-, Greek . . . . 71 
-, preventive . . . 86 
-,veterinary . . . 79 
Medinet Habu 38,53,57,105 
Memmon, Colossi of . 57 
Memphis, 2, 8, 10, 11, 21, 
26 f.9 39942,439 52,559 62, 
66,68,91 
Mwhu or slaughterer . 108 
Mercur . . . . . 28 
Meroe, Pyramids of . 109 
Mes-son of Pedu-Ptah 103 
Meter, Viceroy of Nubia 8 
Midwifery in Egypt . 79 
Milne, J. G. . . 349 50 
Monasticism in Egypt . 70 
Money-boxes in 
temples . . . . 62 
Moral precepts . I g, 20 
Moslem conquest . . 73 
Mosquitoes . . . 86 
Miiller, W. Max . . 76 
Mummification . . 77 
Mummy, treatment of 
the . . . . . 14 
I Mural figures of Im- 
hotep . . . . 104f. 
Mut, the goddess 39,48,49 
Mut-Hathor . . 39,48 
Mycerinus, king . 29,34 
N 
Name Imhotep, the . 4,95 
Naville, E. . . . . 108 
Nechautis . . . . 30 f. 
Nectanebo . . . . 29 
Neferebre . . . . 39 
Neferhotpe . . . . 17 
Nefertem . . . . 39 
Nemes head-dress, the 3 
Nepenthes . . . . 81 
Nephthys . . . . 95 
New Kingdom, the, 29,34,36 
New York Museum, 102,103 
I Nitria, desert of . . 70 
Nobadae, the . . . 72 
Nubia . 42,67, 104,108 
-viceroy of . . . 8 
Nut.. . . . . 39


--- PAGE 156 ---
I 16 INDEX 
0 
On.. .. . . 43 
' Opening the Mouth ', 
the . . . . 
opium, of . -I3 
Osiris . 48,83,95,105,107 
Osler, Sir W. . v,8o,go 
Otto, W. . 68,70 
Oxford, ~skdlean 
Museum at . . 102 
Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 29, 34, 
36 
P 
Pa-aten-emhab, tomb 
of. . . . . . 16 
Palette of scribe . . IOI 
Papyri, the Oxyrhynchus, 29, 
34936 Papyrus, incantations 
written on . . . 84 
-, the Berlin Medical 75 
-, the Ebers 24,75,76,81 
-,the Edwin Smith, I, 75, 
76379 -, the Harris . . . 16 
-, the Hearst . . . 75 
-, the Kahun . . 75.79 
-, the London Medical 75 
-, the Westcar . 23,79 
Paris, the Louvre at . IOI 
Pedi-Bast . . . 53, 59 
Pedigree of Imhotep . 98 f. 
- of the architects . 99 
Penek, son of Uahibra . 103 
Persia, deities of medi- 
cine in . . . . 2 
Persian period, the . 38 
Pesubis, a gnostic . . 50 
Peteamensamtau . . 103 
Petrograd, museum at . 102 
Philae, 44, 45, 92, 106, 107, Figs. xi-xvi 
Philae, the ' Holy Island ' qq 
Phoenicians, deities of 
medicine amongst . 2 
Phritob . . . . . 50 
Pi-l-m-bap-si-ptah . 27 
plin~ 
hdaleirus 88 
Preventive medicine . 86 
Priesthood, hereditary 30 
Priestsofthe Apis Bull 66 
- of the AsHe~ieion 62 
-, personal purity of ; 86 
Propaganda by devotees 33 
Prophylaxis of disease 87 
Psammetik I, king . . 96 
-11,king. . . . 39 
P-Shere-en-Ptah . 52, 53 
Ptah, 2,8, 11, 12,25,25, 30, 
33, 38, 39, 46, 51 f., 66, 103,104,108, Fig. XI 
Ptah-hotpe . . 7,19,28 
Ptah-mes . . . . 103 
Ptolemais . . . 62 
Ptolemy 111, king . . 12 
- IV, king, 46,58,105,106 
- V, king . 46,48,106,107 
- VII, king . . 106,107 
- IX, king, 43, 56, 57, 105, 
106,109 
- XIII, king . . . 52 
Pyramid age, the . . 74 
- of Gizeh . . . I7 
- of Lisht . . . . 25 
- of Sakkarah, 3, 10, I I, 28, 
92, Fig. iii 
Q 
Qasr-el-Agouz, temple 
of. . . . . . 57 
R 
P in medical prescrip- 
tions . . . . . 107


--- PAGE 157 ---
DEX 
Rationalism in medi- 
cine . . . . . 83 f. 
Re, the sun-god . . 2,13 
Reading Pathological 
Society, the . . . 
Rekhrnir~ . . . . 
Religio privata . . . 22 
Religion and magic 22, 82 
Ricinus communis . . 62 
Ritual of embalmment 15 
Roeder . . . . . 26 
Roman period, the . 38 
Rome 35,68,69,73,90,91 
Ronpe-nofret . . 24,42 
S 
Sais . . . . . . 43 
Saite period, the . 68, IOI 
Sakkarah, pyramid of, 3, 10, 
I I, 27,28,92, Fig. iii 
Sanatorium at Deir-el- 
Bahari . . . . 
Sanitation in ancient 49 
Egypt . . . . 86 
Satis . . . . . 48 
Satmi Khamuas . 50,51 
Scribe, palette of . . IOI 
Scribes, libations of, to 
Imhotep . . . 36,103 
Sebek, the crocodile 
god ..... '5 
Sedare dolorem divinum 
ops.. . . . 43 
Sehel, island of . . 7 
Sekhmet, 2, 35 39, 49, 57, 
61, 86, Fig. XI 
Sem priest, the . 13,14 
Semitic scripts . . . 
Senosiris . . . . 96 
52 Senusert . . . . 25 
Serapeum, the . . 27,44 
Serapis . . . . . 44 
Sesame oil . . - . 62 
1 Sesostris . . . . 25 
Set . . . 83,107,108 
Sethe, K., 5,38,39,96, 101, 
107 Show (Shu) . . . 39 
Shrines in honour of 
Imhotep . . . . 58 
Siculus Diodorus . 21,87 
Socharis . . . . 10 
Society, the Reading 
Pathological . . . 89 
Sokari . . . . . 10 
' Song of the Harper ', 
the . . . 16,18,19 
' South of his wall ', 
meaning of . . . 8 
Specialism in Egypt 78,79 
Spells, use of . . . 84 
Spelt . . . . . 62 
Statuettes of Imhotep, 37, 
I01 f. 
Ste~-Pvramid of Sak- 
kirah, 3, 10, 11, 28, 92, 
Fig.. iii 
~teri%ty, cures of . . 51 f. 
Stupas in India . . 11 
Suggestion, influence of 85 
Surgery in ancient 
Egypt . . . 76,77 
T 
Ta-Khred-Khons . . 103 
Temple of Edfu, 11, 12, 107, 
108, Fig. iv 
- of Hatshepsowet . 49 
- of Qasr-el-Agouz . 
47, Figs. xi-xvi 
Temples of Imhotep, 28,43 
Teos . . . . . 105 
Theban necropolis . 106 
Thebes, 6,1~,21,2s, 3539, 
43,489 49956, 57,66, '04 Thenen . . . . . 46


--- PAGE 158 ---
INDEX I 18 
Therapeutics, progress 
in . I* 78, 
*t 1Aot;p : 52 
Thoth, z,8,2o, 46,489 53,579 
102, 103 105 106, 108 
Topes in India . - .I1 
Triad of Memphis, 39, Fig- 
xi 
-of l'l~ebes 49 
T~OY - 88 
Tuat,the . - . . 15 
Tuthmothii 111, king, 57,104 
Twin-sisters, the . . 62 
Typhon . . 108 
U 
Uas sceptre . . . 109 
Underworld, the . . 15 
University College, 
London . . . I03 
Unnefer . . . . 48 
Uraei as decoration 37, 103 
Uraeus, Imhotep with 109 
Usecht, a hall in a 
temple . . . 108 
Usermares, king . . 50 
V 
Vdens, empe;or . . 70 
Variants of the name 
Imhotep . . . . 95 fe - of the name Zoser . 
Veterinary medicine . 79 
Virgil, quotation from 73 
Vizier, duties of a . . 6 
- Imhotep as . . 5 f., 63 
Votiveofferings . . 55 
W 
Wadi Hammamat . 24,98 
Weigall, A. E. . 28,48,108 
Wellcome Historical 
Medical Museum, 37, IOI f. 
Wenarnon . . . . 103 
Westcar Papyrus, the 23,79 
z 
Zoser, king, 3,10, 18,23,27, . 
29, 36, 54, 55, 63, 731 91, Flg. 11 
Zosimos, the alchemist 68


--- PAGE 159 ---
Pn'ntcd in Engkad 
At the OXFORD UNI~~RSITY Psgss 
By John Johnson 
Printn to the Univasily

