=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Info Cointelpro- The Untold American Story.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 116
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:08:05.117472
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
COINTELPRO: The Untold American Story  
  
  
  
By Paul Wolf with contributions from Robert Boyle, Bob Brown, 
Tom Burghardt, Noam Chomsky, Ward Churchill, Kathleen Cleaver, 
Bruce Ellison, Cynthia McKinney, Nkechi Taifa, Laura Whitehorn, 
Nicholas Wilson, and Howard Zinn.  
Presented to U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary 
Robinson at the World Conference Against Racism in Durban, 
South Africa by the members of the Congressional Bl ack Caucus 
attending the conference: Donna Christianson, John Conyers, 
Eddie Bernice Johnson, Barbara Lee, Sheila Jackson Lee, Cynthia 
McKinney, and Diane Watson, September 1, 2001.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Table of Contents 
  
Overview  
Victimization  
COINTELPRO Techniques  
Murder and Assassination  
Agents Provocateurs 
The Ku Klux Klan  
The Secret Army Organization  
Snitch Jacketing  
The Subversion of the Press  
Political Prisoners  
Leonard Peltier  
Mumia Abu Jamal  
Geronimo ji Jaga Pratt  
Dhoruba Bin Wahad  
Marshall Eddie Conway  
Justice Hangs in the Balance  
Appendix: The Legacy of COINTELPRO  
CISPES  
The Judi Bari Bombing  
Bibliography


--- PAGE 3 ---
Overview 
We're here to talk about the FBI and U.S. democracy  
because here we have this peculiar situation that we live in a 
democratic country - everybody knows that, everybody says 
it, it's repeated, it's dinned into our ears a thousand times, 
you grow up, you pledge allegiance, you salute the flag, you 
hail democracy, you look at the totalitarian states, you read 
the history of tyrannies, and here is the beacon light of 
democracy. And, of course, there's some truth to th at. There 
are things you can do in the United States that you can't do 
many other places without being put in jail.  
But the United States is a very complex system. It's very 
hard to describe because, yes, there are elements o f 
democracy; there are things that you're grateful for, that 
you're not in front of the death squads in El Salva dor. On the 
other hand, it's not quite a democracy. And one of the things 
that makes it not quite a democracy is the existence of 
outfits like the FBI and the CIA. Democracy is based on 
openness, and the existence of a secret policy, sec ret lists of 
dissident citizens, violates the spirit of democracy.  
Despite its carefully contrived image as the nation's premier 
crime fighting agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
has always functioned primarily as America's political police. 
This role includes not only the collection of intelligence on 
the activities of political dissidents and groups, but often 
times, counterintelligence operations to thwart those 
activities. The techniques employed are easily recognized by 
anyone familiar with military psychological operations. The 
FBI, through the use of the criminal justice system, the 
postal system, the telephone system and the Interna l 
Revenue Service, enjoys an operational capability 
surpassing even that of the CIA, which conducts covert 
actions in foreign countries without having access to those 
institutions.  
Although covert operations have been employed throughout 
FBI history, the formal COunter INTELligence PROgrams 
(COINTELPRO's) of the period 1956-1971 were the fir st to 
be both broadly targeted and centrally directed. According to 
FBI researcher Brian Glick, "FBI headquarters set policy, 
assessed progress, charted new directions, demanded


--- PAGE 4 ---
increased production, and carefully monitored and c ontrolled 
day-to-day operations. This arrangement required that 
national COINTELPRO supervisors and local FBI field 
offices communicate back and forth, at great length , 
concerning every operation. They did so quite freely, with 
little fear of public exposure. This generated a pr olific trail of 
bureaucratic paper. The moment that paper trail beg an to 
surface, the FBI discontinued all of its formal dom estic 
counterintelligence programs. It did not, however, cease its 
covert political activity against U.S. dissidents." 1  
Of roughly 20,000 people investigated by the FBI solely on 
the basis of their political views between 1956-1971, about 
10 to 15% were the targets of active counterintelligence 
measures per se . Taking counterintelligence in its broadest 
sense, to include spreading false information, it's  estimated 
that about two-thirds were COINTELPRO targets. Most 
targets were never suspected of committing any crime.  
The nineteen sixties were a period of social change and 
unrest. Color television brought home images of jungle 
combat in Vietnam and protesters and priests burnin g draft 
cards and American flags. In the spring and summer months 
of 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967 and 1968, massive black 
rebellions swept across almost every major US city in the 
Northeast, Midwest and California. 
2 Presidents Johnson 
and Nixon, and many others feared violent revolution and 
denounced the protesters. President Kennedy had fel t the 
opposite: "Those who make peaceful revolution impos sible 
will make violent revolution inevitable."  
The counterculture of the sixties, and the FBI's re action to it, 
were in many ways a product of the 1950s, the so-called 
"Age of McCarthyism." John Edgar Hoover, longtime Director 
of the FBI, was a prominent spokesman of the anti-
communist paranoia of the era:  
The forces which are most anxious to weaken our internal 
security are not always easy to identify. Communists have 
been trained in deceit and secretly work toward the day 
when they hope to replace our American way of life with a 
Communist dictatorship. They utilize cleverly camouflaged 
movements, such as peace groups and civil rights groups to 
achieve their sinister purposes. While they as indi viduals are 
difficult to identify, the Communist party line is clear. Its first 
concern is the advancement of Soviet Russia and the


--- PAGE 5 ---
godless Communist cause. It is important to learn t o know 
the enemies of the American way of life. 3  
Throughout the 1960s, Hoover consistently applied this 
theory to a wide variety of groups, on occasion reprimanding 
agents unable to find "obvious" communist connectio ns in 
civil rights and anti-war groups. 4 During the entire 
COINTELPRO period, no links to Soviet Russia were 
uncovered in any of the social movements disrupted by the 
FBI.  
The commitment of the FBI to undermine and destroy 
popular movements departing from political orthodoxy has 
been extensive, and apparently proportional to the strength 
and promise of such movements, as one would expect in the 
case of the secret police organization of any state, though it 
is doubtful that there is anything comparable to th is record 
among the Western industrial democracies.  
In retrospect, the COINTEPRO's of the 1960s were 
thoroughly successful in achieving their stated goals, "to 
expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" 
the enemies of the State .  
  
Victimization 
The most serious of the FBI disruption programs were those 
directed against "Black Nationalists." Agents were instructed 
to undertake actions to discredit these groups both  within 
"the responsible Negro community" and to "Negro radicals," 
also "to the white community, both the responsible 
community and to `liberals' who have vestiges of sympathy 
for militant black nationalists simply because they are 
Negroes..."  
A March 4 
th , 1968 memo from J Edgar Hoover to FBI field 
offices laid out the goals of the COINTELPRO - Blac k 
Nationalist Hate Groups program: "to prevent the coalition of 
militant black nationalist groups;" "to prevent the rise of a 
messiah who could unify and electrify the militant black 
nationalist movement;" "to prevent violence on the part of 
black nationalist groups;" "to prevent militant black 
nationalist groups and leaders from gaining respectability;" 
and "to prevent the long-range growth of militant black


--- PAGE 6 ---
nationalist organizations, especially among youth." Included 
in the program were a broad spectrum of civil rights and 
religious groups; targets included Martin Luther King, 
Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael, Eldridge Cleaver, and Elijah 
Muhammad.  
A top secret Special Report  5 for President Nixon, dated 
June 1970 gives some insight into the motivation for the 
actions undertaken by the government to destroy the Black 
Panther party. The report describes the party as "the most 
active and dangerous black extremist group in the United 
States." Its "hard-core members" were estimated at about 
800, but "a recent poll indicates that approximatel y 25 per 
cent of the black population has a great respect fo r the BPP, 
incuding 43 per cent of blacks under 21 years of ag e." On 
the basis of such estimates of the potential of the  party, 
counterintelligence operations were carried out to ensure 
that it did not succeed in organizing as a substantial social or 
political force.  
Another  memorandum explains the motivation for the FBI 
operations against student protesters: "the movemen t of 
rebellious youth known as the 'New Left,' involving and 
influencing a substantial number of college student s, is 
having a serious impact on contemporary society with a 
potential for serious domestic strife." The New Lef t has 
"revolutionary aims" and an "identification with Marxism-
Leninism." It has attempted "to infiltrate and radicalize labor," 
and after failing "to subvert and control the mass media" has 
established "a large network of underground publications 
which serve the dual purpose of an internal communi cation 
network and an external propaganda organ." Its leaders 
have "openly stated their sympathy with the international 
communist revolutionary movements in South Vietnam and 
Cuba; and have directed others into activities which support 
these movements."  
The effectiveness of the state disruption programs is not 
easy to evaluate. Black leaders estimate the significance of 
the programs as substantial. Dr. James Turner of Co rnell 
University, former president of the African Heritage Studies 
Association, assessed these programs as having "serious 
long-term consequences for black Americans," in tha t they 
"had created in blacks a sense of depression and 
hopelessness." 
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
He states that "the F.B.I. set out to break the mom entum 
developed in black communities in the late fifties and early 
sixties"; "we needed to put together organizational 
mechanisms to deliver services," but instead, "our ability to 
influence things that happen to us internally and e xternally 
was killed." He concludes that "the lack of confide nce and 
paranoia stimulated among black people by these act ions" is 
just beginning to fade.  
The American Indian Movement, arguably the most hop eful 
vehicle for indigenous pride and self-determination in the late 
20th century, was also destroyed. As AIM leader Dennis 
Banks has observed:  
"The FBI's tactics eventually proved successful in a peculiar 
sort of way. It's remarkable under the circumstances - and a 
real testament to the inner strength of the traditi onal Oglalas 
- that the feds were never really able to divide them from us, 
to have the traditionals denouncing us and working against 
us. But, in the end, the sort of pressure the FBI p ut on 
people on the reservation, particularly the old people, it just 
wore 'em down. A kind of fatigue set in. With the f irefight at 
Oglala, and all the things that happened after that , it was 
easy to see we weren't going to win by direct confrontation. 
So the traditionals asked us to disengage, to try and take 
some of the heaviest pressure off. And, out of resp ect, we 
had no choice but to honor those wishes. And that w as the 
end of AIM, at least in the way it had been known u p till then. 
The resistance is still there, of course, and the s truggle goes 
on, but the movement itself kind of disappeared." 7 
The same can be said for socialist movements target ed by 
COINTELPRO. Alone among the parliamentary 
democracies, the United States has no mass-based so cialist 
party, however mild and reformist, no socialist voice in the 
media, and virtually no departure from Keynesian economics 
in American universities and journals. The people of the 
United States have paid dearly for the enforcement of 
domestic privilege and the securing of imperial domains. The 
vast waste of social wealth, miserable urban ghettos, the 
threat and reality of unemployment, meaningless work in 
authoritarian institutions, standards of health and  social 
welfare that should be intolerable in a society with such vast 
productive resources -- all of this must be endured and even 
welcomed as the "price of freedom" if the existing order is to 
stand without challenge.


--- PAGE 8 ---
COINTELPRO Techniques 
From its inception, the FBI has operated on the doc trine that 
the "preliminary stages of organization and preparation" 
must be frustrated, well before there is any clear and present 
danger of "revolutionary radicalism."  
At its most extreme dimension, political dissidents have been 
eliminated outright or sent to prison for the rest of their lives. 
There are quite a number of individuals who have been 
handled in that fashion.  
Many more, however, were "neutralized" by intimidation, 
harassment, discrediting, snitch jacketing, a whole 
assortment of authoritarian and illegal tactics.  
Neutralization, as explained on record by the FBI, doesn't 
necessarily pertain to the apprehension of parties in the 
commission of a crime, the preparation of evidence against 
them, and securing of a judicial conviction, but rather to 
simply making them incapable of engaging in political activity 
by whatever means.  
For those not assessed as being in themselves, necessarily 
a security risk, but engaged in what the Bureau views to be 
politically objectionable activity, those techniques might 
consist of disseminating derogatory information to the 
target's family, friends and associates, visiting and 
questioning them, basically, making it clear that the FBI are 
paying attention to them, to try to intimidate them .  
If the subject continues their activities, and particularly if they 
respond by escalating them, the FBI will escalate its tactics 
as well. Maybe they'll be arrested and prosecuted for 
spurious reasons. Maybe there will be more vicious rumors 
circulated about them. False information may be pla nted in 
the press. The targets' efforts to speak in public are 
frustrated, employers may be contacted to try to get them 
fired. Anonymous letters have been sent by the FBI to 
targets' spouses, accusing them of infidelity. Others have 
contained death threats.  
And if the subject persists then there will be a fu rther 
escalation.


--- PAGE 9 ---
According to FBI memoranda of the 1960s, "Key black  
activists" were repeatedly arrested "on any excuse" until 
"they could no longer make bail." The FBI made use of 
informants, often quite violent and emotionally dis turbed 
individuals, to present false testimony to the courts, to frame 
COINTELPRO targets for crimes they knew they did not 
commit. In some cases the charges were quite serious, 
including murder.  
Another option is "snitch jacketing" - making the target look 
like a police informant or a CIA agent. This serves the dual 
purposes of isolating and alienating important lead ers, and 
increasing the general level of fear and factionalism in the 
group.  
"Black bag jobs" are burglaries performed in order to obtain 
the written materials, mailing lists, position papers, and 
internal documents of an organization or an individual. At 
least 10,000 American homes have been subjected to illegal 
breaking and entering by the FBI, without judicial warrants.  
Group membership lists are used to expand the opera tion. 
Anonymous mailings of newspaper and magazine articles 
may be mailed to group members and supporters to 
convince them of the error of their ways. Anonymous or 
spurious letters and cartoons are sent to promote 
factionalism and widen rifts in or between organizations.  
According to the FBI's own records, agents have been 
directed to use "established local news media conta cts" and 
other "sources available to the Seat of Government"  to 
"disrupt or neutralize" organizations and to "ridicule and 
discredit" them.  
Many counterintelligence techniques involve the use of paid 
informants. Informants become agents  provocateurs by 
raising controversial issues at meetings to take advantage of 
ideological divisions, by promoting emnity with other groups, 
or by inciting the group to violent acts, even to the point of 
providing them with weapons.  
Over the years, FBI provocateurs have repeatedly urged and 
initiated violent acts, including forceful disruptions of 
meetings and demonstrations, attacks on police, bom bings, 
and so on, following an old strategy of Tsarist police director


--- PAGE 10 ---
TC Zubatov: "We shall provoke you to acts of terror  and then 
crush you."  
A concise description of political warfare is given in a 
passage from a CIA paper entitled "Nerve War Agains t 
Individuals," referring to the overthrowing of the government 
of Guatemala in 1954:  
The strength of an enemy consists largely of the individuals 
who occupy key positions in the enemy organization, as 
leaders, speakers, writers, organizers, cabinet members, 
senior government officials, army commanders and st aff 
officers, and so forth. Any effort to defeat the en emy must 
therefore concentrate to a great extent upon these key 
enemy individuals.  
If such an effort is made by means short of physica l 
violence, we call it "psychological warfare." If it is focussed 
less upon convincing those individuals by logical reasoning, 
but primarily upon moving them in the desired direction by 
means of harassment, by frightening, confusing and 
misleading them, we speak of a "nerve war". 
8  
The COINTELPROs clearly met the above definition of  
"nerve wars," and, in the case of the American Indi an 
Movement in Pine Ridge, South Dakota, the FBI condu cted 
a full-fledged counterinsurgency war, complete with death 
squads, disappearances and assassinations, recalling 
Guatemala in more recent years.  
The full story of COINTELPRO may never be told. The  
Bureau's files were never seized by Congress or the courts 
or sent to the National Archives. Some have been destroyed. 
Many counterintelligence operations were never committed 
to writing as such, or involve open investigations, and ex-
operatives are legally prohibited from talking about them. 
Most operations remain secret until long after the damage 
has been done.  
  
Murder and Assassination  
Among the most remarkable of the COINTELPRO 
revelations are those relating to the FBI's attempts to incite 
gang warfare and murderous attacks on Black Panther


--- PAGE 11 ---
leaders. For example, a COINTELPRO memo from FBI 
Headquarters mailed November 25, 1968, informs reci pient 
offices that:  
a serious struggle is taking place between the Black Panther 
Party (BPP) and the US [United Slaves] organization. The 
struggle has reached such proportions that it is taking on the 
aura of gang warfare with attendant threats of murd er and 
reprisals.  
In order to fully capitalize upon BPP and US differ ences as 
well as to exploit all avenues of creating further dissension in 
the ranks of the BPP, recipient offices are instruc ted to 
submit imaginative and hard-hitting counterintelligence 
measures aimed at crippling the BPP. 
9 
According to the national chairman of the US organi zation, 
who became a professor at San Diego State, the US a nd the 
Panthers had been negotiating to avoid bloodshed: " Then 
the F.B.I. stepped in and the shooting started."  
A series of cartoons were produced in an effort to incite 
violence between the Black Panther Party and the US; for 
example, one showing Panther leader David Hilliard hanging 
dead with a rope around his neck from a tree. The S an 
Diego office reported to the director that:  
in view of the recent killing of BPP member SYLVESTER 
BELL, a new cartoon is being considered in the hope s that it 
will assist in the continuance of the rift between BPP and 
US. This cartoon, or series of cartoons, will be similar in 
nature to those formerly approved by the Bureau and  will be 
forwarded to the Bureau for evaluation and approval  
immediately upon their completion.  
Under the heading "TANGIBLE RESULTS" the memo 
continues:  
Shootings, beatings, and a high degree of unrest co ntinues 
to prevail in the ghetto area of southeast San Diego. 
Although no specific counterintelligence action can be 
credited with contributing to this over-all situation, it is felt 
that a substantial amount of the unrest is directly  attributable 
to this program.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Between 1968-1971, FBI-initiated terror and disruption 
resulted in the murder of Black Panthers Arthur Mor ris, 
Bobby Hutton, Steven Bartholomew, Robert Lawrence, 
Tommy Lewis, Welton Armstead, Frank Diggs, Alprenti ce 
Carter, John Huggins, Alex Rackley, John Savage, Sylvester 
Bell, Larry Roberson, Nathaniel Clark, Walter Touré  Pope, 
Spurgeon Winters, Fred Hampton, Mark Clark, Sterlin g 
Jones, Eugene Anderson, Babatunde X Omarwali, Carl 
Hampton, Jonathan Jackson, Fred Bennett, Sandra Lan e 
Pratt, Robert Webb, Samuel Napier, Harold Russell, and 
George Jackson.  
One of the more dramatic incidents occurred on the night of 
December 4, 1969, when Panther leaders Fred Hampton  
and Mark Clark were shot to death by Chicago policemen in 
a predawn raid on their apartment. Hampton, one of the 
most promising leaders of the Black Panther party, was 
killed in bed, perhaps drugged. Depositions in a civil suit in 
Chicago revealed that the chief of Panther security and 
Hampton's personal bodyguard, William O'Neal, was a n FBI 
infiltrator. O'Neal gave his FBI contacting agent, Roy 
Mitchell, a detailed floor plan of the apartment, w hich 
Mitchell turned over to the state's attorney's office shortly 
before the attack, along with "information" -- of d ubious 
veracity -- that there were two illegal shotguns in the 
apartment. For his services, O'Neal was paid over $10,000 
from January 1969 through July 1970, according to Mitchell's 
affidavit.  
The availability of the floor plan presumably explains why "all 
the police gunfire went to the inside corners of th e 
apartment, rather than toward the entrances," and 
undermines still further the pretense that the barr age was 
caused by confusion in unfamiliar surroundings that  led the 
police to believe, falsely, that they were being fired upon by 
the Panthers inside. 
10  
Agent Mitchell was named by the Chicago Tribune  as head 
of the Chicago COINTELPRO directed against the Blac k 
Panthers and other black groups. Whether or not thi s is true, 
there is substantial evidence of direct FBI involvement in this 
Gestapo-style political assassination. O'Neal continued to 
report to Agent Mitchell after the raid, taking part in meetings 
with the Hampton family and their discussion with their 
lawyers.


--- PAGE 13 ---
There has as yet been no systematic investigation of the FBI 
campaign against the Black Panther Party in Chicago, as 
part of its nationwide program against the Panthers.  
Malcolm X was supposedly murdered by former colleagues 
in the Nation of Islam (NOI) as a result of the fac tion-fighting 
which had led to his splitting away from that movement, and 
their "natural wrath" at his establishment of a sep arate 
mosque, the Muslim Mosque, Inc.  
However, the NOl factionalism at issue didn't just happen. It 
had been developed by deliberate Bureau actions, th rough 
infiltration and the "sparking of acrimonious debat es within 
the organization," rumor-mongering, and other tactics 
designed to foster internal disputes. 11  The Chicago Special 
Agent in Charge, Marlin Johnson, who also oversaw the 
assassinations of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark, make s it 
quite obvious that he views the murder of Malcolm X as 
something of a model for "successful" counterintell igence 
operations.  
"Over the years considerable thought has been given, and 
action taken with Bureau approval, relating to methods 
through which the NOI could be discredited in the eyes of 
the general black populace or through which factionalism 
among the leadership could be created. Serious 
consideration has also been given towards developing ways 
and means of changing NOI philosophy to one whereby the 
members could be developed into useful citizens and  the 
organization developed into one emphasizing religion - the 
brotherhood of mankind - and self improvement. Fact ional 
disputes have been developed - most notable being Malcolm 
X Little." 
12  
In an internal FBI monograph dated September 1963 f ound 
that, given the scope of support it had attracted o ver the 
preceding five years, civil rights agitation represented a clear 
threat to "the established order" of the U.S., and that Martin 
Luther "King is growing in stature daily as the leader among 
leaders of the Negro movement ... so goes Martin Lu ther 
King, and also so goes the Negro movement in the United 
States." This accorded well with COINTELPRO specialist 
William C. Sullivan's view, committed to writing shortly after 
King's landmark "I Have a Dream" speech during the 
massive civil rights demonstration in Washington, D.C., on 
August 28 of the same year:


--- PAGE 14 ---
We must mark [King] now, if we have not before, as the most 
dangerous Negro in the future of this Nation from t he 
standpoint of communism, the Negro, and national se curity 
... it may be unrealistic to limit [our actions against King] to 
legalistic proofs that would stand up in court or before 
Congressional Committees.  
The stated objective of the SCLC, and the nature of  its 
practical activities, was to organize for the securing of black 
voting rights across the rural South, with an eye toward the 
ultimate dismantlement of at least the most blatant  aspects 
of the southern U.S. system of segregation. Even th is 
seemingly innocuous agenda was, however, seen as a 
threat by the FBI. In mid-September of 1957, FBI su pervisor 
J.G. Kelly forwarded a newspaper clipping describing the 
formation of the SCLC to the Bureau's Atlanta field  office - 
that city being the location of SCLC headquarters - informing 
local agents, for reasons which were never specified, the 
civil rights group was "a likely target for communist 
infiltration," and that "in view of the stated purp ose of the 
organization you should remain alert for public source 
information concerning it in connection with the racial 
situation." 
13  
The Atlanta field office "looked into" the matter and ultimately 
opened a COMINFIL (communist-inflitrated group) 
investigation of the SCLC, apparently based on the fact that 
a single SWP member, Lonnie Cross, had offered his 
services as a clerk in the organization's main office. 
14  By 
the end of the first year of FBI scrutiny, in Septe mber of 
1958, a personal file had been opened on King himse lf, 
ostensibly because he had been approached on the st eps of 
a Harlem church in which he'd delivered a guest sermon by 
black CP member Benjamin J. Davis. 15  By October 1960, 
as the SCLC call for desegregation and black voting rights in 
the south gained increasing attention and support a cross the 
nation, the Bureau began actively infiltrating organizational 
meetings and conferences. 16  
By July of 1961, FBI intelligence on the group was detailed 
enough to recount that, while an undergraduate at A tlanta's 
Morehouse College in 1948, King had been affiliated with the 
Progressive Party, and that executive director Wyatt Tee 
Walker had once subscribed to a CP newspaper, The 
Worker . 17


--- PAGE 15 ---
Actual counterintelligence operations against King and the 
SCLC seem to have begun with a January 8, 1962 letter 
from Hoover to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, 
contending that the civil rights leader enjoyed a "close 
relationship" with Stanley D. Levison, "a member of the 
Communist Party, USA," and that Isadore Wofsy, "a h igh 
ranking communist leader," had written a speech for King. 
18  
On the night of March 15-16,1962, FBI agents secret ly broke 
into Levison's New York office and planted a bug; a wiretap 
of his office phone followed on March 20. 19  Among the 
other things picked up by the surveillance was information 
that Jack ODell, who also had an alleged "record of ties to 
the Communist party," had been recommended by both King 
and Levison to serve as an assistant to Wyatt Tee W alker. 
20  Although none of these supposed communist affiliat ions 
were ever substantiated, it was on this basis that SCLC was 
targeted within the Bureau's ongoing COINTELPRO-
CP,USA, beginning with the planting of five disinformational 
"news stories" concerning the organization's "communist 
connections" on October 24, 1962. 
21  By this point, Martin 
Luther King's name had been placed in Section A of the FBI 
Reserve Index, one step below those individuals registered 
in the Security Index and scheduled to be rounded u p and 
"preventively detained" in the event of a declared national 
emergency; Attorney General Kennedy had also authorized 
round-the-clock surveillance of all SCLC offices, as well as 
King's home. 22  Hence, by November 8,1963, 
comprehensive telephone taps had been installed at all 
organizational offices, and King's residence. 23   
By 1964, King was not only firmly established as a 
preeminent civil rights leader, but was beginning to show 
signs of pursuing a more fundamental structural age nda of 
social change. Meanwhile, the Bureau continued its efforts to 
discredit King, maintaining a drumbeat of mass medi a-
distributed propaganda concerning his supposed 
"communist influences" and sexual proclivities, as well as 
triggering a spate of harassment by the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS). 
24  When it was announced on October 14 of 
that year that King would receive a Nobel Peace Prize as a 
reward for his work in behalf of the rights of American 
blacks, the Bureau - exhibiting a certain sense of 
desperation - dramatically escalated its efforts to neutralize 
him.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Two days after announcement of the impending award,  
COINTELPRO specialist William Sullivan caused a 
composite audio tape to be produced, supposedly con sisting 
of "highlights" taken from the taps of King's phones and bugs 
placed in his various hotel rooms over the preceding two 
years.  
The result, prepared by FBI audio technician John M atter, 
purported to demonstrate the civil rights leader had engaged 
in a series of "orgiastic" trysts with prostitutes and, thus, "the 
depths of his sexual perversion and depravity." The finished 
tape was packaged, along with an accompanying 
anonymous letter (prepared by Bureau Internal Security 
Supervisor Seymore F. Phillips on Sullivan's instruction), 
informing King that the audio material would be released to 
the media unless he committed suicide prior to best owal of 
the Nobel Prize.  
King, look into your heart. You know you are a complete 
fraud and a great liability to all of us Negroes. W hite people 
in this country have enough frauds of their own but I am sure 
that they don't have one at this time that is any where near 
your equal. You are no clergyman and you know it. I repeat 
you are a colossal fraud and an evil, vicious one at that. ...  
King, there is only one thing left for you to do. You know 
what it is. You have just 34 days in which to do (this exact 
number has been selected for a specific reason, it has 
definite practical significant. You are done. There  is but one 
way out for you. You better take it before your filthy, 
abnormal fraudulent self is bared to the nation. [s ic]. 
25  
Sullivan then instructed veteran COINTELPRO operative 
Lish Whitson to fly to Miami with the package; once  there, 
Whitson was instructed to address the parcel and ma il it to 
the intended victim. 26  When King failed to comply with 
Sullivan's anonymous directive that he kill himself, FBI 
Associate Director Cartha D. "Deke" DeLoach attempt ed to 
follow through with the threat to make the contents of the 
doctored tape public:  
The Bureau Crime Records Division, headed by DeLoach, 
initiated a major campaign to let newsmen know just what 
the Bureau [claimed to have] on King. DeLoach perso nally 
offered a copy of the King surveillance transcript to 
Newsweek  Washington bureau chief Benjamin Bradlee.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Bradlee refused it, and mentioned the approach to a  
Newsday  colleague, Jay Iselin. 27  
Bradlee's disclosure of what the FBI was up to served to 
curtail the effectiveness of DeLoach's operation, a nd Bureau 
propagandists consequently found relatively few takers on 
this particular story. More, in the face of a planned 
investigation of electronic surveillance by government 
agencies announced by Democratic Missouri Senator 
Edward V. Long, J. Edgar Hoover was forced to order the 
rapid dismantling of the electronic surveillance coverage of 
both King and the SCLC, drying up much of the sourc e 
material upon which Sullivan and his COINTELPRO 
specialists depended for "authenticity."  
Still, the Bureau's counterintelligence operations against 
King continued apace, right up to the moment of the  target's 
death by sniper fire on a Memphis hotel balcony on April 4, 
1968. 
28  By 1969, "[FBI] efforts to 'expose' Martin Luther 
King, Jr., had not slackened even though King had been 
dead for a year." 29  
Those seeking independence for Puerto Rico were sim ilarly 
attacked. The Bureau considered independentista  leader 
Juan Mari Bras' near-fatal heart attack during April of 1964 to 
have been brought on, at least in part, by an anonymous 
counterintelligence letter:  
[deleted] stated that MARI BRAS' heart attack on Ap ril 21, 
1964, was obviously brought on by strain and overwork and 
opinioned that the anonymous letter certainly did nothing to 
ease his tensions for he felt the effects of the le tter deeply. 
The source pointed out that with MARI BRAS' illness and 
effects of the letter on the MPIPR leaders, that th e 
organization's activities had come to a near halt.  
[paragraph deleted]  
It is clear from the above that our anonymous lette r has 
seriously disrupted the MPIPR ranks and created a climate 
of distrust and dissension from which it will take them some 
time to recover. This particular technique has been 
outstandingly successful and we shall be on the lookout to 
further exploit the achievements in this field. The  Bureau will 
be promptly advised of other positive results of this program 
that may come to our attention. 30


--- PAGE 18 ---
The pattern remained evident more than a decade lat er 
when, after reviewing portions of the 75 volumes of 
documents the FBI had compiled on him, Mari Bras te stified 
before the United Nations Commission on Decolonizat ion:  
[The documents] reflect the general activity of the FBI toward 
the movement. But some of the memos are dated 1976 and 
1977; long after COINTELPRO was [supposedly] ended as 
an FBI activity ... At one point, there is a detailed description 
of the death of my son, in 1976, at the hands of a gun-toting 
assassin. The bottom of the memo is fully deleted, leaving 
one to wonder who the assassin was. The main point, 
however, is that the memo is almost joyful about th e impact 
his death will have upon me in my Gubernatorial campaign, 
as head of our party, in 1976. 31  
When Mari Bras suffered from an attack of severe 
depression the same year, the San Juan Special Agen t in 
Charge noted in a memo to FBI headquarters that, "I t would 
hardly be idle boasting to say that some of the Bureau's 
activities have provoked the situation of Mari Bras." Given 
the context established by the Bureau's own statements vis 
a vis  Mari Bras, it also seems quite likely that one of the 
means by which the FBI continued to "exploit its 
achievements" in "provoking the situation" of the 
independentista  leader was to arrange for the firebombing of 
his home in 1978.  
Lethal COINTELPRO operations against the 
independentistas  continued well into the 1980s. As Alfredo 
Lopez recounted in 1988:  
[O]ver the past fifteen years, 170 attacks - beatin gs, 
shootings, and bombings of independence organizations and 
activists - have been documented ... there have been 
countless attacks and beatings of people at rallies  and 
pickets, to say nothing of independentistas  walking the 
streets. The 1975 bombing of a rally at Mayaguez that killed 
two restaurant workers was more dramatic, but like the other 
170 attacks remains unsolved. Although many right-wing 
organizations claimed credit for these attacks, not one 
person has been arrested or brought to trial. 
32  
A clear instance of direct FBI involvement in anti-
independentista  violence is the "Cerro Maravilla Episode" of 
July 25,1978. On that date, two young activists, Arnaldo


--- PAGE 19 ---
Dario Rosado and Carlos Soto Arrivi, accompanied a 
provocateur  named Alejandro Gonzalez Malave, were lured 
into a trap and shot to death by police near the mo untain 
village. Official reports claimed the pair had been on the way 
to blow up a television tower near Cerro Maravilla, and had 
fired first when officers attempted to arrest them.  A taxi 
driver who was also on the scene, however, adamantly 
insisted that this was untrue, that neither independentista  
had offered resistance when captured, and that the police 
themselves had fired two volleys of shots in order to make it 
sound from a distance as if they'd been fired upon.  "It was a 
planned murder," the witness said, "and it was carried out 
like that." What had actually happened became even more 
obvious when a police officer named Julio Cesar And rades 
came forward and asserted that the assassination ha d been 
planned "from on high" and in collaboration with th e Bureau. 
This led to confirmation of Gonzalez Molave's role as an 
infiltrator reporting to both the local police and the FBI, a 
situation which prompted him to admit "having planned and 
urged the bombing" in order to set the two young victim up 
for execution. In the end, it was shown that:  
Dario and Soto [had] surrendered. Police forced the  men to 
their knees, handcuffed their arms behind their bac ks, and 
as the two independentistas  pleaded for justice, the police 
tortured and murdered them. 
33  
None of the police and other officials involved were ever 
convicted of the murders and crimes directly involved in this 
affair. However, despite several years of systematic coverup 
by the FBI and U.S. Justice Department, working in direct 
collaboration with the guilty officers, ten of the latter were 
finally convicted on multiple counts of perjury and sentenced 
to prison terms ranging from six to 30 years apiece. Having 
evaded legal responsibility for his actions altogether, 
provocateur  Gonzalez Molave was shot to death in front of 
his home on April 29,1986, by "party or parties unknown." 
This was followed, on February 28,1987, by the 
government's payment of $575,000 settlements to bot h 
victims' families, a total of $1,150,000 in acknowledgment of 
the official misconduct attending their deaths and the 
subsequent investigation(s).  
Despite tens of thousands of pages of documentary 
evidence, the idea that the Bureau would utilize private right-
wing operatives and terrorists is a chilling, alien concept to


--- PAGE 20 ---
most Americans. Nevertheless, the FBI has financed,  
organized, and supplied arms to right-wing groups that 
carried out fire-bombings, burglaries, and shootings. 34  
This was the case during the FBI's COINTELPRO in South 
Dakota in the 1970's against the Oglala Sioux Nation and the 
American Indian Movement. Right-wing vigilantes were used 
to disrupt the American Indian Movement (AIM) and 
selectively terrorize and murder the Oglala Sioux people 
35 , 
in what could only be described as a counter-insurgency 
campaign. During the 36 months roughly beginning with the 
1973 seige of Wounded Knee and continuing through t he 
first of May 1976, more than sixty AIM members and 
supporters died violently on or in locations immediately 
adjacent to the Pine Ridge Reservation. A minimum o f 342 
others suffered violent physical assaults. As Roberto 
Maestas and Bruce Johansen have observed:  
Using only these documented political deaths, the yearly 
murder rate on Pine Ridge Reservation between March 1, 
1973, and March 1, 1976, was 170 per 100,000. By 
comparison, Detroit, the reputed "murder capital of  the 
United States," had a rate of 20.2 in 1974. ... The  political 
murder rate at Pine Ridge between March 1, 1973, an d 
March 1, 1976, was almost equivalent to that in Chile during 
the three years after the military coup supported by the 
United States deposed and killed President Salvador  
Allende. 
36  
To commemorate the 1890 massacre of Wounded Knee, i n 
which 300 Minnecojou Lakota were slaughtered by the U.S. 
Seventh Cavalry, hundreds of Native Americans from 
reservations across the West gathered in Wounded Kn ee, 
on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, during the 
winter of 1972-73. 
37  
This situation was already tense due to a series of unsolved 
murders on the reservation, and a struggle between the 
administration of the Oglala Sioux tribal president, Dick 
Wilson, and opposition organizations on the reserva tion, 
including AIM. Wilson had been bestowed with a $62, 000 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) grant for purposes o f 
establishing a "tribal ranger group" - an entity which 
designated itself as "Guardians Of the OgIala Natio n" 
(GOONs). Wilson's "goon squads" patrolled the reser vation, 
unleashing a reign of terror against Wilson's enemi es. When


--- PAGE 21 ---
victims attempted to seek the protection of the BIA  police, 
they quickly discovered that perhaps a third of its roster - 
including its head, Delmar Eastman (Crow), and his second-
in-command, Duane Brewer (OgIala) - were doubling as 
GOON leaders or members. For their part, BIA offici als - 
who had set the whole thing up - consistently turned aside 
requests for assistance from the traditionals as be ing "purely 
internal tribal matters," beyond the scope of BIA a uthority.  
On Feb 28th, 1973, residents of Wounded Knee, South  
Dakota found the roads to the hamlet blockaded by G OONs, 
later reinforced by marshals service Special Operations 
Group (SOG) teams and FBI personnel. By 10 p.m., 
Minneapolis SAC Joseph Trimbach had flown in to ass ume 
personal command of the GOONs and BIA police, while  
Wayne Colburn, director of the U.S. Marshals Servic e, had 
arrived to assume control over his now reinforced SOG unit. 
Colonel Volney Warner of the 82nd Airborne Division  and 
6th Army Colonel Jack Potter - operating directly under 
General Alexander Haig, military liaison in the Nixon White 
House - had also been dispatched from the Pentagon as 
"advisors" coordinating a flow of military personnel, weapons 
and equipment to those besieging Wounded Knee. As R ex 
Weyler has noted:  
Documents later subpoenaed from the Pentagon reveal ed 
that Colonel Potter directed the employment of 17 A PCs 
[armored personnel carriers], 130,000 rounds of M-1 6 
ammunition, 41,000 rounds of M-40 high explosive, a s well 
as helicopters, Phantom jets, and personnel. Military officers, 
supply sergeants, maintenance technicians, chemical 
officers, and medical teams remained on duty throughout the 
71 day siege, all working in civilian clothes [to conceal their 
unconstitutional involvement in this "civil disorder"]. 
38  
On March 5, Dick Wilson - with federal officials pr esent - 
held a press conference to declare "open season" on  AIM 
members on Pine Ridge, declaring "AIM will die at W ounded 
Knee." For their part, those inside the hamlet anno unced 
their intention to remain where they were until such time as 
Wilson was removed from office, the GOONs disbanded , 
and the massive federal presence withdrawn.  
Beginning on March 13, federal forces directed fire  from 
heavy .50 caliber machineguns into the AIM positions. The 
following month was characterized by alternating periods of


--- PAGE 22 ---
negotiation, favored by the army and the marshals - which 
the FBI and GOONs did their best to subvert - and raging 
gun battles when the latter held sway. Several defenders 
were severely wounded in a firefight on March 17, and on 
March 23 some 20,000 more rounds were fired into 
Wounded Knee in a 24-hour period.  
The FBI's "turf battle" with the "soft" elements of  the federal 
government rapidly came to a head. On April 23, Chief U.S. 
Marshal Colburn and federal negotiator Kent Frizzell were 
detained at a GOON roadblock and a gun pointed at 
Frizzell's head. By his own account, Frizzell was saved only 
after Colburn leveled a weapon at the GOON and said , "Go 
ahead and shoot Frizzell, but when you do, you're dead." 
The pair were then released. Later the same day, a furious 
Colburn returned with several of his men, disarmed and 
arrested eleven GOONs, and dismantled the roadblock . 
However, "that same night... some of Wilson's peopl e put it 
up again. The FBI, still supporting the vigilantes, had 
[obtained the release of those arrested and] suppli ed them 
with automatic weapons." The GOONs were being armed by 
the FBI with fully automatic M-16 assault rifles, apparently 
limitless quantifies of ammunition, and state-of-th e-art radio 
communications gear. When Colburn again attempted t o 
dismantle the roadblock:  
FBI [operations consultant] Richard [G.] Held arrived by 
helicopter to inform the marshals that word had com e from a 
high Washington source to let the roadblock stand . .. As a 
result the marshals were forced to allow several of Wilson's 
people to be stationed at the roadblock and to part icipate in 
... patrols around the village. 
39  
On the evening of April 26, the marshals reported t hat they 
were taking automatic weapons fire from behind thei r 
position, undoubtedly from GOON patrols. The same " party 
or parties unknown" was also pumping bullets into the 
AIM/ION positions in front of the marshals, a matte r which 
caused return fire from AIM. The marshals were thus  caught 
in a crossfire. At dawn on the 27th, the marshals, unnerved 
at being fired on all night from both sides, fired tear gas 
cannisters from M-79 grenade launchers into the AIM /ION 
bunkers. They followed up with some 20,000 rounds o f small 
arms ammunition. AIM member Buddy Lamont (Oglala), 
driven from a bunker by the gas, was hit by automatic


--- PAGE 23 ---
weapons fire and bled to death before medics, pinne d down 
by the barrage, could reach him.  
When the siege finally ended through a negotiated 
settlement on May 7, 1973, the AIM casualty count s tood at 
two dead and fourteen seriously wounded. An additio nal 
eight-to-twelve individuals had been "disappeared" by the 
GOONs. They were in all likelihood murdered and - like an 
untold number of black civil rights workers in the swamps of 
Mississippi and Louisiana - their bodies secretly buried 
somewhere in the remote vastness of the reservation.  
Of the 60-plus murders occurring in an area in which the FBI 
held "preeminent jurisdiction," not one was solved by the 
Bureau. In most instances, no active investigation was ever 
opened, despite eye-witnesses identifying members of the 
Wilson GOON squad as killers.  
U.S. Court of Appeals Judge Gerald Heaney, after re viewing 
numerous court transcripts and FBI documents, concl uded 
that the United States Government overreacted at Wo unded 
Knee.  Instead of carefully considering the legitimate 
grievances of Native Americans, the response was 
essentially a military one.  
While Judge Heaney believed that the "Native Americ ans" 
had some culpability in the firefight that day, he concluded 
the United States must share the responsibility.  It never 
has.  The FBI has never been held accountable or ev en 
publicly investigated for what one Federal petit jury and 
Judge Heaney concluded was complicity in the creation of a 
climate of fear and terror on the Pine Ridge Reservation.  
Other AIM casualties include Richard Oaks, leader of the 
1970 occupation of Alcatraz Island by "Indians of A ll Tribes," 
who was gunned down in California the following year. 
Larray Cacuse, a Navajo AIM leader, was shot to death in 
Arizona in 1972. In 1979, AIM leader John Trudell, preparing 
to make a speech in Washington, was told by FBI per sonnel 
that, if he gave the speech, there would be "conseq uences." 
Trudell not only made his speech, calling for the U.S. to get 
out of North America and detailing the nature of fe deral 
repression in Indian country, he burned a U.S. flag as well. 
That night, his wife, mother-in-law, and three children were 
"mysteriously" burned to death at their home on the  Duck 
Valley Reservation in Nevada.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Agents Provocateurs  
Many details are now available concerning these extensive 
campaigns of terror and disruption, in part through right-wing 
paramilitary groups organized and financed by the national 
government, but primarily through the much more eff ective 
means of infiltration and provocation of existing groups. In 
particular, much of the violence that occurred on c ollege 
campuses can be attributed to government provocateurs .  
The Alabama branch of the ACLU argued in court that  in 
May 1970 an FBI agent "committed arson and other vi olence 
that police used as a reason for declaring that uni versity 
students were unlawfully assembled" -- 150 students were 
arrested. The court ruled that the agent's role was irrelevant 
unless the defense could establish that he was inst ructed to 
commit the violent acts, but this was impossible, according 
to defense counsel, since the FBI and police thwart ed his 
efforts to locate the agent who had admitted the ac ts to him. 
40  
William Frapolly, who surfaced as a government info rmer in 
the Chicago Eight conspiracy trial, an active member of 
student and off-campus peace groups in Chicago, "du ring an 
antiwar rally at his college, ... grabbed the microphone from 
the college president and wrestled him off the stag e" and 
"worked out a scheme for wrecking the toilets in the college 
dorms...as an act of antiwar protest." 41  
One FBI provocateur resigned when he was asked to 
arrange the bombing of a bridge in such a way that the 
person who placed the booby-trapped bomb would be k illed. 
This was in Seattle, where it was revealed that FBI 
infiltrators had been engaged in a campaign of arso n, 
terrorism, and bombings of university and civic buildings, 
and where the FBI arranged a robbery, entrapping a young 
black man who was paid $75 for the job and killed in a police 
ambush. 
42  
In another case, an undercover operative who had fo rmed 
and headed a pro-Communist Chinese organization "at  the 
direction of the bureau" reports that at the Miami Republican 
convention he incited "people to turn over one of t he buses 
and then told them that if they really wanted to bl ow the bus


--- PAGE 25 ---
up, to stick a rag in the gas tank and light it." They were 
unable to overturn the vehicle. 43  
  
The Ku Klux Klan 
During the 1960's, the FBI's role was not to protect civil 
rights workers, but rather, through the use of informants, the 
Bureau actively assisted the Ku Klux Klan in their campaign 
of racist murder and terror.  
Church Committee hearings and internal FBI document s 
revealed that more than one quarter of all active Klan 
members during the period were FBI agents or informants. 
44  However, Bureau intelligence "assets" were neither 
neutral observers nor objective investigators, but active 
participants in beatings, bombings and murders that  claimed 
the lives of some 50 civil rights activists by 1964. 44  
Bureau spies were elected to top leadership posts in at least 
half of all Klan units. 45  Needless to say, the informants 
gained positions of organizational trust on the basis of 
promoting the Klan's fascist agenda. Incitement to violence 
and participation in terrorist acts would only confirm the 
infiltrator's loyalty and commitment.  
Unlike slick Hollywood popularizations of the period, such as 
Alan Parker's film, "Mississippi Burning," the FBI was 
instrumental in building the Ku Klux Klan in the South,  
"...setting up dozens of Klaverns, sometimes being leaders 
and public spokespersons. Gary Rowe, an FBI informant, 
was involved in the Klan killing of Viola Liuzzo, a civil rights 
worker. He claimed that he had to fire shots at her  rather 
than 'blow his cover.' One FBI agent, speaking at a rally 
organized by the Klavern he led, proclaimed to his followers, 
'We will restore white rights if we have to kill every negro to 
do it.'" 46  
Throughout its history, the Klan has had a contradictory 
relationship with the national government: as a defender of 
white privilege and the patriarchal status quo, and as an 
implicit threat, however provisional, to federal power. 
Depending on political conditions in society as a whole, 
vigilante terror can be supplemental to official violence, or


--- PAGE 26 ---
kept on the proverbial shortleash. 47  As a surrogate army in 
the field of terror against official enemies, the K lan enjoys 
wide latitude. But when it moves into an oppositional mode 
and attacks key institutions of national power, Klan 
paramilitarism - but not its overt white supremacist ideology - 
is treated as an imminent threat to the social orde r, 
suppressed, but never destroyed, unlike other 
COINTELPRO target groups.  
These roles are not mutually exclusive. As anti-racist 
researcher Michael Novick warns: "The KKK and its 
successor and fraternal organizations are deeply rooted in 
the actual white supremacist power relations of US society. 
They exist as a supplement to the armed power of th e state, 
available to be used when the rulers and the state find it 
necessary." 
48  
The Klan's "supplemental" role, particularly as a private 
armed force sporadically deployed to arrest the development 
of movements for Black freedom, is best considered by 
comparison to other Bureau operations. Unlike other  
COINTELPROs, the "Klan - White Hate Groups" program  
was of a different order entirely. Senior FBI manag ement 
and a majority of agents in the field endorsed the Klan's 
values, if not the vigilante character of their tactics; from 
militaristic anti-communism to extreme racial hatred; from 
ultra-nationalism to misogynist puritanism. 49  
This was evident during the civil rights struggles of the 
sixties, when Freedom Riders and local community activists 
directly confronted hostile police forces - many of whom 
were openly allied with the Klan. Despite clear jurisdictional 
authority to enforce federal law, the FBI consistently refused 
to protect civil rights workers under attack across the South. 
More than once, the Bureau refused to warn those un der 
imminent threat of violence.  
FBI inaction in the area of civil rights enforcement wasn't 
simply a matter of what the Pike Committee of the H ouse of 
Representatives dubbed "FBI racism." Rather, FBI 
bureaucratic lethargy, when it came to protecting Black lives, 
underscored its mission against subversion for constituents 
whose privileges and power were threatened by a militant 
movement for Black rights. 
50


--- PAGE 27 ---
Strikingly different from anti-communist COINTELPRO s that 
enmeshed broad social sectors in a web of entanglem ents, 
FBI monitoring of the Klan was strictly confined to the 
organization itself. No serious efforts were made to explore 
the supplemental role of White Citizens' Councils, many of 
which were active Klan fronts, let alone investigate the 
obvious and widespread police complicity in racist violence. 
51  Bureau surveillance of the Klan was purely passive, 
hardly the directed aggression reserved for left-wing targets.  
In May, 1961, as civil rights activists turned up the heat, the 
FBI passed information to the Klan about Freedom Ri der 
buses on their way to Birmingham, Alabama. A police 
sergeant, Thomas Cook, attached to the Birmingham p olice 
intelligence branch was plied with reports by Bureau 
informants. A Klan member himself, Cook furnished t his 
information to Robert Shelton's Alabama Knights and  
arranged several meetings to discuss "matters of interest." 
Cook supplied Klan leaders with the names of "inter -racial 
organizations," the location of meetings, and the 
membership lists of civil rights groups for circulation in Klan 
publications. FBI informant Gary Thomas Rowe wrote a 
confidential memo to the Birmingham Special Agent i n 
Charge (SAC) stating that Cook had handed over inter-office 
intelligence memos on civil rights activists during a Klan 
meeting. Rowe insisted that Cook not only gave him relevant 
information that police had in their files, but urg ed Rowe to 
"help himself to any material he thought he would n eed for 
the Klan." 
52  
According to documents obtained by the American Civil 
Liberties Union, the Birmingham SAC called Cook and 
informed him of the progress that Freedom Rider bus es had 
made and when they were scheduled to arrive in the city. 
According to Rowe, Cook and Birmingham's public safety 
director, arch-segregationist Eugene "Bull" Connor conspired 
with Klan leaders and directly organized physical attacks on 
Freedom Riders when the buses reached their destina tion. 
According to one FBI memo, Connor declared: "By God , if 
you are going to do this thing, do it right." 53  
In consultation with Shelton's group, Birmingham police 
agreed not to show up for 15 or 20 minutes after th e buses 
pulled in, to give Klansmen sufficient time to carry out their 
attack. Assailants were promised lenient treatment if through 
some fluke, they managed to get arrested. During a planning


--- PAGE 28 ---
meeting that finalized logistical details, Grand Titan Hubert 
Page advised Klansmen that Imperial Wizard Shelton had 
spoken with Detective Cook, and was informed that 
Freedom Rider buses were scheduled to arrive at 11:00 am.  
Earlier that day, the KKK intercepted another bus o n its way 
to Birmingham, beating the passengers and setting the 
vehicle ablaze. As agreed during consultations with Klan 
leadership, when the buses arrived no police were present at 
either of Birmingham's bus terminals, but 60 Klansm en - 
including Rowe - were waiting. Klansmen attacked civil rights 
workers, reporters and photographers, viciously beating 
anyone within reach with chains, pipes and baseball bats.  
According to ACLU attorney Howard Simon, "We found that 
the FBI knew that the Birmingham Police Department was 
infiltrated by the Klan, that many members of the p olice 
department were Klan members, that they knew a person in 
intelligence was passing information directly to leaders of the 
Klan, and they also knew their undercover agent had worked 
out an agreement with the police department to stay  away 
from the terminals. They knew all that and still continued 
their relationship with the police department." 
54  
Though the Bureau claimed that its "Klan - White Ha te 
Groups" COINTELPRO was launched in order to stifle white 
supremacist activities, the historical record proves otherwise. 
The more well known, but by no means only examples of 
Klan terror during the period - the 1963 bombing of  the 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church that killed four black 
children; the 1964 murders of civil rights workers Goodman, 
Chaney and Schwerner in Mississippi: and the 1965 
assassination of Viola Liuzzo and her companion nea r 
Selma, Alabama, point to knowledge of the crimes, a nd 
complicity in subsequent cover-ups by FBI officials.  
Bureau informant Gary Thomas Rowe was a central figure in 
some of the most publicized crimes of the period, i ndulging 
in freelance acts of racist terror. He was suspected of 
involvement in firebombing the home of a wealthy Black 
Birmingham resident, the detonation of shrapnel bom bs in 
Black neighborhoods and the murder of a Black man d uring 
a 1963 demonstration. He became a prime suspect in the 
Birmingham church bombing after he failed two polygraph 
tests. His answers were described by investigators as


--- PAGE 29 ---
"deceptive" when he denied having been with the Klan group 
that planted the bomb. 55  
Despite enough evidence to open a preliminary 
investigation, the FBI refused, covering-up for Rowe even 
when another informant, John Wesley Hall, named him  as a 
member of a three-man Klan security committee holdi ng 
veto power over all proposed acts of violence. Years later, 
an independent inquiry uncovered evidence that Hall 
became a Bureau informant two months after the bomb ing 
and despite the fact that a polygraph test convince d the 
Alabama FBI that he was probably involved in the attack 
himself, Hall admitted to having moved dynamite for  the 
plot's ringleader, Robert E. Chambliss, a Klan member since 
1924. Even though court testimony and a wealth of e vidence 
linked Hall, Rowe and other members of the Alabama 
Knight's to the bombing, the suspects were convicted on a 
misdemeanor charge - "possession of an explosive without a 
permit." It took more than a decade and three bungl ed 
investigations to finally convict Chambliss of the crime. 
56  
In July 1997, almost 35 years after the Sixteenth Street 
Baptist Church bombing, the FBI re-opened its investigation 
based on "new information." However, mainstream news 
accounts failed to report the pivotal role played by Bureau 
informants. The Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth, a target of a 1963 
Klan assassination plot, believes he knows why only one 
man was convicted for the bombing. "It is well known," the 
75-year old civil rights leader said, "there was collusion all 
along between the FBI, local law enforcement and th e Klan." 
Rev. Shuttlesworth should know: Bureau informant John 
Wesley Hall was the man who proposed killing the mi nister. 
57  
New light was shed on Rowe's privileged position as an FBI 
provocateur tasked to "disrupt and neutralize" the civil rights 
struggle. During a subsequent investigation into the murder 
of Viola Liuzzo, evidence surfaced that it was Rowe who 
actually fired the fatal shots that took her life. But instead of 
prosecuting Rowe, the Bureau placed him in a federa l 
witness protection program. 58  
In 1978, Rowe was indicted by an Alabama grand jury as 
Liuzzo's killer. But complicity in shielding Rowe and the 
Bureau from exposure came to light when the content s of a 
J. Edgar Hoover memo to President Lyndon Johnson


--- PAGE 30 ---
became public. Hours after the killings Hoover wrote: "A 
Negro man was with Mrs. Liuzzo and reportedly was sitting 
close to her." In a subsequent memo to aides, Hoove r said 
he informed the President that "she was sitting very, very 
close to the Negro in the car, that it had the appe arance of a 
necking party." 59  While providing a glimpse into the 
pathological nature of Hoover's racism and misogyny, the 
Director fails to enlighten us as to the mechanics of a 
"necking party" during a 100 mph car chase in the dead of 
night, a "party" by terrorized individuals fleeing armed Klan 
thugs intent on killing them in cold blood. However twisted, 
Hoover's slander was calculated to establish a motive; one 
that would "justify" Mrs. Liuzzo's murder on grounds of 
breaking one of nativism's primal laws: the prohibition 
against sex between the races.  
On November 3, 1979, a posse organized by Klansmen and 
neo-Nazis murdered five members of the Communist 
Workers Party (CWP) in broad daylight. The CWP had 
organized a "Smash the Klan" demonstration in Green sboro, 
North Carolina among the city's mostly black and working 
class mill workers. CWP members included union orga nizers 
and activists who had upset "the fundamental order of 
things." 
60  
An essential component for the operation, organized  by 
night-riding Klansmen, was U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF) agent, Bernard Butkovich. 
The BATF agent, a Vietnam veteran and demolitions e xpert 
undercover in the local branch of the American Nazi Party, 
helped the Klan obtain automatic weapons, and also in 
making their escape. 
61  
The posse had been organized and led by an FBI infi ltrator, 
Edward Dawson. Dawson was also a paid informant for the 
Greensboro Police Department. 62  Dawson reported to his 
handlers that eighty-five Klansmen meeting in nearby 
Lincolnton had expressed their intent to counter-demonstrate 
on November 3. 63  
The night-riders had stated they intended to arm th emselves 
for their counter-demonstration and that Klan leade r, Grand 
Dragon Virgil Griffin, was actively calling out Klansmen from 
other states to participate. It was also rumored that neo-
Nazis from the Winston-Salem area had obtained a ma chine 
gun and other weapons. Dawson reported to Greensboro


--- PAGE 31 ---
detective Jerry Cooper that Klansmen and neo-Nazis were 
assembling at the home of a local Klan member and t hat 
they were armed. 64  
The police/FBI informant had received a copy of the  parade 
route the day before the CWP-initiated march; a map  had 
been supplied by Detective Cooper. Dawson had driven over 
the parade route three hours earlier with a contingent of out-
of-town Klansmen. Dawson also alerted Cooper that the 
Klansmen and neo- Nazis possessed three handguns an d 
nine long-barrelled rifles, including automatic weapons 
supplied by BATF agent Bernard Butkovich. 65  
Prior to the beginning of the CWP's march and 
demonstration, Cooper and other police officials drove by the 
house where the Klansmen and neo-Nazis were assembling. 
They jotted down license plate numbers and then dec lared a 
lunch break -- at approximately 10 a.m. 
66  Less than an 
hour later, Cooper, trailing behind the Klan caravan reported, 
"shots fired" and then "heavy gunfire." The tactica l squad 
assigned to monitor the march were still out to lunch. 67  
Two other officers, responding to a domestic distur bance 
call, noted the absence of patrol cars usually assigned to the 
area. They arrived at the Morningside projects, the site of the 
CWP march. Officer Wise later reported having recei ved a 
most unusual call from the police communications ce nter. 
The officers were asked how long they anticipated being at 
their call; they were subsequently advised to "clear the area 
as soon as possible." 68  
Moments later, five demonstrators lay dead, murdere d in 
broad daylight by members of the Ku Klux Klan and t he 
American Nazi Party. 69  According to Michael Novick, the 
Greensboro massacre "set the tone for neo-Nazi orga nizing 
by the KKK and other white supremacists in the ensu ing 
decade." 70  
A subsequent civil suit brought against the neo-Nazis, the 
Klan and the Greensboro police resulted in a partia l award to 
the surviving family members. FBI and BATF agents walked 
away scott-free.  
  
The Secret Army Organization


--- PAGE 32 ---
Convinced that the United States was under threat of an 
imminent communist takeover, Robert DePugh, a 
disenchanted member of the John Birch Society, foun ded 
the Minutemen in the early sixties. Forged as a "last line of 
defense against communism," DePugh's secret warriors 
were dedicated to building an underground army to fight 
against "the enemy within." 
71  
However absurd this paranoia may appear on the surface, it 
had serious and deadly consequences for anyone caug ht in 
the cross-hairs. Before their undoing in 1969, the result not 
of a sinister plot by "communist infiltrators in the 
government," but because DePugh and others were 
prepared to rob banks to finance the organization, the 
Minutemen had built a formidable national network, with 
thousands of members stockpiling secret arsenals with more 
than enough firepower to match their feverish rheto ric. In 
1966, 19 New York Minutemen were arrested and accused 
of plotting to bomb three summer camps allegedly us ed by 
"Communist, left wing and liberal" groups "for indoctrination 
purposes." Subsequent raids uncovered a huge arms c ache 
that included military assault rifles, bombs, mortars, machine 
guns, grenade launchers and a bazooka.  
In February 1970, six Minutemen from four states le d by 
Jerry Lynn Davis held a clandestine summit in northern 
Arizona. Surveying the ruins, they were convinced that 
"communist elements" in the Justice Department had 
destroyed the group. Undeterred by recent events, they 
formed the nucleus of the Secret Army Organization (SAO).  
As conceived by Davis and the others, the SAO would be 
armed but low-key: a propaganda group with a potential for 
waging guerrilla war against leftists, should the need arise. 
Emphasizing regional autonomy and a decentralized 
structure, they believed they had inoculated themselves 
against unwanted attention from "communist-controll ed" 
government agencies. Shortly after the meeting, chapters 
were established in San Diego, Las Vegas, Phoenix and 
Seattle with promising contacts made in Portland, El Paso, 
Los Angeles and Oklahoma. 
72  
A review of events in San Diego, submitted to the Church 
Committee in June 1975 and based on "pubic admissio ns of 
the officers and agents involved, including sworn testimony 
at various criminal trials and statements given to news


--- PAGE 33 ---
reporters and investigators," 73  describes how the FBI 
played a central role in the creation of the Secret  Army 
Organization, placing informant Howard Berry Godfrey in a 
leadership position.  
Godfrey, a San Diego fireman, devout Mormon, and se lf-
styled commando, was an FBI informant for more than  five 
years. According to ex-members, it was Godfrey who was 
the real force behind the SAO. While employed by th e FBI, 
Godfrey selected the organization's name and defray ed its 
start-up costs, including expenditures for printing and mailing 
literature. By September 1971, there were four active cells in 
San Diego. Little did they know they were under the direction 
of the FBI, the State's ultimate "secret army organ ization."  
San Diego was the center of a thriving activist community 
committed to a multitude of projects anathema to th e nativist 
right. With 200,000 active-duty soldiers stationed at nearby 
bases, the Movement for a Democratic Military (MDM) was 
the outgrowth of antiwar efforts to influence soldi ers bound 
for Vietnam. MDM organizing had made small, but promising 
chinks in the military's armor. Campus organizing by the 
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), and the 
emergence of militant Chicano organizations in the area 
were viewed as serious threats to the successful prosecution 
of the war. A thriving underground press, in the form of the 
San Diego Street Journal , was in stark contrast to the 
conservative and establishment-oriented media. But when 
the  Journal  ran a series of exposes on the shady financial 
empire of Nixon crony, C. Arnholt Smith, the response from 
the right was swift. It would soon turn violent. 
74  
Between November 1969 and January 1970, remnants of  
the Minutemen launched attacks against the Journal . Bullets 
were fired into the office, paint splashed over fur niture, 
equipment smashed, records and subscription lists stolen, 
staff cars firebombed, Journal  vending machines vandalized. 
When the newspaper attempted to relocate to new off ices, 
their prospective landlord was arrested by the San Diego 
police on a fabricated murder charge. Released afte r an 
hour, he told the Journal  they'd have to look elsewhere. As 
the SAO gradually came online as a Bureau surrogate, 
attacks against the newspaper and its staff intensi fied. 75  
Another SAO target was Dr. Peter Bohmer, a radical 
economics professor at San Diego State University who was


--- PAGE 34 ---
popular with students and an articulate spokesperson 
against the war. Harassed by conservative university 
bureaucrats who objected to his antiwar activism, Bohmer 
was fired after a protracted struggle. Predictably, his much-
publicized battle with the university drew SAO scrutiny. 
Beginning in 1971, a vicious campaign was launched against 
the professor. In April, tear gas crystals were dumped in a 
car parked in front of his home. On May 4, a muffle d voice 
warned over the phone "the cross hairs are on you."  
In the summer of 1971, San Diego was chosen as the site 
for the 1972 Republican convention. Harassment agai nst 
Bohmer increased, punctuated by assaults targeting the 
antiwar and Chicano movements. 76  Among these acts were 
destruction of newspaper offices and book stores, 
firebombing of cars, and the distribution of leafle ts giving the 
address of the collective where anti-war activist Peter 
Bohmer lived "for any of our readers who may care to look 
up this Red Scum, and say hello."  
On January 6, 1972 the SAO dramatically upped the a nte. 
Earlier that day SAO cross-hair stickers were plastered on 
the door of Bohmer's office; that evening a caller threatened, 
"This time we left a sticker, next time we may leave a 
grenade. This is the SAO!"  
A few hours later, in a car parked outside Bohmer's home, 
SAO soldier George Mitchell Hoover fiddled with a gun. 
Sitting next to him was Godfrey, the FBI's informant. Aiming 
a 9mm Polish Radom pistol, Hoover fired two shots into the 
house; he would have fired a third but the weapon j ammed. 
The first bullet struck San Diego Street Journal  reporter 
Paula Tharp, shattering her elbow. The second shot 
narrowly missed Shari Whitehead and lodged in a win dow 
frame above her head. Two shell-casings matching the slug 
removed from Tharp's arm were retrieved from the st reet.  
The next day Godfrey turned over the gun to his FBI control 
agent, Steve Christiansen, a devout Mormon and dedicated 
anti-communist himself. The Special Agent hid the w eapon 
under his couch for more than six months while the San 
Diego police conducted a half-hearted investigation. Though 
guilty of covering-up a criminal act, Christiansen insisted that 
Bureau superiors knew he was hiding the gun and fully 
approved of his actions to protect "confidential so urces." 
77


--- PAGE 35 ---
Although the Tharp shooting generated considerable 
publicity, and even some pressure to make arrests, the San 
Diego police responded with the absurd story that Bohmer 
carried out the attack himself in an effort "to att ract sympathy 
for his cause." 
78  
Relentless harassment continued throughout the spri ng of 
1972; more firebombings, threatening phone calls, m ore 
cross-hair stickers, just another day at the office for right-
wing counterguerrillas. But then the group made a fatal 
mistake, one that would cost them dearly.  
On June 19, 1972, William Yakopec entered the Guild  
Theater, a local porno house; concealed under his j acket 
was a bomb. After he pried a cover loose from a ven t at the 
rear of the building, he hurriedly left the premises. Moments 
later a powerful explosion ripped through the theater, 
destroying the screen, blowing debris 60 feet into the air and 
showering the terrified audience with concrete shards and 
two-by-fours. Unfortunately for Yakopec and the SAO, a 
deputy district attorney and a San Diego cop were in the 
audience, conducting an "investigation" to determine 
whether I am Curious (Yellow)  met pertinent criteria to be 
banned as pornography. 79  
Though city fathers had no problem when right-wing militias 
directed their wrath at suitable targets, taking out a cop and 
a district attorney was too much even in San Diego. Rubien 
D. Brandon, the officer who narrowly escaped being blown to 
kingdom come, angrily phoned the FBI and demanded t he 
name of their informer. A week later, seven members  of the 
SAO were behind bars. Yakopec was charged with the Guild 
Theater bombing, George Hoover with the Tharp shooting 
and the group's nominal leader, Jerry Lynn Davis, with 
receiving stolen property and possession of illegal 
explosives. Reluctantly, the Bureau realized the time had 
come to shut the project down.  
During the investigation of the Guild Theater bombing, the 
Yakopec home and those of other SAO members were 
raided by police. Investigators recovered two half pound 
blocks of C-4 plastique, HDP primers, blasting caps, 30-40 
feet of fuses, SAO literature, stacks of cross-hair  stickers 
ready to go and a small arsenal of weapons, including an 
unopened case of M-16's valued at more than $60,000 . 
During a simultaneous raid on the home of Genevieve  and


--- PAGE 36 ---
Richard Fleury, police seized ammunition, dozens of 
revolvers, lugers and eight bandoliers containing more than 
a thousand rounds of 30-caliber bullets. It was later revealed 
that some of these munitions had been transferred t o the 
SAO from the Marine base at Camp Pendelton by a rig ht-
wing physician, Dr. Harold Young. Ex-Minuteman Dino 
Martinelli claimed he had been involved in the transfer and 
that the SDPD and FBI were aware of the thefts but did 
nothing. 80  
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) attorney Frederick 
Hetter discovered during a subsequent investigation "that 
[FBI infiltrator] Godfrey supplied 75% of the money  for the 
SAO" in order for the terrorist army to acquire the weapons. 
81  
What were the results of exposing the extensive lin ks 
between federal authorities and the Secret Army 
Organization? While Yakopec, Hoover and Davis went to 
prison, Godfrey, the FBI's point-man, was rewarded with a 
job in the state fire marshal's office. Agent Chris tiansen left 
the Bureau shortly after his role in the affair cam e to light. 
Refusing to talk, Christiansen would only tell reporters that 
"The FBI is taking good care of us." 
82  The FBI then 
continued with other illegal intelligence and terror programs 
directed against Bohmer and associates, including several 
assassination plots. Not one FBI agent or informer has been 
prosecuted.  
  
Snitch Jacketing  
Under the guidance of the FBI, informants were ofte n able to 
work their way into positions of power, such as was the case 
with Chicago-BPP Chief of Security William O'Neal, or 
American Indian Movement bodyguard Douglas Durham. 
Such individuals were often considered valuable due to the 
(FBI-supplied) information they were able to provide. 
Besides misleading and provoking the infiltrated groups, 
another technique used by informants was to "snitch  jacket" 
genuine activists, to make them appear to be the in formants. 
One such person was Kwame Toure, formerly Stokely 
Carmichael.


--- PAGE 37 ---
Utilizing the services of an infiltrator who had worked his way 
into a position as the Student Nonviolent Coordinat ing 
Committee leader's bodyguard, the Bureau deliberate ly 
created the false appearance that Stokely Carmichae l was 
himself an operative. 83  In a memo dated July 10, 1968, the 
SAC, New York, proposed to Hoover that:  
... consideration be given to convey the impression that 
CARMICHAEL is a CIA informer. One method of 
accomplishing [this] would be to have a carbon copy of an 
informant report supposedly written by CARMICHAEL to the 
CIA carefully deposited in the automobile of a clos e Black 
Nationalist friend ... It is hoped that when the in formant 
report is read it will help promote distrust between 
CARMICHAEL and the Black Community ... It is also 
suggested that we inform a certain percentage of reliable 
criminal and racial informants that "we have it from reliable 
sources that CARMICHAEL is a CIA agent. It is hoped that 
the informants would spread the rumor in various large 
Negro communities across the land. 
84  
Pursuant to a May 19,1969 Airtel from the SAC, San 
Francisco, to Hoover, the Bureau then proceeded to "assist" 
the BPP in "expelling" Carmichael through the forgery of 
letters on party letterhead. The gambit worked, as is 
evidenced in the September 5, 1970 assertion by BPP  head 
Huey P. Newton: "We ... charge that Stokely Carmich ael is 
operating as an agent of the CIA." 
85  
Snitch jacketing has even resulted in the target's death. This 
appears to have occurred in 1975 in the case of Ann a Mae 
Pictou Aquash, a young Micmac woman working with the 
American Indian Movement on the Pine Ridge Reservation. 
According to attorney Bruce Ellison,  
"I represented a young mother and AIM member named 
Anna Mae Pictou on weapons charges.  She told me af ter 
her arrest that the FBI threatened to see her dead within a 
year unless she cooperated against members of AIM.  In an 
operation [similar to those] previously used against members 
of the Black Panther Party, the FBI, through an inf ormant 
named Doug Durham who had infiltrated AIM leadershi p, 
began a rumor that she was an informant.  
"Six months later her body was found on the Pine Ridge 
Reservation.  The FBI said she died of exposure.  T hey cut


--- PAGE 38 ---
off her hands, claiming that this was necessary to identify 
her, and buried her under the name of Jane Doe.  
"We were able to get her body exhumed, and a second , 
independent autopsy revealed that rather than dying of 
exposure, that someone had placed a pistol to the b ack of 
her head and pulled the trigger.  When I asked for her hands 
after the second autopsy, because she was originally not 
buried with her hands, an FBI agent went to his car and 
came back and handed me a box, and with a big smile  on 
his face he said, 'You want her hands?  Here.'" 86  
The FBI agents involved then used the morgue photos  of 
Aquash to frighten another victim, Myrtle Poor Bear, a 
woman with a history of deep psychological disorder, for 
which she had undergone extensive treatment, explaining to 
their captive that she'd end up "the same way" unless she 
did exactly what they wanted. Poor Bear quoted Agent Wood 
as informing her, in specific reference to Aquash, that "they 
[Price and Wood] could get away with killing because they 
were agents." Poor Bear was coerced into giving false 
testimony which led to the extradition of Leonard Peltier, who 
remains a political prisoner to this day. [See "Political 
Prisoners" section].  
  
The Subversion of the Press 
In 1960, the FBI implemented a formal COINTELPRO wi th 
the expressed intent of destroying pro-independence groups 
in Puerto Rico. In doing so, the Bureau engaged in the same 
kind of political warfare that was used by the United States in 
Chile and elsewhere in Latin America. In an August 4, 1960 
memorandum to the Special Agent in Charge, San Juan , 
Director Hoover wrote:  
"In considering this matter, you should bear in mind the 
Bureau desires to disrupt the activities of these organizations 
and is not interested in mere harrassment." 
87  
San Juan complied, at least on the level of plantin g 
disinformation in the island press. Agents systematically 
planted articles and editorials, often containing m alicious 
gossip concerning independentista  leaders' alleged sexual or 
financial affairs, in "friendly" newspapers, and di spensed


--- PAGE 39 ---
"private" warnings to the owners of island radio stations that 
their FCC licenses might be revoked if pro independence 
material were aired.  
There is clear evidence that agents "talked to" the  owners of 
radio stations WLEO in Ponce, WKFE in Yauco and WJR S 
in San German about their licensing as early as 1963. One 
result was cancellation of the one hour daily time-block 
allotted to "Radio Bandera," a program produced by the 
APU. Such tactics to deny a media voice to independentistas  
accord well with other, more directly physical methods 
employed during the 1970s, after COINTELPRO suppose dly 
ended:  
[There was] the bombing of Claridad [daily paper fi rst of the 
MPIPR and then the PSP] printing presses which has 
occurred at least five times in the present decade.  Although 
the MPI [now PSP] usually furnished the police with detailed 
information as to the perpetrators of these acts, n ot even 
one trial has ever been held on this island in connection with 
these bombings, nor even one arrest made. The same holds 
true for a 1973 bombing of the National Committee o f the 
[PIP]. 
88  
In the same memo, Hoover recommended gearing up the  
COINTELPRO, using existing infiltrators within "groups 
seeking independence for Puerto Rico" as agents 
provocateurs . The director felt that "carefully selected 
informants" might be able to raise "controversial issues" 
within independentista  formations. Further, he pointed out 
that such individuals might be utilized effectively to create 
situations in which "nationalist elements could be pitted 
against the communist elements to disrupt some of t he 
organizations, particularly the MPIPR and ... FUPI."  
Hoover also instructed that "the San Juan Office sh ould be 
constantly alert for articles extolling the virtues of Puerto 
Rico's relationship to the United States as opposed  to 
complete separation from the United States, for use  in 
anonymous mailings to selected subjects in the 
independence movement who may be psychologically 
affected by such information."  
The Bureau engaged in intensive investigation of 
independentista  leaders both on the island and in New York 
in order to ascertain their "weaknesses" in terms of "morals,


--- PAGE 40 ---
criminal records, spouses, children, family life, educational 
qualifications and personal activities other than 
independence activities." The findings, however flimsy or 
contrived, were pumped into the media, disseminated  as 
bogus cartoons or "political broadsides," and/or surfaced 
within organizational contexts by provocateurs , all with the 
express intent of setting the leaders one against the other 
and at odds with their respective organizational 
memberships.  
When evidence to support such redbaiting contention s could 
not be discovered, the FBI's COINTELPRO specialists 
simply made it up:  
MPIPR leaders, cognizant of the basic antipathy of Puerto 
Ricans, predominantly Roman Catholic, to communism,  
have consistently avoided, at times through public 
statements, any direct, overt linkage of the MPIPR to 
communism ... The [San Juan office] feels that the above 
situation can be exploited by means of a counterint elligence 
letter, purportedly by an anonymous veteran MPIPR 
member. This letter would alert MPIPR members to a 
probable Communist takeover of the organization. 
89  
Not only did the Bureau's systematic denial of media access 
to, spreading of disinformation about, and fosterin g of 
factionalism within the independentista movement ha ve the 
effect of negating much of the movement's electoral potential 
within the island arena itself, such tactics also subverted 
other initiatives to resolve the issue of Puerto Rico's colonial 
status in a peaceful fashion. This concerns in part icular a 
plebescite called for July 23, 1967. During the ten months 
prior to the scheduled referendum to determine the desires 
of the Puertorriqueno public with regard to the political status 
of their island, the Bureau went far out of its way to spread 
confusion. The COINTELPRO methods used included 
creation of two fictitious organizations Grupo pro-Uso Voto 
del MPI (roughly, "Group within the MPIPR in Favor of 
Voting to Achieve Independence") and the "Committee  
Against Foreign Domination of the Fight for Indepen dence" - 
as the medium through which to misrepresent 
independentista  positions "from the inside ." One outcome 
was that Puertorriqueno  voters increasingly shied away from 
the apparently jumbled and bewildering independentista  
agenda and "accepted" continuation of a "commonweal th" 
status under U.S. domination.


--- PAGE 41 ---
A 1967 Airtel from SAC, San Juan to J. Edgar Hoover  
describes a portion of the COINTELPRO methods to be  
used in subverting the 1967 United Nations plebescite to 
determine the political status of Puerto Rico:  
[deleted] of the MPIPR Youth, has a personal follow ing, and 
the San Juan Office feels that if [deleted] can be split from 
the MPIPR at this time, enough of the MPIPR Youth 
members would be sufficiently confused and disgrunt led to 
effectively neutralize the MPIPR during the critical period just 
prior to the plebescite scheduled for July 23, 1967 . 
90  
With this accomplished, the Bureau set about seeing  to it the 
independentistas  remained artificially discredited (and the 
overall Puertorriqueño  option to mount a coherent effort to 
protest or reconvene the plebescite truncated) by shifting 
responsibility for the disaster onto its foremost victims:  
It might be desirable to blame the communist bloc a nd 
particularly Cuba for the failure of the United Nat ions and to 
criticize Mari Bras and others for isolating the Puerto Rican 
independence forces from the democratic countries. 91  
The other COINTELPRO's also made use the news media . 
One tragic story concerns Jean Seberg, a well known 
actress and white supporter of the Black Panther Pa rty.  
According to former FBI agent M. Wesley Swearingen,  who 
worked in Los Angeles at the time, a culture of racism had 
so permeated the Bureau and its field offices that the agents 
seethed with hatred toward the Panthers and the white 
women who associated with them.  
"In the view of the Bureau," Swearingen reported, "Jean was 
giving aid and comfort to the enemy, the BPP ... Th e giving 
of her white body to a black man was an unbearable thought 
for many of the white agents. An agent [allegedly Richard W. 
Held] was overheard to say, a few days after I arrived in Los 
Angeles from New York, 'I wonder how she'd like to gobble 
my dick while I shove my .38 up that black bastard's ass [a 
reference to BPP theorist Raymond "Masai" Hewitt, with 
whom Seberg was reputedly having an affair]." 92  
On May 27, 1970, when Seberg was in her fifth month  of 
pregnancy, Held sent a telegram to headquarters requesting 
approval to plant a story with Hollywood gossip columnists to 
the effect that Seberg was pregnant, not by her hus band,


--- PAGE 42 ---
Romaine Gary, but by a Panther. Held's idea was approved, 
although implementation was to be postponed 
"approximately two additional months," to protect the 
secrecy of a wiretap the Bureau had installed in the LA and 
San Francisco BPP headquarters, and until the victim's 
"pregnancy would be more visible to everyone." Hoover felt 
that Seberg should be "neutralized" because she'd b een a 
financial supporter of the Black Panther Party.  
The schedule was apparently accelerated, because on  June 
6, Held sent Hoover a letter and attached newspaper 
clipping demonstrating the "success" of his COINTEL PRO 
action: a column by Joyce Haber, which had run in the Los 
Angeles Times on May 19. Known by the FBI to have been 
emotionally unstable and in the care of a psychiatr ist before 
the operation began, Seberg responded to the "discl osure" 
by attempting suicide with an overdose of sleeping pills. This 
in turn precipitated the premature delivery of her fetus; it died 
two days later. Seberg held a press conference, and brought 
the fetus in a glass jar, to prove that it was white.  
Henceforth, a shattered Jean Seberg was to regularly 
attempt suicide on or near the anniversary of her child's 
death. In 1979, she was successful. Romaine Gary, h er ex-
husband, who all along maintained he was the father  of the 
child, followed suit shortly thereafter. There is no indication 
that this was ever considered to be anything other than an 
extremely successful COINTELPRO operation.  
The FBI actively promoted the idea that the Panther s and 
other black nationalists were anti-Semitic, in order to weaken 
their support "among liberal and naive elements." I n one 
indicent, the New York Office sent anonymous letters to 
Rabbi Meir Kahane of the right-wing Jewish Defense League 
to try to provoke a response against the BPP. In reference to 
a July 25, 1969 FBI report entitled, "JEWISH DEFENS E 
LEAGUE, RACIAL MATTERS" the New York Field Office 
proposed:  
Referenced report has been reviewed by the NYO in an 
effort to target one individual within the Jewish Defense 
League (JEDEL) who would be the suitable recipient of 
information furnished on an anonymous basis that th e 
Bureau wishes to disseminate and/or use for future 
counterintelligence purposes.


--- PAGE 43 ---
NY is of the opinion that the individual within JEDEL who 
would most suitably serve the above stated purposed would 
be Rabbi MEIR KAHANE, a Director of JEDEL. It is noted 
that Rabbi KAHANE's background as a writer for the NY 
newspaper "Jewish Press" would enable him to give 
widespread coverage of anti-Semetic [sic] statements made 
by the BPP and other Black Nationalist hate groups not only 
to members of JEDEL but to other individuals who would 
take cognizance of such statements. ...  
In view of the above comments the following is submitted as 
the suggested communication to be used to establish  
rapport between the anonymous source and the select ed 
individual associated with JEDEL:  
Dear Rabbi Kahane:  
I am a negro man who is 48 years old and 
served his country in the U.S. Army in WW2 
and worked as a truck driver with "the famous 
red-ball express" in Gen. Eisenhour's Army in 
France and Natzi Germany. One day I had a 
crash with the truck I was driving, a 2 1/2 ton 
truck, and was injured real bad. I was treated 
and helped by a Jewish Army Dr. named 
"Rothstein" who helped me get better again.  
Also I was encouraged to remain in high school 
for two years by my favorite teacher, Mr. Katz. I 
have always thought Jewish people are good 
and they have helped me all my life. That is 
why I became so upset about my oldest son 
who is a Black Panther and very much against 
Jewish people. My oldest son just returned 
from Algiers in Africa where he met a bunch of 
other Black Panthers from all over the world. 
He said to me that they all agree that the 
Jewish people are against all the colored 
people and that the only friends the colored 
people have are the Arabs.  
I told my child that the Jewish people are the 
friends of the colored people but he calls me a 
Tom and says I'll never be anything better than 
a Jew boy's slave.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Last night my boy had a meeting at my house 
with six of his Black Panther friends. From the 
way they talked it sounded like they had a plan 
to force Jewish store owners to give them 
money or they would drop a bomb on the 
Jewish store. Some of the money they will get 
will be sent to the Arabs in Africa.  
They left books and pictures around with Arab 
writing on them and pictures of Jewish soldiers 
killing Arab babys. I think they are going to give 
these away at Negro Christian Churchs.  
I thought you might be able to stop this. I think I 
can get some of the pictures and books without 
getting myself in trouble. I will send them to 
you if you are interested.  
I would like not to use my real name at this 
time.  
A friend"  
It is further suggested that a second communication  be sent 
to Rabbi KAHANE approximately one week after the above 
described letter which will follow the same foremat [sic], but 
will contain as enclosures some BPP artifacts such as 
pictures of BOBBY SEALE, ELDRIDGE CLEAVER, a copy 
of a BPP newspaper, etc. It is felt that a progress ion of 
letters should then follow which would further establish 
rapport with the JEDEL and eventually culminate in the 
anonymous letter writer requesting some response from the 
JEDEL recipient of these letters. 
93  
 
Political Prisoners  
When the government can select a person for crimina l 
persecution because of their political activity, when they can 
fabricate evidence against that person and suppress  
evidence proving that fabrication, and prosecute a person 
and put them in prison for any amount of time, let alone for 
life, then you have a political prisoner.


--- PAGE 45 ---
There are numerous people in American jails who've 
dedicated their lives to the transformation of thei r country, 
who put the benefit of their communities ahead of 
themselves, who believed that transformation was not only 
possible but they were willing to die for it.  They were willing 
to die to end brutality, racism, economic discrimination, 
imperialism, war.  
In the case of AIM, this has meant the wholesale ja iling of 
the movement's leadership. Virtually every known AIM 
leader in the United States has been incarcerated i n either 
state or federal prisons since (or even before) the 
organization's formal emergence in 1968, some repea tedly. 
After the 1973 siege of Wounded Knee the FBI caused  542 
separate charges to be filed against those it ident ified as 
"key AIM leaders." This resulted in 15 convictions, all on 
such petty or contrived offenses as "interfering with a federal 
officer in the performance of his duty." Russell Me ans was 
faced with 37 felony and three misdemeanor charges,  none 
of which held up in court. Organization members oft en 
languished in jail for months as the cumulative bail required 
to free them outstripped resource capabilities of A IM and 
supporting groups.  
Another example was the "Panther 21" case, which in 1969 
was the longest criminal trial in New York history. It took the 
jury just ninety minutes to reach "not guilty" verdicts in all of 
the 156 of the charges against the thirteen defenda nts who 
ultimately stood trial.  
A fair accounting of American political prisoners is beyond 
the scope of this report, which seeks only to draw attention 
to the problem of political repression and the tact ics used, 
making note of a few illustrative cases.  
  
Leonard Peltier 
U.S. Court of Appeals Judge Gerald Heaney, after re viewing 
numerous court transcripts and FBI documents, concl uded 
that the United States Government overreacted at Wo unded 
Knee.  Instead of carefully considering the legitimate 
grievances of Native Americans, the response was 
essentially a military one which culminated in a deadly


--- PAGE 46 ---
firefight on June 26, 1975, between Native American s and 
FBI agents and U.S. Marshals.  
While Judge Heaney believed that the "Native Americ ans" 
had some culpability in the firefight that day, he concluded 
the United States must share the responsibility.  It never 
has.  The FBI has never been held accountable or ev en 
publicly investigated for what one Federal petit jury and 
Judge Heaney concluded was complicity in the creation of a 
climate of fear and terror on the Pine Ridge Reservation.  
The resulting firefight near Oglala was preceded by FBI 
documents internally declaring AIM to be one of the  most 
dangerous organizations in the country and a threat to 
national security.  It followed by two months the issuing of a 
position paper entitled "FBI Paramilitary Operations in Indian 
Country," a how-to plan for dealing with AIM in the 
battlefield.  It used such terms as "neutralization ," which in 
the document was defined as "shooting to kill."  It  included 
the role of the then-Nixon White House in handling 
complaints as to such military tactics being utilized 
domestically.  
It followed by one month the build-up of FBI person nel on 
the Pine Ridge Reservation with mostly SWAT team 
members from various divisions of the FBI. It follo wed by 
three weeks an inspection tour of the reservation by senior 
FBI officials and the reporting of concern by those  officials 
for the widespread support enjoyed by AIM in the outlying 
communities on the Pine Ridge Reservation, such as Oglala.  
The FBI headquarters document further referred to a n area 
near Oglala which reportedly contained bunkers and would 
require the use of paramilitary forces to assault.  Three 
weeks later a firefight broke out on the ranch of e lders 
Cecelia and Harry Jumping Bull which lasted for nearly nine 
hours. FBI documents describe as many as 47 people being 
involved in the battle with SWAT teams of the FBI, the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, and State police agencies .  
Three young men lost their lives that day, each shot in the 
head, two FBI agents and one AIM member.  Members o f 
the American Indian Movement, before they escaped, sat 
and prayed for the three men who died that day.  Th e FBI 
has always only considered that only two men died that day, 
their own agents.


--- PAGE 47 ---
One of the agents had in his briefcase a map of the  
reservation.  It had the Jumping Bull ranch circled with the 
word "bunkers" written next to it. The bunkers turned out to 
be aged and crumbling root cellars.  
Leonard Peltier and other AIM members from outside the 
reservation had come into the Jumping Bull area to join other 
local AIM members because the climate of violence o n the 
reservation had gotten so intense that people felt the need to 
gain assistance from the outside, so men and women came 
in, including Leonard Peltier, and they brought with them 
their single-shot 22's and their rusted shotguns and a few 
hunting rifles that they were able to get, and they were in a 
camp on the Jumping Bull ranch.  
The government used the incident to increase its ca mpaign 
of disruption and destruction of the American India n 
Movement.  FBI agents, dressed and equipped like combat 
soldiers, searched homes and questioned Pine Ridge 
residents at gunpoint.  Armored vehicles patrolled the 
reservation, as did SWAT teams and National Guard 
helicopters.  
This was accompanied by a public disinformation cam paign 
by the FBI, designed to make Oglala residents and their 
guests appear to be the aggressors and, in fact, te rrorists.  
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights would soon report, "It 
is patently clear that many of the statements relea sed to the 
media regarding the incident are either false, 
unsubstantiated, or directly misleading."  
Noting Leonard Peltier's regular presence and involvement 
in AIM activities throughout the country, the FBI targeted him 
for prosecution from the desks of its agents.  Acco rding to 
FBI documents, about two and a half weeks after the  
firefight, the Bureau was going to, in its own words, "develop 
information to lock Peltier into the case," and it set out to do 
so.  
The FBI eventually charged four AIM members, including 
Peltier, with the killing of the agents.  No one has ever been 
prosecuted for the killing of AIM member Joe Stuntz  that 
day.  
After hearing testimony of numerous eyewitnesses to the 
violence directed at AIM members by the goon squad and


--- PAGE 48 ---
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, two of Leonard  Peltier's 
codefendants were acquitted on self-defense grounds  by an 
all-white jury in the conservative town of Cedar Rapids, Iowa 
-- truly a remarkable thing, but people who were willing to 
keep their eyes and their ears open and listen to t he truth, 
and were able, by a judge who had the courage and 
willingness to learn himself, to allow this evidence to be 
presented.  
However, after those acquittals, the FBI analyzed why these 
two men, these two long-haired indian militant men could be 
acquitted by an all-white jury, and decided a new judge was 
needed.  FBI documents show that in a meeting in 
Washington, D.C. at FBI headquarters, there was a d ecision 
made to "put the full prosecutive weight of the Fed eral 
Government" against Leonard Peltier.  
Evidence shows the government used now admittedly false 
eyewitness affidavits to extradite Peltier from Canada.  This 
would catch the attention of Amnesty International and the 
Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, but only a little bit.  
The Court of Appeals would call such conduct "a clear abuse 
of the investigative process by the FBI" and give credence to 
the claims of indian people that if the government is willing to 
fabricate evidence to extradite a person in this country, it is 
willing to fabricate evidence to convict those branded as the 
enemy.  Well, absolutely true, but Leonard Peltier remains in 
prison.  
At Peltier's trial the government presented evidence and 
argued to the jury that he personally shot and killed the 
agents.  To do this, the government presented balli stics 
evidence purportedly connecting a shell casing found near 
the agents' bodies with a rifle said to be possessed by Peltier 
on that day, and the coerced and fabricated eyewitn ess 
account of a terrified teenager, claiming that the agents 
followed Peltier in a van, precipitating the firefight in Oglala.  
Documents obtained under the Freedom of Information  Act 
show that the ballistics evidence was a fraud; that the rifle 
could not have fired the expended casing found near  the 
body. Further, the FBI had suppressed evidence showing 
the agents followed a pickup, not a van, into the c ompound, 
and thought someone else, not Peltier, was in that vehicle.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Citing the case of Leonard Peltier as an example, A mnesty 
International has called for an independent inquiry  into the 
use of our criminal justice system for political purposes by 
the FBI and other intelligence agencies in this country.  
Amnesty cited similar concerns for other members of  AIM 
and other victims of the COINTELPRO-type operations  by 
the FBI.  
Upon disclosure of these documents, a renewed effor t in a 
new trial was sought from the courts.  While conclu ding that 
the suppressed evidence "casts a strong doubt" on t he 
government's case, the appellate courts denied relief.  The 
U.S. Attorney's office has now admitted in court th at it had 
no credible evidence Leonard Peltier killed the agents, and 
speciously claimed it never tried to prove it did.  Under our 
system, if there is a reasonable doubt, then Leonar d Peltier 
is not guilty, yet he has been in prison for nearly 25 years for 
a crime he did not commit.  
The FBI still withholds thousands of pages of docum ents in 
this case, claiming in many instances that disclosure would 
compromise the national security.  In the absence o f such 
disclosure, no further efforts in a new trial are possible.  And 
Leonard Peltier is not alone in his imprisonment fo r his 
political activities.  
  
Mumia Abu Jamal 
In the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal, neutralization occu rred by 
falsely creating the appearance that he was in comm ission 
of a crime he did not commit, to put him in prison.  The cost 
of political activism can include judicial railroading into the 
electric chair, or the gas chamber or lethal injection.  
It is unquestionable that from a very early age, Mumia Abu-
Jamal was specifically targeted for neutralization by the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Philadelphi a Police, 
and that the pattern of police activity evident in that targeting, 
was continued, as it was in a number of comparable cases, 
so long as he maintained political activism, and this creates 
the basis to believe that he was in fact framed for  the crime.  
Mumia was deprived a fair trial, in which key witnesses were 
not allowed to testify, exculpatory evidence was excluded,


--- PAGE 50 ---
and a key witness had been arrested numerous times for 
prostitution, opening the possibility that her testimony was 
paid or coerced. Although no motive was ever shown for why 
Mumia would have killed a police officer, there was a 
certainly a motive to neutralize and frame him.  
  
Geronimo ji Jaga Pratt 
Elmer Gerard ("Geronimo" or "G" ji Jaga) Pratt was an active 
member of the Los Angeles Black Panther Party (LA-B PP) 
Chapter during the counterintelligence campaign which 
resulted in the "shooting war" described earlier, between the 
US organization and the Panthers.  
When Bunchy Carter and Ed Huggins were assassinated  by 
US gunmen on January 17, 1969, it was discovered that 
Carter had prepared an audio tape for such an event uality, 
designating Pratt his successor as head of the LA-BPP. Pratt 
was also named by Carter to succeed himself and Huggins 
as chapter representative on the national Panther C entral 
Committee. 
94  It was at precisely this point that he appears 
to have been personally targeted for "neutralization" through 
the application of COINTELPRO techniques.  
Pratt was designated a "Key Black Extremist" by the L.A. 
Bureau office and placed in the National Security I ndex. 95  
As a consequence, he was targeted not only for 
neutralization by the FBI, but, as former Panther infiltrator 
Louis Tackwood had pointed out, this automatically placed 
him "on the wall' of the Los Angeles Police Departm ent's 
(LAPD) Criminal Conspiracy Section (CCS) "glass-house" 
(headquarters) as an individual to be eliminated by local 
police action. As the informant explained the CCS o peration:  
The room is broken up into divisions, see my point? Black, 
white, chicano and subversives. Everybody's there. And 
every last one of the walls has pictures of them. This one 
black, the middle all white, and the chicanos all on this side. 
Most of the files are on the walls, you see? ... Th ey got 
everybody. Panthers, SDS, Weathermen. Let me explai n to 
you. They got a national hookup. You see my point? And 
because of this national power, they are the only 
organization in the police department that has a liaison man,


--- PAGE 51 ---
that works for the FBI, and the FBI has a liaison m an who 
works with the CCS." 96   
The inevitable consequence of this was that the new LA-
BPP was placed under intensely close surveillance by the 
FBI 97  and subjected to a series of unfounded but serious  
arrests by the Bureau's local police affiliates at CCS.  
A conspiracy investigation of Pratt was opened with regard 
to the robbery of a Bank of America facility alread y known by 
the Bureau to have been carried out by US members. 98  
Pratt was also made the subject of a personalized s eries of 
COINTELPRO cartoons designed to make him a target f or 
the attentions of US.  
This was followed very closely by a Bureau effort to ensnarl 
both Pratt and Roger Lewis in a violation of the 1940 Smith 
Act and plotting of "insurrection." 99  
Four days after a similar raid on a Panther apartme nt in 
Chicago (the raid which left Mark Clark and Fred Hampton 
dead), forty men of the Special Weapons and Tactics  
(SWAT) squad, with more than a hundred regular poli ce as 
backup, raided the Los Angeles Panther headquarters  at 
5:30 in the morning ... (No suggestion has been mad e that 
the two raids were linked. But it's interesting to note that 
Fred Hampton had been in Los Angeles one or two day s 
before his death, meeting with Geronimo Pratt, whom  
Tackwood says was the main target of the second raid.) The 
Panthers chose to defend themselves, and for four h ours 
they fought off police, refusing to surrender until  press and 
public were on the scene. Six of them were wounded. 
Thirteen were arrested. Miraculously, none of them were 
killed. 100  
The similarities between the Chicago and Los Angeles raids 
are undeniable, with a special local police unit closely linked 
to the FBI involved in both assaults, spurious warrants 
seeking "illegal weapons" utilized on both occasions, 
predawn timing of both raids to catch the Panthers asleep 
and a reliance upon overwhelming police firepower to the 
exclusion of all other methods. Both raids occurred  in the 
context of an ongoing and highly energetic anti-BPP 
COINTELPRO, and - as in the Hampton assassination -  
bullets were fired directly into Pratt's bed. Unlike the Chicago


--- PAGE 52 ---
leader, however, Pratt was sleeping on the floor, the result of 
spinal injuries sustained in Vietnam. 101  
Pratt was explicitly singled out for neutralization by the head 
of the Bureau's LA-COINTELPRO section, Richard Wall ace 
Held - the son of Richard G. Held, who orchestrated the 
coverup of FBI involvement in the Hampton-Clark 
assassinations. 
102  
In both instances, the FBI had managed to place an 
infiltrator/provocateur very high within the local BPP chapter 
- O'Neal in Chicago, in Los Angeles it was Melvin "Cotton" 
Smith, number three man in the LA-BPP, who provided  
detailed floorplans, including sleeping arrangements of the 
Panther facility, prior to the raid. 
103  And, in both cases, 
surviving Panthers were immediately arrested for their 
"assault upon the police." 104  
When the resultant case against the L.A. Panthers w as 
finally prosecuted in July, 1971:  
... there was a "surprise" development. Melvin "Cotton" 
Smith turned up as a star witness for the prosecuti on. 
According to Deputy District Attorney Ronald H. Carroll, 
Smith had turned State's evidence to escape prosecu tion ... 
[However] on November 22, 1971, Tackwood testified ... he 
had started working for [CCS Sergeant R.G.] Farwell in the 
fall of 1969, before the December 8 raid, and had b een told 
by Farwell that [FBI infiltrator] Cotton Smith was to be 
Tackwood's contact. Since Smith's testimony was crucial to 
the State's case, Tackwood's exposure of Smith's re al role 
was a devastating blow to the prosecution. 105  
One consequence of this revelation was that, after eleven 
days of deliberation, the jury returned acquittals or failed to 
reach any verdict whatsoever relative to charges of 
conspiring to assault and murder police officers brought 
against all thirteen Panther defendants. Oddly, nin e of the 
defendants, including Pratt, were convicted of the relatively 
minor and technical charge of conspiring to possess illegal 
weapons. 106  In addition:  
In order for the armed police assault on the Panthe r 
headquarters to have been justified, the police con tention 
that the Panthers had fired on them first would hav e had to 
have been true, in which case at least some of the Panthers


--- PAGE 53 ---
would have been guilty of conspiracy to commit murder and 
assault charges ... The failure of the jury to retu rn guilty 
verdicts on these charges represented a total repudiation of 
the CCS [and FBI] "conspiracy" theory that led to the raids 
on December 8. 107  
On December 18, 1968, two black men robbed and shot  a 
white couple, Caroline and Kenneth Olsen, on a Sant a 
Monica, California tennis court. Caroline Olsen died one 
week later.  
Pratt was accused of "the tennis court murder" in a  letter 
dated August 10, 1969, addressed to LAPD Sergeant 
Duwayne Rice by an "underworld informant" and marked 
"Do Not Open Except In Case of My Death." Although the 
informant had not died, Rice opened and read the 
accusation, and turned it over to CCS detective Ray 
Callahan for presentation to a grand jury which secretly 
indicted Pratt.  
The informant would later testify at trial that Pratt, in direct 
personal conversation with him, had "bragged" of the crime. 
He further testified that a .45 calibre Colt automa tic seized 
by the LAPD, belonging to Pratt but not ballistically matching 
the tennis court murder weapon, was actually the gun in 
question, Pratt having "changed the barrel" in order to alter 
its ballistic pattern. A second informant, who did not testify, 
corroborated this testimony. 
108  
The supposed informant corroboration testimony, it was later 
revealed, was obtained from Cotton Smith, already 
unmasked as an infiltrator/provocateur during the 1971 
shootout trial and thus unable to credibly take the  stand in 
the Olsen murder case. In 1985, Smith totally recan ted his 
allegations against Pratt, stating unequivocally that the 
former Panther leader had been "framed," but by "th e FBI 
rather than local police"; he specifically named LA  FBI 
COINTELPRO operative George Aiken as having been 
instrumental in the affair. 
109  
Kenneth Olsen, the surviving victim, identified Pratt as the 
murderer in open court, as did Barbara Reed, a shop keeper 
who had seen the gunmen prior to the shooting. Mitchell 
Lachman, who had been near the tennis court on the 
evening of the murder, testified the gunmen fled in  a vehicle


--- PAGE 54 ---
matching the description of Pratt's white over red GTO 
convertible.  
However, both Olsen and the District Attorney omitted 
mention of the fact that he had positively identifi ed another 
man - Ronald Perkins - in a police lineup very shortly after 
the fact, on December 24, 1968; they had similarly neglected 
to mention that LAPD personnel had "worked with" Ol sen 
from photo spreads for some months prior to the tri al, with 
an eye toward obtaining the necessary ID of Pratt. 110  
Again, both the prosecutors and Mrs. Reed, the othe r 
witness who offered a positive ID on Pratt, "forgot" 
comparable police coaching, and all parties to the State's 
case somehow managed to overlook the fact that both  Olsen 
and Reed had repeatedly described both gunmen as "c lean 
shaven," while Pratt was known to have worn a mustache 
and goatee for the entirety of his adult life. 111  This leaves 
Lachman's testimony that the assailants fled the sc ene in a 
white-over-red convertible "like" (but not necessarily) Pratt's; 
even if it were the same car, it was well established - and 
never contested by the State - that virtually the whole LA-
BPP had use of the vehicle during the period in que stion. 
112  
Pratt's defense was that he was in Oakland, some 40 0 miles 
north of Santa Monica, attending a BPP national lea dership 
meeting on the evening in question. Presentation of  this alibi 
was, however, severely hampered by the refusal of many of 
those also in attendance - such as David, June, and  Pat 
Hilliard, Bobby and John Seale, Nathan Hare, Rosema ry 
Gross and Brenda Presley (all of the Newton faction) - to 
testify on his behalf. 113  Kathleen Cleaver, also in 
attendance at the meeting, did testify that Pratt w as in 
Oakland from December 13-25, 1968, but even her eff orts to 
do so had been hampered by COINTELPRO letters to he r 
husband "explaining" that it was "too dangerous" fo r her to 
return to the United States during the trial. 114  With the 
weight of testimony heavily on the side of the prosecution, 
Pratt was convicted of first degree murder on July 28, 1972 
and sentenced to seven years to life. 115  
There were other problems with the case which went beyond 
Pratt's inability to assemble defense witnesses. For instance, 
it did occur to the defense that if the FBI were ta pping the 
phones of the BPP national offices in Oakland durin g 
December of 1968 - as seems likely - the Bureau its elf might


--- PAGE 55 ---
well be able to substantiate Pratt's whereabouts on the 
crucial night. The FBI, however, submitted at trial that no 
such taps or bugs existed, an assertion which was later 
shown to be untrue. 116  
The Bureau then refused to release its logs from th e 
wiretaps, on "national security" grounds, until forced to do so 
by an FOIA suit brought by attorneys Jonathan Lubell, Mary 
O'Melveny and William H. O'Brien. 117  At that point (1981), 
the transcripts were delivered, minus precisely the records 
covering the period of time which might serve to establish 
Pratt's innocence; "The FBI has indicated that the transcripts 
of the conversations recorded by these telephone ta ps have 
been lost or destroyed," wrote the frustrated judge. 118  
The State's star witness, who first accused Pratt of the tennis 
court murder in his letter to Rice, testified to Pratt's 
"confession" of the crime (i.e., "bragging") and fi nally 
reconciled the prosecution's ballistics difficulties, was none 
other than the infiltrator/ provocateur , expelled from the BPP 
by Pratt, Julius C. (aka Julio) Butler. At the trial, the 
prosecution went considerably out of its way to bolster 
Butler's credibility before the jury by "establishing" that the 
witness was not a paid FBI informant:  
Q: And when you were working for the Black Panther Party, 
were you also working for law enforcement at the same 
time?  
A: No.  
Q: You had severed any ties you had with law enforcement?  
A: That's correct.  
Q: Have you at any time since leaving the Sheriffs 
Department worked for the FBI or the CIA?  
A: No.  
Q: Are you now working for the FBI or CIA?  
A: No.  
This testimony was entered despite the fact that Los Angeles 
FBI Field Office informant reports concerning one J ulius Carl


--- PAGE 56 ---
Butler show he performed exactly this function, at least 
during the period beginning in August of 1969 (the time 
when he ostensibly made his initial accusation against Pratt) 
until January 20, 1970 (after Pratt was jailed without bond on 
the Olsen murder charge). During the whole of 1970, he filed 
monthly reports with the Bureau, he was "evaluated" by the 
FBI as an informant during that year, and his infor mant file 
was not closed until May of 1972 - immediately prior to his 
going on the witness stand. 119  
Louis Tackwood has consistently contended that Butl er was 
an FBI infiltrator of the BPP from the day he joine d the Party 
in early 1968 and that he actively worked with CCS 
detectives Ray Callahan and Daniel P. Mahoney to eliminate 
Pratt. 
120  
At the trial, the Bureau also submitted that Pratt was not the 
target of COINTELPRO activity; several hundred documents 
subsequently released under the FOIA demonstrate th is to 
have been categorically untrue. Further:  
On 18 December 1979, eight years after Pratt's trial, the 
California Attorney-General's office filed a declar ation in 
court that his defense camp had been infiltrated by  one  FBI 
informant. The Deputy Attorney-General wrote to the court 
and defense counsel on 28 July 1980, enclosing a co py of a 
letter of the same date from the Executive Assistan t Director 
of the FBI. This letter revealed that two had been in a 
position to obtain information about Elmer Pratt's defense 
strategy. 121  
One reason for the seemingly blanket recalcitrance of the 
authorities - federal, state and local - in extending even the 
most elementary pretense of justice in the Pratt ca se may 
revolve around his quiet refusal to abandon the political 
principles which caused him to become a COINTELPRO 
target in the first place. Whatever the particulars  of official 
motivation in the handling of the Pratt case, it mu st be 
assessed within the overall COINTELPRO-BPP context, 
especially a counterintelligence-related instructional memo, 
dated October 24, 1968, and sent by Bureau headquar ters 
to all field offices. It reads in part:  
Successful prosecution is the best deterrent to suc h unlawful 
activities [as dissident political organizing]. Intensive 
investigations of key activists ... are logically expected to


--- PAGE 57 ---
result in prosecutions under substantive violation within the 
Bureau's jurisdiction. 122  
To this, the Church Committee's rejoinder in its investigation 
of the Bureau's COINTELPRO illegalities still seems quite 
appropriate: "While the FBI considered Federal pros ecution 
a 'logical' result, it should be noted that key activists were 
chosen not because they were suspected of having 
committed or planning [sic] to commit any specific Federal 
crime." 
123  After 27 years in prison and five habeus corpus 
motions, the conviction for the tennis court murder  was 
finally vacated and Geronimo ji Jaga was released.  
  
Dhoruba Bin Wahad 
In 1966, the New York City Police Department commenced 
its own investigation of the Black Panther Party. Detective 
Ralph White of the New York City Police Department was 
directed to infiltrate the Black Panther Party and submit daily 
reports on the Party and its members. The NYPD regularly 
communicated with police departments throughout the  
country, sharing information on the BPP, its member s and 
activities.  
The NYPD was also working with the FBI on a daily basis. 
On August 29, 1968 FBI Special Agent Henry Naehle 
reported on his meeting with a member of an NYPD "S pecial 
Unit" investigating the BPP. SA Naehle acknowledged that 
the FBI 
s New York Field Office (NYO) "has been working 
closely with BSS in exchanging information of mutual 
interest and to our mutual advantage."  
An FBI "Inspector s Review" for the first quarter of 1969 
shows that the NYPD, in conjunction with the FBI, had an 
"interview" and "arrest" program as part of their campaign to 
neutralize and disrupt the BPP. The NYPD advised the FBI 
that  
these programs have severely hampered and disrupted the 
BPP, particularly in Brooklyn, New York, where, for a while, 
BPP operations were at a complete standstill and in  fact 
have never recovered sufficiently to operate effect ively.


--- PAGE 58 ---
A series of FBI documents reveal a joint FBI/NYPD plan to 
gather information on BPP members and their support ers in 
late 1968. During an unprovoked attack by off-duty members 
of the NYPD on BPP members attending a court appearance 
in Brooklyn, the briefcase of BPP leader David Brothers was 
stolen by the NYPD and its contents photocopied and  given 
to the FBI. Rather than seeking to prosecute the po lice 
officers for this theft, the FBI ordered "a review of these 
names and telephone numbers [so that] appropriate a ction 
will be taken."  
That "appropriate action" included an effort to lab el Brothers 
and two other BPP leaders, Jorge Aponte and Robert 
Collier, as police informants. On December 12, 1968 , the 
FBI 
s New York Office proposed circulating flyers warning 
the community of the "DANGER" posed by Brothers, Co llier 
and Aponte. The NYO proposed that the flyers "be le ft in 
restaurants where Negroes are known to frequent (Chock 
Full of Nuts, etc.)" BSS later told the FBI that its proposal 
was successful in that David Brothers had come under 
suspicion by the BPP. An FBI memorandum dated 
December 2, 1968 captioned "Counterintelligence Pro gram" 
lists several operations during the previous two-week period. 
It closes by stating that "every effort is being made in the 
NYO to misdirect the operations of the BPP on a dai ly 
basis."  
In August 1968, Dhoruba Bin Wahad, then known as 
Richard Dhoruba Moore, joined the BPP, and within a few 
months was promoted to a position of leadership. He  was 
soon identified by the Bureau and by the NYPD as a "key 
agitator" and placed in the FBI's "Security Index", "Agitator 
Index," and "Black Nationalist Photograph Album." F BI 
supervisors instructed the NYO to "develop better liaison and 
closer working relationship with the NYCPD" in their 
investigation of Dhoruba Bin Wahad.  
On April 2, 1969 Bin Wahad and 20 other members of the 
Black Panther Party were indicted on charges of conspiracy 
in the so-called "Panther 21" case. A NYPD memorand um 
notes that the Panther 21 arrests were considered a  
"summation" of the overt and covert investigation 
commenced in 1966. In a bi-weekly report to FBI 
Headquarters listing several counterintelligence operations 
the FBI reported that


--- PAGE 59 ---
To date, the NYO has conducted over 500 interviews with 
BPP members and sympathizers. Additionally, arrests of 
BPP members have been made by Bureau Agents and the  
NYCPD. These interviews and arrests have helped disrupt 
and cripple the activities of the BPP in the NYC area. Every 
effort will be made to continue pressure on the BPP ...  
In July 1969, the NYPD sent officers to Oakland, Ca lifornia 
to monitor the Black Panther Party s nationwide conference 
calling for community control of police departments . An 
NYPD memorandum candidly acknowledged that communit y 
control of the police, "may not be in the interests  of the 
department."  
Through its warrantless wiretaps of BPP telephones, the FBI 
learned that the BPP was trying to raise the $100,000 bail 
that had been set for Bin Wahad, whose release was 
considered by the BPP to be a priority over the other 20 
defendants, due to his leadership role in the organ ization. 
Fundraising efforts were impeded by FBI/NYPD 
counterintelligence operations. For example, following a fund 
raiser at the home of conductor Leonard Bernstein, the FBI 
sent falsified letters to those in attendance in or der to "thwart 
the aims and efforts of the BPP in their attempt to  solicit 
money from socially prominent groups..." Unable to raise 
bail, Dhoruba Bin Wahad spent the next year incarce rated.  
The FBI continued to target BPP community programs.  For 
example, the FBI pressured several churches not to institute 
the BPP 
s Free Breakfast for Children Program at their 
parishes. In September, 1969, an NYPD BSS represent ative 
told the FBI that the BPP was disintegrating in New York.  
By March of 1970, the BPP had raised enough money t o 
post bail for the most articulate leaders and chose  Mr. Bin 
Wahad for release. The FBI ordered that he be immed iately 
and continuously surveilled and that donors of bail money be 
identified. Director Hoover reminded his New York Office 
that the activities of Panther 21 defendants were o f "vital 
interest" to the "Seat of Government".  
Through their warrantless wiretaps of BPP offices and 
residences, the FBI became aware in May 1970 of 
dissatisfaction among New York BPP members, including 
Bin Wahad, with West Coast BPP members. A 
COINTELPRO operation prepared by the New Haven Field


--- PAGE 60 ---
Office and submitted to the FBI s New York Office 
consisted of an FBI-fabricated note wherein Bin Wah ad 
accused BPP leader Robert Bay of being an informant .  
This successful operation resulted in Dhoruba Bin W ahad's 
demotion within the BPP. Aware of his disillusionment, the 
FBI disseminated information regarding BPP strife t o the 
media and participated in a plan to either recruit Bin Wahad 
as an informant or have BPP members believe he was an 
agent for the FBI.  
In August 1970, BPP leader Huey P. Newton was released 
from prison. A plethora of counterintelligence acti ons 
followed which sought to make Newton suspicious of fellow 
BPP members, particularly those, like the Bin Wahad , who 
were on the East Coast.  
By early 1971, the plan bore fruit. On January 28, 1971, FBI 
Director Hoover reported that Newton had become 
increasingly paranoid and had expelled several loyal BPP 
members:  
Newton responds violently...The Bureau feels that this near 
hysterical reaction by the egotistical Newton is triggered by 
any criticism of his activities, policies or leadership qualities 
and some of this criticism undoubtedly is result of  our 
counterintelligence projects now in operation.  
This operation was enormously successful, resulting in a 
split within the BPP with violent repercussions. In early 
January 1971, Fred Bennett, a BPP member affiliated  with 
the New York chapter, was shot and killed, allegedly by 
Newton supporters. Newton came to believe that Bin Wahad 
was plotting to kill him. Bin Wahad, in turn, was t old by 
Connie Matthews, Newton 
s secretary, that Newton was 
planning to have Bin Wahad and Panther 21 co-defend ants 
Edward Joseph and Michael Tabor killed during Newton s 
upcoming East Coast speaking tour. As a result of t he split 
and fearing for his life, Bin Wahad, along with Tab or and 
Joseph, were forced to flee during the Panther 21 t rial.  
On May 13, 1971, the Panther 21, including Dhoruba Bin 
Wahad, were acquitted of all charges in the less th an one 
hour of jury deliberations, following what was at that time the 
longest trial in New York City history. BSS Detective Edwin 
Cooper begrudgingly reported to defendant Michael Codd


--- PAGE 61 ---
that the case "was not proven to the jury s satisfaction." 
Alarmed and embarrassed by the acquittal, Director Hoover 
ordered an "intensification" of the investigations of acquitted 
Panther 21 members with special emphasis on those, like 
Bin Wahad, who were fugitives.  
On May 19, 1971, NYPD Officers Thomas Curry and 
Nicholas Binetti were shot on Riverside Drive in Manhattan. 
Two nights later, two other officers, Waverly Jones  and 
Joseph Piagentini, were shot and killed in Harlem. In 
separate communiques delivered to the media, the Bl ack 
Liberation Army claimed responsibility for both attacks.  
Immediately after these shootings, the FBI made the  
investigation of these incidents, called "Newkill," a part of 
their long-standing program against the BPP. Before any 
evidence had been collected, BPP members, in partic ular 
those acquitted in the Panther 21 case, were targeted as 
suspects. Hoover instructed the New York Office to  
consider [the] possibility that both attacks may be result of 
revenge taken against NYC police by the Black Panther 
Party (BPP) as a result of its arrest of BPP member s in April, 
1969 [i.e. the Panther 21 case].  
On May 26, 1971, J. Edgar Hoover met with then President 
Richard Nixon who told Hoover that he wanted to make sure 
that the FBI did not "pull any punches in going all out in 
gathering information...on the situation in New York." Hoover 
informed his subordinates that Nixon's interest and  the FBI's 
involvement were to be kept strictly confidential.  
"Newkill" was a joint FBI/NYPD operation involving total 
cooperation and sharing of information. The FBI mad e all its 
facilities and resources, including its laboratory, available to 
the NYPD. In turn, NYPD Chief of Detectives Albert 
Seedman, who coordinated the NYPD's investigation, 
ordered his subordinates to give the FBI "all available 
information developed to date, as well as in future  
investigations."  
On June 5, 1971, Bin Wahad was arrested during a ro bbery 
of a Bronx after hours "social club", a hangout for  local drug 
merchants. Seized from inside the social club was a .45 
caliber machine gun. Although the initial ballistics test on the 
weapon failed to link it with the Curry-Binetti shooting, the


--- PAGE 62 ---
NYPD publicly declared they had seized the weapon used in 
May 19. The NYPD now had in custody a well-known and 
vocal Black Panther leader and the alleged weapon linked to 
a police shooting. His prosecution and conviction would both 
neutralize an effective leader and justify the fail ed Panther 
21 case. But there was no direct evidence linking Bin Wahad 
to the shooting.  
Pauline Joseph, a diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic, 
became the prosecution s star witness. Ms. Joseph first 
surfaced when she made a phone call to the NYPD on June 
12, 1971, supplying her name and address and statin g that 
Bin Wahad and Edward Joseph (a Panther 21 defendant  
who jumped bail with Bin Wahad) were innocent of th e 
Curry-Binetti shooting. She told the police that Bin Wahad 
"did not do it, either the Riverside Drive [Curry-Binetti] 
shooting or the 32nd precinct [Piagentini-Jones] shooting..."  
The first person to arrive at Ms. Joseph s apartment was 
NYPD Lieutenant Kenneth Sauer, the head of the 24th  
precinct detective squad. Contrary to her testimony at trial, 
Ms. Joseph continued to maintain that Bin Wahad was  
innocent of the Curry-Binetti shooting. Later that day she 
was interviewed by BSS Detective Edwin Cooper. Joseph 
repeated that Bin Wahad was innocent.  
Ms. Joseph was arrested, and committed as a materia l 
witness. For nearly two years she remained in the exclusive 
custody of the New York County District Attorney s Office. 
She was repeatedly interviewed by state and federal 
authorities.  
Ms. Joseph, while in the custody of the District Attorney, was 
recruited as a "racial informant" for the FBI. She was paid for 
her services and housed first in a hotel and then i n a 
furnished apartment, paid for by the District Attor ney. 
Pauline Joseph, a diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic, 
became the prosecution s star witness in the case.  
Dhoruba Bin Wahad was indicted for the attempted mu rder 
of Officers Curry and Binetti on July 30, 1971. Alt hough the 
NYPD and FBI continuously interviewed Ms. Joseph, and 
prepared written memoranda of those interviews, the 
Assistant District Attorney represented that, except for a one 
paragraph statement made on the night of her commit ment 
and her grand jury testimony, there were no prior


--- PAGE 63 ---
statements. The text of Ms. Joseph s initial phone call was 
withheld by the prosecution through two trials. No notes of 
memoranda of the initial, exculpatory interviews by 
Lieutenant Sauer and Detective Cooper were ever provided 
to Bin Wahad. Neither were reports of subsequent in teriews 
during the two years she was in custody. After three trials, 
Dhoruba Bin Wahad was convicted of attempted murder  and 
sentenced by Justice Martinisto to the maximum pena lty, 25 
years to life.  
In December 1975, after learning of Congressional h earings 
which disclosed the FBI's covert operations against the BPP, 
Dhoruba Bin Wahad filed a lawsuit in Federal Distri ct Court, 
charging that he had been the victim of numerous il legal and 
unconstitutional actions designed to "neutralize" him, 
including the frame-up in the Curry-Binetti case.  
In 1980, the FBI and NYPD were ordered by the Court to 
produce their massive files on Mr. Bin Wahad and th e BPP, 
that they had claimed did not exist. The FBI and NYPD 
documents revealed that Mr. Bin Wahad was indeed a target 
of FBI/NYPD covert operations and, for the first time, 
depicted the FBI's intimate involvement in the Curry-Binetti 
investigation. The "Newkill" file, which was finally produced 
in unredacted form in 1987, after 12 years of litig ation, 
contains numerous reports which should have been provided 
to Dhoruba Bin Wahad during his trial.  
In a decision announced December 20, 1992, Justice Bruce 
Allen of the New York State Supreme Court ordered a  new 
trial. The court exhaustively analyzed the prosecution s 
circumstantial case, particularly the testimony of Pauline 
Joseph. The court found that the inconsistencies an d 
omissions in the prior statements contradicted test imony 
"crucial to establishing the People s theory of the case". 
The inconsistencies, said the Court "went beyond me re 
details" and involve "what one would expect to have been 
the most memorable aspects of [the night of the sho oting]". 
On January 19, 1995, the District Attorney moved to dismiss 
the indictment, acknowledging that they could not prove their 
case. The indictment was dismissed. After more than  20 
years in prison, Mr. Bin Wahad is at liberty today, residing in 
Accra, Ghana.  
The COINTELPRO off-shoot "Newkill" and later "Chesr ob" 
(an FBI acronym named after Assata Shakur, aka Joan ne


--- PAGE 64 ---
Chesimard) had other targets as well. Members of the Black 
Panther Party forced underground by Cointelpro-instigated 
violence were hunted down by local and federal law 
enforcement officials. In the three years after the  1971 BPP 
split, BPP members, Harold Russsel, Woody Green, 
Twyman Meyers and Zayd Shakur were killed during 
confrontations with law enforcement. Others were captured 
and charged with crimes. All were tried at a time when the 
public (and juries) knew nothing of COINTELPRO. During 
these trials, as in the trials of Dhoruba Bin Wahad  and 
Geronimo Pratt, exculpatory evidence was withheld and 
other violations of the United States Constitution were 
committed. However, post-conviction motions on behalf of 
these former BPP members were unsuccessful and they  
remain in prison today. They include Anthony Jalil Bottom, 
Herman Bell, Robert Seth Hayes, Sundiata Acoli, Abdul 
Majid and Bashir Hameed. Two of these former BPP 
members died while in prison: Albert Nuh Washington  in 
2000 and Teddy Jah Heath in 2001. Both spent over 2 5 
years in prison but were denied compassionate release even 
in their last days.  
  
Marshall Eddie Conway 
In 1970, Marshall Eddie Conway was Minister of Defense of 
the Baltimore chapter of the Black Panther Party. H e was 
also employed by the United States Postal Service. 
Unbeknownst to Conway, some of the founding members  of 
the Baltimore chapter were undercover officers with the 
Baltimore Police Department, who reported daily on his 
activities in the chapter. At the same time, the Fe deral 
Bureau of Investigation began its own investigation of 
Conway, recording his whereabouts, contacting his 
employers at the Post Office and maintaining "liais on" with 
the Baltimore Police Department.  
On April 23, 1970, a Baltimore Police officer was s hot and 
killed. Later that night, another officer named Nolan was fired 
upon by an unapprehended Black male. Two men arrest ed 
at the scene of the first shooting were allegedly associates of 
members of the Baltimore BPP chapter. Because of th is, the 
police attributed both incidents to the BPP. Not su rprisingly, 
Nolan then claimed that a picture of Conway, a well-known 
BPP member, resembled the unapprehended shooter. Th e


--- PAGE 65 ---
next day, Conway was arrested while working at the Post 
office. He was charged with both the homicide and t he 
attempted homicide of Nolan. Conway was held without bail.  
Conway petitioned the court to have either Charles Garry or 
William Kunstler, two attorneys who consistently represented 
party members, represent him at his trial. Although both 
offered their services free of charge, the court de nied 
Conway s request. Instead, a lawyer was appointed who 
performed no pre-trial investigation and never met with 
Conway. Deprived of his rights, Conway chose to absent 
himself from much of his January, 1971 trial.  
But the state s case, relying solely upon Nolan s equivocal 
and highly suspect photo identification, was shaky. To 
buttress their case, the state called one Charles Reynolds, a 
known jailhouse informant. He ultimately testified that while 
he shared a cell with Conway pre-trial, Conway made 
admissions to him. In fact, as was verified by the court 
transcript, Conway loudly objected when Reynolds was 
placed in his cell because everyone knew he was an 
informant. Reynolds, who was a fugitive from Michigan, was 
promised release if he testified. When the trial wa s over, he 
got his wish.  
Represented by inadequate counsel and tried at a time when 
the existence of COINTELPRO was not known, Conway was 
convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment. All a ppeals 
have been denied and he has been denied parole, as are all 
"lifers" in the State if Maryland. He has now been 
incarcerated for over 31 years and is probably the longest 
held political prisoner in the United States, if not the world.  
  
Justice Hangs in the Balance 
Although COINTELPRO was first exposed during the 
Watergate period, and incomparably more serious tha n 
anything charged against Nixon, it was virtually ignored by 
the national press and journals of opinion. A revie w of these 
programs demonstrates the relative insignificance of the 
charges raised against Nixon and his associates, 
specifically, the charges presented in the Congressional 
Articles of Impeachment. 
124


--- PAGE 66 ---
In the early 1970s, there occurred a seemingly endless 
series of revelations about governmental transgressions. A 
"credibility gap" was engendered by the federal executive 
branch having been caught lying too many times, too red-
handedly and over too many years in its efforts to dupe the 
public into supporting the U.S. war in Southeast Asia. This 
had reached epic proportions when Daniel Ellsberg leaked 
the "Pentagon Papers," a highly secret government 
documentary history of official duplicity by which America 
had become embroiled in Indochina, and caused parti cularly 
sensitive excerpts to be published in the New York Times . 
125  
Then on March 8, 1971, a group calling itself the C itizen's 
Commission to Investigate the FBI, broke into an FBI office 
in a small town called Media, Pennsylvania. They subjected 
the FBI to what the FBI has been habitually subjecting 
political dissidents to throughout the course of its history. 
That is, in Bureau parlance, a black bag job. The i nformation 
they obtained was widely distributed through left and peace 
movement channels, and summarized the following week in 
the Washington Post . 126  
An analysis of the documents in this FBI office rev ealed that 
1 percent were devoted to organized crime, mostly 
gambling; 30 percent were "manuals, routine forms, and 
similar procedural matter"; 40 percent were devoted to 
political surveillance and the like, including two cases 
involving right-wing groups, ten concerning immigrants, and 
over 200 on left or liberal groups. Another 14 percent of the 
documents concerned draft resistance and "leaving t he 
military without government permission." The remainder - 
only 15% - concerned bank robberies, murder, rape, and 
interstate theft. 
127  
"Among the 34 cases [of infiltration] for which som e 
information is available, 11 involved white campus groups, 
11, predominantly white peace groups and/or economi c 
groups; 10, black and Chicano groups; and two right-wing 
groups." Furthermore, "in two-thirds of the 34 cases 
considered here, the specious activists appear to have gone 
beyond passive information gathering to active provocation." 
128  
One year later, the political scandal known as Wate rgate 
began to unravel, when five men were arrested for breaking


--- PAGE 67 ---
into the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee, 
located in the Watergate apartment and office compl ex in 
Washington, D.C. It was soon discovered that one of  the 
men was employed by the Committee to Re-elect the 
President (CRP or CREEP) and that the break-in had been 
planned by two others with close ties to the White House.  
In this peculiar and potentially volatile set of circumstances, 
a government-wide effort was undertaken to convince the 
public that its institutions were fundamentally sound, albeit in 
need of fine-tuning and a bit of housecleaning. It was 
immediately announced that U.S. ground forces would  be 
withdrawn from Vietnam as rapidly as possible. Televised 
congressional hearings were staged to "get to the bottom of 
Watergate," a spectacle which soon led to the resig nations 
of a number of Nixon officials, the brief imprisonm ent of a 
few of them, and the eventual resignation of the pr esident 
himself.  
The ousting of Richard Nixon for his misdeeds on Au gust 9, 
1974 was described in the nation's press as "a stun ning 
vindication of our constitutional system." 
129  Yet the 
Watergate affair -- allegedly the media's finest ho ur -- merely 
demonstrated their continued subservience to power and 
official ideology. Until the dust had settled over Watergate, 
there was virtually no mention of the government programs 
of violence and disruption or comment concerning th em, and 
even after the Watergate affair was successfully co ncluded, 
there has been only occasional discussion.  
Beginning in 1974, the Senate held hearings to investigate 
COINTELPRO and other intelligence agency abuses. No 
other congressional investigation into these types of matters 
has been so extensive, either before or since.  
The Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental 
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, commonly 
known as the Church committee, after Chairman Frank  
Church, produced a extensive series of reports entitled, 
"Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans," 
encompassing not only COINTELPRO, but also a wide 
variety of other subjects, including electronic surveillance by 
the National Security Agency, domestic CIA mail opening 
programs, the misuse of the IRS, the assassination of 
President Kennedy, covert actions abroad, assassination


--- PAGE 68 ---
plots involving foreign leaders, and various topics related to 
military intelligence.  
The Church committee found that COINTELPRO, 
presumably set up to protect national security and prevent 
violence, actually engaged in other actions "which had no 
conceivable rational relationship to either national security or 
violent activity. The unexpressed major premise of much of 
COINTELPRO is that the Bureau has a role in maintai ning 
the existing social order, and that its efforts should be aimed 
toward combating those who threaten that order."  
This meant that the Bureau would take actions again st 
individuals and organizations simply because they were 
critical of government policy. The Church committee report 
gives examples of such actions, violations of the right of free 
speech and association, where the FBI targeted peop le 
because they opposed U.S. foreign policy, or criticized the 
Chicago police actions at the 1968 Democratic National 
Convention. The documents assembled by the Church 
committee "compel the conclusion that Federal law 
enforcement officers looked upon themselves as guar dians 
of the status quo" and cite the surveillance and ha rassment 
of Martin Luther King Jr. as an example of this.  
With regard to COINTELPRO, the Church committee's report 
was based, it says, on a staff study of more than 2 0,000 
pages of Bureau documents, and included depositions  of 
many of the Bureau agents involved in the programs. The 
FBI eventually acknowledged having conducted 2,218 
separate COINTELPRO actions from mid-1956 through m id-
1974. These, the bureau conceded, were undertaken i n 
conjunction with other significant illegalities: 2,305 
warrantless telephone taps, 697 buggings, and the opening 
of 57,846 pieces of mail. 
130  This itemization, although an 
indicator of the magnitude and extent of FBI crimin ality, was 
far from complete. The counterintelligence campaign  against 
the Puerto Rican independence movement was not 
mentioned at all, while whole categories of operational 
techniques - assassinations, for example, and obtai ning 
false convictions against key activists - were not divulged 
with respect to the rest. There is solid evidence that other 
sorts of illegality were downplayed as well.  
The FBI's quid pro quo  for cooperating in this charade 
seems to have been that none of its agents would ac tually


--- PAGE 69 ---
see the inside of a prison as a result of the "exce sses" 
thereby revealed. 131  The result was that  
"The Justice Department has decided not to prosecut e 
anyone in connection with the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation's 15-year campaign to disrupt the activities of 
suspected subversive organizations." 
132  
J. Stanley Pottinger, head of the Civil Rights Division, 
reported to the attorney general that he had found "no basis 
for criminal charges against any particular individuals 
involving particular incidents." The director of the FBI also 
made clear that he saw nothing particularly serious in the 
revelations of the Church and Pike Committees. Ther e is as 
yet no public record or evidence of any systematic 
investigation of these practices. The press paid little heed to 
the record that was being exposed during the Waterg ate 
period and even since has generally ignored the more 
serious cases and failed to present anything remote ly 
resembling an accurate picture of the full record a nd what it 
implies.  
The object of all this muscle-flexing was, of course, to create 
a perception that congress had finally gotten tough, placing 
itself in a position to administer appropriate oversight of the 
FBI. It followed that citizens had no further reason to worry 
over what the Bureau was doing at that very moment, or 
what it might do in the future.  
In 1975 the Senate Select Committee concluded that in 
order to complete its (re)building of the required public 
impression, it might be necessary to risk going beyond 
exploration of the Bureau's past counterintelligence practices 
and explore ongoing (i.e.: ostensibly post-COINTELPRO) 
FBI conduct vis a vis political activists. Specifically at issue in 
this connection was what was even then being done to the 
American Indian Movement, and hearings were scheduled to 
begin in July. But this is where the Bureau, which had been 
reluctantly going along up to that point, drew the line. The 
hearings never happened. Instead, they were "indefinitely 
postponed" in late June of 1975, at the direct requ est of the 
FBI. 
133  
The Church committee cites the testimony of FBI dir ector 
Clarence M. Kelley as indication that even after the official


--- PAGE 70 ---
end of COINTELPRO, "faced with sufficient threat, c overt 
disruption is justified." 134  
  
The Legacy of COINTELPRO 
The repression of dissident groups can be traced fa r back 
into US history, at least to the passage of the Alien and 
Sedition Acts, by which "the Federalists sought to suppress 
political opposition and to stamp out lingering sympathy for 
the principles of the French Revolution," or to the judicial 
murder of four anarchists for "having advocated doc trines" 
which allegedly lay behind the explosion of a bomb in 
Chicago's Haymarket Square after a striker had been killed 
by police in May 1886. 
135  The Pinkerton Detective Agency, 
a private investigating agency of the ninteenth century, made 
extensive use of informants, strike-breakers and 
provocateurs .  
During the first World War, when the long-time, pow erful 
head of the FBI, J. Edgar Hoover led the Bureau of 
Investigation, there was a "mass deprivation of rights 
incident to the deserter and selective service violator raids in 
New York and New Jersey in 1918..." 
136  What happened is 
that 35 Bureau Agents assisted by police and military 
personnel and a "citizens auxiliary" of the Bureau, "rounded 
up some 50,000 men without warrants of sufficient p robable 
cause for arrest."  
In 1920 the Bureau, along with Immigration Bureau a gents, 
carried on the "Palmer Raids" (authorized by Attorney 
General A. Mitchell Palmer), which, in 33 cities rounded up 
10,000 persons. The Church Committee report 137  talks of 
"the abuses of due process of law incident to the r aids," 
quoting a scholarly study 138  that these raids involved 
"indiscriminate arrests of the innocent with the guilty, 
unlawful seizures by federal detectives..." and other 
violations of constitutional rights.  
The Church Committee cites a report of distinguishe d legal 
scholars 139  made after the Palmer Raids, and says the 
scholars "found federal agents guilty of using third-degree 
tortures, making illegal searches and arrests, using agents 
provocateurs...."


--- PAGE 71 ---
Attorney General Palmer justified his actions "to clean up the 
country almost unaided by any virile legislation" on grounds 
of the failure of Congress "to stamp out these sedi tious 
societies in their open defiance of law by various forms of 
propaganda":  
Upon these two basic certainties, first that the "Reds" were 
criminal aliens, and secondly that the American Government 
must prevent crime, it was decided that there could be no 
nice distinctions drawn between the theoretical ideals of the 
radicals and their actual violations of our national laws. 
Palmer's "information showed that communism in this  
country was an organization of thousands of aliens, who 
were direct allies of Trotzky." Thus "the Government is now 
sweeping the nation clean of such alien filth," with the 
overwhelming support of the press, until they perceived that 
their own interests were threatened. 140  
Elsewhere he described the prisoners as follows:  
Out of the sly and crafty eyes of many of them leap  cupidity, 
cruelty, insanity, and crime; from their lopsided faces, 
sloping brows, and misshapen features may be recognized 
the unmistakable criminal type.  
Palmer's declared purpose was "to tear out the radical seeds 
that have entangled American ideas in their poisono us 
theories." 141  
One early FBI target was Marcus Garvey, founder of the 
Universal Negro Improvement Association. Under his 
leadership, UNIA, which to this day remains the largest 
organization of African Americans ever assembled, devoted 
itself mainly to the realization of various "bootstrapping" 
strategies (i.e., undertaking business ventures as a means of 
attaining its twin goals of black pride and self-sufficiency).  
Nonetheless, despite UNIAs explicitly capitalist orientation, 
or maybe because of it, Hoover launched an inquiry into 
Garvey's activities in August 1919. When this initial probe 
revealed no illegalities, Hoover, railing against Garvey's "pro-
Negroism," ordered that the investigation be not only 
continued but intensified. UNIA was quickly infiltrated by 
operatives recruited specifically for the purpose, and a 
number of informants developed within it. Still, it was another 
two years before the General Intelligence Division was able


--- PAGE 72 ---
to find a pretext - Garvey's technical violation of the laws 
governing offerings of corporate stock - upon which to bring 
charges of "mail fraud." Convicted in July 1923 by an all-
white jury, the UNIA leader was first incarcerated in the 
federal prison at Atlanta, then deported as an unde sirable 
alien in 1927. By then, the organization he'd found ed had 
disintegrated. Hoover, in the interim, had vowed to prevent 
anyone from ever again assuming the standing of what he 
called a "Negro Moses."  
World War II brought a return of the FBI to 
counterintelligence operations as President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt issued a series of instructions establishing the 
basic domestic intelligence structure for the feder al 
government. Roosevelt was advised by Hoover to proceed 
with the utmost degree of secrecy:  
In considering the steps to be taken for the expans ion of the 
present structure of intelligence work, it is believed 
imperative that it proceed with the utmost degree of secrecy 
in order to avoid criticism or objections which might be raised 
to such an expansion by either ill-informed persons or 
individuals having some ulterior motive ... Consequently, it 
would seem undesirable to seek any special legislation 
which would draw attention to the fact that it was proposed 
to develop a special counterespionage drive of any great 
magnitude. 
142  
According to William C. Sullivan, Hoover's assistant for many 
years:  
Such a very great man as Franklin D. Roosevelt saw nothing 
wrong in asking the FBI to investigate those opposing his 
lend-lease policy -- a purely political request. He also had us 
look into the activities of others who opposed our entrance 
into World War II, just as later Administrations ha d the FBI 
look into those opposing the conflict in Vietnam. I t was a 
political request also when he [Roosevelt] instructed us to 
put a telephone tap, a microphone, and a physical 
surveillance on an internationally known leader in his 
Administration. It was done. The results he wanted were 
secured and given to him. Certain records of this kind ... 
were not then or later put into the regular FBI filing system. 
Rather, they were deliberately kept out of it. 
143


--- PAGE 73 ---
The passage in 1940 of the Smith Act, made "seditio n" a 
peacetime as well as a wartime offense. The doctrin e was 
laid out clearly by Supreme Court Justice Robert H. Jackson 
in his opinion upholding of the Smith Act on the gr ounds 
"that it was no violation of free speech to convict 
Communists for conspiring to teach or advocate the forcible 
overthrow of the government, even if no clear and present 
danger could be proved." For if the clear and prese nt danger 
test were applied, Jackson argued, "it means that 
Communist plotting is protected during its period of 
incubation; its preliminary stages of organization and 
preparation are immune from the law, the Government  can 
move only after imminent action is manifest, when i t would, 
of course, be too late." Thus there must be "some l egal 
formula that will secure an existing order against 
revolutionary radicalism.... There is no constitutional right to 
`gang up' on the Government." Opposition tendencies , 
however minuscule, must be nipped in the bud prior to 
"imminent action."  
Hoover claimed that in 1940, "advocates of foreign isms" 
had succeeded in boring into every phase of American life, 
masquerading behind front organizations. 
144  In 1939, 
Hoover told the House Appropriations Committee that  his 
General Intelligence Division had compiled extensive indices 
of individuals, groups, and organizations engaged in 
subversive activities, in espionage activities, or any activities 
that are possibly detrimental to the internal security of the 
United States.. . . Their backgrounds and activities are 
known to the Bureau. These indexes will be extremely 
important and valuable in a grave emergency. 145  
After World War II, the FBI's attention turned from  fascism to 
communism. This was the beginning of the Cold War. In 
March of 1946, Hoover informed Attorney General Tom  
Clark that the FBI had  
found it necessary to intensify its investigation of Communist 
party activities and Soviet espionage cases and it was taking 
steps to list all members of the Communist party an d any 
others who might be dangerous in the event of a bre ak with 
the Soviet Union, or other serious crisis involving the United 
States and the USSR.. . . It might be necessary in a crisis to 
immediately detain a large number of American citizens. 146


--- PAGE 74 ---
As for the Communist party, "ordinary conspiracy principles" 
sufficed to charge any individual associated with it "with 
responsibility for and participation in all that makes up the 
Party's program" and "even an individual," acting alone and 
apart from any "conspiracy," "cannot claim that the  
Constitution protects him in advocating or teaching 
overthrow of government by force or violence." 147  
In 1948, the Mundt-Nixon bill, calling for the registration of 
the Communist party, was reported out of Nixon's House 
Committee on Un-American Activities. Senate liberals 
objected, and after a Truman veto they proposed as a 
substitute "the ultimate weapon of repression: conc entration 
camps to intern potential troublemakers on the occa sion of 
some loosely defined future 'Internal Security Emer gency'," 
148  including, as one case, "insurrection within the United 
States in aid of a foreign enemy." 149  
This substitute was advocated by Benton, Douglas, Graham, 
Kefauver, Kilgore, Lehman, and Humphrey, then a fre shman 
senator. Humphrey later voted against the bill, though he did 
not retreat from his concentration camp proposal. I n fact, he 
was concerned that the conference committee had bro ught 
back "a weaker bill, not a bill to strike stronger blows at the 
Communist menace, but weaker blows." The problem wi th 
the new bill was that those interned in the detention centers 
would have "the right of habeas corpus  so they can be 
released and go on to do their dirty business." 150  
In 1949 the attorney general's list was established, excluding 
members of "communist front organizations" from fed eral 
employment, since their influence on government pol icies 
would be such that those policies will either favor the foreign 
country of their ideological choice or will weaken the United 
States government domestically or abroad to the ultimate 
advantage of the ... foreign power. Consequently, [Mr. 
Hoover] urged that attention be given to the association of 
government employees with front organizations. These 
included not only established fronts but also tempo rary 
organizations, spontaneous campaigns, and pressure 
movements so frequently used by subversive groups. If a 
disloyal employee was affiliated with such fronts, he could be 
expected to influence government policy in the direction 
taken by the group. 
151


--- PAGE 75 ---
The first formal COINTELPRO, aimed at the U.S. 
Communist Party, commenced on August 28, 1956. 
Although this was the first instance in which the Internal 
Security Branch was instructed to employ the full range of 
extralegal techniques developed by the bureau's 
counterintelligence specialists against a domestic target in a 
centrally coordinated and programmatic way, the FBI had 
conducted such operations against the CP and to a l esser 
extent the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) on an ad hoc  basis 
at least as early as 1941.  
Instructively, Hoover began at the same time to include a 
section on "Negro Organizations" in reports otherwise 
dedicated to "Communist Organizations" and "Axis Fifth 
Columnists." In 1954 there was also the Communist C ontrol 
Act, a statute outlawing the CP and prohibiting its members 
from holding certain types of employment.  
Viewed against this backdrop, it is commonly believed that, 
however misguided, COINTELPRO-CPUSA was in some 
ways well intended, undertaken out of a genuine concern 
that the CP was engaged in spying for the Soviet Union. 
Declassified FBI documents, however, reveal quite the 
opposite. While espionage and sabotage "potentials"  are 
mentioned almost as afterthoughts in the predicatin g 
memoranda, unabashedly political motives take cente r 
stage. The objective of the COINTELPRO was, as Inte rnal 
Security Branch chief Alan Belmont put it at the ti me, to 
block the CP's "penetration of specific channels of  American 
life where public opinion is molded" and to prevent thereby 
its attaining "influence over the masses."  
From the outset, considerable emphasis was placed o n 
intensifying the bureau's long-standing campaign to promote 
factional disputes within the Party. To this end, the CP was 
infiltrated more heavily than ever before. It has been 
estimated that by 1965 approximately one-third of t he CP's 
nominal membership consisted of FBI infiltrators an d paid 
informants, while bona fide  activists were systematically 
snitch jacketed. A formal "Mass Media Program" was also 
created, "wherein derogatory information on prominent 
radicals was leaked to the news media."  
The programs directed against the Communist party 
continued through the 1960s, with such interesting 
innovations as Operation Hoodwink from 1966 through mid-


--- PAGE 76 ---
1968, designed to incite organized crime against the 
Communist party through documents fabricated by the  FBI, 
evidently in the hope that criminal elements would carry on 
the work of repression and disruption in their own manner. 
152  
In October 1961, the "SWP Disruption Program" was p ut into 
operation against the Socialist Workers Party. The grounds 
offered, in a secret FBI memorandum, were the follo wing: 
the party had been "openly espousing its line on a local and 
national basis through running candidates for public office 
and strongly directing and/or supporting such causes as 
Castro's Cuba and integration problems...in the Sou th." The 
SWP Disruption Program, put into operation during t he 
Kennedy administration, reveals very clearly the FBI's 
understanding of its function: to block legal polit ical activity 
that departs from orthodoxy, to disrupt opposition to state 
policy, to undermine the civil rights movement.  
  
CISPES 
The FBI has continued to violate the constitutional  rights of 
citizens through the 1980's, up to 1990, as revealed by Ross 
Gelbspan in his book Break-Ins, Death Threats And The FBI . 
Utilizing thousands of pages of FBI documents secur ed 
through the Freedom of Information Act, Gelbspan fo und 
that activists who opposed U.S. policy in Central America 
"experienced nearly 200 incidents of harassment and  
intimidation, many involving...break-ins and thefts or rifling of 
files." Gelbspan 
s intent was to "add a small document to 
the depressingly persistent history of the FBI as a national 
political police force."  
During the 1980's as the FBI waged an "active measures" 
campaign against the Committee In Solidarity with the 
People of El Salvador (CISPES), a former FBI inform ant, 
Frank Varelli, became disillusioned with the Bureau's attempt 
to destroy CISPES. Acting on disinformation supplied by the 
murderous Salvadoran National Guard, false informat ion 
was forwarded by the FBI to the Defense Intelligence 
Agency.  
The National Guard claimed that one FMLN coalition 
member, the Armed Revolutionary Group (GAR), "were to


--- PAGE 77 ---
promote in North America a strong and violent campa ign of 
agitation and propaganda on behalf of FMLN-FDR, hav ing 
obtained immediate support from different sectors o f North 
American society. Among the groups providing support were 
labor unions, Gay Power groups, Pro- Abortion groups, 
groups involved in the women's liberation movement, and 
organizations that are opposed to the strengthening of the 
military forces of the US." 153  
Although not a shred of evidence existed linking these North 
American organizations to the GAR, the groups were 
included in the National Guard communique -- at the  direct 
request of the FBI.  
According to Varelli, "Can you imagine if gay rights groups, 
abortion rights groups, the Equal Rights Amendment groups 
were known to support a group that had killed more than 20 
police and soldiers in a year?" The informant added , "Once 
the FBI had this data in their files, they could proceed to 
investigate all these other groups. What is even worse, the 
FBI knew that this material from the National Guard  was 
strictly disinformation. But they passed the same m aterial 
along to the Secret Service, the Defense Intelligence Agency 
and other agencies in the intelligence community without 
alerting them to the fact that it was completely fa bricated." 
154  
The FBI found it "imperative to formulate some plan  of attack 
against CISPES," not because of its suspected invol vement 
in terrorism or any other criminal activity, but because of its 
association with "individuals [deleted] who defiantly display 
their contempt for the U.S. government by making speeches 
and propagandizing their cause." In plain English, CISPES 
was politically objectionable to the Bureau - no more, or less 
- and was therefore deliberately targeted for repression. 155  
The investigation was ultimately expanded to include not 
only CISPES itself, but nearly 2000 organizations and 
individuals with which CISPES had some sort of interactive 
relations. This included pastors of local churches who were 
sympathetic to the Salvadorean peasantry, and Duke 
University, which provided meeting space.  
The Bureau admits it paid Varelli from 1981 to 1984  to 
infiltrate CISPES. Varelli has testified that the F BI's stated 
objective was to "break" CISPES. He recounts a modus


--- PAGE 78 ---
operandi  straight out of the annals COINTELPRO - from 
break-ins, bogus publications and disruption of pub lic events 
to planting guns on CISPES members and seducing 
CISPES leaders in order to get blackmail photos for  the FBI. 
156  
Alerted by Varelli's disclosures, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights obtained a small portion of the Bureau's CIS PES files 
and released them to the press. The files show the U.S. 
government targeting a very broad range of religious, labor 
and community groups opposed to its Central America  
policies. They confirm that the FBI's objective was to attack 
and "neutralize" these groups. 157  Mainstream media 
coverage of these revelations elicited a flurry of 
congressional investigations and hearings. Publicly exposed, 
the FBI tried to scapegoat the whistle blower. Its in-house 
investigation found Varelli "unreliable" and held that his 
reports of CISPES terrorism were false. The Bureau denied 
any violation of the constitutional rights of U.S. citizens or 
involvement in the hundreds of break-ins reported b y Central 
America activists. A grand total of six agents received 
"formal censure" and three were suspended for 14 da ys. FBI 
Director William Sessions declared the case closed,  a mere 
"aberration" due to "failure in FBI management." 
158  
  
The Judi Bari Bombing 
There is no better example than the Judi Bari "boom  and 
bust" case to show that the FBI kept on well into the 1990s 
using covert action tactics against political movements and 
activists which they perceived as threats to the established 
order. One can make a case that the FBI is still us ing such 
tactics in the Bari case in 2001.  
The car bombing of Judi Bari and Darryl Cherney on May 24, 
1990 made headlines across the nation. At the FBI's  
instigation, Oakland California police immediately arrested 
the two nonviolent environmental leaders and told the media 
that they were terrorists blown up by their own bomb. For the 
next two months, the FBI and police held a series of press 
conferences where they dribbled out false evidence of the 
pair's guilt to feed a drumbeat of sensational medi a 
coverage.


--- PAGE 79 ---
But there was clear evidence that Bari was targeted because 
of her leftist environmental and labor organizing. Someone 
wanted to stop the two Northern California Earth First! 
leaders, the organizers of Redwood Summer, the largest 
ever campaign of nonviolent protests against corporate 
liquidation logging of the redwoods.  
After two months, the Alameda County District Attorney 
declined to file any charges, citing lack of evidence against 
the pair. There is evidence, though, from the FBI's  own files, 
that agents falsified evidence, suppressed exonerat ing 
evidence, and conspired with Oakland police to frame the 
two bombing victims. Moreover, the records show that the 
FBI stubbornly refused to do a genuine investigation of the 
bombing, and failed to pursue real evidence and lea ds 
turned over to them, such as fingerprints or death threats 
Bari received.  
Bari, the mother of two young daughters, was nearly killed 
when the powerful motion-triggered pipe bomb wrapped with 
nails for shrapnel effect blew up directly under he r driver's 
seat. The bomb caused horrifying maiming and crippl ing 
injuries, leaving her with a paralyzed right foot and unending 
pain for the rest of her life.  
Bari and Cherney were on an organizing tour for their 
campaign, which at first they called Mississippi Summer in 
the Redwoods in homage to the civil rights movement that 
inspired it. The idea was to have mass nonviolent civil 
disobedience to delay the cutting of redwoods long enough 
to let voters decide the issue in November 1990, when two 
statewide timber reform initiatives would be on the ballot. 
The call went out to college students across America: Come 
to Northern California and save the redwoods.  
In the June 10, 1990 San Francisco Examiner, writer Jane 
Kay raised the issue of law enforcement interest:  
"Environmental activism is the new target of political 
suspicion and surveillance, and law enforcement agencies 
are stepping up action against those who demand rad ical 
change. Calling them agitators, outsiders, the mafia and 
extremists, local, state and federal investigators and 
prosecutors say they suspect them of violent acts -- or the 
potential for them. They have responded in the last  year with 
arrests, searches, seizures and questioning."


--- PAGE 80 ---
FBI files contained evidence of Bari and Cherney's 
innocence, but not until three years after the bomb ing did the 
FBI begin (grudgingly) to disclose that evidence, and then 
only under court order and Congressional pressure. A year 
after the bombing, with no progress in the official  
investigation, and with the FBI still telling the media that 
there were no other suspects but Bari and Cherney, the pair 
filed a federal civil rights suit against the FBI and Oakland 
Police, charging them with conspiring "to suppress, chill and 
'neutralize' their constitutionally protected activities in 
defense of the environment."  
Now Bari and Cherney could investigate the bombing 
themselves, using civil discovery and subpoena power to 
compel the FBI and police to turn over files and ev idence 
and to submit to questioning under oath. Ten years later, 
their charges are supported by over 20,000 pages of 
evidence, including FBI files and the testimony of over 70 
FBI agents and police officers. The evidence of pol ice 
misconduct is strong enough that the suit has survived 
repeated motions by the FBI and Oakland to dismiss it.  
Bari and Cherney discovered that police crime scene photos 
clearly showed that the bomb ripped a two foot by four foot 
hole in the floorboard centered directly under the driver's 
seat. FBI files revealed that a top explosives expert, agent 
David R. Williams, inspected the bombed car three w eeks 
after the explosion and showed the local agents tha t the 
bomb had been completely hidden under the driver's seat. 
He told them the bomb was detonated by a motion tri gger, 
and had functioned as designed rather than explodin g 
accidentally.  
That put the lie to FBI statements that the bomb wa s on the 
back seat floorboard where they would have seen it -- the 
principal claim used to justify arresting Bari and Cherney for 
possession and transportation of an explosive device. 
Knowing full well from their own expert's testimony that Bari 
and Cherney were innocent victims, the FBI and Oakland 
police continued to lie to the media for another fi ve weeks, 
saying they had plenty of evidence they were the bombers.  
Bari's last work in her life was to oversee a crucial phase of 
her lawsuit so that her legal team could take the case to trial 
on behalf of her children, to clear her name, and t o secure 
the rights of all activists to be free from FBI interference with


--- PAGE 81 ---
their constitutional rights. Although she died of cancer on 
March 2, 1997, the suit is continued by Bari's estate and 
Cherney.  
Bari felt sure as soon as it happened that timber i nterests 
were behind the bombing. She told investigating officers in 
the hospital that she began receiving death threats soon 
after she had announced plans for Redwood Summer. 
Police found copies of written threats in her bombe d car.  
Perhaps the key incident that made her the target o f the 
bomb attack was her demand for government seizure o f 
timber corporation property. Bari appeared in a coalition with 
Louisiana Pacific workers before an April 3, 1990 m eeting of 
Mendocino County's Board of Supervisors. LP had closed 
several sawmills as the trees were used up, leaving many of 
their workers jobless. Bari demanded that the county use 
eminent domain powers to seize LP corporate timberlands 
and turn them over to the workers.  
Her property seizure demand and her coalition with 
disgruntled timber workers certainly focused negative timber 
industry attention on Bari, and probably the FBI's too. A local 
paper published a large front page photo of Bari fr om the 
board meeting. A copy of that photo with the circle and cross 
hairs of a rifle scope drawn over her face was the most 
frightening death threat Bari received, she said. The photo 
was smeared with excrement and stapled to the door of the 
Mendocino Environmental Center along with a yellow ribbon, 
the symbol of timber industry support groups opposed to 
Redwood Summer and Proposition 130, the "Forests 
Forever" initiative on the November ballot.  
If the "Forests Forever" initiative, Prop. 130, had passed in 
the fall 1990 election, the three big logging corporations of 
the redwood region -- Georgia Pacific, Louisiana Pacific and 
Pacific Lumber -- would have lost billions of dollars. It would 
have put an end to unsustainable liquidation logging and 
clearcutting, and ended industry control over the board that 
wrote timber regulations.  
With an enormous financial motive to defeat the initiative, the 
corporations hired the giant public relations firm Hill & 
Knowlton to manage a PR campaign to turn public opi nion 
against the initiative. An important part of the campaign was


--- PAGE 82 ---
to derail Redwood Summer. It was drawing media attention 
to the overlogging, which would work in favor of Prop.130.  
There were many signs of an orchestrated COINTELPRO -
like campaign of harassment and intimidation agains t Bari 
and other environmentalists in the weeks before the  
bombing. Someone cooked up counterfeit EF! flyers a nd 
press releases calling for violence and sabotage during 
Redwood Summer, and Pacific Lumber and Louisiana 
Pacific knowingly distributed the fakes to workers, 
community members and media in a move calculated to  
deceive people about EF!'s nonviolent intentions and create 
an atmosphere of hatred and violence toward 
environmentalists.  
As the FBI and police smeared Bari, Cherney and Ear th 
First! as terrorists after the bombing, the PR company 
quickly put out propaganda falsely labeling Prop. 130 "the 
Earth First! initiative," and calling it "too extreme." By some 
reports, they spent up to $20 million by the time voters 
defeated the initiative by a narrow margin.  
FBI records obtained through the Freedom of Informa tion 
Act show that the FBI infiltrated and spied on Eart h First! 
almost from its beginning in 1980, with the earliest known 
FBI report on it dated 1981. Heavily censored FBI 
documents obtained through Bari's suit indicate weekly 
meetings in spring 1990 between an FBI agent and a secret 
informant in Northern California. Deposition testim ony by 
Oakland Police Department officers and FBI agents s tates 
the FBI had an informant on EF! leaders, and the FB I told 
OPD that Cherney and Bari were already "the subjects of an 
investigation in the terrorist field" when they were bombed. 
They could have been under surveillance when the bomb 
was placed.  
Just before the Bari bombing, the FBI was wrapping up 
"Operation Thermcon" in Arizona, a 3-year covert operation 
employing over 50 FBI agents designed to entrap and 
discredit EF! and its co-founder Dave Foreman as explosive-
using terrorists. The FBI infiltrated a tiny Arizona EF! group 
with an undercover agent provocateur, won their trust over a 
couple of years, and tried to persuade them to use thermite, 
an explosive incendiary, to take down a power line. The 
activists refused the FBI infiltrator's offer to provide 
explosives, and he settled for providing them with a cutting


--- PAGE 83 ---
torch instead. The FBI provocateur provided the equipment, 
trained the activists in its use, chose the target, drove them 
to the site, and joined an FBI strike team in busti ng them in 
the act on May 31, 1989, almost a year to the day b efore the 
Bari bombing. Foreman was not directly involved, but was 
charged with conspiracy for providing $100 to the group. The 
resulting "Arizona Five" trial ended in plea bargains in 
August, 1991, with prison sentences for two of the activists, 
and with probation and fines for the others, includ ing 
Foreman. Note that the Bari bombing came midway bet ween 
the arrest and the trial in the Thermcon case.  
Thermcon was the FBI's code name meaning "thermite 
conspiracy," but there was no thermite involved except in the 
FBI scheme to tie EF! to explosives despite the fact they 
have never advocated or used explosives in their entire 
history. The FBI had a public relations goal in Thermcon, to 
deceive the public into believing EF! were violent extremists 
so as to neutralize their effectiveness and isolate them from 
public support. It was a classic COINTELPRO against Earth 
First!  
The true goal of Thermcon was revealed when Michael Fain, 
the FBI's undercover agent provocateur in the case, 
accidentally left his body wire running and recorded his 
conversation with other agents. On the tape, Fain is heard to 
say, "I don't really look for them to be doing a lot of hurting 
people. (Foreman) isn't really the guy we need to pop -- I 
mean in terms of an actual perpetrator. This is the  guy we 
need to pop to send a message. And that's all we're  really 
doing. . . . Uh-oh! We don't need that on tape! Hoo  boy!" The 
FBI's true goal was to "send a message" to the public that 
Earth First! was a terrorist group.  
Bari and Cherney's investigation turned up several 
connections between the timber industry and the FBI , 
including a chummy "Dear Bill" letter sent to FBI Director 
William Sessions by a board member of Maxxam, which  
owns Pacific Lumber.  
Louisiana Pacific had an FBI connection that direct ly 
involved bombs. One month before the Bari bombing, the 
FBI conducted a bomb investigator school in Humbold t 
County. FBI terrorist squad bomb expert Frank Doyle blew 
up cars with pipe bombs on a Louisiana Pacific logging site, 
then his students practiced investigating. Louisiana Pacific


--- PAGE 84 ---
was the company whose timberlands Bari asked the 
government to seize, after which she immediately began 
receiving death threats.  
There is the mystery of another bomb at an LP sawmi ll in 
Cloverdale, California, about an hour's drive south of Bari's 
home. Two weeks after the FBI bomb school (and two 
weeks before Bari's car exploded), a partly-exploded 
firebomb was found. That bomb, a pipe bomb next to a can 
of gasoline, failed to fully explode or to ignite the gasoline. A 
cardboard sign near the firebomb bore the words, "L P 
screws millworkers," a message that could be associated 
with Bari. A cardboard sign next to a firebomb makes no 
sense, unless it was designed to fail and to leave evidence 
that could be used to help to frame Bari for the Oa kland 
bomb two weeks later.  
The FBI lab found that the Cloverdale and Oakland b ombs 
matched exactly in components and construction meth od, 
and were built by the same person(s). This same type of 
bomb was studied at the FBI bomb school two weeks earlier, 
according to testimony of an Oakland officer who was there. 
Investigators found a usable fingerprint on the cardboard 
sign, but there is no record that the FBI ever tried to match 
the print to Bari or Cherney, or to anyone else.  
Less than an hour after the Oakland explosion, none  other 
than Special Agent Frank Doyle, the bomb school instructor, 
took charge of the bomb scene investigation. There were at 
least five of his bomb school students at the scene , and they 
were overheard on a videotape joking about the scene being 
the "final exam." Since he was the FBI's terrorist squad 
bomb expert and their instructor the other FBI and Oakland 
bomb investigators who were at the scene first deferred to 
his pronouncements about the evidence.  
It was Doyle who overruled the Oakland sergeant who got 
there first and said the bomb was under the driver's seat and 
that he could see the pavement under the car throug h the 
hole in the seat bottom. It was Doyle who falsely said the 
bomb was on the floor behind the driver's seat where it 
would have been easily seen. It was also Doyle who falsely 
claimed that two bags of nails found in the back of  Bari's car 
matched nails taped to the bomb for shrapnel effect , when in 
fact they were not even the same type, and were clearly


--- PAGE 85 ---
different to the naked eye. (Bari worked as a carpe nter, and 
always had tools and nails in the car.)  
Other officers on the scene testified that Doyle ar gued with 
them, and quoted him saying, "I've been looking at bomb 
scenes for 20 years, and I'm looking at this one, a nd I'm 
telling you you can rely on it. This bomb was visible to the 
people who loaded the back seat of this car."  
Exactly three weeks later, when Supervisory Special Agent 
David R. Williams -- the FBI crime laboratory's top 
explosives expert -- inspected the bombed car, he pointed 
out to Doyle that impact marks left by the pipe bom b's end 
caps on the transmission tunnel and driver's door, combined 
with the location of the hole in the floorboard and  the 
damage to the seat cushion, clearly proved the bomb  was 
under the driver's seat, not in the back where Doyle had 
said.  
Despite this early clear evidence that Bari was the target of 
attempted murder, the FBI and Oakland PD continued telling 
the media and the court that Bari and Cherney were their 
only suspects, and fabricating other stories about nails from 
the bomb matching nails found in Bari's house. Repe tition is 
a fundamental of the "Big Lie" propaganda technique , 
maintaining a drumbeat of false information until i t is 
accepted by the media and the public as the truth. There can 
be no doubt that the FBI was knowingly lying about the 
evidence.  
M. Wesley Swearingen, a retired career FBI agent with first-
hand inside knowledge of COINTELPRO wrote in his book 
"FBI Secrets -- An Agent's Expose:  
"(COINTELPRO) is still in operation today, but under a 
different code name. The operation is no longer pla ced on 
paper where it can be discovered through the release of 
documents under the Freedom of Information Act.  A clear 
example of the FBI's continued COINTELPRO is in the  FBI's 
alleged involvement in the 1990 bombing of the vehicle 
occupied by Judi Bari and Darryl Cherney ... which was an 
effort to neutralize Judi Bari."  
There could hardly have been a more ideal location than 
Oakland for an FBI covert operation against Bari. The media 
coverage of the Oakland bombing was far more extensive,


--- PAGE 86 ---
and was far more easily manipulated by the FBI, than if it 
had happened in Mendocino or Humboldt Counties wher e 
Bari lived and spent nearly all of her time. Oakland was the 
home of the Black Panther Party for Self Defense, w hich 
bore the brunt of the most extreme COINTELPRO of al l, 
including multiple assassinations and frame-ups of its 
leaders. The Oakland Police Department has a long h istory 
of cooperating with the Bureau in targeting progressive and 
radical groups.  
In deposition in the Bari case, OPD intelligence division chief 
Kevin Griswold admitted that his department keeps f iles on 
over 300 political groups and individuals in the Bay Area. 
Griswold said the Oakland Police have spied on EF! since 
1984, and had their own informant inside EF! who re ported 
back to Griswold on plans for upcoming demonstratio ns. 
This even though EF! is not based in Oakland and wa s not 
active there prior to the Bari bombing. Griswold said he 
shares information from his spies with the FBI. Enc ouraging 
and tapping into political spying operations run by local 
police like Oakland's was one of the key ways the FBI got 
around the Attorney General's guidelines that barred the 
bureau from purely political spying.  
The special agent in charge of the FBI's San Francisco office 
at the time of the bombing was Richard W. Held, a 2 6-year 
veteran of the FBI's COINTELPRO "dirty tricks" campaigns 
against the Black Panthers, American Indian Movemen t and 
Puerto Rican independence activists.  
Under deposition under oath in the Bari case, Held claimed 
he was unaware of the details of the Bari-Cherney case, and 
implied that it was not important enough to merit h is 
attention. But files in the San Francisco FBI offic e contained 
a memo from Washington ordering his office to provi de 
weekly reports on the Bari case so that headquarters could 
respond to the "numerous inquiries" they were getting from 
the media. Held's testimony was also contradicted by FBI 
agents under his command who said in their depositions that 
they briefed him daily on the case.  
The unraveling of the frame-up of Bari and Cherney may 
have brought an early end to Held's 25-year FBI career. It is 
a strong tradition in the FBI not to embarrass the bureau. 
Held announced his early resignation from the FBI in May of 
1993, the day before Bari held a press conference w ith the


--- PAGE 87 ---
newly released Oakland Police crime scene photos exposing 
the FBI lies about the location of the bomb. Held t old 
reporters he resigned because he expected reassignment to 
a new post and didn't want to move his family. His father, 
Richard G. Held, had risen to the high post of Depu ty 
Director of the FBI, and Held's career track was headed for 
the top as well. He told reporters his mother cried when he 
told her he was resigning, so clearly Held's FBI career was 
very important to him and his family, and it seems unlikely he 
would end it early just to avoid a relocation.  
Other cases have come to light where the FBI allegedly used 
bombs to frame radicals twenty years before the Bari 
bombing. FBI agent provocateur David Sannes was used to 
get radicals in Seattle to use bombs so that they could be 
arrested and discredited. When he learned that the FBI 
wanted him to set up one bomber to die in a booby-t rapped 
explosion, he refused to go along and went public.  
Sannes said in an interview on WBAI radio "My own 
knowledge is that the FBI along with other Federal law 
enforcement agencies has been involved in a campaig n of 
bombing, arson and terrorism in order to create in the mass 
public mind a connection between political dissidence of 
whatever stripe and revolutionaries of whatever violent 
tendencies."  
Though the Seattle cases happened in the early 1970 s, just 
before the supposed termination of COINTELPRO, the goal 
of the FBI's Operation Thermcon at the time of the Bari 
bombing 20 years later was to connect well-known Earth 
First! leaders with the use of explosives in the public mind, 
the same FBI strategy Sannes exposed in the Seattle  cases.  
Until the Bari-Cherney suit finally has its day in court, 
beginning October 1, 2001, many questions will lie 
unanswered. But it seems more rational than paranoi d to 
believe there was an FBI and corporate timber connection to 
the bombing. Both timber and the FBI had ample moti ves, 
history, means and opportunity to bomb Bari. There are also 
FBI connections to both Maxxam/Pacific Lumber and 
Louisiana Pacific -- even involving bombs, in LP's case.  
Big Timber's PR firm may have planned the bombing a nd 
arranged the FBI cooperation in the frame-up, but i t meshed 
perfectly with the FBI's own Operation Thermcon to


--- PAGE 88 ---
neutralize Earth First! by trying to connect its best known 
leaders to explosives, first Dave Foreman, then Judi Bari 
and Darryl Cherney.  
Judi Bari was the redwood timber industry's most outspoken, 
brilliant, and effective opponent. The industry wou ld go to 
any length to defeat Prop. 130, because billions of  dollars 
were at stake. Framing Judi Bari for a bombing would serve 
that goal. It would be used to demonize Earth First! as 
violent extremists. Then voters could be turned against the 
initiative by falsely linking it with Earth First!. And that's 
exactly what they did.  
The bombing was expertly planned, including the Cloverdale 
sawmill bomb which the FBI immediately cited as evidence 
of Bari's guilt in her own bombing. Both bombs were expertly 
conceived and built, according to the FBI's top expert, and 
the one in Bari's car functioned as designed. Becau se of 
that, Bari believed the bombing was a professional hit.  
The bombing happened in the midst of a sophisticate d 
psychological warfare blitz of disinformation, intimidation and 
death threats, while Bari was organizing the biggest mass 
demonstrations against corporate overlogging in history, 
while she was taking on multi-billion dollar corporations and 
threatening their bottom line, and while she was building a 
coalition between timber workers and environmentalists by 
pointing to the corporations as the problem. She had also led 
Earth First! in her region to disavow tree-spiking and 
equipment sabotage, and insisted that a strict non- violence 
code be adhered to during Redwood Summer. The fact that 
Bari was an outspoken advocate of nonviolence gave all the 
more sensational impact to framing her as a terrori st 
bomber.  
In depositions the FBI agents involved in the Bari 
investigation admitted that they never found any evidence 
whatsoever that she built the bomb that nearly killed her, or 
any other bomb, But the FBI has never issued any statement 
of exoneration or any apology. Not only has the FBI not 
retracted their false charges, they continue to repeat them. 
Speaking to students at an October 1999 Humboldt St ate 
University recruiting event, FBI agent Candice DeLong told 
the students: "Judi Bari was a terrorist. They were carrying 
that bomb." The FBI recently spent $200,000 of the 
taxpayers' money paying a U. S. Air Force laboratory to do


--- PAGE 89 ---
simulation experiments aimed at showing that the bomb 
could have been in the back seat of Bari's car afte r all.  
Regardless who bombed Bari, it is plainly evident that FBI 
agents made a determined effort to frame her for it . After 
years of delay by the FBI, Bari's civil rights suit is set for trial 
beginning October 1, 2001 in federal court in Oakla nd.  
  
Footnotes  
1 Civil Liberties , no. 273, December 1970; publication of the 
ACLU.  
2 Race, Reform and Rebellion , Marable, pp. 102-3. For more 
on the Detroit rebellion, see Hersey, John, The Algiers Motel 
Incident , Alfred A. Knopf Publishers, New York, 1968. Of 
related interest, see Hayden, Tom, Rebellion in Newark: 
Official Violence and Ghetto Response , Vintage Books, New 
York, 1967; and Gilbert, Ben W., et. al., Ten Blocks From the 
White House: Anatomy of the Washington Riots of 196 8 , 
Frederick A. Praeger Publishers, New York, 1968. For an 
overall appraisal of the motivations underlying the urban 
rebellions from the perspective of a former CORE fi eld 
secretary, see Wright, Nathan Jr., Black Power and Urban 
Unrest: Creative Possibilities , Hawthorn Books, Inc., New 
York, 1967. In general, see Boesel, David, and Peter H. 
Rossi (eds.), Cities Under Siege: An Anatomy of the Ghetto 
Riots, 1964-1968 , Basic Books, New York, 1971.  
3 Hoover, statement, July 26, 1950 (Harry S. Truman 
Library, Bontecore Papers), from Ideological Warfare: The 
FBI's Path Toward Power , Frank M. Sorrentino, Associated 
Faculty Press, Inc. 1985.  
4 See Memorandum from F.J. Baumgardner to W.C. 
Sullivan , October 1, 1964; Memorandum from Sullivan to A. 
Belmont, August 30, 1963; J. Edgar Hoover, chairman , 
Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference Report to  
McGeorge Bundy, special assistant to the President, July 25, 
1961, enclosing IIC, Status of U.S. Internal Security 
Programs, July 1, 1960, through June 30, 1961 . From 
Ideological Warfare , op. cit .


--- PAGE 90 ---
5 Special Report of Interagency Committee on Intelligence  
(Ad Hoc), Chairman J. Edgar Hoover, along with the 
directors of the CIA, DIA, and NSA, prepared for th e 
President, June 25, 1970, marked "Top Secret." A ce nsored 
version was later released. Quotes are from Book 7, Part 1: 
Summary of Internal Security Threat .  
6 C. Gerald Fraser, "F.B.I. Action in 1961 Called Still Harmful 
to Hopes of Blacks," New York Times , April 6, 1974. See 
also Jesse Jackson and Alvin Poussaint. "The Danger 
Behind FBI Obstruction of Black Movements," Boston Globe , 
April 2, 1974.  
7 
8 Nerve War Against Individuals, forwarded to CIA s tation in 
Guatemala City on June 9, 1954 
http://www.parascope.com/ds/articles/nervewardoc.htm  
9  
10 John Kifner, "F.B.I. Gave Chicago Police Plan of  Slain 
Panther's Apartment," New York Times , May 25, 1974. 
Although the act of FBI involvement in the Hampton 
assassination, along with other details of this major state 
crime, was not widely publicized outside of Chicago, 
nevertheless there were a few reports, such as this one. 
There can be no excuse for the general silence on t his 
matter, which alone overshadows the entire Watergat e Affair 
by a substantial margin.  
11 On the significance of the threat, both actual a nd 
potential, as perceived at high levels of policy planning, see 
Noam Chomsky's review of some of the evidence contained 
in the "Pentagon Papers" in _For Reasons of State_, chapter 
1. For discussion of the impact on the American 
expeditionary force, see David Cortright, _Soldiers in 
Revolt_, Doubleday, 1975).  
12 January 22, 1969 memo from SAC, Chicago, to Dire ctor 
Hoover, cited in The COINTELPRO Papers, by Ward 
Churchill and Jim Vander Wall, South End Press.  
13 Kelly's memorandum is reproduced in U.S. Department of 
Justice, Report of the Justice Department Task Forc e to 
Review FBI Martin Luther King, Jr., Security and


--- PAGE 91 ---
Assassination Investigations, Washington, D.C., Jan uary 11, 
1977.  
14 Cross is mentioned in a memorandum from Atlanta agent 
Robert A. Murphy to J. Stanley Pottinger, at FBI 
headquarters, in July 1958. Interestingly, Murphy suggests 
the "SWP connection" is not a sufficient basis from  which to 
undertake a COMINFIL investigation. Pottinger apparently 
did not agree; see Pottinger, J. Stanley, "Martin Luther King 
Report" (to U.S. Attorney General Edward H. Levi), U.S. 
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C., April 9,19 76.  
15 The King file was opened by the New York rather than 
Atlanta field office. It should be noted that altho ugh the 
Bureau has always maintained that there was no COMINFIL 
activity directed at King and the SCLC during the 1950s, the 
code prefixed to the files on both was "100," indic ating they 
were viewed as "internal security" or "subversive" matters. 
The numerical file prefix for material accruing fro m what was 
considered an investigation of civil rights activities per se 
would have been "44."  
16 See U.S. Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, FBI  
Statutory Charter - Appendix to Hearings Before the 
Subcommittee an Administrative Practice and Procedu re, 
Part 3, 95th Congress, 2d Session, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1979, pp. 33-73.   
17 Concerning King see Lee v. Kelly, Civil Action No. 76-
1185, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, 
"Memorandum Opinion and Order" (by U.S. District Judge 
John Lewis Smith, Jr.), January 31, 1977. Certain of the 
information on both King and Walker was attributed by FBI 
Associate Director Cartha D. DeLoach to NAACP head Roy 
Wilkens (see report on the SCLC from Atlanta agent Robert 
R. Nichols to DeLoach, dated July 1961). Wilkens la ter 
vehemently denied any such interaction between himself 
and the Bureau; see Lardner, George Jr., 'Wilkens D enies 
Any Link to FBI Plot to Discredit King," Washington  Post, 
May 31, 1978.  
18 Levison's CP membership was never established 
although it was demonstrable that he maintained dos e 
relations with party members from roughly 1949 through '54. 
The speech attributed to Wofsy was actually drafted  by 
Levison and can be found in Proceedings of the Four th


--- PAGE 92 ---
Constitutional Convention of the AFL-CIO, Vol. 1, A merican 
Federation of Labor - Congress of Industrial Organizations, 
Washington, D.C., 1962, pp. 282-9. Levison also had  much 
to do with the preparation of the manuscript for Ki ng's first 
book Stride Toward Freedom (Harper and Brothers 
Publishers, New York, 1958); see King, Coretta Scott, My 
Life With Martin Luther King, Jr., Holt, Rinehart a nd Winston 
Publishers, New York, 1969.  
19 Such Bureau activities with regard to Levison were 
nothing new and seem to have stemmed largely from reports 
coming from "Solo," two brothers - Jack and Morris 
(Chilofsky) Childs - who served from as early as 1951 as 
highly placed FBI informants within the CP, USA. It was they 
who appear to have originally 'linked" Levison to the party 
even though they could never attest to his actual 
membership and essentially stopped referring to him  by 
early 1954. J. Edgar Hoover's predictable (and quite 
unsubstantiated) response was to declare Levison a "secret" 
CP member; see Garrow, op. cit., pp. 21-77.  
20 Memorandum, SAC, New York, to Director, FBI, 
captioned "Martin Luther Kin& Jr., SM-C," and dated  June 
21, 1962. Shortly thereafter, the New York field of fice began 
to openly affix a COMINFIL caption to correspondenc e 
concerning King and the SCLC. The Atlanta field off ice 
followed suit on October 23. The designation was of ficially 
approved by FBI headquarters supervisor R.J. Rampton in 
identical letters to the SACs on the latter date.  
21 Targeting the SCLC under COINTELPRO-CP, USA was 
first proposed by the SAC, New York in a memorandum to 
Hoover dated September 28,1962. The operation was 
approved by memo in an exchange between Assistant 
Director William C. Sullivan and one of his aides, Fred J. 
Baumgardner, on October 8. The initial five newspap ers 
selected for purposes of surfacing the anti-King pr opaganda 
were the Long Island Star-Journal, Augusta (GA) Chronicle, 
Birmingham (AL) News, New Orleans Times-Picayune, and 
the St. Louis Globe Democrat (where the reporter utilized in 
spreading the lies was Patrick J. Buchanan, later part of the 
White House press corps under Presidents Nixon and 
Reagan, as well as a current host on the Cable News 
Network Crossfire program).


--- PAGE 93 ---
22 The ELSURS authorization was signed by Kennedy on 
October 10, 1963 and provided to FBI liaison Courtn ey A. 
Evans. The attorney general's main concern, detailed in the 
minutes of his meeting with Evans, seems to have be en not 
that the bugging and tapping of King and the SCLC f or 
purely political purposes was wrong but that it might be 
found out. Once Evans convinced him that this was 
genuinely improbable, "the Attorney General said he felt [the 
FBI] should go ahead with the technical coverage of King on 
a trial basis, and to continue if productive results were 
forthcoming." See Denniston, Lyle, "FBI Says Kenned y 
OKed King Wiretap," Washington Evening Star, June 
18,1969. Also see OLeary, Jeremiah, "King Wiretap C alled 
RFK's Idea," Washington Evening Star, June 19, 1969 . 
Concerning continuation of the taps after the "tria l period" 
had concluded, see Rowan, Carl, "FBI Won't Talk abo ut 
Additional Wiretappings," Washington Evening Star, June 
20,1969.  
23 The New York SAC reported in a memorandum to 
Hoover, dated November 1, 1963, and captioned 'Mart in 
Luther Kin& Jr., SM-C; CIRM (JUNE)," that his agents had 
tapped all three SCLC office lines in his area of o perations, 
with coverage on two lines beginning October 24. He also 
recommended installation of a tap on the residence line of 
civil rights leader Bayard Rustin; the tap was approved and 
installed in early January 1964. On November 27,1963, the 
Atlanta SAC informed Hoover by a memo captioned 
"COMINFIL, RM; Martin Luther Kin& Jr., SM-C (JUNE)," that 
Atlanta operatives had tapped King's home phone and  all 
four organizational SCLC lines in that city as of November 8.  
24 For its disinformation campaign, the Bureau made  ample 
use of "friendly media contacts" such as the nation ally 
syndicated columnist Joseph Alsop, who proved quite willing 
to smear King in print on the basis of FBI "tips" l acking so 
much as a shred of supporting evidence. Concerning the 
IRS, as Garrow (op. cit.) notes at p. 114, 'in mid-March 
[1964) the Internal Revenue Service reported that despite 
careful scrutiny it had been unable to discover any violations 
in either King's or SCLC's tax returns. Director Hoover 
scrawled 'what a farce' on the margin when the disappointing 
memo reached his desk."  
25


--- PAGE 94 ---
26 The instructions by Sullivan to Whitson and othe rs are 
summarized in a memorandum from a member of the 
Internal Security Section named Jones to FBI Associate 
Director Cartha D. DeLoach on December 1, 1964, 
captioned simply 'Martin Luther King, Jr." For further 
information, see Lardner, George, Jr., "FBI Bugging and 
Blackmail of King Bared, Washington Post, November 
19,1975. Also see Horrock, Nicholas M., "Ex-Officials Say 
FBI Harassed Dr. King to Stop His Criticism," New York 
Times (March 9,1978), and Kunstler, William, "Write rs of the 
Purple Page," The Nation (No. 227, December 30, 197 8).  
27 Garrow, op. cit., p. 127. It appears DeLoach had  to 
content himself with the "contributions" of right-wing hacks 
like Victor Riesel. However, Bureau efforts to place the 
"story" in more respectable quarters are known to have 
included overtures to - at the very least -reporters John 
Herbers of the New York Times, James McCartney of the 
Chicago Daily News, David Kraslow of the Los Angeles 
Times, Eugene Patterson of the Atlanta Constitution , Lou 
Harris of the Augusta Chronicle, and syndicated columnist 
Mike Royko. Herbers appears to have passed word of what 
was happening to civil rights leader James Farmer, who 
confronted DeLoach with the matter during an appoin tment 
on December 2, 1964.  
28 There are serious questions concerning the possibility 
that the FBI might have been involved in the assassination of 
Martin Luther King. See, for example, Lane, Mark, a nd Dick 
Gregory, Code Name "Zorro:" The Assassination of Martin 
Luther King, Jr. , Prentice-Hall Publishers, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1977. Also see Lawson, James, "And the Characte r 
Assassination That Followed," Civil Liberties Review , No. 5, 
July-August 1978. Of further interest, see Lewis, David L., 
King: A Biography , University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1979, 
especially pp. 399-403.  
29 Gid Powers, Richard, Secrecy and Power: The Life of J. 
Edgar Hoover , The Free Press, New York, 1987, p. 4,58.  
30 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap4.h 
tm  
31 Ibid.


--- PAGE 95 ---
32 Ibid.  
33 Ibid.  
34 For a review of some of these actions, see Dave 
Dellinger, More Power than We Know  (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1975); Gary T. Marx, "Thoughts on a Neglected 
Category of Social Movement Participant: The Agent 
Provocateur and the Informant," American Journal of 
Sociology , vol. 80, no. 2 (September 1974, pp. 402-42).  
35 Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall, Agents of 
Repression: The FBI's Secret Wars Against the Black  
Panther Party and the American Indian Movement , South 
End Press, Boston, MA, 1990.  
36 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap7a. 
htm  
37 Kunstler, William, My Life as a Radical Lawyer  
38 Voices From Wounded Knee , 1973, (Institute for Policy 
Studies, Washington, D.C., 1974)p. 81. Warner and P otter 
were specifically ordered to wear civilian clothes, in order to 
hide the fact of direct military participation at Wounded Knee. 
They arranged for supply sergeants, maintenance personnel 
and medical teams to be present on the federal peri meter 
throughout the 71-day siege, all similarly attired in civilian 
garb. Further, the colonels placed a special army assault unit 
to be placed on 24-hour-a-day alert at Ft. Carson, Colorado 
for the duration of the siege. See The Nation , November 
9,1974. Also see University Review, the same month.  
39 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap7b. 
htm  
40  
41 Dave Dellinger, More Power than We Know  (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, 1975) Many such cases have been exposed 
throughout the country.


--- PAGE 96 ---
42 For information on these and other FBI actions i n Seattle, 
see Dellinger, op. cit. , and Frank J. Donner, "Hoover's 
Legacy," Nation , June 1, 1974.  
43 John M. Crewdson, "Ex-Operative Says He Worked f or 
F.B.I. To Disrupt Political Activities up to '74," New York 
Times , February 24, 1975.  
44 Donner Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege: Red 
Squads and Police Repression in Urban America , University 
of California Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. , P. 207  
45 Ibid.  
46 Michael Novick, "BLUE BY DAY, WHITE BY NIGHT: 
Organized White Supremacist Groups in Law Enforceme nt 
Agencies," People Against Racist Terror (PART), PO BOX 
1990, Burbank, CA 91507, Revised and Updated, Febru ary 
1993, p. 4  
47 Ken Lawrence, "Vigilante Repression," Covert Action 
Information Bulletin , Washington, D.C., Number 31, Winter 
1989  
48 Michael Novick, White Lies, White Power. The Fight 
Against White Supremacy and Reactionary Violence , 
Common Courage Press, Monroe, Maine, 1995, PP. 35-5 7  
49 For an insider's account of FBI racism and misog yny, 
particularly the Bureau's role in the frame-up of B lack 
Panther Party leader Geronimo ji Jaga [Pratt] see: M. 
Wesley Swearingen, FBI Secrets: An Agent's Expose, South 
End Press, Boston, 1995  
50 For a discussion of the nature of the FBI's "Whi te Hate 
Groups" COINTELPRO see: Donner 1980, PP. 204-211  
51 Donner Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege: Red 
Squads and Police Repression in Urban America , University 
of California Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. 206  
52 Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and 
Police Repression in Urban America , University of California 
Press, Berkeley, 1990, p. 309


--- PAGE 97 ---
53 National Lawyer's Guild, Counterintelligence: A 
Documentary Look at America's Political Police, Volume 
One , Chicago, 1978, p. 7  
54 "Documents detail FBI-Klan links in early rights strife," 
Chicago Tribune , August 2,1978  
55 Howell Raines, "Police Given Data on Boast by Rowe, 
The New York Times , July 14, 1978  
56 Churchill and Vander Wall, The COINTELPRO Papers , p. 
369  
57 Elizabeth Wine, "Blacks Hope for Best as Feds Re open 
Bombing Case," Reuters , July 21, 1997  
58 The COINTELPRO Papers , p. 170  
59 Donner, Protectors of Privilege , p. 214  
60  
61 Churchill And Vander Wall, op. cit. , p. 182  
62 Frank Donner, PROTECTORS OF PRIVILEGE: Red 
Squads and Police Repression in America , University of 
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1990, p. 360  
63 ibid.  
64 ibid.  
65 Novick, op. cit. , p. 4  
66Donner, op. cit. , p. 361  
67 ibid.  
68 ibid.  
69 ibid.  
70 Novick, op. cit. , p. 4  
71 Ridgeway, op. cit. pp. 76-81


--- PAGE 98 ---
72 Peter Biskind, "The FBI's Secret Soldiers," New Times , 
Volume 6, Number 1, January 9, 1976, pp. 21-22  
73 Everett R. Holles, "A.C.L.U. Says F.B.I. Funded `Army To 
terrorize Antiwar Protesters'," N.Y. Times , June 27, 1975. 
Information and quotes are from the 18-page single- space 
report submitted to the Senate Select Committee on June 
27, 1975, unless otherwise indicated. See also Steven V. 
Roberts, "F.B.I. Informer Is Linked to Right-Wing V iolence, 
N.Y. Times , June 24, 1974.  
74 Biskind, op. cit. , P. 21  
75 ibid.  
76 CARIC, op. cit. , PP. 5-6 
77 Biskind, op. cit. , P. 23  
78 Ibid.  
79 Ibid.  
80 CARIC, op. cit. , p. 6  
81 Churchill and Vander Wall, op. cit. , p. 182. Also, Godfrey 
"has testified in a California court that the burea u gave him 
$10,000 to $20,000 worth of weapons and explosives for use 
by the [SAO] in addition to his $250-a-month salary as an 
informant." John M. Crewdson, "Kelley Discounts F.B.I.'s 
Link to a Terrorist Group," N.Y. Times , January 12, 1976.  
82 Biskind, op. cit. , P. 25  
83  
84 The Bureau was also busy trying to split up the SNCC 
leadership during this period. In Agents, op. cit. , at p. 50, a 
document is reproduced proposing a bogus letter des igned 
to achieve this effect vis a vis  H. Rap Brown, Stokely 
Carmichael and James Forman.  
85 See Newton, Huey P., To Die for the People , Vintage 
Books, New York, 1972, p. 191.


--- PAGE 99 ---
86 Current Political Prisoners - Victims of COINTELPRO, 
roundtable dicsussion of Congresswoman Cynthia 
McKinney, September 14, 2000 
http://www.house.gov/mckinney/news/if_000914_humanright 
s.htm  
87 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap4.h 
tm  
88 Ibid.  
89 Ibid.  
90 Ibid.  
91 Ibid.  
92  
93 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap5a. 
htm  
94 Summary , p. 5.  
95 The "Key Black Extremist" tag seems to have been  
adopted for local use by the LA office COINTELPRO g roup 
from at least as early as January 20, 1969, based u pon 
internal office memos. A memo from SAC, Los Angeles  to 
the Director, dated 4/21/69 and captioned BLACK 
PANTHER PARTY-ARRESTS, RESTS, RACIAL MATTERS, 
recommended placing both Pratt and his second in 
command, Roger Lee Lewis, in the National Security Index.  
96 Durden-Smith, op. cit., pp. 145-46.  
97 This is readily borne out in a Bureau document, LA 157-
3436 which, in Section V (MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS 
RELATING TO ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATED WITH THE 
BPP), describes how Pratt and several other Panthers, in a 
private residence, had sawn off the barrels of "15 to 20 
weapons" (a legal act, so long as resulting barrel length is 
not less than 18 inches) during January of 1969; fo r no 
apparent reason, it stated that "it was believed the weapons 
were obtained in a burglary." The document then goe s on to


--- PAGE 100 ---
itemize other legal activities in which Pratt had engaged, 
such as target practice in the Mojave Desert, travel to and 
from Kansas City, providing a guided tour of the local BPP 
office for Angela Davis, etc. This is intermixed with 
suggestions (no reference to evidence of any sort) that Pratt 
illegally possessed at least one .45 caliber submachinegun 
and engaged in other criminal behavior.  
98 Memo from SCA, Los Angeles to the Director, FBI,  dated 
5/6/69 and captioned ELMER PRATT, BR--CONSPIRACY 
states, "As the Bureau is aware, Los Angeles is investigating 
one bank robbery committed by persons known to be 
involved in 'US' [several words deleted] UNSUBS 131; 
BANK OF AMERICA, NT & SA, Jefferson HUI Branch, 332 0 
South Hill Street, Los Angeles, California, 1/10/69, BR')." 
The document then goes on, for no logical reason, t o 
announce that BPP members "have possibly been invol ved 
in bank robbery matters in the Los Angeles area," singles 
Pratt out by name in a heavily deleted passage, and ends 
with the observation that, "A bank robbery conspiracy case is 
being opened in the Los Angeles Office on ELMER PRA TT 
... appropriate investigation to attempt to develop a 
conspiracy case will be conducted [emphasis added]." In a 
memo to the Director dated 6/5/69 and captioned "EL MER 
PRATT, BR--CONSPIRACY," the SAC, Los Angeles, 
eventually acknowledged that the matter was being dropped 
because "no information has been developed to indic ate that 
any Black Panther Party (BPP) members have been plotting 
bank robberies in Los Angeles or elsewhere." The document 
concludes that the "captioned case is ... subject t o being 
reopened at any time information is received to ind icate that 
Pratt or other members of the BPP are plotting or a re 
responsible for bank robberies."  
99 Los Angeles office Field Report, LA 157-3553, da ted 
5/14/69. The character of the case reported upon is  
described as, "RM-SMITH ACT OF 1940; SEDITIOUS 
CONSPIRACY AND INSURRECTION."The document was 
circulated to 8 Bureau offices, the Norton Air Forc e Base 
Office of Strategic Intelligence, 115th Military Intelligence 
Group, and the Secret Service in its initial distribution.  
100  
101 Summary  at p. 6.


--- PAGE 101 ---
102 See Counterintelligence Report from the SAC, Lo s 
Angeles, to Director, FBI, (LA 157-17511), dated 6/3/69 and 
captioned "COUNTERINTELLIGENCE PROGRAM, BLACK 
NATIONALIST-HATE GROUPS, RACIAL INTELLIGENCE 
(BLACK PANTHER PARTY)." As to the younger Held's 
position in the LA-COINTELPRO operation, see Swearingen 
deposition, op. cit., p. 1: "1 knew RICHARD WALLACE  
HELD as head of the COINTELPRO section in Los Angel es 
[during this period]."  
103 Durden-Smith, op. cit., p. 136, quotes Tackwood  
describing Cotton Smith before the raid, "cutting u p this 
cardboard and making this budding, and he's putting  little 
dolls with names on them, where they were, and 
associations and such and such." The LA version of the 
O'Neal floorplan in Chicago was thus apparently in three 
dimensions.  
104 Although not so straightforward as the Chicago 
memoranda in the aftermath of the HamptonClark 
assassinations, a memo from SAC, Los Angeles to Dir ector, 
FBI, dated 12/8/69 and captioned BLACK PANTHER 
PARTY, ARRESTS-RACIAL MATTERS, indicates the 
Bureau was directly involved in the LA raid and that the local 
FBI office sought credit for this "success." Among the BPP 
members listed in this document as having been arre sted on 
(spurious) attempted murder charges and other offen ses as 
a result of Bureau/police efforts on 12/8 are Rober t Bryan, 
Roland Freeman, Craig Williams, Jackie Johnson, Way ne L. 
Pharr, Isiah Houston, Elmer Pratt, Sandra Lane Prat t (wife), 
Willie Stafford, Tommy E. Williams, Renee Moore, Pa ul 
Redd, Albert Armor, Melvin Smith and George Young. The 
situation seems to have sparked substantial interest at the 
very highest levels of the FBI, as is indicated by a memo on 
the matter between national COINTELPRO head W.C. 
Sullivan and his primary operational coordinator, G.C. 
Moore, dated 12/17/69, in which Moore expresses delight 
that, "Both Pratts were arrested for their participation in the 
shooting battle with the Los Angeles Police Department on 
12-8-69."  
105 Churchill, Ward, The COINTELPRO Papers , 
http://www.derechos.net/paulwolf/cointelpropapers/copap5a. 
htm


--- PAGE 102 ---
106 See "63 Verdicts End Panther Trial", Los Angeles 
Times , December 24, 1971.  
107 The Glass House Tapes, op. cit., pp. 104-105.  
108 Summary at pp. 1-2.  
109 Richardson, Lee, "Ex-FBI Agent Exposes Use of 
Informants to Destroy the BPP," Freedom Magazine,  18:5, 
January 1985, P. 31.  
110 Summary at P. 3; this was a matter raised in a motion 
for retrial by Johnnie Cochran, which was denied by trial 
judge Kathleen Parker.  
111 Ibid. at p. 2.  
112 Ibid. at pp. 91-93.  
113 On prosecution presentation, see ibid. at pp. 2 -3; on 
Newton faction refusal to testify for Pratt, see pp . 94-96.  
114 AIRTEL from SAC, Los Angeles, to Acting Directo r, FBI, 
dated 7/18/72 (caption deleted), from The COINTELPRO 
Papers . 
115 An "URGENT" Teletype, sent at 1:26 PM, 7-28-72,  from 
the Los Angeles Field Office to the Acting Director, FBI, and 
reading, "LOS ANGELES SHERIFF'S OFFICE 
INTELLIGENCE, ADVISED INSTANT DATE ELMER 
GERARD PRATT FOUND GUILTY FIRST DEGREE 
MURDER ... DETAILS TO FOLLOW," gives some indicatio n 
of the ownership and priority the Bureau felt in th is case, 
from The COINTELPRO Papers . 
116 See Amnesty International, Proposal for a commission 
of inquiry into the effect of domestic in telligence activities on 
criminal trials in the United States of America , Amnesty 
International, New York, 1980, p. 29: "[The defense  
obtained] over 7,000 pages of FBI surveillance records 
dated after 2 January 1969. Elmer Pratt claimed ear lier 
records would reveal that he was at a meeting in Oakland at 
the time of the murder on 18 December 1968 but the FBI's 
initial response to this was that there had been no  
surveillance before 1969. This was later shown to be 
untrue."


--- PAGE 103 ---
117 See Elmer G. Pratt v. William Webster, et al. , United 
States Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia  (No. 81 
1907) for presentation of the case, and Pratt v. Webster; et. 
al. (508 F. Supp. 751 [19811) for the ruling. The feder al 
"national security" argument may be found in the re ply brief 
(No. 81-1907).  
118 For Judge J. Dunn's dissenting remarks, see his 
minority opinion In Re: Pratt , 112 Cal. App. 3d. 795,-Cal. 
Rptr. (Crim. No. 3 7534. Second Dist., Div. One. 3 
December 1980); hereinafter referred to as "Minorit y' and 
"Majority. "  
119 Proposal for a commission of inquiry into the effect of 
domestic in telligence activities on criminal trials in the 
United States of America , op. cit., pp. 107-110. Informant 
Reports and related memoranda on file.  
120 Summary  at p. 15.  
121 Proposal for a commission of inquiry into the effect of 
domestic in telligence activities on criminal trials in the 
United States of America , op. cit. , p. 25.  
122 The document also posits "the absolute necessit y for 
intensive investigative efforts in [political] matters."  
123 Select Committee, Final Report , Book III, OP. cit., p. 
517.  
124 See New York Times , August 4, 1974, for documents 
and commentary.  
125 This led directly to one of the three post-1971  
"COINTELPRO-type" operations:"The leaking of deroga tory 
information about Daniel Ellsberg's lawyer to Ray McHugh, 
chief of the Copley News Service." ( Spying on Americans , 
op. cit., p. 151).  
126 The break-in at the Media resident agency, which 
occurred on the night of March 8, 1971, compromised  the 
secrecy of COINTELPRO and thereby set in motion a 
process of high level "re-evaluation" of the program's 
viability. This led to an April 28 memorandum from Charles 
D. Brennan, number two man in the COINTELPRO 
administrative hierarchy, to his boss, FBI Assistant Director


--- PAGE 104 ---
William C. Sullivan. Brennan recommended the acrony m be 
dropped, but that the activities at issue be contin ued under a 
new mantle "with tight procedures to insure absolute 
secrecy." Hoover's famous "COINTELPRO termination" 
memo of the following day was merely a toned-down 
paraphrase of the Brennan missive. In another conne ction, it 
should be noted that publication of the COINTELPRO 
documents taken from the Media office was not in it self 
sufficient to cause the FBI to admit either the lon g-term 
existence or the dimension of its domestic 
counterintelligence activities. Instead, this required a suit 
brought by NBC correspondent Carl Stern after the reporter 
had requested that Attorney General Richard Kleindienst 
provide him with a copy of any Bureau document which "(i) 
authorized the establishment of Cointelpro - New Left, (ii) 
terminated such program, and (iii) ordered or authorized any 
change in the purpose, scope or nature of such prog ram" on 
March 20,1972. Kleindienst stalled until January 13, 1973 
before denying Stern's request. Stern then went to court 
under provision of the 1966 version of the FOIA, with the 
Justice Department counter-arguing that the judiciary itself 
"lacks jurisdiction over the subject matter of the complaint." 
Finally, on July 16, 1973 U.S. District Judge Barrington 
Parker ordered the documents delivered to his chamb ers for 
in camera review and, on September 25, ordered thei r 
release to Stern.  
The Justice Department attempted to appeal this dec ision on 
October 20, but abandoned the effort on December 6.  On 
the latter date, Acting Attorney General Robert Bork 
released the first two documents to Stern, an actio n followed 
on March 7,1974 by the release of seven more. By this point, 
there was no way to put the genie back in the bottle, and the 
Senate Select Committee as well as a number of priv ate 
attorneys began to force wholesale disclosures of 
COINTELPRO papers.  
127 Examples abound. Early instances come with Jimmy 
Carter's Executive Order 12036, signed on January 24,1978, 
which moved important areas of 
intelligence/counterintelligence activity under the umbrella of 
"executive restraint" rather than effective oversight, and the 
electronic surveillance loopholes imbedded in S. 1566, a 
draft bill allegedly intended to protect citizens' rights from 
such police invasion of privacy, which passed the senate by 
a vote of 99-1 on April 20,1978. This was followed on


--- PAGE 105 ---
December 4,1981 by Ronald Reagan's Executive Order 
12333, expanding the range of activities in which U.S. 
intelligence agencies might "legally" engage. Then there was 
the Intelligence Identifies Protection Act of 1982 which made 
it a "crime" to disclose the identities of FBI info rmants, 
infiltrators and provocateurs working inside domestic political 
organizations. And, in 1983, Reagan followed up with 
Executive Order 12356, essentially allowing agencies such 
as the FBI to void the Freedom of Information Act b y 
withholding documents on virtually any grounds they choose. 
Arguably, things are getting worse, not better.  
128 For analysis and texts of the Media documents, see 
Paul Cowan, Nick Egleson, and Nat Hentoff, State Secrets  
(Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973).  
129 Henry Steele Commager, "The Constitution Is Ali ve and 
Well," New York Times , August 11, 1974. Commager, who 
has been forceful in defense of civil liberties and  opposition 
to the Indochina war, states that prior to Nixon, "no President 
has ever attempted to subvert" the Constitution or 
"challenged the basic assumptions of our constituti onal 
system itself." But "the system worked" and the cha llenge 
was defeated.  
130  
131 The classic articulation of how this was rationalized 
came in the 1974 Justice Department report on 
COINTELPRO produced by an "investigating committee" 
headed by Assistant Attorney General Henry Peterson. After 
reviewing no raw files (innocuously worded FBI "summary 
reports" were accepted instead), but still having to admit that 
many aspects of COINTELPRO violated the law, the 
Peterson committee nonetheless recommended against 
prosecuting any of the Bureau personnel involved. "Any 
decision as to whether prosecution should be undert aken 
must also take into account several other important  factors 
which bear on the events in question. These factors are: 
first, the historical context in which the programs were 
conceived and executed by the Bureau in response to public 
and even Congressional demands for action to neutralize the 
self-proclaimed revolutionary aims and violence prone 
activities of extremist groups which posed a threat to the 
peace and tranquility of our cities in the mid and late sixties; 
second, the fact that each of the COINTELPRO progra ms


--- PAGE 106 ---
were personally approved and supported by the late Director 
of the FBI; and third, the fact that the interferen ce with First 
Amendment rights resulting from individual implemented 
program actions were insubstantial." The Senate Sel ect 
Committee and other bodies went rather further in t heir 
research and used much harsher language in describing 
what had happened under COINTELPRO auspices, but th e 
net result in terms of consequences to the Bureau a nd its 
personnel were precisely the same: none.  
132 "Charges Over F.B.I.'s Tactics on Subversive Suspects 
Barred," Washington Star-News ; New York Times , January 
4, 1975.  
133 For an in-depth analysis of the disinformation campaign 
at issue, see Weisman, Joel D., "About that 'Ambush ' at 
Wounded Knee,"  Columbia Journalism Review , September-
October 1975.  
134  
135 David Brion Davis, ed., _The Fear of Conspiracy_ 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1971). A fifth committed 
suicide before the sentence of death could be execu ted. 
Three others were sentenced to hanging as well, but were 
not executed. No proof was offered that any of the eight had 
been involved in the bomb-throwing.  
136  
137  
138  
139  
140 See excerpts from Palmer in Davis, _op. cit._ On the 
role of the press, see Levin, _op. cit._.  
141 See excerpt in Davis, op.cit.   
142  
143


--- PAGE 107 ---
144 Proceedings of the Federal-State Conference on Law 
Enforcement Problems of National Defense , August 5-6, 
1940. From Ideological Warfare, op. cit.  p. 44.  
145 U.S. Congress, House, House Committee on 
Appropriations, First Deficiency Appropriations Bill, Hearing, 
February 19, 1941, pp. 188-89. 77th Congress, 1st s ession. 
From Ideological Warfare, op. cit.  p. 43.  
146 Personal and confidential memorandum from Hoove r to 
Attorney General Tom Clark, March 8, 1946. Ibid. , p. 44-45.  
147  
148  
149  
150  
151  
152  
153 Ross Gelbspan, "Break-ins, Death Threats and th e FBI: 
The Covert War Against the Central American Movemen t," 
South End Press, Boston, MA, 1991, pp. 71-72  
154 Ibid.  
155 For further information on the FBI's anti-CISPE S 
operations, see Buitrago, Ann Mari, Report on CISPES Files 
Maintained by the FBI and Released under the Freedo m of 
Information Act , FOIA, Inc., New York, January 1988.  
156 U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on the  
Judiciary, Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, 
Break-Ins at Sanctuary Churches and Organizations 
Opposed to Administration Policy in Central America, Serial 
No. 42, 100th Congress, 1st Session, Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C., 1988, Hearing of February  19 
20,1987, pp. 432 ff. Also see Harlan, Christi, "The  Informant 
Left Out in the Cold," Dallas Morning News , April 6,1986, 
Gelbspan, Ross, "Documents show Moon group aided FB I," 
Boston Globe , April 118,1988; and Ridgeway, James, 
"Spooking the Left," Village Voice , March 3, 1987. For more


--- PAGE 108 ---
on Varelli's role and the FBI's attempt to scapegoa t him, see 
Gelbspan, Ross, "COINTELPRO in the'80s: The 'New' FBI," 
Covert Action Information Bulletin , No. 31 (Winter 1989), pp. 
14-16.  
157 See, for example, the FBI teletype on p. 18. Al so see 
Buitrago, Report on CISPES Files Maintained by FBI 
Headquarters and Released Under the Freedom of 
Information Act, Fund for Open Information and 
Accountability, Inc., New York, 1988; Groups Included in the 
CISPES Files Obtained from FBI Headquarters, Center for 
Constitutional Rights, 1988; Ridgeway, James, "Abroad at 
Home: The FBI's Dirty War," Village Voice , February 9, 
1988.  
158 U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on the  
Judiciary, Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, 
CISPES and FBI Counter-Terrorism Investigations , Serial 
No. 122, 100th Congress, 2nd Session, U.S. Governme nt 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1989, Hearing of  
September 16,1988, pp. 116-27. The changing public 
positions taken by Webster and Sessions concerning the 
FBI's CISPES operations are well traced in Buitrago, Ann 
Mari, "Sessions' Confessions," Covert Action Information 
Bulletin , No. 31 (Winter 1989), pp. 17-19.  
  
Bibliography 
Books  
The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents From the FBI's 
Secret Wars Against Dissent in the United States , by Ward 
Churchill & Jim Vander Wall, South End Press  
Agents of Repression: The FBI's Secret Wars Against  the 
Black Panther Party and the American Indian Movement , by 
Ward Churchill & Jim Vander Wall, South End Press  
COINTELPRO: The FBI's Secret War on Political Freedom,  
by Nelson Blackstock, Pathfinder, 1975  
FBI Secrets: An Agent's Expose,  by M. Wesley Swearingen, 
South End Press


--- PAGE 109 ---
War at Home: Covert Action Against U.S. Activists and What 
We Can Do About It  by Brian Glick, South End Press  
In the Spirit of Crazy Horse  by Peter Matthiessen, 1991, 
Viking Press  
Break-ins, Death Threats and the FBI: The Covert Wa r 
Against the Central America Movement , by Ross Gelbspan, 
1991, South End Press  
Are You Now or Have You Ever Been in the FBI FILES:  How 
to Secure and Interpret Your FBI Files  by Ann Mari Buitrago 
and Leon Andrew Immermann, Grove Press Inc.  
All Power to the People! The Black Panther Party an d 
Beyond , video by the Electronic News Group  
Vincent, Ted, Black Power and the Garvey Movement , 
Nzinga Publishing House, Oakland, CA, 1987.  
Cronon, E. Davis, Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey 
and the United Negro Improvement Association , University 
of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1955.  
Frank J. Donner, The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and 
Methods of America's Political Intelligence System, New 
York: Knopf, 1980  
Ideological Warfare: The FBI's Path Toward Power , Frank M. 
Sorrentino, Associated Faculty Press, Inc. 1985.  
Robert J. Goldstein, Political Repression in Modern America , 
Cambridge: Schenkman, 1978  
Morton H. Halperin et. al., The Lawless State,  New York: 
Penguin, 1976  
Kenneth O'Reilly, Racial Matters,  New York: Free Press, 
1989  
Hersey, John, The Algiers Motel Incident , Alfred A. Knopf 
Publishers, New York, 1968  
Hayden, Tom, Rebellion in Newark: Official Violence and 
Ghetto Response , Vintage Books, New York, 1967


--- PAGE 110 ---
Gilbert, Ben W., et. al., T en Blocks From the White House: 
Anatomy of the Washington Riots of 1968 , Frederick A. 
Praeger Publishers, New York, 1968  
Wright, Nathan Jr., B lack Power and Urban Unrest: Creative 
Possibilities , Hawthorn Books, Inc., New York, 1967.  
Boesel, David, and Peter H. Rossi (eds.), Cities Under 
Siege: An Anatomy of the Ghetto Riots, 1964-1968 , Basic 
Books, New York, 1971  
Paul Cowan, Nick Egleson, and Nat Hentoff, State Secrets,  
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973  
Chomsky, Noam,  For Reasons of State , New York: 
Pantheon, 1973  
Chomsky and E.S. Herman, Counterrevolutionary Violence: 
Bloodbaths in Fact and Propaganda  (New York: Warner 
Modular, 1973), suppressed by order of the parent 
conglomerate (Warner Brothers) but available in Fre nch 
(Bains de Sang , Paris: Seghers/Laffont, 1974)  
Chomsky and Herman, The Political Economy of Human 
Rights  (Boston: South End Press, 1979).  
Herman and Chomsky, Manufacturing Consent  (New York: 
Pantheon, 1988).  
Zinn, Howard, A People's History of the United State s, 
Harper and Row Publishers, New York, 1980.  
Johnson, Loch, A Season of Inquiry. The Senate Intelligence 
Investigation , University of Kentucky Press, Lexington, 1985  
Hersh, Seymour, The Price of Power , Simon and Schuster, 
New York, 1983, p. 295  
Barry, John M., The Ambition and the Power: The Fall of Jim 
Wright, A True Story of Washington , Viking, New York 1989  
David Brion Davis, ed., The Fear of Conspiracy, Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1971


--- PAGE 111 ---
Murray B. Levin, Political Hysteria in America: the 
Democratic Capacity for Repression,  New York: Basic 
Books, 1972  
Max Lowenthal, The Federal Bureau of Investigation,  William 
Sloane Associates, Inc., 1950  
Novick, Michael, Blue by Day, White by Night: Organized 
White Supremacist Groups in Law Enforcement Agencie s , 
People Against Racist Terror (PART), PO BOX 1990, 
Burbank, CA 91507, Revised and Updated, February 19 93  
Novick, Michael, White Lies, White Power: The Fight Against 
White Supremacy and Reactionary Violence , Common 
Courage Press, Monroe, Maine, 1995  
Donner, Frank, Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and 
Police Repression in Urban America , University of California 
Press, Berkeley, 1990  
National Lawyer's Guild, Counterintelligence: A 
Documentary Look at America's Political Police, Volume 
One , Chicago, 1978  
Newton, Huey P., To Die for the People , Vintage Books, 
New York, 1972, p. 191.  
King, Coretta Scott, My Life With Martin Luther King, Jr. , 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston Publishers, New York, 19 69  
Lane, Mark, and Dick Gregory,  Code Name "Zorro:" The 
Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. , Prentice-Hall 
Publishers, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1977.  
Lewis, David L., King: A Biography , University of Illinois 
Press, Urbana, 1979.  
Gid Powers, Richard, Secrecy and Power: The Life of J. 
Edgar Hoover , The Free Press, New York, 1987  
Tom Burghardt, "Paramilitary Violence and the State : The 
'Public-Private Partnership' in Political Repression," Toronto, 
Antifa Forum , Number 3, 1998.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Nicholas Wilson, "The Judi Bari Bombing Revisited: Big 
Timber, Public Relations and the FBI," The Albion Monitor , 
http://www.monitor.net/monitor/9905a/jbrevisited.html  
  
Government Reports and Newspaper Articles  
Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental 
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities of the 
United States Senate, Ninety Fourth Congress, First 
Session,  
U.S. Government Printing Office, No. 94-755, April 14, 1976, 
Vol 1-6.  
Hearings Before the Select Committee to Study 
Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence 
Activities of the United States Senate, Ninety Fourth 
Congress, First Session,  
U.S. Government Printing Office, Sept. 16 - Dec. 5,  1975, 
Vol 1-7.  
U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Assassinations, 
Hearings on the Investigation of the Assassination of Martin 
Luther King, Jr. , Vol. 6, 95th Congress, 2d Session, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1978  
U.S. Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, FBI Statutory 
Charter - Appendix to Hearings Before the Subcommittee an 
Administrative Practice and Procedure , Part 3, 95th 
Congress, 2d Session, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C., 1979  
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on the Jud iciary, 
Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, Break-Ins 
at Sanctuary Churches and Organizations Opposed to 
Administration Policy in Central America , Serial No. 42, 
100th Congress, 1st Session, Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C., 1988, Hearing of February 19 20,1 987, 
pp. 432  
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on the Jud iciary, 
Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, CISPES 
and FBI Counter-Terrorism Investigations , Serial No. 122,


--- PAGE 113 ---
100th Congress, 2nd Session, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C., 1989, Hearing of Septembe r 
16,1988  
Proposal for a commission of inquiry into the effect of 
domestic intelligence activities on criminal trials in the United 
States of America , Amnesty International, New York, 1980  
Special Report of Interagency Committee on Intelligence  (Ad 
Hoc), Chairman J. Edgar Hoover, along with the directors of 
the CIA, DIA, and NSA, prepared for the President, June 25, 
1970,  
Gary T. Marx, "Thoughts on a Neglected Category of Social 
Movement Participant: The Agent Provocateur and the  
Informant," American Journal of Sociology , vol. 80, no. 2, 
September 1974  
Weisman, Joel D., "About that 'Ambush' at Wounded K nee,"  
Columbia Journalism Review , September-October 1975.  
See "63 Verdicts End Panther Trial", Los Angeles Times , 
December 24, 1971.  
Richardson, Lee, "Ex-FBI Agent Exposes Use of Informants 
to Destroy the BPP," Freedom Magazine,  January 1985  
"Charges Over F.B.I.'s Tactics on Subversive Suspects 
Barred," Washington Star-News ; New York Times , January 
4, 1975.  
Hill, Robert A., "The Foremost Radical of His Race: Marcus 
Garvey and the Black Scare, 1918-1920," Prologue , No. 16, 
Winter 1984.  
Frank Wilkinson, The Era of Libertarian Repression - 1948 to 
1973: from Congressman to President, with Substantial 
Support from the Liberal Establishment , University of Akron, 
1974; reprinted from the University of Akron Law Review . 
Nicholas M. Horrock, "The F.B.I.'s Appetite for Very Small 
Potatoes," New York Times , March 23, 1975.  
C. Gerald Fraser, "F.B.I. Action in 1961 Called Still Harmful 
to Hopes of Blacks," New York Times , April 6, 1974.


--- PAGE 114 ---
Jesse Jackson and Alvin Poussaint, "The Danger Behind 
FBI Obstruction of Black Movements," Boston Globe , April 2, 
1974  
Henry Steele Commager, "The Constitution Is Alive and 
Well," New York Times , August 11, 1974  
John M. Crewdson, "Black Pastor Got F.B.I. Threat in '69," 
New York Times , March 17, 1975  
Vin McLellan, "FBI Heists Names of 1970 Student Str ikers," 
Boston Phoenix , March 5, 1974  
John Kifner, "F.B.I. Gave Chicago Police Plan of Sl ain 
Panther's Apartment," New York Times , May 25, 1974.  
John Kifner, "Security Aide for Indians Says He Was  F.B.I. 
Informer," New York Times , March 13, 1975  
Harry Kelly, "FBI spurred gang fight in Chicago, Senate 
says," Chicago Tribune , November 20, 1975.  
Harlan, Christi, "The Informant Left Out in the Col d," Dallas 
Morning News , April 6,1986  
Ridgeway, James, "Abroad at Home: The FBI's Dirty W ar," 
Village Voice , February 9, 1988  
"Documents detail FBI-Klan links in early rights strife," 
Chicago Tribune , August 2,1978  
Raines, Howell, "Police Given Data on Boast by Rowe, The 
New York Times , July 14, 1978  
Elizabeth Wine, "Blacks Hope for Best as Feds Reope n 
Bombing Case," Reuters , July 21, 1997  
Biskind, Peter, "The FBI's Secret Soldiers," New Times , 
January 9, 1976  
Everett R. Holles, "A.C.L.U. Says F.B.I. Funded `Army To 
terrorize Antiwar Protesters'," N.Y. Times , June 27, 1975  
Steven V. Roberts, "F.B.I. Informer Is Linked to Ri ght-Wing 
Violence, N.Y. Times , June 24, 1974


--- PAGE 115 ---
John M. Crewdson, "Kelley Discounts F.B.I.'s Link to a 
Terrorist Group," N.Y. Times , January 12, 1976.  
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vander Wall, "COINTELPRO 
Against the Black Panthers: The Case of Geronimo Pr att," 
Covert Action Information Bulletin , No. 31, January 1989  
U.S. Department of Justice, Report of the Justice 
Department Task Force to Review FBI Martin Luther King, 
Jr., Security and Assassination Investigations , Washington, 
D.C., January 11, 1977  
Pottinger, J. Stanley, "Martin Luther King Report" (to U.S. 
Attorney General Edward H. Levi), U.S. Department of 
Justice, Washington, D.C., April 9,1976  
Goldstein, Robert Justin, "The FBI's Forty Year Plot," The 
Natio n, No. 227, July 1, 1978  
"An American Gulag? Summary Arrest and Emergency 
Detention of Political Dissidents in the United States,"  
Columbia Human Rights Law Review,  No. 10, 1978  
Denniston, Lyle, "FBI Says Kennedy OKed King Wireta p," 
Washington Evening Star , June 18,1969.  
OLeary, Jeremiah, "King Wiretap Called RFK's Idea,"  
Washington Evening Star , June 19, 1969.  
Rowan, Carl, "FBI Won't Talk about Additional 
Wiretappings," Washington Evening Star , June 20,1969.  
Jacobs, James, "An Overview of National Political 
Intelligence," University of Detroit Journal of Urban Law , No. 
55, 1978.  
Lardner, George, Jr., "FBI Bugging and Blackmail of King 
Bared, Washington Post , November 19,1975.  
Horrock, Nicholas M., "Ex-Officials Say FBI Harassed Dr. 
King to Stop His Criticism," New York Times,  March 9,1978  
Kunstler, William, "Writers of the Purple Page," The Nation,  
No. 227, December 30, 1978.


--- PAGE 116 ---
Lawson, James, "And the Character Assassination Tha t 
Followed," Civil Liberties Review , No. 5, July-August 1978.

