=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Islam in Black America  identity, liberation, and difference in African-American Islamic thought.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 179
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:16:11.301622
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Islam in Black America
Identity, Liberation, and Difference
in African-American Islamic Thought
Edward E. Curtis IV
State University of New York Press


--- PAGE 3 ---
Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany
© 2002 State University of New York
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatso-
ever without written permission. No part of this book may be stored in 
a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means including
electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise without the prior permission in writing of the
publisher.
For information, address State University of New York Press,
90 State Street, Suite 700, Albany, NY 12207
Production by Michael Haggett
Marketing by Fran Keneston
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Curtis, Edward E., IV , 1970–
Islam in Black America: identity, liberation, and difference in 
African-American Islamic thought / Edward E. Curtis IV .
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7914-5369-3 (alk. paper)––ISBN 0-7914-5370-7 
(pbk.: alk. paper)
1. African American Muslims––History. 2. Black Muslims––History.
3. African Americans––Religion––History. 4. African Americans––
Ethnic identity. I. Title.
BP221.C87 2002
297.8/H110327––dc21 2002017746
1 0987654321


--- PAGE 4 ---
To  Walter Ray Elliston


--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Usage xi
1 Introduction 1
2 Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the
Paradox of Islam 21
3 Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) and the Establishment
of Black Particularistic Islam 45
4 Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) and the Absolutism
of Black Particularistic Islam 63
5 Islamic Universalism, Black Particularism,
and the Dual Identity of Malcolm X (1925–1965) 85
6 Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933), Sunni Islamic Reform,
and the Continuing Problem of Particularism 107
7 T oward an Islam for One People and Many 129
Notes 141
Selected Bibliography 159
Index 169


--- PAGE 6 ---
ix
Acknowledgments
This book began as a doctoral dissertation, entitled “T oward an Historical
Islam: Universalism and Particularism in African-American Islamic
Thought,” completed at the University of South Africa in the Department
of Religious Studies. Its completion was—truly—a pleasurable experience
due to the able guidance of my joint supervisors, Professor G. J. A. Lubbe,
of the University of South Africa, and Professor Ahmet Karamustafa, di-
rector of the Religious Studies program at Washington University in St.
Louis. Because of their gentle and supportive approach to the advising
process, I never felt alone during the writing of this work. Professor Lubbe
was always able to challenge and reassure me at the same time; and I con-
sider myself especially fortunate to have worked with a man whose intel-
lectual and personal contributions to the anti-apartheid movement were
so courageous and unique. Shaikh Ahmet has been my teacher and adviser
for many years now, and though I suspect he knows how much I respect
and like him, he cannot know how much his example both as an intellec-
tual and as a human being has inspired me. I can never repay either of my
advisers for their generosity.
It is also a pleasure to thank those people who have inﬂuenced my in-
terest in and approach to the study of religion, history, and the humanities
in general. At Washington University, where I received my master’s degree
in history, they include Engin Akarli (now at Brown), Iver Bernstein,
Howard Brick, the late Nancy Grant, and Peter Heath (now Provost of 
the American University of Beirut). At Kenyon College, my alma mater,
they include Michael Brint, Leonard Gordon, George McCarthy, Royal
Rhodes, and Vernon Schubel, who ﬁrst nurtured my interest in Islam.
Some other especially important teachers have been Cassie Samaha Caf-
fery, James Caffery, Ann Garrett, the late Dexter Porter, and Donald
Dow.
For reading and commenting on work related to this project, I am
also grateful to Steve Angell, Henry Berger, Molly Bidwell, Alexandra
Cornelius, Gerald Early, Amy Elefante, Tim Fox, Yvonne Haddad,
Sylvester Johnson, Mark Kornbluh, Larry Mamiya, Sandy Martin, Maria
Papacostaki, Sarah Pinnock, Mary Sawyer, Barbara von Schlegel, Ann
Taves, Richard Walter, Judith Weisenfeld, and Mary Wiltenburg.


--- PAGE 7 ---
I also feel lucky to have revised this manuscript in the supportive in-
tellectual community created by my colleagues at T rinity University’s De-
partment of Religion in San Antonio. They include Mackenzie Brown,
Frank Garcia, Kris Lindbeck, Margaret Miksch, Randy Nadeau, Sarah
Pinnock, Jeremy Rehwaldt-Alexander, Mary Ellen Ross, and Bill Walker.
I also want to thank those persons in the St. Louis Muslim commu-
nity who ﬁrst inspired me to dig more deeply into the history of African-
American Islamic thought, including Imam Muhammad Nur Abdallah,
Imam Samuel Ansari, Ahmed Ghani, Lorene Ghani, Khadijah Mahdi,
Abdul Shabazz, Kareem Shabazz, and Abdul Shakir.
Finally, I acknowledge my parents, Ed Earl III and Susie Saffa, and my
sister, Cassie, for their support and love. And I thank my adopted family
for the same, especially Regan, Gordon, and Steve. I dedicate this book
with love and respect to Dr. Walt, who has been my steadfast friend since
seventh grade.
X Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 8 ---
Usage
Following the Chicago Manual of Style, I have avoided, as much as possi-
ble, using diacritical markings in my transliteration of Arabic terms. In
general, I have italicized any Arabic word when ﬁrst introduced and there-
after reproduced it in normal print. I have also added an English transla-
tion of the word or concept in order to aid the reader. Finally, I have tried
to preserve the sometimes differing transliterations of Arabic terms offered
by the subjects of this study, while making it clear exactly what he or she
meant by its use. In this, I have followed the precedent that, given the lack
of any truly correct method of reproducing Islamic terms into English,
scholars should be sensitive to the varying ways in which English-speaking
Muslims themselves do so.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Chapter 1
Introduction
This book examines a tension common within the history of religions. The
tension exists between the idea, on the one hand, that a religious tradition
is universally applicable to the experience of all human beings and the idea,
on the other hand, that a religious tradition is applicable to the experience
of one particular group of human beings. The history of African-American
Islam provides an especially useful vantage point from which to view this
problem, since it has been so central to both African-American religion
and American Islam. More speciﬁcally, this work seeks to explore the ten-
sion between universalism and particularism by analyzing the thought of
ﬁve prominent black ﬁgures, including Edward W . Blyden, Noble Drew
Ali, Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, and Wallace D. Muhammad. Under-
standing these thinkers in their respective historical contexts, which have
been characterized by the struggle for black liberation and the continuous
reconstruction of black identity, I explain when and how they came to un-
derstand Islam as a tradition for all human beings, a tradition for only
black human beings, and sometimes, a combination of both.
This introductory chapter outlines the theoretical assumptions that
underlie my argument and speciﬁes how this study offers new ways of
viewing African-American Islam. The ﬁrst section argues against the static
treatment of African-American Islam as “religion” in favor of a more dy-
namic deﬁnition of Islam as “tradition.” Then, in order to develop a
broader theoretical framework and show the relevance of this work to
Islamic studies more generally, the second section examines the tension
between universalism and particularism with reference to classical Islamic
1


--- PAGE 10 ---
history. Finally, I discuss more fully the problem of studying universalism
and particularism in African-American Islam and provide an outline of
my argument.
DEFINING ISLAM AS TRADITION
In order to examine African-American Islam in new ways, one must note
the lasting inﬂuence of C. Eric Lincoln’s classic The Black Muslims in
America on all scholarship related to Islam in black America. While more
recent studies of African-American Islam add greatly to our knowledge of
speciﬁc movements, historical events, and new sources for the study of
African-American Islam, none has yet replaced Lincoln’s work as the au-
thoritative source on either the Nation of Islam or African-American Islam
more generally.
1 Now in its third edition, the book still captures the most
scholarly attention, despite the fact that it discounts the “religiosity” of the
movement.
2 Viewing the Nation of Islam from a functionalist perspective,
Lincoln argued that religious elements of the movement, including its Is-
lamic “mystique,” were incidental to its success. In his view, “religious val-
ues” had a “secondary importance.” In fact, Lincoln said, “[t]hey are not
part of the movement’s basic appeal, except to the extent that they foster
and strengthen the sense of group solidarity.” Focusing on the various so-
ciological factors that “pushed” disenfranchised blacks toward the Nation
of Islam, Lincoln argued that the movement’s success stemmed primarily
from its ability to create an exclusionary sense of community among its
members. For Lincoln, this was the essence of black nationalism.
3
Lincoln’s argument is especially important for this study since he
seemed to distinguish “politics” from “religion” as if the two were diamet-
rically opposed, as if politics were this-worldly and religion were other-
worldly. Lincoln’s deﬁnition of religion seemed to assume that “true” reli-
gion dealt mainly with issues of theology, salvation, and meaning, a
deﬁnition seemingly shaped by Lincoln’s own Protestant Christianity. His
use of religion and politics as analytical categories ultimately obscured
more than they revealed since he underemphasized the legitimately reli-
gious aspects of the movement’s nationalistic activity. In reality, of course,
the line between religion and politics was and is often more blurry than he
indicated. Indeed, politics and religion were wedded in fascinating and
problematical ways within the movement.
Lincoln, however, was not the only scholar of his generation to deﬁne
religion in this way. Clifford Geertz’s famous deﬁnition of religion was, in
2 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 11 ---
a similar fashion, highly reﬂective of “Enlightenment Christianity.” As
Talal Asad has shown, however, “religion” has not always been equated
with belief or conscience as it has been in the modern age. In the Euro-
pean Middle Ages, for instance, religion often translated into intellectual
and social discipline in submission to the authority of the Roman Catholic
Church. The more contemporary deﬁnition emerged in early modern
Europe. By the time of Immanuel Kant, religion came to be deﬁned as
a kind of belief that could withstand the criticism of reason and nature.
“From being a concrete set of practical rules attached to speciﬁc processes
of power and knowledge,” Asad argued, “religion has come to be ab-
stracted and universalized.” Clifford Geertz’s deﬁnition of religion re-
ﬂected these modern biases, according to Asad, since Geertz viewed reli-
gion as a belief system designed ultimately to confront questions of
meaning.
4 As Abdulkader Tayob summarizes, Geertz’s approach meant
that “[r]eligion as political practice or religion as social action could not
constitute its core, essential characteristic. Any religious act that had a di-
rect political intention was regarded as the political abuse of religion.”
5
While this deﬁnition of “religion” as quest for meaning was not unreason-
able in a modern context, said Asad, it should not be assumed to be true
for all times and places.
Asad’s analysis also raises an important question about whether the
word “religion” in its modern usage adequately captures what the word
“Islam” has meant to various Muslims throughout the past fourteen hun-
dred years, including African-American Muslims. Etymologically speak-
ing, islam most strictly refers to a spiritual state coterminous with the
submission of all creatures to God. At the same time, Muslims have also
referred to Islam as “religion” or din, a word that encompasses the obliga-
tions imposed by God upon human beings. But the word “Islam” has been
used even more broadly to refer to social, political, and economic insti-
tutions, groups, and ideas—see, for example, “Islamic banking” or “the 
Islamic jihad.” Modern Muslims, in particular, often speak of Islam not
only as a personal creed or internal state of submission, but also as a social
and political body of peoples, countries, and states. Some, like the Muslim
Brothers of Egypt, have made famous the assertion that there is no separa-
tion in Islam between din and dawla, or religion and state. Islam, they
argue, is both. Despite the fact that this deﬁnition ignores the historical
split between din and dawla in Islamic history, it can be regarded as valid
as any other deﬁnition of Islam.
6
Given the theoretical problems and ambiguity involved in analyzing
Islam as a “religion,” I prefer to explore its history as that of a “tradition.”
Introduction 3


--- PAGE 12 ---
Admittedly, this change poses equally daunting methodological problems.
But in making the semantic shift, I hope to emphasize the changing na-
ture of Islamic tradition, its dynamism, and the provisional character of
its elements. In so doing, I borrow in part from Alasdair MacIntyre’s deﬁ-
nition of a living tradition as “an historically extended, socially embodied
argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which con-
stitute that tradition.”
7 For my purposes, tradition is not an historical
product so much as an historical process in which human beings, interact-
ing with each other in discrete social contexts, invent, embrace, and in-
herit something that they care about and argue over, whether explicitly or
not. I say “something” because what it is that people create and pass along
is never completely clear. While a tradition may seem to contain distin-
guishing characteristics and constitutive elements, including certain ques-
tions, ideas, rituals, and symbols, these “things” are always subject to alter-
ation, reinterpretation, and abandonment.
This approach, however, begs the question of whether there are any
limits or boundaries that deﬁne a tradition and set it apart from another—
a question that continues to haunt Islamic studies or “Orientalism,” which
was founded partly on the premise that certain essential elements of the
tradition are to be found in Islam’s elite textual discourses. In his well-
known essay about unity and variety in Islam, for example, Gustave von
Grunebaum depicted Islam as a “universal culture whose essential tenets
and values are, consciously at least, not to be compromised.”
8 Von
Grunebaum was a civilizationist who, according to Edmund Burke III,
privileged the “high cultural artifacts of the major literary traditions.” By
examining them, he sought to discover the “timeless essences” of Islam
that predetermined its fate from the “moment of [their] inception.”
9 This
approach often meant that once the Islamicist had been trained in these
textual traditions, he or she could then track the spread of Islam by study-
ing the degree to which “local” cultures adopted, corrupted, and/or
rejected these “essential” elements. The central plot of Islamic studies thus
became the clash between “Muslim civilization” and local cultures, be-
tween the universal and the provincial. While this type of Orientalism
raised a number of problematic empirical issues, it also crossed an ethical
line, since it placed scholars in the position of determining the essential,
and by implication, the true Islam.
If one’s goal is to avoid such essentialism in Islamic studies, there is
not and cannot be any one normative deﬁnition of Islamic tradition or its
boundaries and limits. But scholars can identify competing deﬁnitions of
Islam by examining the historical interpretations of Muslims themselves.
4 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 13 ---
As mentioned above, the most visible tradition in the Euro-American
study of Islam, which is sometimes mistakenly seen to represent all of
“Islam,” has been the discourse in which the Qur’an and the Sunna 
are treasured as paramount sources of divine authority. For Islamicist 
Marshall Hodgson, the centrality of these texts and Muslim responses to
them can be seen as the result of a threefold process of tradition-making.
First, said Hodgson, came Muhammad’s creative action, or “an occasion of
fresh awareness of something ultimate in the relation between ourselves
and the cosmos.” Next, he argued, there was a group commitment to this
creative action, so that Islam came to “be deﬁned as commitment to the
venture to which Muhammad’s vision was leading: which meant, con-
cretely, allegiance to Muhammad and his Book and then to the continuing
community of Muhammad.” Finally, there was “cumulative interaction,
which eventually produces dispute.” In fact, he said, “within the dialogue
launched by the advent of Islam, almost from the start there came to be
conﬂicting sets of presuppositions about what Islam should involve.”
These disputes, however, did not make impossible the unity of Muslims,
which continued to be guaranteed by their commitment to “an initial
point of departure.” This commonality, according to Hodgson, led to the
“integrality of dialogue that can provide an intelligible framework for 
the historical study” of Islam.
10 The history of Islam, then, is in part that
of one “discursive tradition” that Muslims have constantly redeﬁned and
contested over time and in space through an “interaction with sacred texts
and with the history of that interaction.”
11 This deﬁnition of one, if not
the most salient Islamic tradition also takes into account the historical re-
ality that Muslims have supported competing and contrasting approaches
to the most basic issues of authority and textual interpretation from the
very beginning of their history in seventh-century Arabia.
Moreover, this deﬁnition of Islamic tradition does not establish any
common norms, values, or beliefs, other than the centrality of the Qur’an
and the Sunna—which is not to say that other commonalities have not
existed in Islamic history. But it does suggest that any tradition which is
truly universal, as the Qur’an nearly is to all self-identifying Muslims,
is bound, in Ernesto Laclau’s words, to have no “necessary body and no
necessary content; different groups, instead, compete among themselves
to temporarily give their particularisms a function of universal represen-
tation.” In many cases, states Laclau, one group may attempt to exclude
or subordinate another group by positioning itself as the only legitimate
spokesperson for the “universal.” Put another way, Laclau asserts that
“[t]he universal... does not have a concrete content of its own (which
Introduction 5


--- PAGE 14 ---
would close it in itself) but is the always receding horizon resulting from
the expansion of an indeﬁnite chain of equivalent demands.” These
demands are the result of competition among people who attempt to de-
ﬁne what the universal element of culture (here sacred texts) means in a
given historical context; or as Laclau puts it, “[s]ociety generates a whole
vocabulary of empty signiﬁers whose temporary signiﬁeds are the result of
political competition.”
12
The essential point is that any tradition, whether religious or not, is
fashioned by human beings, who operate in historical time. “What people
of faith share,” Wilfred Cantwell Smith argued, “is not necessarily com-
mon deﬁnitions of what their religion means, but a common history.”
Hence, no person should be understood simply as a product of his or 
her tradition, but rather as a participant in that tradition. Faith is not
“generated and sustained and shaped” by a religious tradition, according
to Smith; rather, a person’s faith is the result of his or her participation in
“one historical phase” of an ongoing process. Moreover, these processes
cannot be “reiﬁed” or “precisely delimited.”
13 T o take this reasoning to 
its logical conclusion, I would argue that the student of Islam should
not even insist on using a person’s identiﬁcation with the Qur’an as a kind
of minimal deﬁnition of what it means to be a Muslim. Instead, wherever
and whenever a person calls himself or herself Muslim, scholars should
include this person’s voice in their understanding of what constitutes
Islam. The mere fact that one has labeled oneself a Muslim indicates some
sort of participation, however slight, in the process of Islamic history. That
participation, in my view, is worthy of both scholarly attention, and in
Hodgson’s words, “human respect and recognition.”
14
In fact, the study of African-American Islam has been too consumed
with dismissing certain Muslims as cultists, heretics, and sectarians. 15 All
of these pejorative and unhelpful labels presume, by their comparison
to “orthodox” Muslims, a normative Islam that in no time and in no place
has ever existed. Rather, if we adopt W . C. Smith’s approach, it is more
useful to ask how African Americans have participated in the historical
process of being a Muslim. What has Islam meant to them? What exactly
is their connection to Islamic traditions in the Old World? Some scholars
and many African Americans themselves understand their Islamic faith
as being rooted in premodern African Islamic traditions. My own ap-
proach, which differs from those who see larger continuities between
African Islam and African-American Islam, proceeds from the assumption
that most African Americans have had little historical connection to any
form of premodern Islam. Though many African slaves were Muslims and
6 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 15 ---
a number of them continued to practice Islam once in North America,
African Muslim slaves never cohered into an American community of
faith that passed on its traditions from one generation to the next.
16 The
result is that when African Americans began to convert to Islam during
this century, their connection to the ongoing discursive traditions in 
Islamic lands, including traditional sources of Islamic knowledge, was 
extremely tenuous and limited.
In turn, this fact made it easy for the ﬁrst English-speaking black the-
orists of Islam, especially Noble Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad, to de-
ﬁne Islam without facing the criticism of most fellow Muslims. As more
and more Muslim immigrants and missionaries made an impact on Amer-
ican and African-American Islam, however, their systems of thought came
under increased scrutiny. It was at this point that Elijah Muhammad, in
particular, attempted to utilize sacred texts in supporting his own system
of thought. As this occurred, a larger debate about the place of difference
within Islam ensued between Muhammad and his critics. But this type of
debate was nothing new to the history of Islam. Indeed, a tension between
universalism and particularism was present from the very beginning of 
Islamic history, a subject to which I now turn.
UNIVERSALISM AND PARTICULARISM
IN CLASSICAL ISLAM
This tension between universalism and particularism in classical Islam can
be observed in disputes over the meaning of egalitarianism and hierarchy
within early Islamic society. Muslims debated whether the egalitarian
tones of the Qur’an were meant to challenge the social hierarchies so
prevalent within Islamdom. For the Qur’an proclaimed in 49:13 that
God “made you into shu‘ub (peoples) and qaba ’il(tribes, ancestral groups)
that you may know one another. The most noble among you in the sight
of God is the most pious.” While most commentators interpreted this
verse to support an egalitarian ideal of “individual salvation,” there
was disagreement over whether “it also carried implications for social or-
ganisation in the here and now.” In fact, while some interpreters used
Qur’an 49:13 to champion this-worldly egalitarianism, the majority of
commentators like Al-Tabari mentioned only its other-worldly implica-
tions, leaving particularistic social hierarchies unchallenged.
17
This tension between the egalitarian and the hierarchical could be
seen quite vividly in debates over the importance of tribal afﬁliation.
Introduction 7


--- PAGE 16 ---
Because Islam began in the midst of strong tribal rivalries, much of the
Prophet Muhammad’s genius lay in trying to unite different Arab tribes
under the banner of Islam, which was supratribal. Despite the Prophet’s
efforts, however, tribal conﬂict continued to characterize much of early
Islamic history. Rivalries between Arab tribes often resulted in poetic
forms of “boasting or deprecation,” including forms of racial or ethnic
prejudice. In addition to this tribalism, yet another manifestation of the
tension between the egalitarian and the hierarchical was the friction be-
tween Arab and non-Arab Muslims in the nascent Muslim state. Because
Islam also became “a badge of united Arabism, the code and discipline of
a conquering elite,” Arabs often claimed superior social status in the new
Islamic order. This association of Islam with Arab culture had staying
power and to a certain extent remained viable until the middle period,
by which time other languages like Persian usurped the role of Arabic as
the dominant language of political discourse. Throughout much of early
Islamic history, including both the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphates,
many claimed that “the Arabs were supreme among the nations.” The rea-
sons cited included the fact that the Prophet himself was an Arab; that the
Qur’an was revealed in Arabic; and even that Bedouin culture surpassed
all others in its hospitality and eloquence.
18
That this arabocentrism conﬂicted with egalitarian views of many
Muslims can be seen clearly in a story related by Louise Marlow about
Bilal ibn Rabah, an Abyssinian freedman who became a companion of the
Prophet and the ﬁrst muadhdhin, or prayer-caller, of Islam. The story is
that the caliph ‘Umar invited Bilal into his presence before inviting Abu
Sufyan, who was a member of the Quraysh, the tribe of the Prophet.
When Abu Sufyan complained, an associate of the Caliph replied that
“‘you [Quraishis] should blame yourselves, not the Commander of the
Faithful. [These] people were called [to Islam], and they responded, while
you, who were also invited, rejected the summons. On the Day of Resur-
rection, they [will be] of greater degrees and more favour.’” T o this, Abu
Sufyan answered that “‘[t]here is no good in a place where Bilal is [consid-
ered] noble (sharif).’” The general tenor of the story is transparent: ethnic
and social status theoretically counted less than individual piety in the all-
important issue of access to the center of political power. In this story,
however, Abu Sufyan, a member of the Prophet’s own tribe, dismissed this
idea as he clung to notions of Arab superiority and privilege.
19
One tangible political challenge to this ethnocentrism arose in the
middle of the seventh century, when a group called the Kharijis protested
against what they saw as the “reemergence of traditional Arab elements” in
8 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 17 ---
the selection of the leader of the faithful. That person, they said, should 
be the Muslim believer who is most pious, regardless of his (or, in some
cases, her) social status. According to Hamid Dabashi, “[t]heir famous
motto that anyone, even an Abyssinian slave, could become a caliph quite
emphatically attested to, among other things, their total rejection of the
traditional aristocratic criterion adopted by the Muslim majority.” In jus-
tifying their arguments, Kharijis also drew on a report of the Prophet’s
farewell sermon, which quoted Muhammad as saying that “God has re-
moved from you baseless pride of the period of ignorance and its glorying
in ancestors. You are all from Adam and Adam was from the dust. The
Arab has no superiority to the non-Arab except by virtue of righteous-
ness.” In fact, the Shabibiyah Kharijis took this egalitarian notion of Mus-
lim leadership to include women in addition to men.
20
On the whole, however, the Kharijis stressed that the question of
leadership within the Islamic community should not be colored by issues
of tribal afﬁliation or geographic origin. Khariji egalitarianism fueled
much political revolt, especially in North Africa, where Kharijism was
adopted to oppose Umayyad prejudice against the local Berbers. In 
A.D.
869, black slaves also revolted in Iraq under the leadership of a Khariji and
established a state. Ironically, they tried to enslave their former slavehold-
ers. This phenomenon raised the question of just how deeply many of
these revolts were infused with the Khariji spirit of egalitarianism. In fact,
some writers argued that most African and black Muslims adopted Khari-
jism merely as a rallying cry, without any knowledge of Khariji ﬁqh, or
jurisprudence. As Al-Khirrit declared, “I have become Khariji, because
they stand for shura [consultation between the ruler and the ruled] among
men” and not presumably for any other reason.
21
The radical egalitarianism of the Kharijis also had an ugly side, which
was expressed in their moral absolutism. The great irony of the Kharijis 
is that while they insisted upon equality among believers with regard to
rights of leadership, they rejected tolerance or even compassion as a virtue.
Most believed that jama‘a, or communal unity, must never come before
din, or the obligations imposed on humans by God. In addition, most
Kharijis often regarded islam and iman (faith) as one and the same, assert-
ing that the “one who deviates from Iman, ipso facto, deviates from Islam
and becomes an unbeliever.” In practice, this view led to continual war
against their own leaders and much of the Muslim community. Any Khar-
iji leader who was found out as a sinner was to be rejected immediately.
From the early days of the Kharijis, then, many Kharijis “began to brand
everyone inﬁdel... who did not accept their point of view.”
22
Introduction 9


--- PAGE 18 ---
So, while the Kharijis battled tribal and Arab particularism, they also
created their own form of moral absolutism, which was yet another form
of particularism. While they invested this moral particularism with the
“function of universalism,” which in this case was the struggle for egalitar-
ianism, its effect seemed to be more exclusionary and less humane than the
emerging Sunni (majoritarian) Islamic order. Kharijis tried to deﬁne what
was universal about Islam, like the idea that any righteous man or woman
could become leader of the community, but did so in a way that refused
to accept any alternate means for determining who should lead the Mus-
lim community. While attractive to several groups, Kharijism ended up
being—in political terms—a relatively unsuccessful series of movements.
T oo much internal conﬂict and unrealistic expectations of human good-
ness made it impossible for them to have more than a modest, if important
impact against the more powerful forces of the early Muslim confederacy
and the Umayyad and Abbasid dynasties. In the meantime, some of the
very ideas against which they battled, especially the arabocentrism of the
political elites, continued to dominate the formation of Muslim society.
Kharijism was not, however, the only response to this phenomenon.
As the Abbasid dynasty grew to incorporate much of the Persian aristoc-
racy of Khurasan into its new state apparatus, a new movement called the
shu‘ubiyya (roughly translated, the people’s movement) arose to challenge
the arabocentrism so central to the classic period. In fact, the Abbasid dy-
nasty could be seen to be a result of the alliance between Arab “colonists”
and Persian aristocracy. Some of these Persian elites utilized Sasanian court
literature to denigrate and mock Arabs as a way of challenging Arab dom-
inance. But these Shu‘ubiyya had very little interest in a truly egalitarian
Islam, often exalting the Persian literary traditions above all else. Using
sarcasm to criticize Arab traditions, some poets and men of letters also
reintroduced Manicheanism as a challenge to the Qur’an itself.
23
Though embracing a title for their movement that would seem to 
indicate an interest in egalitararism, a belief in social hierarchy ran deep
among the movement’s ideologues. “[T]he Shu‘ubi poet s...a r e  argu-
ing, at most, for a parity of honor among the upper classes of two distinct
peoples,” claimed Roy Mottahedeh. While most Shu‘ubi commentators
argued that God viewed righteousness as the paramount criterion in es-
tablishing a human’s worth, they also agreed that beneath this lay whole
sets of social and political hierarchies to be viewed as “obvious” in deter-
mining one’s place in worldly life. “Although the shu‘ubiyyah has some-
times been loosely labeled an egalitarian movement...w e  h a v e  seen that
10 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 19 ---
the shu‘ubiyya controversy soon reﬂected rival principles of social hierar-
chy.” Humans may be equal before God, the argument went, but they are
not equal before other humans, as Ibn ‘Abbas declared: “The nobility
(karam) of this world is wealth ( ghina) and of the next is righteousness
(taqwa).”
24
In this case, as with the Kharijis, a movement that arose to challenge
certain prejudices within the new Islamic order ended up taking on the
form of a particularism that was both exclusionary and hierarchical. This
phenomenon also occurred much later in African-American Islam,
which produced similarly particularistic calls for radical segregation and
exclusion. One wonders, with Ernesto Laclau above, if such a phenome-
non is not simply inevitable. If, as Laclau argues, the “universal” is usu-
ally an expression of one form of particularism that temporarily becomes
dominant as a result of political competition, any brand of universalism
in theory may remain a dream and in political reality may become a
form of totalitarianism. Such an argument can be detected in the work
of many students of imperialism, like Edward Said, who associates Euro-
pean hegemony with forms of “universalizing” scholarship.
25 But the
prejudice of the Kharijis and the Shu‘ubiyya depended not only on the
assertion of their viewpoint as the most universal, but on other theoreti-
cal bases as well. In the case of the Kharijis, their total lack of any moral
relativism translated into an absolutism that was devoid of compassion.
The Shu‘ubiyya refusal, on the other hand, to question their own no-
tions of hierarchy meant that egalitarianism was a mere cover for their
own particularistic interests.
It is, in fact, the ambiguity of the “universal” that provides various so-
cial actors with numerous strategic opportunities. For the oppressed, uni-
versalism can become a vehicle to articulate a more truly egalitarian social
order. In African-American history, for example, leaders like Frederick
Douglass and Martin Luther King, Jr., appropriated the universalism of
American revolutionary ideals to ﬁght for black liberation. Their actions
show the power of employing an alternate “signiﬁed” or deﬁnition of the
universal in challenging oppression and exclusion. Sometimes, the source
of the “new” universalism may come from the very tradition that is seen as
exclusionary. The Kharijis relied, for example, on Qur’an and Sunnah, tra-
ditions that they both shared with their enemies and simultaneously used
to oppose them. Other times, the source of the “new” universalism may be
a critique that is made by using a foreign tradition, as was the case with the
Persian literary challenge to arabocentrism in the Shu‘ubiyyah movement.
Introduction 11


--- PAGE 20 ---
Both of these patterns occur in the history of African-American Islamic
thought, where alternate deﬁnitions of dominant universalisms (like
Christianity and American revolutionary ideals) are combined with “for-
eign” forms of universalism (like Islam).
UNIVERSALISM AND PARTICULARISM
IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN ISLAM
At ﬁrst glance, it might be tempting to conclude that the tension between
universalism and particularism in African-American Islamic thought is, by
deﬁnition, a tension between Islamic universalism and black particularism.
Such a formulation might posit that because Islam, by its very essence, is a
universalistic creed, African-American Muslims were bound to face prob-
lems in creating any version of Islam that was both true to the “essence” of
Islam and relevant to their particular experiences as African Americans. In
reality, however, that formula is far too simplistic, because as has been
shown in the previous sections, it utilizes an essentialist deﬁnition of Islam
that ignores the historical debates among Muslims themselves regarding
whether Islam is a universalistic tradition. Because Islam can signify what-
ever its confessors wish, it need not be identiﬁed with all of humankind
as a group. In its classical period, for example, many Muslims felt it to be
inseparable from Arab culture. Likewise, in more modern times, many
African-American Muslims have viewed it as synonymous with being
black. Hence, one can say for these Muslims that there was not any ten-
sion whatsoever between being part of a particular group of human beings
and being Muslim; for them, it was one and the same.
However, when Islam has been embraced by Muslims as a universalis-
tic tradition, questions about the meaning of diversity and difference have
emerged with special urgency—in classical Islam as well as in African-
American Islam. These questions have involved a number of different
issues, including variation in ritual practice and belief as well as social jus-
tice and politics. In North America, as Haddad and Smith point out, con-
temporary Muslim debate often focuses on “how not to compromise the
ideal of unity in Islam while still maintaining some degree of ethnic iden-
tity and cultural afﬁliation.”
26 Many times, this debate becomes one over
the question of what exactly constitutes “identity and culture” versus what
constitutes proper Islamic belief and observance. But the root of the prob-
lem lies in the question of how much difference of any sort can be incor-
porated or tolerated within a tradition that is seen as universally applicable
12 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 21 ---
to all human beings, regardless of race, nation, ethnicity, or any other
identiﬁer. The same tension can be observed in African-American Chris-
tianity, which like African-American Islam has emerged in an historical
context where race and racism have been central to the formation of nearly
every aspect of the culture.
27
It is this historical context of racism and racial difference that pro-
duced an unstable environment for the rise of a universalistic Islam
within black America. Given this, it might seem unlikely that African-
American Muslims would entertain any universalistic interpretations of
Islam at all. And yet they have done so from the very beginning of their
history as Muslim converts: African-American Islamic universalism has
been a remarkably idealistic expression of the hope for human equality
and dignity. It should not come as a great surprise, however, that the al-
lure of particularistic interpretations of Islam has been stronger during
certain moments in American history. Generally speaking, any ﬁssure in
human community, especially when involving a lack of equity, can lead
easily to a challenge of universalism, whose ideals seem like unfulﬁlled
promises or even propaganda to the oppressed. In this environment, a
particularistic response that supports the humanity and solidarity of the
oppressed can arise as an implicit challenge to the hollow universalism of
the oppressors.
As mentioned above, C. Eric Lincoln understood the particularistic
response advocated by the Nation of Islam as a form of black nationalism.
He used that term rather broadly, emphasizing the elements of black na-
tionalism that fostered a sense of group solidarity among African Ameri-
cans in a hostile environment. In the latter 1960s and throughout the
1970s, some scholars of the black experience seemed to take Lincoln’s 
deﬁnition of nationalism even further, equating black nationalism with
nearly any “form of group behavior or expression of group sentiment.”
One scholar, for example, deﬁned black nationalism as “the feeling on the
part of black individuals that they are responsible for the welfare of other
black individual s... because of a shared racial heritage and destiny.”
While this trend continued into the 1980s, more recent scholarship in
black studies has problematized the use of nationalism as an intellectual
category, paying more attention to the historically speciﬁc and contested
meanings of “nation” to persons of African descent.
28 Likewise, this study
attempts to employ ideas of nation and nationalism with the same histor-
ical precision.
But “nation” and “nationalism” are not the only problematic cate-
gories in the study of African-American Islam. Similarly, “race” and
Introduction 13


--- PAGE 22 ---
“racialism” can raise equally important methodological concerns. Most
scholars no longer assume that race is a biological phenomenon. In fact,
historians, sociologists, and other scholars of the American experience
have asserted more and more that race is most properly understood as a
social construction. Simply put, these scholars usually assert that “race is
socially constructed insofar as selected physical characteristics [like the
color of one’s skin] have social meaning.” Moreover, the social meaning of
race is often tied to the structure of status and power among individuals
and groups more generally. Of course, scholars still argue about how ex-
actly race is related to issues of class, gender, and other sociological cate-
gories. But at the present moment, race is increasingly seen as the product
of racialization, a social process which can affect nearly every aspect of
one’s life—where a person lives, the person whom one marries, and where
one goes to school, among other factors. Like “nation,” race is seen as a 
social construct whose most basic meanings can shift, depending on the
historical contexts in which the term is being used.
29
Rather than uncritically labeling certain varieties of African-American
Islam as either nationalist or racialist, I have more generically labeled them
particularistic. In my view, this term allows for the theoretical ambiguity
necessary in describing the diverse and ultimately disputed meanings of
blackness espoused by the subjects of this study. In employing this label, I
mean to indicate only that these ﬁgures, like many other black persons in
the modern world, have held in common a sense that they are part of a
distinct group—they have shared, in others words, a sense of their own
particularity .But what this particular identity actually means or signiﬁes is
never completely clear or stable, because the historical actors themselves
constantly debate and contest the ideological bonds that hold them to-
gether. The category of particularism is methodologically useful because it
can incorporate the various and ultimately ambiguous meanings of black-
ness that arise in this common historical universe.
These debates over the meaning of black identity have revolved
around a large number of issues, including ongoing disputes about what
name or label should be applied to African Americans as a group. In
the past two hundred years, a number of candidates have vied for recogni-
tion, including Anglo-African, colored, free African, Black, Negro, Afro-
American, African-American, African American, and so on.
30 Moreover,
for over two centuries African Americans have disagreed about other as-
pects of black identity, including the issue of whether the meaning of
blackness is primarily biological, historical, and/or theological in nature.
Being “black” has also been seen as invoking shared language, symbols,
14 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 23 ---
memories, myths, and lifeways. As will be shown in the following chap-
ters, these contests over the meaning of black identity were central to the
unfolding of African-American Islamic thought.
A second and related theme in the history of African-American
Islamic thought is the struggle for black liberation.
31 All of the ﬁgures cov-
ered in this study, like many other modern black persons, have sought
to liberate themselves and their fellows from some form of oppression. But
their understandings of this oppression and their strategies for liberation
from it have been incredibly diverse and complex. Here I refer not only
to formal political involvement, but to all acts of liberation, including
those that might be seen by some as apolitical. For example, I view the
nineteenth-century African-American tradition of Ethiopianism as a form
of black liberation. Founded upon the prophecy in Psalm 68:31 that
“princes shall come out of Egypt, and Ethiopia shall soon stretch forth her
hand unto God,” Ethiopianism often focused on black suffering as a sign
of divine favor. Its advocates also utilized biblical themes of exile and re-
demption to posit the imminent arrival of a personal savior or prophet
and sometimes argued for a belief in the redemptive mission of the black
race as a whole.
32
By situating African-American Islamic thought amidst major histori-
cal themes of the modern black experience, this study proceeds along the
assumption that any comprehensive understanding of the topic must ana-
lyze the relationships between the historical actors and the larger contexts
in which they wrote and spoke. Moreover, my use of categories like uni-
versalism and particularism has emerged from an historical reading of the
data. Put another way, the main methodological assumption of this book
is that the tension between various forms of particularism and universalism
in African-American Islamic thought is a historical phenomenon. It is a
tension created, sustained, and sometimes dismissed by African Americans
themselves. This is not to say that the historical actors explicitly refer to
these terms. But as categories of analysis, universalism and particularism
become real when subjected to historical scrutiny. In my view, phenome-
nological categories, if used at all, should always be tempered by such his-
torical inquiry.
From the beginning of African-American Islam, I argue, there existed
both universalistic and particularistic impulses, ﬁrst expressed in the para-
doxical and ambiguous thought of both Edward W . Blyden and Noble
Drew Ali. Elijah Muhammad then attempted to rid African-American
Islam of any paradox or ambiguity, eventually advancing an entirely par-
Introduction 15


--- PAGE 24 ---
ticularistic interpretation of Islam. Malcolm X, however, rejected Elijah
Muhammad’s absolutism, and in so doing, once again faced the tension
between universalism and particularism. But he was assassinated before he
could explore fully his own approach to these issues. In the 1970s, Wallace
D. Muhammad, the son of Elijah, sought to transform this intellectual
legacy by suggesting a new approach to the question of unity and diversity
within Islam. By viewing Islam through the lens of its various historical
contexts, Wallace Muhammad suggested a new model that incorporated
racial, ethnic, and national difference under an umbrella of Islamic unity.
It should be noted that my focus on ﬁve black thinkers—all obviously
male—has its limitations. While this work hopes to offer new directions
for the study of African-American Islam, it is by no means a comprehen-
sive history of the various Islamic movements in black America. I have 
focused on these ﬁgures both because of their crucial role in the formation
of African-American Islam and because of the irreplaceable quality and
originality of their thought. In addition, these men have produced the 
primary source material necessary to any textual study. In fact, most have
been quite proliﬁc, excepting Noble Drew Ali who left us only the Holy
Koran of the Moorish Science T emple.All others have published numerous
works, making it possible to explain how their thought both changed and
stayed the same usually over a period of decades. T o reconstruct the con-
texts in which they wrote, spoke, and published, I have also relied on a
number of other sources, including African-American Muslim newspa-
pers, FBI documents, mainstream press accounts, secondary sources, and
oral histories.
My study begins with an examination of Liberian nationalist Edward
Wilmot Blyden, a Caribbean émigré who became a leading intellectual
and political ﬁgure in the black Atlantic world of the late nineteenth cen-
tury. Blyden, who never converted to Islam himself, was exposed to Islam
through his travels in the Middle East and his interaction with Muslim
“natives” in the West African interior. As a result, he appropriated Islam in
a largely polemical way both to criticize white Protestant missionaries and
to encourage the development of black nationalism. Blyden argued that
Islam, rather than Christianity, would lead to African self-determination,
racial equality, and black greatness. Sometimes, Blyden explained the salu-
tary effects of Islam on blacks by arguing that blacks were by nature better
suited to Islam. Other times, however, he stressed the universalistic quali-
ties of Islam, implying that Islam’s message of human equality and justice
applied to black people as well as everyone else. The contradictions that
these deﬁnitions of Islam produced are explored in chapter 2.
16 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 25 ---
While Blyden’s promotion of Islam made him a rogue ﬁgure in the
eyes of most black Christians, his use of Ethiopianism showed just how
much he was part of the same modern black culture. In fact, across the At-
lantic in black America, Ethiopianist themes had already become central
to the theological discourse of the post-Reconstruction African-American
Church, especially the Black Baptist and Methodist denominations.
There, these ideas found a large audience not only among black intellectu-
als, but also among the literally millions of African Americans whose lives
revolved around the Black Church during the nadir in race relations from
1880 to 1920. During this period, as Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham has
demonstrated, the Black Church provided an alternate public sphere
where black economic, political, and social life could ﬁnd shelter from Jim
Crow, disenfranchisement, and despair. In these years, the Black Church
reigned as the popular cultural institution in black America.
33
During the great migration of African Americans to the urban North
between World War I and World War II, however, modern black advo-
cates of Islam and others challenged the ubiquity of the Black Church
by providing alternative discourses and social spaces. African-American
Muslims reinterpreted many black Christian themes within a new Islamic
matrix. Noble Drew Ali, the subject of chapter 3, was the ﬁrst African
American to appropriate Islam in such a way. Ali’s religious system, 
however, owed nothing to the Islamic textual traditions of Qur’an and
Sunnah. Rather, Ali combined themes from black messianism and Islamic
symbols from the black Shriners with the teachings of several modern 
esoteric traditions, including both Theosophy and Rosicrucianism, to
construct what he called “Moorish Science.” Rejecting the existence of a
speciﬁcally African racial heritage, he argued that African Americans were
Moorish nationals who drew their biological lineage from a more generic
Asiatic race. Though Moors possessed a unique national heritage, accord-
ing to Noble Drew, they shared a common religion, Islam, with all nations
of Asiatic descent. Drew Ali, too, was interested in world harmony, al-
though his version of Islam also entertained particularistic notions that
contradicted his universalism.
In studying Noble Drew Ali, I initially hoped to show some continu-
ity between his thought and that of Edward Blyden. In this regard, I
examined the role of Marcus Garvey’s United Negro Improvement Associ-
ation (UNIA) as a potential conduit in spreading Blyden’s pro-Islamic
polemic throughout black America during the 1920s. Alas, I could ﬁnd
little direct connection between Blyden and Ali. Furthermore, while
the UNIA became one place where African Americans discussed Islam,
Introduction 17


--- PAGE 26 ---
Garvey himself only adopted Blyden’s ideas regarding race, even though
he was intimately familiar with the African sage’s advocacy of Islam. In-
deed, there was much more than geographical distance that separated
Drew Ali from Blyden. Blyden was a member of the elite black Atlantic
intelligentsia of the latter half of the 1800s, whereas Drew Ali was a part
of the urban black working class to have emerged during the Great Migra-
tion. Blyden had easy access to educational and cultural resources, includ-
ing the Old World traditions of Islamic education, while Drew Ali seemed
to have learned what he knew mostly from American popular culture. In
part, Drew Ali’s importance for this study is not that he disseminated tra-
ditional Islamic ideas in black America but that he launched “Islam” as a
black particularistic tradition in the United States. At the same time, how
he came to deﬁne Islam had reverberations throughout African-American
Islamic history. For Ali, Islam was synonymous with the identity of people
of color, who could ignore their “natural” religion only at their own peril.
This became an important precedent that found a powerful spokesperson
in Elijah Muhammad.
In fact, the expansion of Ali’s black separatist Islamic tradition owes
much to Muhammad, who led the most popular black Islamic movement
in the history of African-American Islam. Chapter 4 explores the thought
of this seminal ﬁgure by examining the development of his unique version
of Islam within several historical contexts. I demonstrate, for example,
how Muhammad combined the Christian dispensationalism of his youth
with elements of Islam, a belief in “clean living,” and even a post-World
War II fascination with UFOs to create a new African-American Islamic
tradition. I also show the pivotal role played by non-movement black con-
verts to Islam, immigrant Muslims, and foreign Muslims in the genealogy
of Muhammad’s thought. In the late 1950s, these Muslims publicly ques-
tioned the Islamic legitimacy of Muhammad’s teachings. They directed
their criticism at the movement’s claims of divinity for Nation of Islam
(NOI) founder W . D. Fard, at Elijah Muhammad’s own status as Mes-
senger, and at the racist aspects of his Islamic thought, all of which they
said contradicted the universal message of Islam. As a result, Muhammad’s
chief lieutenant, Malcolm X, sought to legitimate the movement’s teach-
ings by both questioning the motives and credentials of the critics and by
mining proof texts from the Qur’an.
I argue that this latter act, the authentication of Muhammad and his
movement through the use of Qur’anic scriptures, had monumental im-
plications for the intellectual future of the movement. Once this occurred,
it immediately elevated the status of traditional Sunni Islamic discourse,
18 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 27 ---
especially its sacred texts, within African-American Islamic thought more
generally. Ironically, though English-speaking black thinkers had launched
Islam as a tradition whose meaning would be determined exclusively
within the black community, their vessel became more and more mired in
the texts and traditions of Old World Sunni Islam. Moreover, the use of 
Islamic texts by Malcolm X ceded important methodological ground to
Muhammad’s critics, who were far better acquainted with the textual tra-
ditions of Islam than was he.
By 1964 Malcolm X, the subject of chapter 5, had publicly embraced
the nonracial vision of Islam that was being actively advanced by Muham-
mad’s Muslim critics, especially Muslim missionaries funded largely by
petrodollars from Saudi Arabia. As a new convert, Malcolm faced an intel-
lectual dilemma even more complex than that of Elijah Muhammad. After
he separated from the NOI, Malcolm embraced a dual identity as both
a Sunni Muslim missionary who stressed the need for transracial brother-
hood and a pan-Africanist revolutionary who struggled for an explicitly
black liberation. In so doing, however, Malcolm separated his “politics”
from his “religion,” creating a tension that remained unresolved before his
assassination in 1965. Because Malcolm could not reconcile his race-less
Islam to his racial struggle, he seemed unable to imagine a strategy of
black liberation that would achieve his revolutionary ends through an
Islamic means.
Wallace Muhammad, the subject of chapter 6, inherited Malcolm’s
dilemma after rising to the leadership of the Nation of Islam in 1975.
During the ﬁrst few years of his tenure, this son of Elijah Muhammad at-
tempted to synthesize themes from the black consciousness movement
with Islam in an effort to provide followers with an identity that was both
“authentically” Muslim and African American. Certain immigrant and
foreign Muslims closely aligned with Muhammad, however, asked him to
abandon his attention toward blackness, which he initially agreed to do.
But in the 1980s, Wallace Muhammad again took up his efforts to forge
an approach to Islam that accounted both for the unity of humankind and
the struggle for black liberation. In doing so, he stressed the historical con-
tingency of any application of Islam. In creating his own program for
black uplift, he hailed the value of the individual and personal responsibil-
ity in Islam while simultaneously calling on blacks to ﬁnd a collective 
solution to the race problem in America. Whether he reconciled these 
collective and individualistic approaches to social change is a question for
debate, although his approach in attempting to do so suggested new direc-
tions for African-American Islam.
Introduction 19


--- PAGE 28 ---
Finally, in the conclusion, I explore the teachings of Louis Farrakhan,
emphasizing how his thought is in many ways a recapitulation of earlier
themes in African-American Islam. Though Farrakhan may have begun
his career as an avowed Muslim particularist, he now celebrates Islamic
universalism just as vociferously. In so doing, his thought recalls the para-
doxical formulations of early African-American Islam. I then argue that
Minister Farrakhan’s thought is also indicative of the “essentialist style” in
African-American Islamic thought—a style that has been challenged at
least implicitly by the thought of Wallace Muhammad. In fact, I submit
that in its historical understanding of Islam, Wallace Muhammad’s
methodology suggests that the tension between universalism and particu-
larism might become a source for a dynamic interpretation of Islam that
consciously balances views of the human community as one and many.
20 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 29 ---
Chapter 2
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912)
and the Paradox of Islam
INTRODUCTION
Born on August 3, 1832, in the Dutch West Indies, Edward Wilmot Bly-
den became one of the more remarkable intellectual and political ﬁgures
of the black English-speaking world during the nineteenth century. An
immigrant to Liberia, Blyden was a largely self-taught Presbyterian mis-
sionary who went on to become a professor and President of Liberia Col-
lege, two-time Ambassador to Great Britain, Liberian Secretary of State,
Minister of the Interior, Director of Muslim Education in Sierra Leone, a
Liberian presidential candidate, and one of the most noted black authors
of his time. As a critic of missionary Christianity and an ardent Liberian
nationalist, Blyden was also the ﬁrst English-speaking black author to tout
Islam as a more “natural” tradition for blacks than Christianity.
As I will show in this chapter, Blyden argued that Islam was a far bet-
ter vehicle of black self-determination than Christianity. For in contrast
to the Christian faith, he said, Islam encouraged African nationalism, the
development of black civilization, and racial equality. But many of Bly-
den’s arguments on Islam were inconsistent or at least ambiguous and
prone to change, depending on what audience he was addressing and what
his political motives were in so doing. When Blyden was seeking support
from European or American Christian missionaries, for example, he might
present Islam as a menacing adversary to Christianity, trying to spur his
missionary audience to fund his education projects or other concerns of
the young Liberian state, which he hailed as a Christian outpost in the in-
21


--- PAGE 30 ---
ﬁdel wilderness. When in Sierra Leone, however, he might actually call for
better cooperation between Muslim “natives” and Christian immigrants.
Later in life, his quest for international support of African nationalism led
him to challenge the parochialism that he viewed as endemic among
Christians, Jews, and Muslims everywhere. The point is that Blyden con-
stantly shifted his rhetorical strategies in his life-long mission to build
black nation-states in West Africa, which was the only truly consistent
theme in his intellectual life.
As I will argue, however, Blyden’s writings on Islam anticipated many
themes that would ﬁgure prominently later in African-American Islam.
His various constructions of Islam as a vehicle of black nationalism, civi-
lizationism, and human equality have appeared in some form in the
thought of nearly every African-American Muslim leader since the 1920s.
In addition, Blyden’s appropriations of Islam inaugurated the tension 
between universalism and particularism in black Islamic thought. On the
one hand, Blyden assumed that Christianity was an essentially white tradi-
tion while Islam was essentially nonwhite. At the same time, he insisted 
on the universality of all monotheistic traditions, including Islam. How
Blyden reconciled these particularistic and universalistic views of Islam re-
mained unclear in his published works and letters. In fact, he used both
interpretations of Islam sometimes in the very same speech, never dis-
cussing the theoretical problems suggested by his paradoxical views.
Moreover, Blyden became a fervent black messianist, supporting the
view of Africa and Africans as potential messiahs in the redemption of 
the world. This belief further complicates our understanding of his
thought regarding Islam, since it is also unclear exactly how Blyden con-
ceived of Islam’s role, if it was to play any, in the redemptive black mission.
As mentioned in chapter 1, black messianism posited a special role for
blacks in the salvation history of the world, often connecting the redemp-
tion of black people with the redemption of all humankind. This sense 
of being a chosen people was sometimes developed into a form of black
Christian particularism that linked Christianity to biological blackness,
black nationalism, and black messianism. Though Blyden came close to
constructing Islam in this way, especially in associating Islam so closely
with black nationalism, he never articulated speciﬁcally messianist or bio-
logical interpretations of Islam.
I will also assert that the irony of Blyden’s thought was that in his
mind these forms of particularism, including black messianism, black na-
tionalism, and the defense of biological blackness, would lead to harmony
between the three major monotheistic faiths. According to Blyden, if
22 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 31 ---
Africans could build nation-states with the assistance rather than tyranni-
cal control of the colonial powers, then Africans could make their essential
and redemptive contribution to the world, and in so doing, usher in some
sort of global harmony between Jews, Christians, and Muslims. This har-
mony, Blyden said, was merely a reﬂection of the truly universal message
that formed the essence of each faith. But in espousing both black mes-
sianism and an Abrahamic universalism, Blyden seemed to believe in a
particularistic means to a universalistic end. The tension between these
positions remained beneath the surface of his thought as another paradox-
ical formulation that I develop further below.
BLACK NATIONALISM AND AFRICAN
COLONIZATION IN BLYDEN’S EARLY THOUGHT
Blyden’s story, like that of many other black intellectuals during the nine-
teenth century, was shaped largely by the circumstances of racial discrim-
ination in which he grew up. As a talented student in St. Thomas, Blyden
had very few career choices open to him. In 1845, however, he met the
Reverend John P . Knox, a white American who had come to St. Thomas
as pastor of a Dutch Reformed Church. Knox furthered Blyden’s educa-
tion and encouraged him to become a minister. In 1850, Blyden traveled
to the United States in an attempt to enroll in Rutgers’ Theological Col-
lege, Knox’s alma mater, but was denied admission on account of his
color. He also tried to gain admission to two other divinity schools, but
was unsuccessful.
1
Blyden had come to the United States at the worst possible political
moment. That year, President Millard Fillmore signed into law the Fugi-
tive Slave Act, which required the cooperation of law enforcement ofﬁcials
in the capture and reenslavement of “fugitive” slaves in the north. This law
threatened the security of all blacks, not just escaped slaves, and was a
major blow to the abolitionist cause. As a result, more and more promi-
nent African-American intellectuals, including the Harvard-trained physi-
cian Martin Delany, began to advocate black emigration from the United
States. While Delany promoted Latin America and the Caribbean as po-
tential sites for black settlement, Edward Blyden spoke early on in favor
of Africa. Moreover, Blyden made a point of criticizing both New York
Senator Garret Smith, who followed the lead of many abolitionists in op-
posing emigration, and Delany, who had challenged the motives of the
American Colonization Society (ACS).
2
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 23


--- PAGE 32 ---
During his visit to the United States, Blyden developed associations
with several white Presbyterian colonizationists, including John B. Pinney,
Walter Lowrie, and William Coppinger of the ACS. These three, in addi-
tion to Knox, encouraged Blyden to begin his life’s work in the American
colony of Liberia, which they argued was a territory full of potential for
any ambitious young black man. Blyden accepted the offer, writing to
Pinney in December 1850, that he might help to “bring those barbarous
tribes under civilized and enlightened inﬂuences.”
3 Blyden’s chauvinist at-
titude toward the “natives” reﬂected a more widespread belief held by
most black intellectuals in what Wilson J. Moses has called “civilization-
ism.” As Moses deﬁnes it, African civilizationism “embodied a sense of
obligation to aid in the uplifting, not only of the continent itself, but of
black people everywhere, and argued that if the internal life of the con-
tinent could be improved, black folk in England and America would ex-
perience a corresponding elevation of status.”
4 For Blyden, however, the
“uplift” of the natives seemed important not so much because it would
elevate the status of all blacks, but rather because he believed it would help
to build a successful black nation in Africa.
After his arrival in Liberia during 1851, Blyden enrolled in Monrovia’s
Alexander High School, where he came under the tutelage of D. A.Wilson,
a Princeton Theological Seminary graduate. In addition, he began an inde-
pendent study of Hebrew, aided by Isidor Kalisch, an American Judaist who
sent Blyden a Hebrew grammar and commentaries on Genesis and Exodus.
After Blyden gained ordination as a Presbyterian minister in 1858, he
served as principal of his old high school and as a Christian missionary
throughout the latter part of the 1850s. In 1861, however, the ambitious
Blyden entered politics, being posted as Liberian Educational Commis-
sioner to Britain and the United States and then in 1862, as a Commis-
sioner charged with the recruitment of black American emigrants.
5
His recruitment tour throughout the United States during 1862 only
added to Blyden’s nationalist fervor. Blyden faced humiliation at nearly
every turn, including the House of Representatives, where he was banned
from making a visit. In Liberia’s Offering, published that same year,
he argued that separation of the races into separate nations was essential
to racial equality. “We shall never receive,” he wrote, “the respect of other
races until we establish a powerful nationality.” Moreover, Blyden said,
“the heart of every true Negro yearns after a distinct and separate national-
ity,” a yearning that he understood as an “ordinance of nature.”
6 In fact,
he wrote in a letter to the Liberia Herald reproduced in an 1862 New York
Colonization Journal: “I would rather go naked and wander among the 
24 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 33 ---
natives of the interior than occupy the position of some of the ‘respectable
colored people’” in the U.S., “[f]or then I should feel that I was in a coun-
try of my own.”
7
But this rhetoric, designed to evoke nationalist sentiment, partially
obscured Blyden’s civilizationist agenda in the building of Liberia. New
World blacks, he said, should also secure Africa for “Christian law, liberty,
and civilization.” In establishing modern black states in Africa, he con-
tinued, blacks must focus on institution building, especially on the law,
education, religion, the press, and government. With the exception of his
changing views towards Christianity, Blyden continued to support this
basic model of African statehood throughout his life:
We must build up Negro states; we must establish and maintain
the institutions; we must make and administer laws, erect and
preserve churches, and support the worship of God; we must have
governments; we must have legislation of our own; we must build
ships and navigate them; we must ply the trades, instruct the
schools, control the press, and thus aid in shaping and guiding
the destinies of mankind.
8
When Blyden returned from the United States later in 1862, he chose to
focus his own nation-building efforts on the establishment of sound edu-
cational institutions and received an appointment as Professor of Classics
at the new Liberia College, having learned both Greek and Latin on his
own. Soon after, however, Blyden would once again become entangled in
the politics of his new nation.
BLYDEN’S APPROPRIATION OF ISLAM
AS A VEHICLE OF BLACK NATIONALISM
By the time Blyden had arrived in West Africa, the region had undergone
a remarkable period of religious and political change. While Islam had
been present in the western Sudan from at least the eleventh century, it
was mainly the religion of ruling elites, merchants, and missionaries. From
the seventeenth until the nineteenth century, however, a number of re-
formers emerged who were committed to sponsoring jihads that would
make their Islamic vision the guiding force in people’s lives. Most famous
among these leaders was Uthman dan Fodio, whose Sokoto jihad of 1804
created the largest Islamic empire of its time in the central Sudan. The
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 25


--- PAGE 34 ---
power of Uthman’s political and social reforms, which were based on cer-
tain Islamic traditions of law, mysticism, and saint worship, reverberated
throughout the entire region. By the late nineteenth century, at the dawn
of Europe’s imperialist scramble for the region, “Islam had come to be the
almost universal language of political ambition and moral reform” in West
Africa.
9
Blyden became aware of the importance of the Muslim presence soon
after his appointment by Liberian President Daniel Warner as Secretary of
State in 1864.
10 While Blyden continued to press for Liberia’s rights in
diplomatic circles, especially with regard to its border disputes with Sierra
Leone, one of his main goals came to be the development of better rela-
tions with the indigenous populations of the West African interior. Even
before 1864, however, Blyden had come to oppose the struggle to subdue
the “natives,” instead hoping to cooperate with them, especially in the ef-
fort to educate and convert them to Christianity.
11 In 1853, Blyden had
joined other American Liberians in an expedition against King Boombo of
the Vai, a native tribe of the region. Blyden was quickly impressed with the
fortiﬁcations of Vai villages and with the “inventive nature of the natives.”
Thereafter, he espoused the idea that these populations should be incorpo-
rated into, rather than shunned from the republic. He also reafﬁrmed this
idea in an 1860 letter to the Reverend John Wilson of the Board of For-
eign Missions of the Presbyterian Church.
12
Because of the burgeoning strength of Islam in the region, Blyden also
believed that the Arabic language could become an important medium of
communication with the interior tribes. Writing to Secretary of the Pres-
byterian Board of Foreign Missions Walter Lowrie, Blyden said that Ara-
bic would be of “great importance to us as our settlements extend into the
interior.”
13 Moreover, Blyden hoped to gain enough proﬁciency in the lan-
guage to one day teach it at Liberia College. Thus, Professor Blyden set
out in May 1866 for Beirut, then part of Ottoman Syria, to study Arabic
at the Syrian Protestant College (now the American University of Beirut).
He later published recollections of the trip in one of his ﬁrst major works,
a travel memoir entitled From West Africa to Palestine(1873).
This ﬁrst work showed that Blyden’s earliest attitudes toward Islam
were clearly ﬁltered through the eyes of Euro-American Orientalism.
Orientalism, as Edward Said famously deﬁned it, was not merely the aca-
demic study of “the Orient” or the imaginative realm where the Euro-
American exotic imagination could wander, but was also a “Western style
for dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the Orient.”
26 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 35 ---
Orientalism, in Said’s terms, was a discourse of power, a “corporate insti-
tution for dealing with the Orient—dealing with it by making statements
about it, authorizing views of it, describing it, by teaching it, settling it,
[and] ruling over it.”
14 Said’s arguments about the nature of power in the
West’s “dealing with the Orient” clearly applied to Blyden, who over time
fashioned himself as a spokesperson for Islam.
In fact, Blyden’s early understanding of Islam derived almost exclu-
sively from what other westerners had written on the topic. On the leg of
his journey that took him from the Gambia river to T eneriffe, one of his
ﬁrst compagnons de voyage, as he put it, was a graduate of Cambridge (un-
named) who noticed Blyden reading Palgrave’s Arabia. The Englishman
was something of an Arabic scholar and tried to assist Blyden in the trans-
lation of some West African manuscripts that Blyden had in his posses-
sion. When neither of them could ﬁgure the text out, Blyden entrusted it
to the mysterious gentleman, who eventually returned it with an anno-
tated translation. During Blyden’s stay in Lebanon from July through Au-
gust 1866, his social and intellectual intercourse was almost entirely with
Europeans and Americans like Dr. Daniel Bliss, president of the Syrian
Protestant College. In describing his travels through the Holy Land in
August, Blyden relied mainly on the words of white travelers like Edward
Robinson, Walter Keating Kelly, the Reverend W . M. Thomson, Henry
Osborne, J. L. Porter, and Norman Macleod to illustrate the attractions of
that sacred place. Moreover, he seemed not to have had one conversation
with a native Palestinian—Muslim, Christian, or Jew. In Jerusalem, Bly-
den recorded encountering some pilgrims from Senegambia, but did not
actually approach them for a conversation.
15
Blyden also thought the Christian sects of Lebanon and Palestine to
be superstitious and sleepy. On the whole, he seemed to believe, the Holy
Land was a religious backwater. Moreover, he found local cultural prac-
tices to be quite bizarre or silly at times, especially veiling, ululation, and
the several-day wedding ceremonies that he was invited to attend. During
his stop in Cairo en route to Beirut, Blyden also saw “nothing to admire”
in the subtly beautiful Sultan Hassan mosque—the claims of natives
notwithstanding—compared to the larger Ottoman-style Muhammad Ali
mosque. Overall, Blyden communicated an attitude of condescension to-
ward the “natives” and their “quaint” culture that his English readers
might ﬁnd amusing.
16
But Blyden’s writing quickly moved from the satirical to the elegiac in
describing his visit to the Pyramids, which he viewed as a great black
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 27


--- PAGE 36 ---
African historical accomplishment. While “standing in the central hall of
the pyramid [of Cheops],” Blyden had an epiphany of sorts. Remember-
ing the words of Liberian poet Hilary T eage, Blyden explained that he
felt I had a peculiar ‘heritage in the Great Pyramid. ’...  T h e
blood seemed to ﬂow faster through my veins. I seemed to hear
the echo of those illustrious Africans ....I  felt lifted out of the
commonplace grandeur of modern times; and, could my voice
have reached every African in the world, I would have earnestly
addressed him in the language of Hilary T eage—Retake your
fame!
17
T o make the link between the Pyramids and his own Liberian nationalism
perfectly transparent, Blyden then engraved the word, “LIBERIA,” with
his name and the date, 11 July 1866, on the entrance to the ancient won-
der. In so doing, Blyden revealed the nationalist purpose of his trip. Unlike
many of the Euro-American pilgrims and travelers whom he quoted in his
book, Blyden did not travel to the Middle East to ﬁnd some mysterious
and exotic backdrop for the struggles of his own soul. He was not particu-
larly moved by Islamicate culture, either. Rather, the purpose of his trip
was to learn Arabic so that he could expand links with the interior popu-
lations at home and so build a new nation.
It made sense, then, that Blyden’s views of Islam only changed after he
made contact with the Muslims of West Africa, for it was with them that
he had desired social intercourse in the ﬁrst place. After returning to West
Africa, Blyden conducted a series of expeditions ﬁrst into the Liberian in-
terior, then into Sierra Leone, conﬁrming his beliefs about the importance
the Arabic language in West African culture. His report to the governor of
Sierra Leone regarding his 1873 expedition to Timbo, located in the hin-
terland of Sierra Leone, revealed a man who was especially impressed with
the degree of literacy present there, as he made clear to the governor:
“Nearly every man and woman can at least read Arabic. Children begin
very early to learn to read. I often saw little boys and girls, four or ﬁve
years old, with their boards upon which are written easy passages from 
the Koran, gathered morning and evening around a ﬁre, repeating their
lessons after the teacher.” While most of this learning was rote, Blyden
said, some students later became quite advanced in Maliki law, one of the
four major Sunni Islamic law schools; in al-Hariri’s Assemblies, an Arabic
classic from the Middle Ages; and in Qur’an. “[M]any,” he concluded,
“have become skilled in the use of Arabic, reading, writing and speaking
28 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 37 ---
with great ﬂuency; and these can sometimes improvise Arabic verses with
remarkable facility.”18
What Blyden saw as a high degree of literacy among West African so-
cieties changed his mind about Islam itself, which he began to view 
as the source of this great learning. For Blyden, what the “natives” had 
created was true black civilization, forged outside of the oppression of
slavery and colonialism. “[I]t wa s...r e f r eshing,” Blyden wrote to the
governor of Sierra Leone in 1873, “to turn from the unsatisfactory da-
guerreotypes of civilization presented in the Europeanized Negroes on the
coast to the genuineness and reality of the self-governing and self-
respecting Negroes of the interior.” In fact, Blyden said, the “so-called civ-
ilized Negro” had suffered a great loss in his becoming civilized in a white
manner. The natives, according to Blyden, were “natural and genuine”
and, in contrast to Euro-American blacks, had experienced “a more 
reliable basis of true and permanent progress than a cramped and ill-
proportioned straining after a foreign and incompatible ideal.” Articulat-
ing an argument that would later be repeated by numerous African-
American Muslims, Blyden stressed that Islam created an authentically
black civilization, which encouraged a type of progress that also created
dignity and self-respect.
19
But Blyden was not exactly consistent in his analysis of Islam, willing
to change his interpretations depending on his audience and his goals.
During the 1870s, he was still an agent of both the Presbyterian Church
and several related colonization groups, upon whom he and his family re-
lied for ﬁnancial sustenance. When he was communicating with these
groups, rather than with the leader of Sierra Leone, he presented Islam in
a different light. Speaking as a Christian missionary, Blyden used the
strength of Islam to encourage the contribution of more human and ﬁ-
nancial resources to Christian-dominated educational and cultural institu-
tions in the region. For instance, in the January 1871 edition of Methodist
Quarterly Review, he published an article on Liberia that included an
analysis of Islam’s “salutary character.” Islam, he argued, had come to West
Africa by the pen, not the sword; it encouraged temperance; it was the
“sole preservative” against the onslaught of the slave trade; and it encour-
aged learning, social unity, and industry. Blyden assured his Christian
readership, however, that despite the strong presence and positive societal
contributions of Islamic civilization, West Africa could still be turned to-
ward the Gospel of Christ. “Mohammedanism,” Blyden wrote, “could
easily be displaced by Christian inﬂuence, if Christian organizations
would enter with vigour into this ﬁeld.”
20 In fact, he offered himself as
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 29


--- PAGE 38 ---
someone with the necessary expertise to accomplish this task. In 1873, for
example, he urged the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions to establish
an institution of higher learning in the interior, where he might be able to
work towards this goal. Instead, they reassigned him to Alexander High
School, which he had left to join Liberia College in 1862.
21
But Blyden continued to ﬁght for support of his own educational ini-
tiatives, soon focusing on a British audience. Clearly relishing his back-
ground as an Orientalist, a self-trained classicist, and a West African
ethnographer, Blyden published several articles in Fraser’s Magazine, a
British periodical, criticizing Christian missionary activities in Africa,
while praising Islam as an alternative religious tradition more respectful of
African culture. Though it remained submerged in Blyden’s articles, the
Victorian context of his arguments was important. During the latter half
of the nineteenth century, a debate raged in British politics over the future
of the British Empire. While most T ories upheld the duties of the “white
man’s burden” and its imperial aspirations as an absolute good, liberals
were split over the dilemma of whether to “civilize the natives” or leave
them to their natural state. The famous sociologist Herbert Spencer,
whose sociological classiﬁcations of “Negrotic” peoples appeared in 1874,
was avowedly anti-imperialist, stressing a kind of social Darwinism that
supported a “natural” state of social evolution.
22 Blyden’s ﬁndings regard-
ing the level of civilization in the West African interior challenged
Spencer’s views on the abilities of black persons. At the same time, Blyden
clearly did not support a typically T ory view of imperialism. Unlike
Spencer, Blyden used his “menacing” descriptions of Islam rather than any
appeal to reason to solicit support for his brand of imperial intervention.
In so doing, his approach paralleled that of his great hero, Liberal party
leader W . E. Gladstone, who appropriated religious rhetoric to gain mass
appeal among a growing voting public during the 1870s.
In criticizing Christianity and simultaneously promoting Islam, Bly-
den hoped to convince his white audience that all Africans, both immi-
grant and indigenous, should be allowed to develop their own authentic
civilization. For instance, in “Mohammedanism and the Negro race,”
published in November 1875, Blyden praised R. Bosworth Smith’s claims
that Islam provided a sense of dignity to its adherents that Christian
converts did not possess. Blyden magniﬁed Smith’s comments, asserting
that “whenever the Negro is found in Christian lands, his leading trait is
not docility, as has been often alleged, but servility.” Devoid of self-
reliance and true independence, countries like Haiti existed only by the
whims of white power, according to Blyden. “On the other hand,” Blyden
30 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 39 ---
continued, “there are numerous Negro Mohammedan communities and
states in Africa which are self-reliant, productive, independent and domi-
nant,” including Sierra Leone, for example. Whereas missionary Chris-
tianity’s arrival in Africa was associated with colonialism and slavery, Islam
had spread, Blyden argued, by “choice” and “conviction,” ﬁnding Africa
in the midst of its “manhood.” Christianity, on the other hand, “sub-
dued,” “soothed,” and inspired sympathy even for the enslavers—so much
so, in fact, that black “ideas and aspirations could be expressed only in
conformity with the views and tastes of those who held rule over them.”
Conversely, Islam managed to inspire spiritual feelings “to which they
[African pagans] had before been utter strangers,” while simultaneously
strengthening and hastening “certain tendencies to independence and self-
reliance which were already at work.”
23
Blyden ampliﬁed this view in “Christianity and the Negro Race,” an
article published in 1876 in which he turned the common European no-
tion of black inferiority on its head, implying that it was European culture
rather than the African “jungle” that had transformed blacks into apes.
“From the lessons he everyday receives,” Blyden protested, “the Negro 
unconsciously imbibes the conviction that to be a great man he must be
like the white man.” Blacks, according to Blyden, were not taught to be
the companions, equals, or comrades of whites, but the “imitator, his ape,
his parasite....T o  b e  like the white man as much as possible—to copy
his outward appearance, his peculiarities, his manners, the arrangement of
his toilet.” Worse yet, Blyden argued in “Christian Missions in West
Africa,” European and American missionaries often measured their success
by how much the “natives” had become imitators of white culture. They
mistook the “thin varnish of European civilization” left with the native as
a genuine “metamorphosis.” The result was that the convert’s “Christian-
ity, instead of being pure is superstitious, instead of being genuine is only
nominal, instead of being deep is utterly superﬁcial.”
24
In full view of his white audience, Blyden had begun to question more
fundamentally the entire missionary enterprise and Christianity itself. In
“Islam and Race Distinctions,” published in 1876, Blyden focused not
only on the ill effects of European Christianity on blacks, but also on its
complicity in the advancement of a secular Western culture. Why, Blyden
demanded, has “the grand Semitic idea of the conversion to Divine truth
of all the races of mankind, and their incorporation into one spiritual fam-
ily” made such slow progress under the direction of Europeans? The an-
swer, he offered, was that Christianity had been subsumed under the more
general Western tendency to divide and conquer the world as a material
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 31


--- PAGE 40 ---
possession. The West, he remarked, was anthropocentric, power-hungry,
and materialistic. Even “religion is... cherished as a means of subserving
temporal and material purposes.” In the Middle Ages, Blyden argued,
Roman Catholicism advanced this obsession with material things through
its emphasis on the “visible” rather than the “unseen and spiritual,” while
Protestantism, through the actions of the Puritans, Presbyterians, and
Episcopalians, focused on “material aggrandisement at any cost,” includ-
ing the enslavement of Africans and the wholesale murder of Indians. But
if the absence of a true spirituality in Christian Europe made slavery and
genocide possible there, Islamic spirituality had the opposite effect in Is-
lamdom. Because the Muslim has a deeper trust in God and reliance in
God’s revelation in the Qur’an, Blyden said, Islam “extinguishes all dis-
tinctions founded upon race, colour, or nationality ....[ T ] h roughout
the history of Islam, in all countries, race or ‘previous condition’ has been
no barrier to elevation.” A true faith, Blyden implied in this article, led
to true brotherhood.
25
Bernard Lewis has criticized Blyden’s views regarding race and racism
in Islam, grouping Blyden with a number of European Orientalists like
Snouck Hurgronje and Alfred von Kremer who perpetuated what Lewis
calls the “myth of Islamic racial innocence.” In fact, Lewis argues that it “is
signiﬁcant that one of the most inﬂuential proponents of the myth was
Edward W . Blyden....H i s  writings, with their stress on Christian guilt
and on a somewhat romanticized Muslim tolerance, were widely read.
Writers of this school usually make the illogical assumption that the repro-
bation of prejudice in a society proves its absence.”
26 In one sense, Lewis’
grouping of Blyden with Hurgronje and von Kremer is fair: Blyden did
draw heavily on the work of European Orientalists to derive his historical
and theological picture of Islam. Furthermore, his description of the utter
absence of racism in Islamdom was certainly an exaggeration.
But in another respect, there is a critical difference between Blyden
and European Orientalists. Unlike his European counterparts, Blyden ap-
propriated Islam as part of a polemic designed to solicit support for his
own educational and cultural projects and more political autonomy for
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Moreover, contrary to what Lewis claims, Bly-
den was not ignorant, intentionally or otherwise, regarding the existence
of racism within Islamic societies. In 1890, for example, he referred to “the
destructive inﬂuence of wicked Arabs in their slave-trading in the Sudan”
in a speech delivered throughout the United States.
27 For Blyden, the pres-
ence of racism in Arab society did not reﬂect poorly on Islam, since he 
regularly observed sub-Saharan Muslims mounting effective challenges to
32 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 41 ---
this racism based on Islamic traditions themselves. Educated Sudanese
Muslims, Blyden said, knew the difference between what Arabs do and
what Islam says to do. In fact, he had often heard them quoting Sura 9:97
(which he mistakenly identiﬁed as verse 98): “The Arabs are most stout in
unbelief and hypocrisy, and are more likely not to know the bounds which
God has sent down to His Apostle” [Blyden’s translation]. According to
Blyden, “this passage has protected the Soudanic Muslims against undue
reverence for the Arab and armed him against imposition from the wiles 
of the unscrupulous among the countrymen of the Prophet.” The point 
is that, despite the shortcomings of Muhammad’s countrymen, that is,
Arabs, Blyden still believed that Islam was an historically positive force in
African life, helping to preserve black dignity and support African self-
determination and civilization. Islam, Blyden said in the same article, is
the African’s “greatest solace and the greatest defense” against the on-
slaught of European civilization. Over and over again, Blyden remarked
on the respect shown to Muslims by foreigners. Moreover, argued Blyden,
Islam had never been the kind of vehicle for terror and genocide that
Christianity had been. “With Islam,” he reiterated, “Africa is at least safe
from physical destruction; with popular Christianity it might share the
fate of the North American Indians, Sandwich Islanders, New Zealanders,
& c.”
28
BLACK MESSIANISM AND UNIVERSALISM
IN BLYDEN’S LATER THOUGHT
The above section makes clear that Blyden viewed Islam as capable of serv-
ing a very particularistic purpose, namely, as a tradition that could foster
African nationalism and help to develop African civilization. But Blyden’s
particularistic use of Islam did not mean that he viewed Islam as an exclu-
sively black tradition. In fact, he also saw Islam, Judaism, and Christianity
as universalistic traditions that advocated the same essential theological
message among all human beings. Ironically, however, Blyden also be-
lieved in a theological formulation of black messianism that posit-
ed a special role for blacks as the chosen people in creating this more
harmonious world. During the 1880s, he developed his own version of
black messianism, which seemingly became the particularistic means to a
universalistic end.
Blyden’s black messianism grew in part out of his belief in what
George Fredrickson has dubbed romantic racialism, which “held that each
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 33


--- PAGE 42 ---
‘race’ or ‘nation’ had its own inherent peculiarities of mind and tempera-
ment and would develop according to its own special ‘genius’ rather than
follow some model based on the experience of peoples with different in-
herited or inbred characteristics.” Races, said Blyden, had been created by
the Almighty to do particular kinds of work in the universe. Thus, Blyden
argued, the various races should be valued for their diversity and be pre-
served against miscegenation: “As in every form of the inorganic universe
we see some noble variation of God’s thought and beauty, so in each sepa-
rate man, in each separate race, something of the absolute is incarnated.
The whole of mankind is a vast representation of the Deity. Therefore we
cannot extinguish any race either by conﬂict or amalgamation without
serious responsibility.” By the 1870s, Fredrickson argues, Blyden had
combined these ideas of romantic racialism with “some of the doctrines 
of nineteenth-century scientiﬁc racism.”
29
The latter found expression in Blyden’s beliefs in the biological nature
of blackness and the inferiority of mixed race persons. In fact, Blyden
sometimes made these opinions public to his own detriment. In 1871, for
example, he was nearly lynched after being accused of committing adul-
tery with the Liberian president’s wife, whom he had praised as having
“pure Negro” blood. Blyden’s comment infuriated the largely “mulatto”
Americo-Liberian ruling class, who, according to Blyden, incited a small
mob to drag him around the streets with his neck in a rope. Fearing for
his life, Blyden then sought exile in Sierra Leone. But rather than making
him question his views on racial purity, this incident only heightened 
Blyden’s hatred of “mulattos.” Throughout the 1870s, he pleaded with
William Coppinger of the American Colonization Society to send only
“pure Negroes” to West Africa. When Blyden actually met some rather
prominent men of mixed heritage, including Frederick Douglass, Senator
Blanche Bruce, and other African-American leaders at the 1880 Republi-
can Convention in Chicago, only Douglass impressed him. The rest of the
“mongrel tribe,” as Blyden called them, struck him as typical mulattos, 
“as light and empty as the men professing to lead a race could well be.” 
He viewed Douglass as an exception, however, due to his “strong Negro
instincts.”
30
In other words, Blyden believed that what made a person “black” was
his or her biological descent. Moreover, Blyden argued that the preserva-
tion of the black “race” was especially important since black traits were
much needed in the development of world civilization. By 1880, Blyden
had developed this particularistic vision into his own version of black mes-
sianism. Recently chosen as president of Liberia College, Blyden delivered
34 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 43 ---
an address entitled “Ethiopia stretching out her hands unto God; or,
Africa’s Service to the World” to the ACS in May of that year. In crafting
his speech, Blyden appropriated one of the most quoted biblical verses in
African-American religious history, namely, the prophecy in Psalm 68:31
that “princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall at once stretch forth
her wings unto God.” Blyden used this “Ethiopianist” prophecy to explain
the contributions that black persons had already made to the historical de-
velopment of humankind. According to Blyden, these contributions in-
cluded (1) African involvement with the advent of the earliest religious
sensibilities; (2) the helper role Africa played in the rise of both Judaism
and Christianity; and (3) the labor blacks provided in the making of the
modern world, most speciﬁcally in the United States. While he had often
criticized the lack of self-determination brought about by white oppres-
sion, in this speech Blyden argued that it was through submission, service,
and suffering that Africa had fulﬁlled her special mission.
31
Even more, he deﬁned black messianism to include a special role not
only for Africans, but also for the African continent itself as a “spiritual
conservatory” where all peoples could “recover some of the simple ele-
ments of faith” in the midst of a materialistic world. Blyden developed this
theme further when he returned to the United States for an anniversary of
the ACS in 1883. Invoking Nazareth and Bethlehem, the towns where
Jesus was annunciated and born, Blyden prophesied the appearance of
such places in Africa and then, perhaps for the ﬁrst time, spoke of himself
publicly as a prophet of black messianism:
In the solitudes of the African forests, where the din of Western
civilization has never been heard, I have realized the saying of the
poet that the ‘Groves were God’s ﬁrst temples’. I have felt that I
stood in the presence of the Almighty; and the trees and the birds
and the sky and the air have whispered to me of the great work yet
to be achieved on that continent. I trod lightly through these
forests, for I felt there was a ‘spirit in the woods’. And I could
understand how it came to pass that the prophets of a race—the
great reformers who have organized states and elevated peoples,
received their inspiration on mountains, in caves, in grottoes.
In this passage, Blyden linked the redemption of humankind not only to
the development of Africa as a spiritual conservatory but also to black na-
tionalism itself. The founding of black nation-states in Africa, he implied,
would produce men who would not be suffering servants, but political
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 35


--- PAGE 44 ---
leaders and prophets. Their leadership, he implied, would be inspired by
numinous experiences on top of “mountains” and in “caves,” much like
those of Moses and Muhammad. But their contributions to the world, he
said, would be shaped above all by their blackness. For the African, Blyden
exclaimed, will “bring as his contribution the softer aspects of human na-
ture. The harsh and stern ﬁgure of the Caucasian races needs this milder
element. The African is the feminine; and we must not suppose that this is
of the least importance in the ultimate development of humanity.”
32
What is so confusing about Blyden’s intellectual development is that
once he had articulated this black messianist vision, he did not integrate 
it in any way with his advocacy of Islam. In 1884, he delivered “Sierra
Leone and Liberia: Their Origin, Work, and Destiny” in front of a West
African audience. In this address, Blyden did the usual recounting of the
advances in civilization due to colonization and launched into a critique of
Christianity, this time praising Roman Catholicism and dismissing Protes-
tantism as the inferior religious alternative for persons of African descent.
According to Blyden, Catholic missionaries, who came in signiﬁcant
numbers in 1864, possessed several superior traits: (1) they engaged in 
an uncompromising war against evolution, agnosticism, and positivism;
(2) they opposed socialism; (3) they opposed divorce, preserving the in-
tegrity of the family; and (4) they respected racial diversity, often incorpo-
rating black saints into their celebrations and encouraging the achieve-
ments of blacks in countries like Brazil, Venezuela, Cuba, and Peru.
33
Blyden also praised Islam in the same way that he had in his publica-
tions during the 1870s. He reminded his audience that Christian mission-
aries would inevitably confront the “irrepressible,” “aggressive” fact of
Islam’s presence among the populations of the interior, mentioning Islam’s
importance to the educational and commercial life of Africa. And like his
African-American Muslim heirs, he also stressed the historic achievements
of blacks in Arabia and under the umbrella of Islam, speaking of the “war-
rior and poet Antarrah,” a pre-Islamic ﬁgure, and of Bilal ibn Rabah, one
of the Prophet Muhammad’s companions. Quoting Sir William Muir’s
The Life of Mahomet (London, 1858), yet another work of European Ori-
entalism, Blyden recounted Bilal’s important role as an early convert
to Islam, as a conﬁdant of the Prophet, and as the ﬁrst muadhdhin, or
prayer-caller, in Islam. In a later article, Blyden also mentioned the black
hero Wahshi, who killed Hamzah, the Prophet’s uncle and one of Islam’s
bitterest enemies, at the Battle of Uhud in 625 
A.D. In addition, Blyden
noted that an entire chapter of the Qur’an was named after Luqman,
whom, he noted, Arabic poetry had identiﬁed as “black as night.” Chapter
36 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 45 ---
31, said Blyden, proved “the high degree of respect entertained for Loq-
man in Arabia.” Moreover, he argued, Luqman’s presence in the holy book
indicated that Muhammad “did not believe that any slur would be cast
upon the new religion by connecting the Koran with the name of that re-
markable slave.”
34 Luqman’s inclusion meant that “no Muslim, whether
Arab, T urk, or Indian, can read the 31st chapter of the Koran... and sep-
arate the Negro from participation in the privileges of God’s elect.” 
Finally, Blyden again linked Islam’s success among blacks to its ability to
create national unity. Africans, he said, “gather under the beams of the
Crescent not only for religion, but for patriotic reasons; till they are not
only swayed with one idea, but act as one individual. The faith becomes a
part of their nationality.”
35
But what role Islam would play, if any, in his new vision of black 
messianism and Abrahamic harmony was unclear. Blyden only suggested
that Africa might someday be the site of reconciliation between Islam and
Christianity and began to develop a new theology in which Africans—
and Jews, as shown below—would play a chosen role. The amalgamation
of Islam and Christianity would not only rid Africa of its darkness, he 
believed, but would have the potential to erase the religious differences 
between all Christian, Muslims, and by implication, Jews, too. Blyden
prophesied that “Japheth [i.e. Europe] introducing Isaac [Christianity],
and Shem [i.e. Semites] bringing Ishmael [i.e. Islam], Ham [i.e. Africa]
will receive both,” adding that “[w]here the light from the Cross ceases to
stream upon the gloom, there the beams of the Crescent will give illumi-
nation; and as the glorious orb of Christianity rises, the twilight of Islam
will be lost in the greater light of the Sun [and not Son, he wrote!] of
Righteousness. Then Isaac and Ishmael will be united, and rejoice together
in the faith of their common progenitor— Abrahim Khalil Allah—Abra-
ham, the Friend of God.”
36
The following year, in 1887, Blyden published this speech in a collec-
tion entitled Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race. He also included two
fresh pieces, an introduction by West African barrister Samuel Lewis and 
a preface that both reiterated and reworked a number of the themes out-
lined above. Once again, Blyden asserted the complementary nature of
Islam and Christianity, when blacks themselves acted as spokespersons for
the two traditions. Whereas Islam, by its “respect for order,” mitigated
against religious fervor, European libertinism, and ignorance, Christianity
promised to bring a vital and spontaneous spirituality to the “formalism of
the Muslims.”
37 According to Hollis Lynch, the book had its detractors
and its fans, but by any account it was a huge hit, ensuring Blyden’s 
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 37


--- PAGE 46 ---
international celebrity. The ﬁrst ﬁve hundred copies sold out quickly,
prompting a second printing. Reviews appeared throughout the English
and American press. Notes and Queries wondered whether Blyden was a
“full-blooded Negro,” implying that such a tour de force must be touched
in some way by European blood. Blyden’s friend, R. Bosworth Smith
praised the book in the Nineteenth Century, calling it “one of the most re-
markable books I have ever met.” The Reverend J. Stephen Barras agreed,
writing in The Times of London that it “may yet prove the greatest contri-
bution of the age on the gigantic subject of Christian missions.” The
Church Missionary Intelligencer, on the other hand, savaged the opus, not-
ing that its positive remarks regarding Islam and Roman Catholicism were
just too much to stomach. Across the Atlantic, the AME Church Review
praised Blyden as the “one Negro of standing in the English world of rec-
ognized scholarship,” while the Southern Recorder pronounced the “work
not only the most learned production that ever emanated from a black
man, but one of the most learned in the English language.” A slightly
more sober review in the Nation noted that Blyden was “not deﬁcient in
the rarer qualities of thorough and patient study.” His scholarship, pro-
claimed the weekly, showed “broad reading, minute investigation, [and] a
surprising mental alertness.” Moreover, discussion of Blyden’s book spilled
into more general public discourse when Canon Isaac Taylor endorsed
Blyden’s viewpoint towards Islam at an Anglican Church Conference held
at Wolverhampton in November 1887, and after Blyden visited North
America in 1888.
38
That year, William Coppinger, secretary of the American Coloniza-
tion Society, summoned Blyden, his movement’s brightest star, to promote
South Carolina Senator Matthew Butler’s proposal for the United States
federal government to fund black emigration. On January 19, 1890, 
Blyden addressed the ACS, this time in Washington, D.C., on the occa-
sion of their seventy-third anniversary. Quoting Thomas Jefferson, Blyden
argued that “nothing is more clearly written in the Book of Destiny than
the emancipation of the blacks” but that “it is equally certain that the two
races will never live in a state of equal freedom under the same Govern-
ment.” Blyden inaccurately described the growing acceptance of Jefferson’s
views among African Americans, who, he argued, were also advancing in
education and culture, and thus in “love and pride of race.” Such people
were now ready, he said, for the “regeneration of the African fatherland.”
Blyden had sympathy for the sentiment that African Americans had
earned their right to full citizenship because of their sacriﬁces in building
the country, but asserted that emigration is not “a question of reason. It is
38 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 47 ---
a question also of instinct.” According to Blyden, the romantic racialist
destiny of blacks could only be fulﬁlled in Africa. “The work to be done
beyond the seas,” he said, “is not to be a reproduction of what we see in
this country. It requires, therefore, distinct race perception and entire race
devotion. It is not to be the healing up of an old race, but the unfolding of
a new bud, an evolution; the development of a new side of God’s charac-
ter and a new phase of humanity.”
39
Unlike his previous visits in 1880 and 1883, this one also featured
much discussion about Islam. On March 3, 1890, for instance, Blyden
read a paper entitled “The Koran in Africa” before the Presbyterial Minis-
terial Association in Philadelphia. In another address entitled “Problems
before the Christian Church,” delivered at various locations throughout
the United States, Blyden also chastised missionaries for arrogantly ignor-
ing any cultural and social contributions that “Mohammedan” and
“pagan” societies might have to offer. Even so, throughout his stay during
1889 and 1890, Blyden did not tout the vision of religious synthesis so
prominent in his famous work. Rather, he warned that the only way to
prevent the spread of Islam and the decline of Christianity was the foun-
dation of an indigenous African Church. When Islam ceased to be the
only tradition protecting Africans from “self-deprecation in the presence
of Arabs or Europeans,” Blyden told his Philadelphia audience, only then
might Christianity have the chance for growth.
40
Still, his pro-Islamic polemic fueled rancor among Blyden’s detractors
and rivals, including former U.S. Minister to Liberia Charles H. J. Taylor,
who published a letter in the Atlanta Constitution accusing Blyden of
being “a Muslim, a fetish-worshipper, and a hypocrite.” Most African
Americans, however, admired Blyden for his intellectual accomplish-
ments, as his warm reception in both the South and North indicated,
while tending to reject his emigrationist rhetoric. Blyden also faced the
negative impact of having his name mentioned so frequently alongside
that of Senator Butler, whose emigration plan inspired overwhelming op-
position in both the black and white press. Senator Butler, not surpris-
ingly, was simply delighted by Blyden’s support and quoted a long passage
of Blyden’s book during debate over his bill in the Senate.
41
In addition to his continued appropriation of the “Islamic menace”
to garner American support for the peopling of Africa with black Chris-
tians, Blyden also reiterated his romantic view of Africa as the site where
the great monotheistic faiths would become universalized and uniﬁed. 
But Blyden never made explicit the theological relationship, if any ex-
isted, between his nationalist appropriations of Islam and his beliefs in
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 39


--- PAGE 48 ---
Abrahamic universalism. With regard to the latter, however, he continued
to develop this notion late into his life. In 1898, for example, Blyden pub-
lished a small tract on the “Jewish question” that advanced his views
on universalism, argued for a special Jewish role in this process, and so-
licited Jewish support for West African nationalism. The timing of the
tract’s publication pointed to its strong nationalistic overtones, as it ap-
peared on the heels of the 1897 resolution of the ﬁrst Zionist Congress to
create a home in Palestine for the Jewish people. He dedicated the treatise
to Louis Solomon, a Jewish resident of Liverpool, with whom, Blyden
said, he had enjoyed many conversations about the topic. The purpose,
Blyden proclaimed, was to make known the views of an African on “the
work and destiny of a people with whom his [Blyden’s] own race is closely
allied, both by Divine declaration and by a history almost identical of 
sorrow and oppression.” His hope, he continued, was to spur a deeper
sympathy between the two groups.
42
Blyden believed that Jews, like blacks, had a special role to play in re-
alizing his vision of a universal monotheism. “Whenever the Jews . . .
move together on any question of religion,” he said, “the whole world is
affected.” The “spiritual life,” he argued, was connected to their particu-
larly “special work and destiny.” For this reason, Blyden submitted, Jews
had “a far higher and nobler work to accomplish for humanity than estab-
lishing a political power in one corner of the earth.” The redemption of
the world, Blyden posited, did not lay in the gathering of the Jews in Is-
rael, as some biblicists would have it, but in Jews’ continued intermingling
with less spiritually inclined peoples. Jews, he said, had been “entrusted
[with] the spiritual hegemony of mankind.” It would be the Jewish peo-
ple, Blyden asserted, who would “bring about the practical brotherhood of
humanity by establishing, or, rather, propagating, the international reli-
gion in whose cult men of all races, climes, and countries will call upon
the Lord under one Name.”
43
Launching into an exegesis of the Bible, Blyden explained that the
meaning of God’s refusal to give Moses any more speciﬁc name than “I am
who I am” was to set forth the universality of Judaism. God, Blyden spec-
ulated, seemed to be saying that “if I give you a speciﬁc designation, it
must be in Hebrew, and you will be tempted, such is human nature, to
identify me with the Hebrews, and call me the Hebrews’ God.” T o make
his point perfectly unambiguous, Blyden reiterated that “God could not
deﬁne Himself . . . [because] Jehovah is a universal sovereign, adapting
Himself to all races, and answering to any name by which, in sincerity and
truth, they call upon Him.”
44
40 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 49 ---
Blyden also applied this universalistic interpretation of Judaism to
Islam in an article written while he was serving as director of Mo-
hammedan Education in Sierra Leone from 1901 to 1906. Lest any Mus-
lims believe that true Islam was any different in nature than any other Se-
mitic tradition, Blyden argued that “Islam is monotheism, not only as
contrasted with polytheism, but also as expressing the idea of a universal,
unapproachable, incomparable, and solitary supremacy.” But, Blyden
lamented, some believers of every faith insisted on asserting a parochial
view of their faith, including Muslims. “[T]here are Mohammedans,” he
claimed, “as there are Christians and Jews and Buddhists, who, inferior to
the true teachings of their creed, cannot believe that God is where He is
not reached by such paths as those they have been taught are the only
paths that lead to Him.” It was especially important, he believed, that Jews
refuse the temptations of this particularistic orientation. Fortunately, Bly-
den said, many Jews had begun to realize the ecumenism of their creed.
Quoting Jewish thinkers Herman Adler, Felix Adler, and Israel Abrahams,
Blyden applauded what he believed to be the growing consciousness
among Jews themselves of the universality of Judaism. Such a develop-
ment was critical, Blyden thought, since the world was “immersed in ma-
terialism,” and science and philosophy had become the gods that humans
worshipped. Of course, he said, the Europeans could offer no way out of
the darkness. Christianity, rather than practicing the Semitic traditions of
Jesus, had become too European in character. For example, Blyden
claimed that whereas Jews and Muslims in Semitic countries were drawn
to the synagogue and the mosque both by training and “racial and reli-
gious instinct,” Europeans and Americans had to be attracted to worship
by “expedients” such as contests that ranked the best sermons. Only Jews,
Blyden said, could carry out the “‘ideals of Zion.’” “Imperial races,” he
concluded, “cannot do the work of spiritual races.”
45
But, Blyden argued, Jews had only begun to realize the true meaning
of being a chosen people; they continued, he said, to overlook potent areas
for missionizing, especially West Africa. “Have the Jews no witness to bear
in inter-tropical Africa?” Blyden asked. “Have they no word of comfort or
of help for millions of the descendants of Ham in that land?” Interestingly,
the comfort advocated by Blyden seemed to be more than spiritual in na-
ture. In fact, Blyden called on Jews to aid their spiritual cousins with their
knowledge of science and “other culture.” Quoting the prophecy made in
Zephaniah 3:10, Blyden implied that such help was divinely commanded:
“From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the daughters of
my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.”
46 This was a telling argument,
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 41


--- PAGE 50 ---
showing how much the development of African nationalism was consis-
tently at the center of Blyden’s thought, linked inextricably to nearly every
other moral and philosophical issue.
CONCLUSION: ISLAM AS PARADOX
In soliciting Jewish support on behalf of African nation-building, Blyden
invoked a universalistic interpretation of Judaism, calling on Jews to work
for more than just Jewish concerns. He asked Muslims and Christians to
do the same. But Blyden preserved a high degree of particularism in his es-
chatology by positing a special role for blacks in the creation of Abrahamic
harmony. Moreover, Blyden’s version of black messianism required the es-
tablishment of black nation-states in Africa. What remained ambiguous
was how Islam ﬁgured into Blyden’s Ethiopianist vision of world salvation.
By associating Islam so closely with black nationalism (which he often jus-
tiﬁed in terms of black messianism), Blyden came one small step away
from creating a form of black Islamic particularism that would link the re-
demption of the world with the growth and development of Islam among
blacks. In addition, Blyden seemed not to notice—or perhaps be bothered
by the fact—that he promoted Islam as the tradition best suited to ad-
vancing African nationalism, while also describing it as an essentially uni-
versalistic tradition. He seemed to accept as paradoxical the idea that Islam
could serve a particularistic purpose without questioning whether this par-
ticularistic construction threatened its universalism. Islam, his thought
implied (though he never said), was both a tradition speciﬁcally suited for
black people and a tradition generally suited for all people.
T owards the end of his life, Blyden rejected this paradox, instead em-
bracing a stark form of particularism that had nothing to do with Islam.
Broke, sick, and politically powerless, this former champion of civiliza-
tionism published a series of articles in the Sierra Leone Weekly News that
advanced a cultural relativist approach to the understanding of African so-
cieties. This series, which became African Life and Customs, once again
drew from the work of European scholars, including Mary Kingsley, Lady
Lugard, J. E. Dennett, Major Leonard, and Dudley Kidd, among others,
to reiterate the British liberal position that the “native” way of life should
be left undisturbed. Blyden criticized his life-long civilizationist agenda,
defending an African social order which was, he claimed, agrarian, patriar-
chal, communistic, polygamous, and religious in character. Anticipating
contemporary Afrocentrism, he praised the collectivist mentality of the
42 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 51 ---
“African,” savoring the irony that communism and socialism, essentially
African norms to him, were gaining ascendancy in a Europe overrun by
individual acquisitiveness. He again criticized missionaries, albeit this time
for their shallow understanding of pantheism, which he deemed to be a
holistic and thus highly laudable form of religion. Interestingly, he made
no mention of Islam or of his vision of a world religion. Blyden had be-
come conservative in the most classic sense, hoping against all odds that
the “native” cultures of West Africa might be preserved against the on-
slaught of modernity.
47
But Blyden’s legacy with regard to Islam was anything but conserva-
tive, for his innovative thinking about Islam foreshadowed most of the
central themes of African-American Islamic thought in the twentieth cen-
tury. Like many of his African-American heirs, Blyden indicted white
Christianity on the grounds that it stunted the development of black self-
determination. Instead, he promoted Islam as a tradition more in tune
with the political, social, and cultural aspirations of blacks. Speciﬁcally, he
believed that Islam had contributed to black nation-building, the develop-
ment of the black racial “essence,” and historic black achievements, espe-
cially in the area of black civilization. Suggesting an even stronger link be-
tween various forms of black communalism and Islam, his thought also
implied that some sort of synthesis of black messianism, nationalism, and
Islam might be possible. But Blyden never answered the question of
whether Islam would become explicitly associated with this kind of partic-
ularism. And the tension implied by such an association—that is, whether
Islam would be a tradition for all or just for blacks—also lay unexplored.
Ultimately, Blyden left it to others to make the hard theoretical choices
about how black Muslims should perceive themselves in relation to other
blacks, other Muslims, and the rest of humanity. Left unresolved, then,
was also a more complete explanation of what the central message of Islam
would be within the story of black liberation.
Edward Wilmot Blyden (1832–1912) and the Paradox of Islam 43


--- PAGE 52 ---
Chapter 3
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 
and the Establishment of 
Black Particularistic Islam
INTRODUCTION
Over a decade after Blyden’s death, Timothy Drew founded the Moorish
Science T emple (MST) in Chicago. Though Drew incorporated Islamic
symbols into this original tradition, his use of them apparently owed very
little to the Islamic traditions of the Old World. Instead, Drew seemingly
appropriated Islamic symbols from Freemasonry, which itself had a long
history of adopting Oriental themes into its esoteric culture. In particular,
as Peter Lamborn Wilson has suggested, Drew borrowed elements from one
of Freemasonry’s brother organizations, the Shriners. Founded in the 1870s
by Scottish Rite Masons from New York, the Ancient Arabic Order Nobles
of the Mystic Shrine claimed lineage to the “Grand Shaykh” of Mecca,
Sultan Selim III, the Bavarian Illuminati, and the Bektashi Suﬁs. Using the
title “Noble,” they donned fezzes, established lodges with Arab-Islamic
names, and appropriated the Islamic crescent and star in the organization’s
jewelry. At Chicago’s World’s Fair in 1893, African Americans formed
their own version of the Shriners. Claiming the consent of visiting Muslim
dignitaries, these Masons called their organization the Ancient Egyptian
Arabic Order of Nobles of the Shrine. It was almost certainly from this
group that Noble Drew Ali, as he became known, adopted his movement’s
few Islamic symbols, including his own title of “Noble” and his fez.
1
Yet while Drew Ali had virtually no direct connection to the traditions
of Old World Islam, he was a seminal ﬁgure in the history of African-
American Islam. For Drew Ali not only fostered the introduction of
45


--- PAGE 53 ---
“Oriental” symbols and language into African-American vernacular, he
also produced a number of ideas that were perpetuated by later African-
American Islamic thinkers. Like Edward Blyden, Drew Ali linked black
liberation to both national and moral renewal. But, I will argue, Drew Ali
differed from his predecessor by attempting to recast black identity strictly
in terms of nation and creed. Refusing to be called black, colored, or
Negro, Drew Ali hoped to separate himself from the legacy of nineteenth-
century racialism. African Americans, he argued, were Moors, a nation
that emerged out of a more general group of Asiatic peoples. While Moors
possessed a unique national heritage, according to Drew Ali, they shared a
common religion, Islam, with all nations of Asiatic descent. For Drew Ali,
unlike Blyden, there was little ambiguity in the question of whether Islam
was a universalistic or particularistic tradition. Islam was not a tradition
for all humans, Drew Ali implied, but the unique heritage of Asiatic peo-
ples. Moreover, he suggested that only Muslims, who were by deﬁnition
nonwhite, would be divinely saved.
But while clearly deﬁning Islam in a particularistic manner, Drew 
Ali’s thought also contained important elements of universalism. Drew Ali
developed the ethics of his particularistic Moorish Science by borrowing
liberally from universalistic teachings of theosophy and Rosicrucianism.
Secondly, he adopted the Blydenian notion that the establishment of self-
determination for all people might lead to a more harmonious world. This
belief at least raised the question of whether Drew Ali, like Blyden, saw
Islam as a particularistic means to a universalistic end or whether, as indi-
cated above, he viewed Islam as a particularistic eschatology that promised
the ultimate demise of whites. While there is no deﬁnitive answer to this
question, I focus below on the historical development of these ideas in the
context of Garveyism and the growth of nationalism during the 1920s.
Drew Ali seemed to have very different aims than Marcus Garvey, who
used Islam, like Christianity, as a means mainly to promote his brand
of African nationalism. In some ways, Drew Ali’s thought shared much
more in common with the general tenor of white American nationalism
during the decade. Using the same logic that informed certain pieces of
U.S. immigration legislation, Drew Ali attempted to ﬁlter biological
forms of racial identity into containers of cultural and national identity.
But like much of the immigration legislation, these new constructions be-
lied a continuing commitment to more old-fashioned biological notions
of group identity and racial purity. By redeﬁning black identity in these
terms, Drew Ali appropriated Islam as a particularistic tradition support-
ing racialism and separatism.
46 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 54 ---
Despite this, Drew Ali’s ethics encouraged peace, justice, and brother-
hood among all peoples. In the ﬁnal section of the chapter, I show how
these teachings emerged from Drew Ali’s use of various “occult” texts in
his Holy Koran. I also explain how his use of them reﬂected a larger fasci-
nation among African Americans with modern esotericism and I outline
how he synthesized these universalistic traditions into his own particular-
istic tradition.
THE PROPHET’S HAGIOGRAPHY AND THE
MYTHICAL ORIGINS OF MOORISH SCIENCE
There are few reliable sources with which to construct an accurate biogra-
phy of Noble Drew and the origins of the Moorish Science T emple. What
do exist, however, are colorful hagiographies of Noble Drew’s life that at
least illuminate the beliefs of his followers regarding the nature of his
prophetic mission. According to reports catalogued by Wilson, Timothy
Drew was born January 8, 1886, in North Carolina to a Cherokee mother
and “Moorish” father. At age sixteen, Drew Ali joined the merchant ma-
rine, which enabled him to travel to Egypt. Once there, he met the “last
priest of an ancient cult of High Magic who took him to the Pyramid of
Cheops, led him in blindfolded, and abandoned him.” When Drew found
his own way out, the priest offered him initiation in the cult. Henceforth,
he would be called Noble Drew Ali. When Drew Ali returned to America,
he established the “Canaanite T emple” in Newark, New Jersey, around
1913. At this time, Noble Drew also wrote President Woodrow Wilson,
requesting that the Moorish ﬂag, which he believed to be hidden in Inde-
pendence Hall since 1776, be given back to him and his people. Legend
has it that Wilson complied with Noble Drew’s request.
2
Importantly, none of these reports can be conﬁrmed by sources exter-
nal to the movement—a fact that leads one to question nearly every aspect
of these stories, including the date for the founding of the Moorish Sci-
ence T emple. Every scholarly source of which I am aware lists the date of
the founding of the MST as 1913, though none of these sources produces
any evidence for this date except references to other secondary sources or
oral history interviews with movement members themselves.
3 Curiously,
there are also no reports about the activities of the MST during and im-
mediately after World War I. Ofﬁcial Moorish history, which supposedly
began in the 1910s in New Jersey, does not recommence until 1925 in
Chicago, where Noble Drew is said to have moved. This, and not the
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 47


--- PAGE 55 ---
1910s, is the period during which the FBI believed the MST to have been
founded.4 Moreover, a number of external sources, including newspaper
articles and pictures, exist to document this chapter in Noble Drew’s his-
tory. It was also during this period that Noble Drew published the Holy
Koran of the Moorish Science T emple,often called the “Circle Seven Koran,”
because of an encircled number “7” on its cover.
5 Because this sacred text
borrowed so much from other books published in the 1920s, it stands
as the most reliable historical source with which to understand Noble
Drew’s Moorish Science during this period.
In 1928, the Moorish Science T emple was ofﬁcially incorporated.
That year, the Moors in Chicago used Unity Hall, located on 3140 Indi-
ana Avenue, as their headquarters. The movement apparently attracted
enough interest to warrant coverage by the Chicago Defender. But the 
favorable impressions did not last long. In the ﬁrst half of 1929, Noble
Drew’s business manager, Claude D. Greene, was brutally murdered. The
Chicago police responded by arresting forty MST members, including the
Prophet himself. While Noble Drew maintained his innocence, he was ar-
raigned, released on bond, and then killed—either by movement rivals or
the police. He died on July 20, 1929. Despite his death, Moorish Science
continued to spread throughout black America, including the Deep
South. Judging by FBI records, it may not have achieved its greatest nu-
merical success until the late 1930s and early 1940s, when the Bureau
found Moors in obscure places like Mounds City, Illinois (a tiny village lo-
cated near the city of Cairo).
6
THE ROLE OF GARVEYISM
IN THE CREATION OF NOBLE DREW’S ISLAM
Because seminal studies of African-American Islam, including Lincoln’s
and Essien-Udom’s, stressed the nationalistic aspects of the Nation of
Islam (NOI), these works often viewed black nationalist Marcus Garvey as
a key precedent to the formation of Islamic movements among blacks, in-
cluding the Moorish Science T emple and the NOI. Richard Brent T urner’s
more recent study perpetuates this notion, but goes further in claiming
that Garvey’s movement was a conduit for Blyden’s ideas regarding Islam.
7
While some evidence exists for all of these claims, the role of Garveyism in
helping to create African-American Islam has been greatly exaggerated.
This section introduces the Garvey movement, explores the use of theol-
48 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 56 ---
ogy and ritual within it, and develops the hypothesis that Garveyism
played a rather modest role in the creation of Noble Drew Ali’s thought.
Born in 1887, Marcus Garvey grew up in St. Ann’s Bay, Jamaica,
where he imbibed what Robert Hill has called the “social conscious-
ness and drive for self-governance of the Caribbean peasantry and Afro-
American traditions.” After study and work in London during the early
1910s, Garvey left his native country for Harlem in 1916. Once in New
York, Garvey popularized the Universal Negro Improvement Association
(UNIA) through his extraordinary abilities as a propagandist and orga-
nizer. Garvey’s goals, as Beryl Satter summarizes, were “to arouse a uniﬁed
race consciousness in all peoples of African descen t...t o  s t rengthen this
united black race by organizing black-owne d... business enterprises...
and ﬁnally, to create a black-governed nation in Africa that would host the
creation of a renewed black civilization and stand up for the rights of black
people everywhere.” In 1919, he launched the Black Star Steamship Line,
which sought to carry goods and persons between the New World and
Africa. By 1920, according to George Fredrickson, “the organization had
developed all the trappings and auxiliaries of an African empire-in-exile,
with its own uniformed paramilitary units, titles of nobility, and patriotic
rituals.” But three years later, Garvey was charged with and convicted
of mail fraud. He was imprisoned in 1925 and pardoned by President
Coolidge in 1927. By this time, Garvey’s movement was a mere shadow
of its former self, despite the fact that at the time it had represented the
most successful black nationalist organization to date among people of
African descent.
8
Ritual and theology were important aspects of Garveyism, although
they were not central to Garvey’s mission. Garvey espoused beliefs in 
the “God of Ethiopia,” divine retribution against whites, and black 
chosenness. In addition, he oversaw the creation of the African Orthodox
Church under the leadership of Bishop George Alexander McGuire. But
Garvey also rejected the typically romantic view of black messianism, 
instead arguing for what Randall Burkett has dubbed a social Darwinist
perspective. Burkett also points out that Garvey believed that God was “no
respecter of persons. He has nothing to with the affairs of men ....  
Otherwise he would be an unfair God.” If blacks desired salvation, Garvey
argued, they should be self-reliant and amass earthly power.
9 When
Garvey did appropriate Ethiopianist themes, it was often to legitimate and
justify his program of social, political, and economic uplift. He repeatedly
referred to “Ethiopia” and “Ethiopians,” words laden with theological
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 49


--- PAGE 57 ---
meaning, in discussions of strictly secular matters. 10 Echoing Garvey’s 
sentiments, McGuire, the general chaplain of the UNIA, interpreted
Psalm 68:31, the foundational verse of black messianism, as a call for prac-
tical national development rather than the promise of direct divine in-
tervention into human affairs, as it was usually seen. He included this 
interpretation in the Universal Negro Catechism written for movement
members:
Q. What prediction made in the 68th Psalm and the 31st verse is
now being fulﬁlled?
A. “Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch
out her hands unto God.”
Q. What does this verse prove?
A. That Negroes will set up their own government in Africa, with
rulers of their own race.
11
Like Blyden, McGuire linked black messianist prophecy to African na-
tionalism and black self-determination.
Likewise, Garvey and other UNIA members used Islamic references
to support their nationalist agenda. The Negro World,for example, praised
pan-Islamic efforts to overthrow European power. Arnold Ford, the musi-
cal director of the UNIA, used allusions to “Allah” in some of his original
songs. Garvey even compared himself to the Prophet Muhammad, though
he was careful to contrast his own “political” aspirations with what he (in-
accurately) characterized as the exclusively “religious” accomplishments of
the Prophet.
12 But despite this use of these Islamic allusions, Garvey never
developed any kind of Islamic approach to the black nationalist struggle.
Moreover, it seems safe to assume that this was a choice, either conscious
or unconscious, on Garvey’s part, since he had had extensive exposure to
Islam through his reading of Blyden. While in London in 1913, for exam-
ple, he had studied Blyden’s works in the reading room of the British 
Museum. Then, in a 1914 pamphlet, Garvey explicitly cited Blyden as 
an example of black achievement and reproduced a large excerpt from
Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race. In fact, Blyden was such an inﬂu-
ential symbol of black success that McGuire included him in the move-
ment’s catechism:
Q. Who was Edward Wilmot Blyden?
A. The most learned Negro of modern times; born in the Danish
West Indies in 1831 but was identiﬁed with Africa for ﬁfty years;
50 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 58 ---
he was a distinguished statesman, philosopher, linguis[t] and
Arabic scholar; the author of several works on Negro history and
sociology.
But as the catechism and Garvey’s writings showed, Blyden was appropri-
ated in the context of the UNIA as a secular ﬁgure. Furthermore, Blyden’s
advocacy of Islam never became a core component of Garvey’s program or
thought.
13
Despite Garvey’s intentions, however, Garveyism became a more tra-
ditional form of black messianism for many UNIA members and ad-
mirers. Robert Hill speculates that the UNIA rank and ﬁle experienced
“Garvey’s teachings on two distinct levels, the one mundane, the other
mystical.” These followers rejected Garvey’s social Darwinist perspective,
usually reafﬁrming the nineteenth-century romantic ideals of black mes-
sianism. Moreover, while still embracing the more political aspects of 
Garveyism, some viewed Garvey himself as a prophetic ﬁgure. For in-
stance, in a 1924 book entitled The Holy Piby, Robert Athlyi Rogers de-
picted Garvey as a leading player in the “redemption of Ethiopia and her
suffering posterities.” Ignore Garvey’s personal sins, Rogers said; God had
sent Garvey “to prepare the minds of Ethiopia’s generations.” Similarly,
the movement’s incorporation of Arabic words and Islamic ﬁgures into its
lexicon increased consciousness of and ideological support for the practice
of Islam. For example, journalist John Bruce, a prominent columnist in
the Negro World, openly espoused Blyden’s arguments regarding Islam’s
lack of racial prejudice in front of a Boston meeting of the UNIA during
1923. Perhaps such ideas reached the ears of Drew Ali. But whether or not
this was true, the inﬂuence could hardly be seen by the middle 1920s.
Drew Ali’s appropriation of Islam within Moorish Science was completely
different from Blyden’s descriptions of Islam—that is, from the one to
which some UNIA members had been introduced.
14
In fact, Noble Drew’s most direct connection with Garveyism seemed
to come through his appropriation of Garvey as the harbinger of his 
own message of salvation. “In the modern days there came a forerunner,”
Drew Ali wrote in chapter 48 of the Holy Koran, “who was divinely pre-
pared by the great God-Allah and his name is Marcus Garvey, who did
teach and warn the nations of the earth to prepare to meet the coming
Prophet [i.e., Noble Drew Ali].”
15 Garvey was no black Moses, the
Prophet implied; he was John the Baptist, preparing the people for the
coming of a new Christ. Noble Drew indicated that he had a different
message from Garvey and that Garvey had only been the warm-up act.
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 51


--- PAGE 59 ---
DREW ALI’S MOORISH SCIENCE
IN THE CONTEXT OF 1920s RACIAL DISCOURSE
Drew Ali’s new dispensation included a rather unique approach to black
nationalism that can best be viewed in the more general context of the
1920s, when racism and xenophobia played a powerful role in the dis-
course of American national identity. The legislative history of the period,
for example, revealed a desire among many to redeﬁne the descent-based
aspects of American identity in terms of nation and culture. In 1924,
Congress passed the National Origins Act, which severely limited immi-
gration from all “non-Nordic” countries. Based on a quota system, the Act
required that 85 percent of all new immigrants come from northern and
western Europe. One Kansas congressman who voted in support of the act
explained its necessity by outlining the potential threats of further immi-
gration from the non-Nordic countries; the difference, he said, was be-
tween “beer, bolshevism . . . and perhaps many ﬂags” and “constitutional
government; one ﬂag, stars and stripes.” The American way of life, the
argument went, was under siege, and America, as one grand dragon from
the KKK put it, must be made safe for Americans. For the Kansas con-
gressman, being an American meant allegiance to the Constitution in 
addition to the eschewing of certain political ideologies and drinking
habits—in short, it meant being a part of a particular culture.
16
But lurking behind much of this “cultural” nationalism was the tradi-
tional specter of racialism, or at the least, a xenophobia that assumed
racialist forms. For example, Senator Albert Johnson of Washington, the
National Origins Act’s chief supporter, viewed “homogeneity” as a neces-
sary component in the preservation of American institutions. President
Coolidge, who signed the bill into law, shared Johnson’s view. When he
was Vice President, President Coolidge had published an article entitled
“Whose Country Is This?” in which he supported notions of Nordic
supremacy and argued that intermarriage produced weak children. The
National Origins Act itself was equally racist. Through a convoluted set 
of provisions, the effect of the act was to ban almost all Asians from immi-
grating. Ironically, racism also ﬁgured into efforts to create the Indian Cit-
izenship Act, which Congress passed that same year. The act declared that
all Native Americans were henceforth citizens of the United States, at ﬁrst
glance a seemingly tolerant gesture toward the inclusion of nonwhite per-
sons into the American family. When viewing the act in light of the immi-
gration bill, however, a logic of racial exclusion can be seen to have in-
spired both bills. “They were both designed to keep people from becoming
52 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 60 ---
citizens,” argues Walter Benn Michaels. While the immigration bill sought
to prevent aliens from immigrating, the Citizenship Act “guaranteed that
Indians would not become citizens by declaring that they were already cit-
izens.” The effect of both bills, in other words, was to change the meaning
of being an American from “a status that could be achieved through one’s
own actions (immigrating, becoming ‘civilized,’ getting ‘naturalized,’) to a
status that could better be understood as inherited.” The largely symbolic
Indian Citizenship Act said, in effect, that being an American is not some-
thing you do, it is something that you are.
17
In sum, the repackaging of nineteenth-century racialism in nationalist
and “culturalist” terms ﬁgured prominently throughout the legislative his-
tory of the 1920s. Interestingly, Drew Ali constructed Moorish Science in
similar ways. Whereas Marcus Garvey had reafﬁrmed the Blydenian idea
that a “nation” was the only natural container for a biologically based
racial group, Noble Drew denied the existence of biological blackness on
both essentialist and historical grounds. For example, Drew Ali refused to
call himself Negro, black, or colored. “According to all true and divine
records of the human race,” he said, “there is no negro, black, or colored
race attached to the human family, because all the inhabitants of Africa
were and are of the human race” (47:9). In case his readers did not under-
stand his point, he reiterated it in the very next chapter, stating bluntly
that “you are not negroes.” But Drew Ali’s comments that all blacks were
simply human beings did not mean that he wanted to rid the world of di-
versity and difference. He believed rather that all humans should separate
themselves according to their respective national groups. For Drew Ali, 
a “nation” signiﬁed a common history, creed, and value system—in short,
a whole culture.
18 In this, his ideas were exactly parallel to those invoked
during the discussion of the National Origins Act.
But Drew Ali, no matter how hard he tried to reconﬁgure biological
ideas of race into new cultural and nationalist forms, continued to use
racial, rather than national identity as the primary determinant of what it
meant to be black. Drew Ali’s discussion of miscegenation, for example,
provides a revealing peek behind the veil of nationalism in his thought.
Like Garvey, Drew Ali denounced interracial relationships, arguing im-
plicitly that racial purity was necessary to black redemption: “We, as a
clean and pure nation [read: race] descended from the inhabitants of
Africa, do not desire to amalgamate or marry into the families of the pale
skin nations of Europe” (48:6). Moreover, as the Holy Koran made clear,
Drew Ali nowhere articulated a desire for the trappings of a modern 
nation-state. The Holy Koran did not possess a constitution and its body 
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 53


--- PAGE 61 ---
of laws referred mostly to moral rather than political matters. In other
words, Drew Ali was not really an advocate of any form of black national-
ism, as were both Blyden and Garvey. Instead, he tried to conceal familiar 
nineteenth-century forms of black particularism, including a biological
deﬁnition of blackness, behind popular conceptions of nation and culture.
His attempts to redeﬁne black particularism in terms that avoided an
explicitly black nomenclature also camouﬂaged an intense desire to escape
the derogatory attitudes associated with blackness in the United States. 
In place of this speciﬁcally “racial” understanding of black identity, Drew
Ali offered a complex genealogy that viewed Moors in light of a glorious,
but fallen past of historical achievements. According to the Prophet, the
“Moslems of northwest and southwest Africa are actually the Moabites,
Hamathites, and Canaanites, all of whom were driven out of Canaan by
Joshua. Having received permission from the Pharaohs to settle in Africa,
these Muslims formed the modern-day kingdoms of Morocco, Algiers,
T unis, T ripoli, etc.” Other Asiatic peoples, including the Egyptians, the
Arabians, the Japanese and Chinese, the “Hindoos,” the T urks, the South
Americans, and even the “Mexicans in North America,” settled the rest of
the non-European world (45:1–7; 47:1–8). Synthesizing and rewriting
various parts of ancient history, Noble Drew explained that African Amer-
icans were the Moorish descendants of an ancient Asiatic race; their creed
was Islam.
19
For Drew Ali, it was not enough that blacks should be true to their
nation; they should also be true to their particular creed. Speciﬁcally, he
said, Moors should not “serve the gods of their [whites’] religion, because
our forefathers are the true and divine founders of the ﬁrst religious creed,
for the redemption and salvation of mankind on earth” (48:6). Drew Ali,
in other words, believed that being a good Moor meant keeping both
foreign blood and foreign creeds out of the “nation.” In constructing his
particularistic Islamic tradition along lines of blood and geographic ori-
gins, Drew Ali also reinterpreted the meaning of Christ, arguing that Jesus
was the Moors’ genealogical ancestor. “Jesus himself was of the true blood
of the ancient Cannanites and Moabites and the inhabitants of Africa”
(46:2). He had come to redeem “His people . . . from the pale skin nations
of Europe” but “Rome cruciﬁed Him” (46:2–3). Drew Ali saw Jesus as a
pan-Asiatic prophet whose teachings had been betrayed by the Church.
Christianity, founded by the Romans, had little to do with the message 
of Jesus, Drew Ali said. “The holy teaching of Jesus,” he wrote, “was to 
the common people, to redeem them from under the great pressure of 
the hands of the unjust. That the rulers and the rich would not oppress 
54 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 62 ---
the poor” (46:5). But Rome, according to Drew Ali, had essentially re-
jected these principles, which explained in part why white Christians had
not acted in a Christian-like manner towards nonwhites.
20
The “pale skins,” however, were not the only ones to blame for the
degradation of the Moors, according to Noble Drew. In fact, the Prophet
blamed the enslavement of blacks on moral and national decline among
the Moors themselves. Because “they honored not the principles of their
mother and father, and strayed after the gods of Europe,” they had been
stripped of their nationality and had been called “negro, black, and col-
ored” (47:16–17). By not being true to their heritage and its obligations,
said Drew Ali, blacks had suffered the worst of fates: they did not know
who they were and instead accepted the labels of their oppressors.
“Through sin and disobedience,” Noble Drew wrote, “every nation suf-
fered slavery, due to the fact that they honored not the creed and princi-
ples of their forefathers” (47:17). Redemption, he taught, would come not
from the acts of a single black messiah but through the collective actions
of a whole nation—uplifting “fallen humanity,” he insisted, must include
linking oneself with the “families of nations” (48:11). Asiatics still held the
“key to civilization,” he continued, if they would only embrace their God-
Allah and seek national renewal. What this really meant for Drew Ali was
not that blacks should return to Africa and establish nation-states, but that
they should separate along racial lines from their oppressors. “Every nation
shall and must worship under their own vine and ﬁg tree, and return to
their own and be one with their Father God-Allah” (48:3). Drew Ali also
argued that only by returning to “their own kind” could humans hope to
live in harmony: “All nations of the earth in these modern days are seeking
peace, but there is but one true and divine way that peace may be obtained
in these days and it is through Love, T ruth, Peace, Freedom and Justice
being taught universally to all nations, in all lands” (46:9). Peace among
human beings would be possible, said Noble Drew, but only if every
group would “learn of your forefathers’ ancient and divine Creed. That
you will learn to love instead of hate” (48:10). Drew Ali seemed to assert
that while there may be universal values linking all human beings, one
could learn them only by adhering to the original creed of one’s national
group. Like Blyden, Drew Ali believed that the separation of races might
yet lead to harmony among all humans.
21
At the same time, however, Drew Ali seemed to support notions 
of Asiatic superiority and chosenness. The Asiatics were of a “Divine ori-
gin,” he said, failing to mention what he thought about the origins of
whites. He also asserted that the Church and Christianity might provide
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 55


--- PAGE 63 ---
the Europeans with earthly salvation, but that Islam would grace Asiatics
with earthly and divine salvation (48:7–8). These verses contradicted the
universal spirit of his comments above and seemed to situate Islam as a
form of particularism that dashed any hope for the divine salvation of
whites. But how strongly Drew Ali believed in this idea is never made clear
in the Holy Koran, which does not devote much space to the issue. In fact,
very little of the text’s contents were the original ideas of Drew Ali, as the
next section explains.
22
MODERN ESOTERICISM 
IN DREW ALI’S MOORISH SCIENCE
In creating his particularistic Moorish Science, Noble Drew plagiarized
from a number of texts published by “esotericist” groups during the
1920s. Esotericism, as deﬁned by Wouter Hanegraaff, is an umbrella word
used to describe premodern traditions like cabalism, alchemy, hermeti-
cism, neoplatonism, astrology, and magic. Each of these premodern tradi-
tions, which had ancient roots but were developed signiﬁcantly during the
Renaissance, “formed a counter-force against a mechanistic worldview and
against science based on wholly secular principles.” Refusing to view the
heavens as separate from Earth, esotericism sought an “organic worldview
and a science based on religious assumptions.” Ultimately, “esoteric” tradi-
tions fostered the hope that human beings could broach the spiritual
realm through some gnosis and/or practice, and in so doing, affect their
state of being for the better. In the modern era, argues Antoine Faivre,
esotericism has come to include four essential characteristics: (1) the belief
that there are symbolic and/or real correspondences between all parts of
the visible or invisible universe; (2) the idea that nature is alive; (3) the
notion that meditation and imagination are necessary to connect to this
enchanted universe; and (4) the possibility of the real and symbolic trans-
mutation of one thing into another. Furthermore, many of the esoteric
traditions have been made to conform to secular assumptions—that is,
they have been remade upon foundations of modern science while try-
ing to preserve the experience of the sacred. It is these traditions that
scholars have often called the “occult.” In the modern religious history 
of the United States and Europe, according to Hanegraaff, esotericism 
has been manifested in a number of traditions, including Rosicrucian-
ism, Mesmerism, Spiritualism, New Thought, Theosophy, New Age, and
nineteenth-century Mormonism.
23
56 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 64 ---
During the 1920s, these traditions were also prominent in African-
American popular culture. Black women, in particular, were often associ-
ated with special “occult” powers. Princess Mysteria, for example, was 
an “East Indian mentalist” who wrote a weekly column for the Chicago
Defender, one of black America’s most prominent newspapers. Draped in
Asian robes, a headband, and loads of beaded necklaces, the princess could
also be found on stage and on WJKS, a Gary, Indiana, radio station where
she demonstrated her abilities as a “human radio.” Occult powers were
also marketed as consumer culture. In one advertisement, Madame An-
nette, graduate astrologer, offered to “interpret your star of destiny” for
twenty-ﬁve cents. Annette, who also appeared on radio, could be reached
at her Madison Avenue address in New York, where she promised to
“amaze” the “unhappy, discouraged, lonely, [and] unsuccessful in love
or business” with her astrological readings. Like the Princess Mysteria, An-
nette wore “orientalist” garb, including a khitab, or face veil. Both women
also incorporated “Oriental” signs and symbols into their teachings.
24
Drew Ali seemed to participate in this popular culture, as well. For
example, a 1927 ﬂyer presented Noble Drew as a kind of magician.
“Don’t miss the Great Moorish Drama!” the ﬂyer exclaimed. The poster
promised theatrical excitement, national renewal, healings (no charge),
and a magic act: “The Prophet Noble Drew Ali will be bound with
several yards of rope, as Jesus was bound in the the [ sic] temple at
Jerusalem.”
25 In using magic, the MST was just one of the many groups
to appropriate this kind of esotericism. For example, according to Hans
Baer, spiritualist churches also emphasized “the manipulation of one’s
present condition through magico-religious rituals and esoteric knowl-
edge. In contrast to the common but probably exaggerated view that
black religion is ‘other-worldly,’ spiritual people are concerned primarily
with discovering solutions to their difﬁculties in the here and now.”
One of the most remarkable spiritual churches was Father George Hur-
ley’s Universal Hagar’s Spiritual Church, which was founded in Detroit
in 1923. George Willie Hurley (b. 1884), a native of Reynolds, Georgia,
had originally trained for the Baptist ministry during his time at
T uskegee. But after migrating north to Detroit, he had converted to the
Holiness Church in 1919. After this, the ferment of the spiritualism
among African Americans quickly attracted Hurley’s attention. In 1922,
blacks formed their own parent organization, the National Colored
Spiritualist Association. Hurley then split from the Spiritualists to
launch his own movement. The Universal Hagar’s Spiritual Church was
a highly syncretistic group in which themes of black redemption and
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 57


--- PAGE 65 ---
Hurley’s own messianic aspirations were mixed with séances and other
forms of communication with spirits. Hurley also utilized astrological
timetables, and in 1924, launched the School of Mediumship and
Psychology. He thus combined modern science and psychology with
spirit mediums, séances, and astrology into one syncretistic esoteric
tradition.
26
While there seem to be no direct links between Hurley and Noble
Drew Ali, both shared a belief in the esoteric sciences, and even more im-
portantly, a fascination with Levi Dowling’s theosophical text, The Aquar-
ian Gospel of Jesus the Christ. Hurley frequently treated the text as sacred
scripture, using it in his religious services. Noble Drew, on the other hand,
attempted to claim it as his own. Chapters 1 through 19 of the Holy
Koran, nearly half of the sixty-four-page text, are copied in exact form
from the Aquarian Gospel, which was written in 1908. Dowling, who early
on followed in his father’s footsteps as a Christian minister, later became
interested in comparative religion and theosophy. His version of the
Gospels, like other modern theosophical texts, incorporated beliefs in the
universality of all religions, the mystical nature of the East, and the possi-
bility of spiritual mastery of the “higher worlds.” These themes, in addi-
tion to some information from the apocryphal Gospel of James, are ap-
parent throughout Dowling’s text. Dowling also borrowed from La Vie
Inconnue de Jesus Christ (1894) by Nicolas Notovich, who may have also
inﬂuenced Ahmadiya founder Ghulam Ahmad, author of Jesus in India
(1899).
27
Dowling himself explained the Aquarian Gospel as the product of 
his ability to “read” or sense the “Akashic Records,” which existed in the
highest realm of consciousness called the “Supreme Intelligence” or the
“Universal Wisdom.” According to Dowling, the Akashic Records were
not physical things, but a spiritual substance that reverberated throughout
the universe. “When the mind of man,” he wrote, “is in exact accord with
the Universal Mind, man enters into a conscious recognition of these
Akashic impressions, and may collect them and translate them into any
language of the earth.” Using this process, Dowling claimed to have re-
produced the gospel. His Aquarian Gospel posited that time was broken
into dispensations determined by the rotation of the solar system around
the center of the universe. Each age, he taught, was 2,100 years long. As
the world entered the twentieth century, a transition from the Piscean
Age, or the Christian dispensation, to the Aquarian Age had begun. Dowl-
ing, reﬂecting theosophical inﬂuences, implicitly criticized the Christian
58 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 66 ---
age and the dominance of the Church, claiming that the New Age, unlike
the old, would be one of spirituality. Like other esotericists, Dowling 
believed in the possibility of mastering higher spiritual powers. In each
human, he taught, there was a higher self, which was “human spirit
clothed in soul,” and a lower self, which was carnal and illusory. The soul,
he said, was a divine thought planted in the human body, where it must
undergo trials and tribulations before it could become pure soul again.
These premises, the most fundamental in Dowling’s creed, are highlighted
in the ﬁrst three chapters of the Holy Koran.
28
Noble Drew’s text also included Dowling’s Christology. Christ, he
taught, was no particular person, but a force, or logos, that might manifest
itself in any human if that human were so anointed. Like many
theosophists, Dowling posited that belief in Christ’s divinity must be un-
derstood symbolically rather than literally, lest humans mistake heaven as
a reward for moral behavior. In Dowling’s text, Jesus teaches that heaven
is present to and abiding in the “conscious” soul. Drew Ali excerpted this
lesson in chapters 11 and 12 of the Holy Koran. In addition, Dowling 
believed that Christ was a universal religious ﬁgure who had traveled
throughout the entire ancient lettered world to spread his good news.
During these travels, Dowling depicted Christ meeting with a represen-
tative of every world religion. Of these, Drew Ali selected Jesus’ meetings
with a Buddhist priest, some Brahmins in India, and a Jewish scholar for
inclusion in the Holy Koran.
29 Finally, Drew Ali chose the stories of 
Elizabeth, John the Baptist, Jesus’ Egyptian journeys, the Cruciﬁxion, the
Resurrection, and Jesus’ “full materialization” (i.e. “transmutation of ﬂesh
into spirit-ﬂesh”) in different sites throughout the world to proclaim his
resurrection.
30 In total, Drew Ali selected 19 of the 182 chapters and part
of the introduction to Dowling’s text for inclusion in his Holy Koran.
Chapters 20 through 44 of the Holy Koran, on the other hand, were
copied from either Unto Thee I Grant or The Inﬁnite Wisdom, which were
completely identical texts. First published in Chicago in 1923 by the 
de Laurence Company, this work purported to be a translation of an 
ancient manuscript “found in the Grand T emple of Thibet” by a “Dr.
Cao-Tsou, Prime Minister of China.” The book’s introductory sections 
included a letter supposedly written by the Chinese Emperor to the 
Tibetan Grand Lama asking for permission on behalf of the Prime Minis-
ter to read and examine ancient Tibetan writings. Also included in these
sections was a letter dated May 12, 1749, addressed to an anonymous
English Earl from the English translator of Cao-Tsou’s Chinese translation
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 59


--- PAGE 67 ---
of the original manuscript. This letter, which explained that the style 
of translation was intentionally biblical, also contained descriptions of
Lhassa, the Potala, the Grand Lama, an account of Cao-Tsou’s journey,
and the text’s Brahmin, Confuscist, and Taoist origins.
31
In 1925, the Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis (AMORC),
the largest Rosicrucian group in the United States, published an almost
exact replica of the text. These Rosicrucians were another modern esoteric
group that traced their roots to early modern history, speciﬁcally to the
Reformation and Counter Reformation. Founded by the mythical Christ-
ian Rosencreutz, the Order of the Rose-Cross was as much an intellectual
current as a real secret society. Like other esotericists, Rosicrucians be-
lieved that the heavenly realm of reality could be broached through the use
of esoteric sciences. John Dee, one of the better-known Rosicrucian
philosophers, developed a “bold . . . supercelestial mathematical magic . . .
[an] angel-conjuring magic,” as Frances Yates put it. But their larger social
goals by the 1900s were to use this knowledge in the reform of ethical be-
havior and education. In publishing The Inﬁnite Wisdom, the Order said
that its ﬁrst goal was to encourage “health, happiness, and peace in the
earthly lives of men.” Their second goal was “to enable men and women to
live clean, normal, natural lives.” In fact, the crux of the text espoused
rather Victorian moral ideals that could have been mistaken for the basic
uplift values of the Black Church.
32
Noble Drew Ali selected a large portion of these for inclusion in the
Holy Koran, including a number of passages regarding the duties of men,
women, and children toward each other. Women were to be submissive,
industrious, nurturing, and modest. Men were to select mates prudently
and treat their wives with kindness. Children were to honor their parents.
Masters were to be good to their servants, and servants were to be “pa-
tient” under the reproof of their master. All people, the text instructed,
should be good citizens by avoiding envy, vanity, deception, oppression,
inconstancy, weakness, and ignorance. Those who practiced the “inﬁnite
wisdom” would be thankful, sincere, truthful, consistent, and faithful.
The pinnacle of wisdom, however, would be to accept life as it was, nei-
ther inherently good nor bad, but only what one makes of it. Only with
work, the text urged, could humans avoid the miseries of life and lift
themselves into a realm of pleasure and joy known only to the Universal
Soul.
33
All of these esoteric texts offered the idea that human beings, through
effort, might liberate themselves from their various forms of slavery, es-
pecially to a negative state of mind itself. Salvation was deﬁned not as 
60 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 68 ---
the other-worldly resting place of good souls, but as a this-worldly state 
of being. Drew Ali seemed to be saying, though not explicitly, that blacks
could achieve true liberation in the here and now rather than in the after-
life. The path towards this liberation, as articulated in Drew Ali’s text, can
be summarized in the following way: blacks must separate from whites, re-
claim their original group identity, understand their own divine origins,
meditate upon the true spiritual nature of all being, and follow a strict
moral code.
DREW ALI’S AMBIGUOUS PARTICULARISM
Noble Drew’s incorporation of modern esoteric texts into his Holy Koran
represented an important moment in the history of African-American Is-
lamic thought, especially since Drew Ali was the ﬁrst to popularize certain
Islamic symbols in African-American culture. It is ironic that the Prophet
drew from works like Unto Thee I Grant and the Aquarian Gospel to
concoct his Moorish Science, since these texts so clearly aimed to create a
modern nonsectarian and universalistic tradition. While invoking “Orien-
tal” wisdom or the Spiritual Orient itself, modern esotericism usually did
so to show the universality, rather than the particularity of its beliefs.
Drew Ali did precisely the opposite, claiming the traditions of the Orient
as his people’s rightful heritage and thus launching this version of Islam as
a black separatist tradition.
At the same time, however, like Blyden, Drew Ali viewed national and
“religious” pluralism as necessary to world harmony. If all peoples would
gather under “their own vine and tree” and be true to their respective eth-
ical and theological traditions, he asserted, world peace and justice might
become a reality. Moreover, while Drew Ali claimed a unique national her-
itage for blacks through his use of a Moorish legend, he also argued that
blacks were part of a shared Asiatic Islamic culture. But he never articu-
lated exactly how he conceived of the relationship between “Moors” and
their fellow Muslim Asiatics; the idea of pan-Islamic unity could be in-
ferred from his thought, but he did not mention it explicitly.
Overall, he seemed little concerned by such thoughts. More impor-
tant to Drew Ali was the development of a tradition that would facilitate
moral renewal and self-determination among black Americans. In con-
structing such a tradition, Drew Ali deﬁned black identity—or in his
words, Moorish identity—in terms of biological descent, national origin,
and creed. Going even further, he claimed divine origins and salvation for
Noble Drew Ali (1886–1929) 61


--- PAGE 69 ---
the Moors, while casting doubts on the beginning and end of whites.
Drew Ali’s famous heir, Elijah Muhammad, would later take that idea and
place it at the center of his understanding of Islam. In fact, Elijah Muham-
mad would adopt Drew Ali’s entire particularistic formula for understand-
ing Islam and turn it into the most well-known tradition in the history
of African-American Islam. But unlike Muhammad, Drew Ali seemed to
express a large degree of ambiguity with regard not to the particularistic
identity of Islam, but to its goals. For Drew Ali, like Blyden, seemed to de-
sire a world in which all nations and peoples would be separate, but equal
and free. With the creation of Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam, how-
ever, even that dream would be abandoned.
62 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 70 ---
Chapter 4
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975)
and the Absolutism of
Black Particularistic Islam
INTRODUCTION
Like Blyden and Drew Ali, Nation of Islam (NOI) leader Elijah Muham-
mad viewed Islam as a religious alternative to Christianity that fostered
a positive sense of black pride and advanced the ﬁght for black liberation.
Muhammad, who led the NOI from the 1930s until his death in 1975,
also saw Islam as the “natural” religion of blacks. In fact, as I argue below,
he did not distinguish between being black and being Muslim: for
Muhammad, these identities were identical. Muhammad’s particularistic
vision, however, was far darker than that of Blyden or Drew Ali. Unlike his
predecessors, he did not share the hope for a rapprochement between
blacks and whites. Instead, Elijah Muhammad embraced an absolutist
particularism, espousing a ﬁre-and-brimstone approach to race relations.
Whites were the devil, Muhammad taught, and both they and their civi-
lization would perish in the coming Apocalypse. Muhammad based
these millennialist beliefs on the teachings of W . D. Fard, who appeared
to him in early 1930s Detroit. Fard, Muhammad believed, was God in the
ﬂesh; Muhammad understood himself to be His Messenger. He believed
that Fard had chosen him to “mentally resurrect” the “black man” through
the propagation of Islam. Muhammad’s mission of Islamic renewal,
however, encompassed more than the mere reconversion of African Amer-
icans to their “original” faith. Being a Muslim, Muhammad taught, also
meant exhibiting a high moral character, industriousness, and indepen-
dence. Hence, Muhammad advocated a strict code of ethical behavior, an
63


--- PAGE 71 ---
economic program of self-help, and the rejection of white American na-
tional identity.
Unlike Drew Ali, Muhammad was familiar with many Old World 
Islamic traditions and texts, and synthesized them with his own prophetic
vision. But as the Nation of Islam gained more national prominence 
during the 1950s, his synthetic vision came under ﬁre from a number of
Muslims outside of the movement. When these attacks on Muhammad’s
Islamic authenticity became more frequent in the late 1950s and 1960s,
he faced an important choice between abandoning parts of his particular-
istic vision or risking his Islamic legitimacy among non-movement Mus-
lims. He chose the latter, entrenching himself even more deeply in his own
prophetic authority.
This chapter begins with the emergence of Muhammad’s thought by
placing him within the general context of African-American Christianity
and more speciﬁcally within the history of millennial dispensationalism
so central to the black Protestantism of his youth. After outlining the ex-
periences that led to Muhammad’s conversion to W . D. Fard’s Nation of
Islam during the Great Depression, I depict the immigrant Muslim milieu
in which Muhammad may have gained much of his knowledge about
Islam. The following section then shows how Muhammad combined
these Islamic inﬂuences in the postwar era with the dispensationalism of
his youth, a fascination with UFOs, and other elements to form a unique
body of African-American Islamic thought. Finally, I discuss Muham-
mad’s decision in the 1960s to dismiss the criticism of non-movement
Muslims, and in effect, to rid his own version of Islam of any universalism
whatsoever.
THE BLACK CHRISTIANITY OF ELIJAH’S YOUTH
AND THE DISPENSATIONALIST IDEA
Born in 1897 in Sandersville, Georgia, Elijah actually grew up in Cordele,
a town whose race relations were governed by the system of Jim Crow seg-
regation that arose in the post-Reconstruction South. Elijah had come
into the world just one year after the Supreme Court ruled in the famous
Plessy v. Ferguson case that segregation in public accommodation could
be “separate, but equal.” Plessy codiﬁed what had already been happening
in the South since the presidential election of 1876, after which blacks
were systematically denied the right to the ballot, to equal opportunity,
and to due process. Lynchings were not uncommon. In the midst of this
64 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 72 ---
depressing scene, African Americans still struggled to support themselves
and to ﬁnd meaning and dignity in their lives. The Black Church, domi-
nated by the Baptists and Methodists, played the most vital role in the sur-
vival process. Young Elijah knew the Church’s importance ﬁrsthand, since
his father, William, was a Baptist preacher. According to Muhammad, his
father’s sermons, like others of the period, were often apocalyptic in na-
ture, although his son constantly questioned his religious beliefs, includ-
ing his scriptural interpretations.
1
Given Elijah’s later teachings, it seems likely that the brand of apoca-
lypticism to which he was exposed as a youth was Christian dispensation-
alism, then en vogue among many black preachers. Deeply rooted in
Christian history, dispensationalism was the belief that God had dealt
with human beings in epochs or dispensations. For many Christians,
the dispensation of ultimate concern was the Day of Judgment and the
Second Coming of Christ, a subject whose timing was vigorously debated.
“Premillennialists” posited that a great battle between God and Satan
would occur before Christ’s triumphal reign of a thousand years. “Post-
millennialists,” on the other hand, countered that Armageddon would
occur after Christ’s triumphal return. Further, postmillennialists tended to
believe that human effort might encourage the coming of the millennium,
whereas premillennialists generally posited that only God could initiate
the superhuman events of the eschaton. One of the most prominent advo-
cates of premillennial dispensationalism was John Darby (1800–1882),
a former ofﬁcial of the Church of Ireland, who visited the United States
during six tours conducted between 1859 and 1877. Dozens of inﬂuential
pastors, including Dwight L. Moody and St. Louis’ James Brookes in
addition to institutions like Chicago’s Moody Bible Institute, the Bible 
Institute of Los Angeles, and William Bell Riley’s Northwestern Bible and
Missionary T raining School in Minneapolis shared and disseminated
Darby’s views.
2
Several key black ministers also espoused his brand of dispensation-
alism. These preachers often combined black messianist themes of black
chosenness and the redemption of Africa with the darker vision offered 
by premillennial dispensationalism. James Theodore Holly (1829–1911),
the ﬁrst African-American Episcopalian bishop and a staunch emigra-
tionist, emerged as one of dispensationalism’s most articulate advocates.
History, Holly wrote in the African Methodist Episcopal Church Review
in 1884, was divided into three dispensations: the Mosaic, in which the
Semitic race received God’s revelation; the Gospel, in which the Japhetic
race, that is, whites, spread the word; and the millennial, during which the
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 65


--- PAGE 73 ---
sons of Ham, that is, blacks, by virtue of their Christ-like suffering for
four thousand years, would ﬁnally realize the Gospel’s promise. Observe
the Cruciﬁxion, Holly argued: Semites (Jews) had denied Christ; the
Japhetic race, in the person of the Romans, had cruciﬁed Him; only
blacks, represented by Simon the Cyrene who had carried the cross, were
morally capable of replacing Japhetic (white) control of ecclesiastical and
social institutions. How ironic, Holly thought, that “warlike and preda-
tory nations” were “at the same time very busily engaged in publishing 
and circulating the Bible.” They would be punished, he said, for their
hypocrisy. “The apostolic phase of the Christian dispensation,” Holly
cried, “is to terminate in a deluge of blood, shed by those warlike nations
in fratricidal combat, at Armageddon in the great battle of God Almighty
when He shall declare war and assemble the bloodthirsty nations for
slaughter.”
3
Theophilus Gould Steward (1843–1924), another premillennialist,
shared Holly’s vision of eschatology. An AME pastor, Steward served as
chaplain to the U.S. Colored Infantry in the Philippines in addition to
teaching at Wilberforce University. Like Holly, Steward prophesied that
the end of the world would be coterminous with the halt of Anglo-Saxon
supremacy. As outlined in his 1888 work The End of the World; or, Clear-
ing the Way for the Fullness of the Gentiles, Steward believed that anarchy
would result from challenges posed to modern industrial capitalism in Eu-
rope. He argued that law and order would be threatened there, encourag-
ing waves of immigration to the United States. America, he said, would
become a searing cauldron, whose only hope would be to embrace the
black prophets of a bigotry-free Christianity. According to Steward, signs
of the Apocalypse would include the Jews’ return to Israel and the rise
of world leaders from Asia and Africa. Invoking the violent prophecy of
the four beasts in Daniel 7, Steward further predicted that militaristic and
clannish whites would receive God’s divine judgment as the “Church of
Abyssinia” led “Africa’s millions” into an age of peace.
4
But the dispensationalism of Steward and Holly was only one form
of black liberation theology then circulating in the Black Church. AME
Bishop Henry McNeal T urner, for example, had been a hopeful believer
in the promise of postwar Reconstruction to create social justice for per-
sons of African descent. With its failure, however, he became a downright
pessimist and an advocate of emigration. T urner also became famous for
popularizing the idea that the Almighty was black. At an 1895 Baptist
convention, T urner said that African Americans had “as much right bibli-
cally and otherwise to believe that God is a Negro, as you buckra or
66 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 74 ---
white people have to believe that God is a ﬁne-looking, symmetrical, and
ornamented white man. For the bulk of you and all the fool Negroes of
the country believe that God is white-skinned, blue-eyed, straight-haired,
projecting nosed, compressed lipped and ﬁnely robed white gentleman,
sitting upon a throne somewhere in the heavens.” As T urner made clear
later, his point was ironical. He merely hoped to illustrate how racism 
had warped the American view of God among both blacks and whites. 
But others actually took T urner’s statement literally and images of the
black Jesus were not uncommon in several black churches.
5 Later, Elijah
Muhammad would structure his interpretation of Islam around the idea
that God was a black man.
Whether Elijah Muhammad knew anything about Steward, Holly, or
T urner cannot be known for certain. But their inﬂuence is discernible
enough in his later writings. Muhammad emerged out of a cultural con-
text in which black Christianity was replete with ideas that he would later
include in his own Islamic vision.
MUHAMMAD’S GREAT MIGRATION TO ISLAM
After marrying Clara Evans in 1919, Muhammad decided in 1923 to join
the Great Migration to the North, landing in Detroit, where decreased
foreign immigration (due to new anti-immigration laws, as explained in
chapter 3) created a need for unskilled labor. Elijah’s arrival preceded what
Richard Thomas has described as a major wave of immigration through-
out 1924 and 1925 that helped to increase Detroit’s black population 194
percent during the 1920s. What had started out as a tiny northern black
community of 5,741 in 1910 grew to 40,838 in 1920 and ﬁnally to
120,066 in 1930, when African Americans would account for 7.6 percent
of the Motor City’s total inhabitants. Like other working-class residents of
Detroit, Muhammad viewed the northern city as both a refuge from Jim
Crow and a place for potential economic advancement. Like many,
Muhammad sought employment in the automobile industry. From 1923
to 1925, according to information that the Messenger gave to the FBI in a
1942 interview, he worked at the American Nut Company, the American
Copper and Brass Company, and Chevrolet Axle.
6
After this time, Muhammad seemed unable to hold steady work,
an occurrence not uncommon among black migrants. The harsh work-
ing conditions for blacks, who still faced discrimination in the workplace,
often prompted them to use constant shufﬂing between jobs as one
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 67


--- PAGE 75 ---
technique to preserve their own humanity. Other challenges faced black
migrants, as well. Because Detroit was segregated and little housing was
available to the city’s new residents, blacks lived in horribly overcrowded
conditions and were charged excessively high rents in the city’s burgeoning
ghetto. Moreover, migrants experienced discrimination in health care, 
education, and nearly every other aspect of life. Detroit’s Salvation Army
even refused to give many Christmas baskets. While most migrants re-
ported that they never wanted to return home, their living conditions
prompted them to ﬁnd a variety of coping and protest strategies. For
some, the self-help strategies of churches like Second Baptist and Bethel
AME, two of black Detroit’s most popular institutions, proved effective.
Others helped to build their local chapter of the United Negro Improve-
ment Association, established in 1920, into one of the most colorful in the
nation. Still others turned to the Detroit underworld, where African
Americans found recreation and escape in vice, including prostitution and
the numbers rackets.
7
But as challenging as African-American life in Detroit was during the
1920s, the Great Depression made matters much worse. In addition to
exacerbating the problems mentioned above, the Depression saw the fail-
ure of several black banks and an inability among black institutions to
cope with the enormity of the crisis. A lack of professionalization and
the sheer depth of the Depression also hindered the efforts of volunteer
organizations like the Black Church. In fact, as Drake and Cayton found
in their massive study of black Chicago, there was widespread dissatisfac-
tion with the mainstream black denominations. Criticisms of the Black
Church, which Elijah Muhammad would repeat throughout his lifetime,
included the accusation that the Church was a “racket”; it was too emo-
tional; it offered no real religion; preachers were hypocritical and failed
to condemn sin; and blacks were too “religious.” In a sense, the Black
Church had become the victim of its own success. As the most popular
grassroots institution in the black community, it was bound to be the tar-
get of vigorous criticism as well.
8
During these years, according to one of his sons, Muhammad himself
had succumbed to despair, relying on his wife, Clara, to literally pick
him up off the streets of Detroit after repeated spells of drunkenness.
The Church, he felt, had failed him too. But in 1931, Muhammad’s
life changed dramatically when he met W . D. Fard. Muhammad under-
stood Fard to be an Arab peddler, although no scholarly consensus has
yet emerged as to the true identity of the mysterious stranger. The stan-
dard histories of the Nation of Islam, nearly all of which are based on 
68 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 76 ---
interviews with movement members or a seminal article by sociologist
Erdmann Beynon, posit the following: when Muhammad met Fard,
Muhammad felt himself to be in the midst of a divine presence and asked
Fard whether he was “that one we read in the Bible that he would come
in the last day under the name Jesus.” Fard indicated that he was, but 
that Muhammad should keep it a secret. Muhammad later claimed that
Fard was an immigrant from Mecca, Saudi Arabia, who came in 1930 to
“mentally resurrect” the so-called Negro from his deceptive views of self.
Muhammad became Fard’s best pupil and left for Chicago later that year
to spread the stranger’s teachings. By 1934, Fard had disappeared, appar-
ently without a trace, leaving Muhammad in charge of the Lost-Found
Nation of Islam.
9
The search for Fard’s identity, which might help us speculate about
the forms of Islam with which he was familiar, reveals the difﬁculty of 
conducting research on the Nation of Islam. The scholar’s only sources
originate either with movement members themselves or with the surveil-
lance and counterintelligence operations of the FBI. Beynon’s article, on
the other hand, was written four key years after the disappearance of Fard,
after which his actual story may have become hagiographic in nature. Fur-
thermore, FBI memos suggest that the Bureau actively tried to discredit
the movement’s founder through a disinformation campaign throughout
the 1950s and 1960s. The result is that the historical record offers a num-
ber of different possibilities for Fard’s identity. According to the Bureau,
Fard was born either of British, Hawaiian, or Polynesian parents, became a
criminal, and eventually served out his time in San Quentin. Other ac-
counts identify him as a Palestinian, a Syrian Druze, a black Jamaican
whose father was a Syrian Muslim, a T urkish-born Nazi, and/or some sort
of T urko-Persian.
10
There is, however, another way to view the problem of Fard’s identity.
Rather than trying to ascertain Fard’s true place of origin, we can explore
the larger immigrant milieu of Detroit in which he lived and worked. In
so doing, we can also understand the link between the emergence of the
NOI and the rise of Islam in the United States more generally.
POSSIBLE SOURCES OF
MUHAMMAD’S BLACK ISLAM
Detroit itself teemed with thousands of Muslim immigrants from
Lebanon, Syria, T urkey, Albania, and India during the 1920s and 1930s.
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 69


--- PAGE 77 ---
According to Kemal Karpat, as many as 1.2 million emigrants from the
Ottoman Empire, including both Christians and Muslims, came to North
and South America from 1860 through the founding of the T urkish
Republic. Approximately half of them were Arabic-speaking. The Motor
City attracted anywhere from two to ten thousand Muslim immigrants 
for the same reasons that it “pulled” in African-American migrants: that is,
the economic opportunities offered by the growing automobile industry.
In 1907, for example, several young T urkish men were employed in the
Ford Plant at Highland Park. By 1920, over a thousand T urkish Muslims,
hailing both from Anatolia and the Balkans, formed a Detroit chapter of
the Red Crescent and purchased three thousand grave plots to bury the
dead according to Islamic law. Syrians, including Christians and Muslims,
also found employment in the automobile industry. In 1916, the Ford 
sociological department listed 555 Arab men as factory workers. While 
no direct connection between these populations and Elijah Muhammad
has been found, it is worth speculating that the factory became the 
place where Muhammad ﬁrst gained exposure to Muslims and perhaps
Islam.
11
Still, his main inﬂuence seemed to be W . D. Fard, who spread his
message not as a factory worker, but as a peddler. Immigrant Arabs, espe-
cially around the turn of the century, often made their mark economically
as peddlers. Willing to construct themselves as exotic Orientals, they fre-
quently sold their wares, including clothing and sweets among other
items, by promoting their goods and themselves as products of the “Holy
Land”—even though most of these Syrian immigrants had never even
been to Ottoman Palestine before. In the midst of the Depression, unem-
ployed T urks, like many other Americans, also took up peddling, hawking
anything from cigarettes to watermelon. Whether or not Fard was an im-
migrant himself, he probably emerged out of this signiﬁcant subculture 
in American life. Like immigrant peddlers, he presented himself as a mys-
terious Easterner from the Holy Land. Moreover, Fard disseminated his
message in a city where Islamic practice was both diverse and abundant.
Lebanese immigrant Muhammad Karoub built the ﬁrst mosque in the
area in 1919, where his brother, Husain, served as imam, or prayer-leader.
Shi‘is, Bektashis (mostly Albanians), and mevlavis, the so-called whirling
dervishes, all actively practiced their particular forms of Islamic life in im-
migrant Detroit from the 1920s onward. In addition, the Ahmadiya had a
presence there and even more so in nearby Chicago.
12
The Ahmadiya are particularly important to the development of
African-American Islamic thought, since, like the Moorish Science T emple,
70 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 78 ---
their theological orientation may have been one of the sources from which
Elijah Muhammad fashioned his black Islamic thought. Begun in the
Punjab, part of British India, in 1889 by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the
Ahmadiya were a messianist movement that revolved around Ahmad’s
claim to be mujaddid, or a renewer of religion, the Christian Messiah, and
the Islamic Mahdi. Ahmad’s prophetic claims garnered ﬁerce opposition
from most Muslims, who have historically understood the Prophet
Muhammad to be the “seal” and thus the ﬁnal prophet in world history.
Nevertheless, the Ahmadiya became effective missionaries for their move-
ment and Islam, in general. In particular, their mass distribution of English
translations of the Qur’an was the ﬁrst such effort among Muslims in
the modern world. Importantly, it was an Ahmadi Qur’an that Elijah
Muhammad would frequently cite in his religious teachings.
13
The Ahmadiya were also quick to focus on urban African Americans
as a group ripe for conversion. In 1920, the Qadiani faction sent Mufti
Muhammad Sadiq as a missionary to North America. Though Sadiq
began to teach in New York, he quickly moved from there to Chicago,
then to Highland Park in the greater metropolitan Detroit area, and ﬁ-
nally back to the Windy City, where he established his headquarters on
the Southside’s Wabash Avenue. While the Ahmadiya both preached and
practiced racial cooperation and equality, Sadiq did not hesitate to use
racialist arguments to promote Islam among blacks. Through his speeches
and the Moslem Sunrise, Sadiq also associated white Christianity with slav-
ery, which he argued destroyed the African’s original language, Arabic, and
his religion, Islam. In 1923, after giving ﬁve lectures at UNIA meetings in
Detroit, Sadiq claimed to have converted forty Garveyites to Islam. Later,
Sadiq’s successor, Suﬁ Bengalee, also promoted Islam (à la Blyden) as the
inspiration behind historical black achievements, including, for example,
the accomplishments of former slaves Bilal ibn Rabah and Zayd ibn
Muhammad under the banner of Islam.
14
This early immigrant missionary activity suggests that Muhammad
may have been inﬂuenced by plenty of other sources besides W . D. Fard—
or at the least that these sources may have inﬂuenced Fard himself. In light
of these facts and the lack of contemporaneous accounts of the relation-
ship between Fard and Muhammad, the claim made by Muhammad’s bi-
ographer that Muhammad repeated Fard’s teachings with remarkable
“consistency” throughout his life seems problematic.
15 My goal in the fol-
lowing section will be to understand less what Fard taught Muhammad
and more how Muhammad translated Fard’s theories into a unique body
of thought that synthesized a number of American traditions.
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 71


--- PAGE 79 ---
MUHAMMAD’S
BLACK ISLAMIC DISPENSATIONALISM
IN POSTWAR AMERICAN CULTURE
Whether the details of Muhammad’s religious system were actually in
place by the end of the 1930s or whether they changed throughout that
decade is difﬁcult to tell, especially since Muhammad himself seemed to
be a wanderer for much of the period. During 1934, according to move-
ment accounts, internal dissension within the NOI forced Muhammad to
ﬂee both Detroit and Chicago, where he had established the second T em-
ple of Islam. After a stay in Milwaukee, Muhammad left the Midwest for
the nation’s capital. For the following four years, Muhammad traveled up
and down the eastern seaboard until he established T emple No. 4 in Wash-
ington in 1939. Still a relative unknown, he was arrested in 1942 on the
charge that he had failed to register for the Selective Service Act. He was
then released on bond and later apprehended in Chicago, where he was
charged with sedition.
16
Ernest Allen argues that Muhammad’s arrest was linked to the FBI’s
sweep of pro-Japanese African-American organizations during that year
and early 1943. The NOI may have had connections to Satokata Taka-
hashi’s Development of Our Own organization, which disseminated pro-
Japanese literature in the United States during the 1930s. In connecting
anti-Western struggles to the rise of the Japanese Empire, Takahashi gar-
nered support among a number of African-American groups, including
the Paciﬁc Movement of the Eastern World and the Original Independent
Benevolent Afro-Paciﬁc Movement of the World. While the NOI may
have been yet another black organization linked to the Japanese cause, it is
important to note that the federal government never convicted Elijah
Muhammad of sedition. In fact, according to an internal FBI memoran-
dum, the charge was dismissed and Muhammad was forced to serve out a
conviction on the less serious charge of draft evasion. In 1943, he entered
the Federal Correctional Institution in Milan, Michigan, where he stayed
until released in 1946.
17
After his release, Muhammad created the Nation of Islam so ﬁrmly
etched in American memory—the organization known for disciplined
corps of bow-tied men hawking bean pies, salvation, and copies of
his books; the “supportive” white-robed women who attended “Muslim
Girls T raining”; and most important of all, an articulate, good-looking
young minister named Malcolm X. By the late 1950s, the NOI had
grown to include dozens of temples in twenty-eight cities and thousands
72 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 80 ---
of card-carrying members. T o some observers, especially C. Eric Lincoln,
the NOI seemed far more like a political organization than a religious one,
as I outlined in chapter 1. Indeed, the Nation of Islam had very explicit
political overtones, especially in its opposition to the civil rights move-
ment. During the 1950s, the struggle for civil rights took huge steps for-
ward in both the judicial assault on segregation (most famously in the
1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education) and in an African-American
grassroots movement of marches and sit-ins that produced powerful black
leadership, including Martin Luther King, Jr. Elijah Muhammad, of
course, rejected King’s vision of an equal and integrated America, arguing
that King was trying to make blacks love the white devil, a self-defeating
act that perpetuated the values of slavery. Even more, said Muhammad,
King failed to understand the “scripture, for it surely teaches you that the
world has been under the rule of Satan (the devil) for 6,000 years, and
now separation must come between God’s people and the devil so that the
righteous can survive.”
18
Despite this opposition to King and his ideal of integration, however,
Muhammad never became a terribly articulate spokesperson for black
nationalism. His call for racial separatism, for example, did not translate
into a concrete plan for the establishment of a modern nation-state or
even for support of emigration. While the Nation of Islam contained
many of the trappings of a nationalist organization, including its own ﬂag
and paramilitary group, Muhammad’s plan for his “Nation” only some-
times mentioned the designation of a small number of black-belt states for
the use of African Americans. In most lectures, Muhammad merely said
that blacks should have some “land of our own.” Even more, he did not
usually associate this land with a geographic region (like Africa), a speciﬁc
form of polity (democratic, authoritarian, etc.), or even with a particular
sense of history, all of which usually constituted the imagined signs of the
modern nation-state. Rather, Muhammad tended to focus on economic
self-sufﬁciency within the American marketplace. Muhammad adapted
the nineteenth-century yeoman ideal of agrarian independence into his
own racialized worldview: he believed that true freedom could exist only
outside the white-dominated market. This economic separatism included
the call for the boycott of white businesses; the development of a black 
nation-wide bank, black hospitals, and black-owned factories; and the
purchase of farmland from which blacks could extract necessary raw 
materials for their economic independence. These activities, and not agita-
tion for the establishment of a black state, consumed the energies of many
of the NOI’s members.
19
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 73


--- PAGE 81 ---
Elijah Muhammad himself, however, concentrated most of his intel-
lectual efforts not on political or economic nationalism, but on his own
particularistic interpretation of Islam. His views could be heard over the
radio, in person, or read either in the Pittsburgh Courier or his numerous
published works. In 1957, The Supreme Wisdom appeared. Then in 1965,
he published his magnum opus, Message to the Blackman in America. The
Message contained edited versions of The Supreme Wisdom and the Prayer
Service in Islam in addition to articles and sermons published previously 
in the Pittsburgh Courier and Muhammad Speaks, which began weekly
publication shortly after its inception in 1961. The content of these pub-
lished works revealed Muhammad to be a man fascinated by biblical and
Qur’anic scriptures, his own prophetic status, numerology, and myth. 
In fact, of the 341 pages in Message, less than one hundred were devoted 
to explicitly political and economic themes. The remainder revealed
Muhammad’s views on theology, mythology, eschatology, scriptural inter-
pretation, and Islamic prayer, among other such topics.
20
Like Blyden and Drew Ali, Muhammad deﬁned Islam as a counter-
tradition to Christianity. Christianity, said Muhammad, was a “slave reli-
gion,” used by whites to keep the truth of blacks’ divine nature from them.
Islam, on the other hand, promoted black achievement, and according
to Muhammad, forbade slavery: “No Muslim will enslave a[nother] 
Muslim.” If slavery had been practiced by Arabs, he argued, then they
were not true Muslims. Christianity, on the other hand, had been used,
according to Muhammad, to decimate the black family in slavery, making
“Uncle T oms” out of black men and “Jezebels” out of black women.
Whereas Islam made blacks industrious and self-reliant, Muhammad 
argued, Christianity made blacks “lazy, careless, and dependent.” Muham-
mad also indicted white Christians on account of their easy use of violence
as a means to accomplish racist ends. Christianity, he said, was a religion
of war. Taking the Gospels literally, Muhammad cited Jesus’ own words 
as proof for his polemical stance: “Do not think that I have come 
to bring peace on earth; I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. 
For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against 
her mothe r . . .” (Matt. 10:34–5). According to Muhammad, even “if
Jesus was a peacemaker, then the Christians are not his followers” since
“Christianity, as we see it in practice in America, certainly does not unite
but rather divides the people against each othe r... its sword is never
sheathed.”
21
All of these themes had been articulated previously by Blyden and
Drew Ali. But where Muhammad differed signiﬁcantly from his prede-
74 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 82 ---
cessors was in the propagation of a rather unique dispensationalist tradi-
tion called the “myth of Yacub.” This alternate creation myth represented
a radical and creative reconceptualization of black identity by trying to
establish black superiority, explain how it was usurped, and describe the
conditions necessary for its restoration. Altering a classic dispensationalist
timeline, Muhammad claimed real Earth time began sixty-six trillion
years ago, when an explosion separated the moon from the Earth, leaving
only the great black tribe of Shabazz, the Earth’s original inhabitants, in-
tact. The original Nation spoke Arabic and practiced Islam. T wenty-four
scientists, one of whom acted as Judge or God, ruled this paradise. But
6,600 years ago, the original Nation suffered a blow at the hands of a
mad scientist named Yacub, who was hell bent on grafting a new race of
devils, whites, out of the original man. After six hundred years, the mad
scientist’s followers succeeded in their horrible task, Muhammad ex-
plained, using Qur’an 49:15 and 76:2 as proof texts. For six thousand
years, it was prophesied, the white devils would be allowed to exist on
Earth.
22
These six thousand years represented known world history for
Muhammad. From 4000 to 2000 B.C., he believed, whites lived as bar-
barous and violent cavepeople in Europe. Sounding strikingly similar to
the nineteenth-century black Presbyterian minister Henry Highland Gar-
net, Muhammad said that whites “wore animal skins for clothe s... they
became so savage that they lost all their sense of sham e... they made
their homes in the caves on hillside s... they lost all knowledge of civili-
zation.” Since whites were naturally brutish in Muhammad’s view, only
God could lift them up and permit them to conquer the world. Beginning
in 2000 
B.C., Allah, according to Elijah Muhammad, sent a number of
prophets, including both Jesus and Muhammad, to disseminate Islam
among the whites. But, Muhammad claimed, “the white race, by nature,
can’t be righteous. Islam was taught to them from Moses to Muhammad,
but they were never able to live the life of a Muslim believer.” Neverthe-
less, the Prophet Muhammad (of seventh-century Arabia), whom Elijah
Muhammad viewed as an Arab and a member of the black nation, refused
to give up on his mission to convert the white devils. Even though the
omniscient twenty-four scientists governing world history informed the
Prophet of the futility of his mission, Elijah Muhammad taught, his com-
passionate heart led him to continue, prompting the scientists to laugh 
at him.
23
Though the Prophet’s mission was unsuccessful, according to
Muhammad, his “bottling up” of the savages in Europe did represent an
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 75


--- PAGE 83 ---
important moment in history. For the success of Islam throughout the
Old World, he said, prevented whites from spreading their evil ways, in-
cluding their false religion, for at least one thousand years. This, Muham-
mad argued, was in fulﬁllment of the prophecy in Rev. 20:7: “And when
the thousand years are ended, Satan will be loosed from his prison.” From
a.d. 570 to 1555, Muhammad wrote, the Prophet’s successors had suc-
ceeded in preventing the “loosening” of Satan. But, in the fateful sixteenth
century, “John Hawkins and others deceived our foreparents in Africa and
brought them into slavery in America.” This instituted another millen-
nium in which the satanic race freely reigned over the world. Why was the
“man of sin” permitted to do this by the all-powerful Black God, Muham-
mad asked. This, too, could be explained by biblical prophecy in 2 Thess.
2:9: “The coming of the lawless one by the activity of Satan will be with
all power and with pretended signs and wonders.” “The man of sin,”
Muhammad paraphrased, “had a work to do and God wouldn’t interfere
with this work.” Ironically, however, in fulﬁlling their prophesied mission
by enslaving blacks, the white devils committed moral suicide, insuring
God’s retribution in the end time.
24
For Muhammad, the events leading to judgment began with the
earthly appearance of W . D. Fard, God in person, among the blacks of De-
troit. In Rev. 18:1, Muhammad wrote, “it says that the Revelator saw an
angel come from Heaven (from the Holy Land) having great power and
the earth (the so-called Negroes) was enlightened with His glory . . . this
angel can be no other than Master W . F . Muhammad [W . D. Fard], the
Great Mahdi, who came from the Holy City of Mecca, Arabia, in 1930.”
25
For God, Muhammad emphasized, was no “spook in space”; he was a
man, the Mahdi, the Messiah, the Christ, and the Son of Man all in one.
Even more, despite Fard’s light-skinned appearance in movement pho-
tographs, Muhammad considered him to be a black man. After Fard left,
according to Muhammad, he would be permitted to carry his Message to
the original Nation for an unspeciﬁed, but relatively short period of time
before the Apocalypse. Signs of the coming doom, according to Muham-
mad, would include human corruption, drought, immorality, homosexu-
ality, nudity, adultery, robbery, gambling, drunkenness, drugs, deception,
and the decline of the dollar. Overall, Muhammad said, these elements
would translate into the fall of the Christian West, which he said began in
1914 with the Great War (a belief also shared by the Jehovah’s Witnesses).
The American government, which represented the fourth beast of Rev.
18:4 in Muhammad’s view, would also have a special role to play in this
prelude due to its continued persecution of its former slave population.
26
76 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 84 ---
In the ﬁnal hour, according to Muhammad, a “Mothership” or
“Motherplane,” a human-built planet measuring one-half mile by one-
half mile “squared,” which was invisible to all but Muhammad and his 
believers, would send horrible bombs on the Earth, destroying all major
cities. T o support his theory, Muhammad cited the prophecy of Ezek.
10:2. This verse depicted God instructing a scribe to gather burning coals
from cherubim that would be hovering above “whirling wheels” in the sky.
These coals would then be distributed over Jerusalem, which had become
a city of sin. For further proof, Muhammad also offered that the “small
circular-made planes called ﬂying saucers, which are so much talked of
being seen, could be from this Mother Plane.”
27
It is worth interrupting our narrative to explore Muhammad’s appro-
priation of this belief in UFOs into his thought, since it serves as such a
good indication of the postwar roots of many of his beliefs. Spaceships, 
of course, were nothing new to American popular culture by the 1950s. In
1938, for example, anywhere from four to twelve million Americans
tuned in to hear the radio adaptation of H. G. Wells’ novel, War of the
Worlds, aired on the CBS radio network. The adaptation, written by
Howard Koch and produced by a young Orson Welles, reported in news-
like fashion the destruction of New Jersey by a cylindrical Martian space-
ship. The participation of ﬁctional, but realistic sounding ofﬁcials, includ-
ing a Princeton professor, military men, and the Secretary of the Interior,
led 28 percent of those listening to mistake the play for real news, accord-
ing to one poll. The resulting panic jammed phone lines, created trafﬁc
jams, and stirred apocalyptic thought. Some interviewed after the panic,
for instance, reported thinking that the country was being punished for
“our evil ways”; another tried to reconcile the events to the biblical
prophecy that the ﬁrst destruction was by ﬂood, while the next would be
by ﬁre. In Harlem, according to the New York Times,some “evening prayer
services became ‘end of the world’ prayer meetings.”
28
In the postwar period, however, the belief in UFOs took a slightly dif-
ferent form. In the 1940s, according to a Gallup poll, most Americans did
not associate ﬂying disks with extraterrestrial spaceships. But in 1947
farmer William Brazel found the remains of a weather balloon carrying
radar reﬂection devices (used to detect the sound waves of atomic blasts)
near Roswell, New Mexico. While the military remained silent about its
Cold War hardware, a myth developed in the popular imagination that the
government actually concealed the crash of a spaceship carrying extrater-
restrials. Frank Scully codiﬁed this belief in his 1950 bestseller, Behind the
Flying Saucers. The obsession with UFOs also spawned several feature
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 77


--- PAGE 85 ---
ﬁlms, including the 1956 Earth vs. the Flying Saucers. Even more, some
groups incorporated the Roswell myth into their system of beliefs. One
Midwestern group studied by Leon Festinger and Henry Riecken posited
that Jesus, or “Sananda” as he was called in the group, commanded a
spaceship that would initiate the Apocalypse, while also whisking true be-
lievers away to a heavenly planet.
29 Muhammad’s dispensationalist Islam
was clearly another tradition during this period to support the ﬂying ob-
ject as deus ex machina, indicating the crossracial appeal of this particular
phenomenon in the popular imagination.
What is so noteworthy about Muhammad’s use of the Mothership
myth is that it did not translate into an escapism on the part of his believ-
ers. In fact, quite the opposite became true. Heaven, Muhammad taught,
was a state on Earth achieved when blacks liberated themselves from the
authority of the white devils and determined their own future. The mysti-
cal world, Muhammad explained, coexists with the material world. Re-
ﬂecting one of the founding principles of modern esotericism, Muham-
mad rejected the dualistic thinking that depicted a division between two
spheres of reality: the earthly, where human beings could exert some con-
trol, and the heavenly, where human beings were powerless. Muhammad
characterized this belief as a self-defeating tradition from slave times. “We
are in Islam what Christianity offers beyond the grave,” Muhammad
wrote. “Stop looking for anything after death—Heaven or Hell. These
are in this life. Death settles it all.” There was, said Muhammad, no sweet
bye-and-bye where blacks could ﬁnally get their due: “No already physi-
cally dead person will be in the hereafter; that is slavery belief, taught to
slaves to keep them under control .... The slave is made to believe his
will came after death, and his master knows that death settles all, and that
you can’t return to tell him whether he lied or told the truth.” Slavery,
Muhammad taught, was not so much the bondage of a black person’s
body, but of his or her mind; in so much as blacks remained tied to what
he deﬁned as “white” ideas, including the traditional Christian belief in an
unseen heaven, they remained enslaved. Muhammad’s thought sought in-
stead to place black destiny mostly in black hands. Returning to God in-
volved no physical resurrection brought about by the Almighty, as most
Muslims understood the Day of Judgment; it was, according to Muham-
mad, a mental resurrection that meant seizing control of one’s own eco-
nomic, political, and moral course. This, Muhammad insisted, was the
meaning of Qur’anic verses like 89:27–30, which referred to paradise: 
“O soul that is at rest, return to Your Lord, well-pleased with Him, well-
pleasing; So enter among My servants, and enter into My Paradise.”
30
78 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 86 ---
Muhammad’s thought, then, contained both this-worldly and other-
worldly aspects. On the one hand, Muhammad’s dispensationalist beliefs
discouraged believers from joining any broad-based reform movements
that aspired to change the status quo. After all, such efforts would be futile
according to his prophecies. Muhammad believed that no true revolution
would occur until the appointed hour, which the council of scientists had
already designated. In this, Muhammad reﬂected a strict premillennial-
ism: no matter what human beings did to make the world better or worse,
they could not affect the timing of the Apocalypse. On the other hand,
Muhammad also taught that believers need not wait until doomsday to re-
alize some of God’s promises for them. In fact, he said, if they embraced
his program of black uplift, they would experience a heavenly life on
Earth, which he deﬁned as a state of freedom, self-determination, and eco-
nomic well-being.
While Muhammad treated economic self-sufﬁciency as an important
component of his code of ethics, he also stressed a need for “clean living”
that usually focused on some aspect of the black body. For example, he
sought to change the way people ate by banning many foods associated
with slave culture, including pork and cabbage. He also prohibited certain
styles of coiffure, like the straightening of one’s hair, which he considered
to be imitative of white style. In addition, he criticized the usual vices like
gambling, drinking, and smoking. In place of these behaviors, he required
believers to follow a complex set of rules regarding their personal appear-
ance and behavior. Muhammad also instructed his followers to practice
the Islamic prayer as another way of bringing these values to life. In the
ﬁnal section, I explore Muhammad’s changing writings on prayer not only
to show how he synthesized his own particularistic vision with certain Old
World Islamic traditions, but also to demonstrate how he defended his 
authority in reaction to Sunni Muslim criticism of his movement.
SUNNI MUSLIM CRITICISM, ISLAMIC PRAYER,
AND MUHAMMAD’S ENTRENCHMENT
For nearly all Muslims outside of the NOI, Muhammad’s unique Islamic
dispensationalism directly contradicted the most basic beliefs of any ac-
ceptable interpretation of Sunni or Shi‘i Islam. But in the beginning, some
movement allies argued that these differences were unimportant. One was
Pakistani Abdul Basit Naeem, the Sunni Muslim publisher of The Moslem
World and the USA, which included extensive coverage of the movement.
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 79


--- PAGE 87 ---
In 1957, Naeem was the guest of honor at the NOI’s annual Savior’s Day
Convention in Chicago. Naeem admitted that “certain differences” existed
between traditional Islam and Elijah Muhammad, but argued that this sit-
uation was by design. He also conceded that the movement “operates on
racial lines,” but maintained the “wisdom of such practices on” the part of
Muhammad. Paraphrasing the Messenger, Naeem asserted that “my peo-
ple must be dealt with on a special basis, because their background and
circumstances are different from those prevailing elsewhere in the world.
You cannot use the same medicine to treat altogether different diseases.” It
was hard to argue with success, Naeem continued, since “Mr. Muham-
mad’s teachings...h a v e  enabled more Americans to form an acquain-
tance with Islam than the efforts of all other individuals seeking converts
to Islam here put together.”
31
In 1959, however, Muhammad’s movement gained national promi-
nence when WNTA-TV in New York aired a ﬁve-part series on the NOI
produced by Mike Wallace of CBS News. It was entitled The Hate that
Hate Produced. Following this blistering bit of investigative journalism, 
articles about the movement appeared in Reader’s Digest, Time, U.S. News
and World Report, and the New York Times. These publications usually
characterized the NOI as a black supremacist group or as anti-American.
Many civil rights leaders, including the NAACP Executive Director Roy
Wilkins and Martin Luther King, Jr., also denounced the NOI as a hate
group. Wilkins faulted the lack of a strong civil rights bill and white
racism in general as the causes of the NOI, claiming that the NOI only
had a following because of the lack of equal opportunity for blacks. Fol-
lowing all of this bad press, more and more Muslims also publicly criti-
cized Muhammad, hoping largely to distinguish themselves and the “true
Islam” from Muhammad and his teachings. Writing to the Pittsburgh
Courier, the newspaper in which Muhammad had published religious arti-
cles since 1956, one Muslim begged the paper’s readers not to “confuse the
sect of Muhammad with that of true Islam. Islam does not preach hate,”
he asserted, “it does not preach racism, it only calls for love, peace, and un-
derstanding.” Yet another writer to the paper argued that Elijah Muham-
mad “twists the Koran around to ﬁt his hate teachings.” In Chicago, Talib
Ahmad Dawud, an émigré from Antigua who had founded the Moslem
Brotherhood of America in 1950, also joined the criticism of Muhammad.
Dawud, who was the husband of jazz singer Dakota Stanton, shared
Muhammad’s anti-integrationist and anti-Christian views, but rejected his
beliefs in Fard’s divinity and his own prophetic status. In 1959, Dawud
launched a campaign against Muhammad, accusing the movement of
80 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 88 ---
being an illegitimate Islamic sect. Dawud attacked Muhammad’s “denial
of a future, bodily resurrection, and his follower’s failure to adhere to the
proper Muslim prayer rituals.” He also charged that Muhammad could
not perform the pilgrimage to Mecca, because the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment and its pilgrimage committee had banned him from Mecca. In addi-
tion, he published a picture of W . D. Fard, whom he claimed was white,
with the caption, “White Man Is God for Cult Of Islam.” Others joined
Dawud in his anti-Muhammad crusade, including his wife, Dakota Stan-
ton, and jazz pianist Ahmad Jamal. Jamil Diab, a Palestinian Arab who
had taught formerly at the NOI’s elementary and secondary school, also
contributed a negative article that appeared on the front page of a Decem-
ber 5 edition of the Chicago Defender, one of black America’s most popular
dailies. Then, in 1962, Adib Nurud-din, a Chicago follower of Ahmadiya
ﬁgure Nur al-Islam, accused Elijah Muhammad of being a “race-hating,
scheming, cynical, and power hungry fanatic.” His teachings, Nurud-din
said, were full of “crude absurdities and trivial nonsense.”
32
The criticism from both the mainstream press and rival black Mus-
lim leaders also inﬂuenced immigrant and foreign Muslim reaction to
Muhammad. For example, the Islamic Center of Washington, D.C.,
which received support from various Arab governments, attempted to dis-
pel the notion that Muhammad’s NOI was a “sect” of Islam. And in 1963,
the Federation of Islamic Associations in the United States and Canada,
the largest umbrella organization of its time, declared the NOI illegiti-
mate. That same year, Ahmad Kamal, an ofﬁcial of Jami‘at al-Islam, pub-
lished an article in the Chicago Defender that labeled Elijah Muhammad’s
doctrines as “satanic.”
33
In response, Muhammad joined his sons Herbert and Akbar in late
1959 and early 1960 for an ‘umra, or lesser pilgrimage to Mecca, in order
to solidify his claims to Islamic authenticity. While articles in Muhammad
Speaks wrote only glowing reports about the experience, his son Wallace
later claimed in a 1996 address that Muhammad, who expected to see
“streets of gold” in Mecca, had been disappointed by the trip. In fact,
upon his return, Muhammad paid increasingly less attention to the ques-
tions raised by other Muslims about his legitimacy as an Islamic leader. He
seemed to care even less whether his own prophecies and those of his
teacher, W . D. Fard, adhered to what other Muslims considered to be the
“real Islam.”
34
This entrenchment into his own prophetic authority can be seen
clearly in the changing nature of his writings on Islamic prayer. In the late
1950s, Muhammad instructed believers to pray in a traditionally Sunni
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 81


--- PAGE 89 ---
manner, although there is no evidence to suggest that a signiﬁcant number
ever actually did so, or that prayers were a regular part of temple meetings.
Nevertheless, Muhammad went on record in a 1957 prayer manual pub-
lished by the University of Islam, the movement’s primary and secondary
school, in favor of the Sunni prayer ritual. His prayer manual outlined all
of the steps common to the Islamic salat, the ritual prayer performed ﬁve
times daily by most pious Muslims. The only difference was that Muham-
mad instructed his followers to say the prayers in English, rather than the
traditional Arabic, which would be taught to them “some day in the near
future.” The manual contained descriptions of the proper prayer times,
ritual cleansing or ablutions, the call to prayer, and the components of
prayer. Most of the manual explained how to perform prayer properly,
rather than telling believers why it was important to do so.
35
But when the edited versions of “The Prayer Service in Islam” ap-
peared in Muhammad Speaks in 1962, Muhammad interpreted the mean-
ing of the prayers strictly within the conﬁnes of his own dispensationalist
Islam. When discussing the Qur’anic injunction that all Muslims face
Mecca while in prayer, for example, Muhammad claimed that the injunc-
tion actually “refers to the lost and found people of Islam,” meaning the
members of the NOI: “Before their return,” Muhammad wrote, “they
must turn in the direction with clean hands and hearts, bow in submission
to the Will of Allah alone with the righteousness that they may be wel-
comed to take their place again among their own people.” This passage
also connected the “resurrection” of black Muslims to proper ritual perfor-
mance, which was explained using the same logic that informed Muham-
mad’s advocacy of a good diet and decent clothes. Believers, Muhammad
claimed, must be clean both inside and out in order to submit properly 
to Allah. Then, they can turn their whole selves towards Mecca, which
symbolized and enacted their submission to the will of God. In 1965,
when edited versions of “The Prayer Service” column became a chapter in
Message to the Blackman in America, Muhammad promised that “he who
cleanses himself in and out leaves no ﬁlthiness.”
36
One should pray especially, Muhammad said, for freedom from
worldly desires, which he equated to a desire for food. Quoting a story
from Exod. 16, the leader argued that “the want of bread and mea t...
gave Moses and Aaron much trouble trying to lead the people into spiri-
tual knowledge of Jehovah and self-independence.” This hunger led peo-
ple to regret that God had even bothered to bring them out of Egypt
(Exod. 16:3). In the case of black Americans, however, it was the “want of
the slave-masters’ bread, meat and luxuries [that] is depriving the so-called
82 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 90 ---
Negroes today of their independence.” What blacks coveted, he implied,
was not a full belly, but the accouterments of the slavemaster’s culture, 
including liquor, cigarettes, pork, and other prohibited foods. T o remedy
this desire, he said, one should pray, beseeching God for deliverance.
Drawing from Qur’an 1:6–7, Muhammad wrote that the “Muslims pray
in their oft-repeated prayer to seek Allah’s help in guiding them on the
right path, the path of those whom God has favored and not on the path
of those who have caused His anger to descend upon them (the Jews and
Christians).”
37
In the later editions of “The Prayer Service,” Muhammad also argued
that the fard or obligatory components of the prayers were references to
the founder of the Nation of Islam, W . D. Fard. This claim was wholly be-
yond the pale of any traditional Islamic understanding of the concept of
the word fard. “All praise is due,” Muhammad wrote, “to our Lord and
Saviour, Master Fard Muhammad. T o Him do we submit; to Him we ﬂy
for refuge from the evils of Yacub’s civilization.” Unlike the black Christ-
ian, the Messenger taught, the Muslim “prays in the Name of Allah and
not to a mystery God that he nor anyone else has seen, nor does such exist.
Neither does he pray in the name of dead prophets.” The leader’s “prayer
service” also introduced some innovations into the traditional Islamic rit-
ual. Muhammad instructed believers that in addition to reciting of the
fatiha, or the ﬁrst sura of the Qur’an, they should add these words: “O
Allah! I seek refuge from anxiety and grief, and I seek Thy refuge from lack
of strength and laziness, and I seek Thy refuge from cowardice and nig-
gardliness, and I seek Thy refuge from being overpowered by dept [sic] and
the oppression of men; O Allah! sufﬁce Thou me with what is lawful to
keep me away from what is prohibited, and with Thy grace make me free
from want of what is besides Thee.” This prayer obviously emerged not
out of any previously Islamic text, but out of Muhammad’s own prophetic
teachings.
38
FROM AN ABSOLUTIST PARTICULARISM
TO AN ABSOLUTIST UNIVERSALISM
The changes in Muhammad’s writings on prayer showed that by the early
the 1960s, Islamic legitimacy within the NOI was deﬁned solely in rela-
tionship to the Messenger himself. As the last and only legitimate repre-
sentative of W . D. Fard, God in the ﬂesh, Muhammad had not only re-
jected Christianity, he had also rejected the right of anyone to interpret
Elijah Muhammad (1897–1975) 83


--- PAGE 91 ---
Islamic traditions except himself. In a sense, this decision can be viewed as
a pragmatic one. Perhaps Muhammad was aware of his own limitations.
He had little formal education and his familiarity with Old World Islamic
traditions was modest. In fact, he possessed no knowledge of Arabic. If
Muhammad had agreed to debate rival Muslims using the terms of Old
World Islamic traditions, he would have been entirely outmatched. But by
rejecting their challenges and offering his own interpretations of Islam, he
effectively ended any possible debate and asserted his own prophetic au-
thority. He embraced a particularistic form of Islam that he could control.
For many of his believers, who felt extremely devoted to Muhammad,
this intellectual insularity was not only justiﬁed, it was also desirable. After
all, many credited the Messenger and his vision with saving their lives—
for them, he was their conduit to Islam. It was his Islam of self-reliance,
black chosenness, and divine retribution that many saw as their pathway
to liberation from oppression, self-hatred, and hopelessness. It was his
Islam rather than the Islam of his critics that made their lives new.
But other followers were more independent of Muhammad and ques-
tioned his authority on various grounds. For some of them, like Malcolm
X, Muhammad’s thought became the particularistic springboard for other
visions of Islam that embraced universalism in equally absolutist ways. In
fact, one of the ironies of movement history was that in trying to defend
his teacher, Malcolm confronted Muhammad’s critics on their own
terms—that is, by trying to use Old World Islamic traditions to justify
Muhammad’s beliefs. In so doing, however, he came to care far more
about Muslims outside of the movement and about the traditions of Old
World Islam. This seminal intellectual moment in the history of African-
American Islamic thought had vital, if unforeseen consequences, as the
next chapter shows.
84 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 92 ---
Chapter 5
Islamic Universalism, Black Particularism,
and the Dual Identity of Malcolm X
(1925–1965)
INTRODUCTION
This chapter argues that at the end of his life, Malcolm X faced what he
called a “double burden”—namely, to be true to his universalistic inter-
pretation of Islam while also promoting the particularistic goals of pan-
Africanism. Unlike Blyden, Drew Ali, or Muhammad, Malcolm came to
deﬁne Islam in strictly universalistic ways. Accepting the “Islam” of his
Arab Muslim sponsors, he never questioned whether Islam might be a ve-
hicle for black nationalism, messianism, or any other form of particular-
ism. For Malcolm, as I show below, Islam was no more relevant to “black”
people than it was to “white” people; it was a “human” tradition that ap-
plied equally to all human beings. At the same time, however, Malcolm
did not look to this universalistic Islam as any sort of strategy in his ﬁght
for black liberation; instead, he espoused a pan-African struggle led exclu-
sively by and for blacks. Moreover, like Blyden, Drew Ali, and Muham-
mad, he believed in an essentialist black identity, characterized by shared
biological and intellectual traits, that linked together all persons of African
descent into a common community.
Because Malcolm viewed his own black identity as different from and
nearly antithetical to his Muslim identity, his thought exhibited a form of
what W . E. B. DuBois famously called “double consciousness.” In fact, Mal-
colm’s simultaneous commitments to identities that he viewed as contradic-
tory shaped much of his thought, including his discussion of “religion” and
“politics.” On the one hand, he championed a particularistic black politics
85


--- PAGE 93 ---
that sought to bring blacks together based on their common cultural and bi-
ological traits. On the other, he believed in an Islam that, by deﬁnition,
could have nothing to do with particularistic movements or struggles. Con-
sequently, he said, he must keep his religion and politics separate. The result
of his doubleness was that his Islam, which had been a powerful force in his
life, could have nothing to do with his struggle for black freedom, which
had been an equally, if not more signiﬁcant force in his life.
In order to understand how Malcolm developed his self-confessed
dual identity, this chapter begins with a brief biographical sketch of Mal-
colm’s life before 1960. I then focus on the intellectual issues surrounding
Malcolm’s separation from Elijah Muhammad and demonstrate how Mal-
colm’s interaction with and eventual sponsorship by Muslim missionaries
during the early 1960s led him to embrace a universalistic deﬁnition of the
“true” Islam. In the next section, I explore Malcolm’s embrace of pan-
Africanism as an approach to the struggle for black freedom and show how
this commitment led him to distinguish between his “religion” and his
“politics.” I conclude with a discussion of how, until his brutal assassina-
tion, Malcolm committed himself to starkly dichotomous views of Islamic
universalism and black particularism.
MALCOLM X BEFORE 1960
Of all the ﬁgures examined in this study, no one has been a more impor-
tant symbol in American and Afro-American popular culture than Mal-
colm X. Malcolm’s mythological place in black culture emerged soon after
his death, brought about in part by the release of the Autobiography of
Malcolm X. This work quickly became a bestseller and since then a classic
of American literature. In addition, ﬁgures in the black power struggle of
the second half of the 1960s appropriated Malcolm as an icon of black lib-
eration, making him even more signiﬁcant in death than he was in life. In
the 1990s, Spike Lee’s biographical movie, based largely on the Autobio-
graphy, both renewed and reﬂected popular fascination with the famous
hustler turned Muslim. Also during the past decade, authors like James
Cone have seized Malcolm as a didactic contrast to Martin Luther King,
Jr., and his advocacy of nonviolence.
1
Partly because of his symbolic and mythological signiﬁcance, Mal-
colm has received an enormous amount of scholarly attention in the
American academy. In addition to the vast number of articles about
Malcolm, a number of full-length treatments have been devoted to his life
86 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 94 ---
and its historical meaning. Peter Goldman’s biography, for example, stands
as a useful introduction to Malcolm. The extensive and controversial bi-
ographies of Eugene Wolfenstein and Bruce Perry employ psychohistory
to illuminate nearly every event in his life. Both Robin Kelley and Clay-
borne Carson, on the other hand, have examined Malcolm in the context
of the social and cultural history of both World War II and the postwar 
period. Finally, paying more attention to Malcolm’s life of faith than any
previous author, Louis DeCaro’s biography speaks to Malcolm’s double
conversion, ﬁrst to Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam, then to Sunni
Islam.
2 Because Malcolm’s biographical data has been extensively studied
by these authors, I begin with only a brief summary of his life before the
1960s, after which I develop my own argument about the importance of
his dual identity during his ﬁnal years.
According to Malcolm’s autobiography, he was born into an activist
family. His mother, Louise, was a Caribbean émigré from Grenada and,
like her husband, a committed Garveyite. While Malcolm’s father, Earl,
organized UNIA activities in Omaha, Louise contributed material to the
Negro World, the UNIA’s ofﬁcial periodical. By the late 1920s, the Littles
had moved to East Lansing, Michigan. In 1931 Earl was tragically run
over by a streetcar and died; later Malcolm said that, according to rumors
he had heard, the accident was intentional. In 1939, broken by the Great
Depression, his mother Louise was no longer able to care for her children
and was declared legally insane. Malcolm spent the next few years in vari-
ous foster homes, eventually moving to the East Coast.
3
At various times from 1940 to 1944, Malcolm lived both in Boston
and New York. In those cities, he joined the ranks of a wartime black
youth culture that donned the zoot suit, did the lindy hop, and listened
to bebop. Many of these young men avoided work, slept around, dodged
the draft, and often embraced hustling, the numbers rackets, and drugs.
According to Robin Kelley, their modes of dress, speech, and behavior,
if criminal, were also subtle forms of resistance against middle-class
norms, especially those of middle-class blacks. For Malcolm, however, this
alternate world of cultural resistance came to an end in 1946, when he
was indicted for larceny, ﬁrearm violations, and breaking and entering. In
March, after being convicted, he entered a Massachusetts state prison.
It was during this incarceration that Malcolm’s ﬁrst conversion took place.
While he was in Concord Reformatory in 1947, Philbert and Reginald
Little, two of Malcolm’s siblings, encouraged their brother to learn about
the teachings of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. Malcolm’s conversion,
dramatically portrayed as both sudden and blinding in Spike Lee’s ﬁlm,
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 87


--- PAGE 95 ---
actually occurred over a period of months as Malcolm became more famil-
iar with the Nation’s teachings.4
After Malcolm was paroled in 1952, he quickly rose to prominence
within the Nation. The next year, Elijah Muhammad appointed him assis-
tant minister at the Detroit temple. For the following three years, Mal-
colm led the temples in Boston, Philadelphia, and New York. Employing
revival-type meetings and other sophisticated evangelistic techniques to
attract young African Americans to the NOI, he quickly became the
movement’s most able and well-known evangelist. In 1957, he also gained
the attention of black New Yorkers and New York City authorities, when
he successfully demanded that a fellow Muslim receive medical attention
after a beating by some police ofﬁcers in Harlem’s twenty-eighth precinct.
Then during 1959, Malcolm garnered national attention when Mike 
Wallace’s The Hate that Hate Produced aired on WTNA-TV . Afterwards,
Malcolm regularly appeared on a number of television and radio pro-
grams, often debating the merits of separatism with advocates of integra-
tion. During this period, according to his autobiography, Malcolm was 
a loyal servant of Elijah Muhammad, never questioning the leader’s ap-
proach to civil rights or matters of belief. Only after Malcolm’s suspension
from the Nation, the Autobiography indicated, did Malcolm truly question
the leader’s approach to these issues. The Autobiography also characterized
Malcolm’s attraction to Sunni Islam and his activist politics as phenomena
that occurred after the break with Elijah Muhammad. While Malcolm
himself may have genuinely felt this way about his activities during the last
year of his life, quite a different pattern emerges from the available sources.
In fact, it is quite clear that Malcolm had begun to have his doubts about
the Messenger by the late 1950s, as the following section argues.
5
MALCOLM’S SECOND CONVERSION AND THE
CRUCIAL ROLE OF MUSLIM MISSIONARIES
By 1959, as seen in chapter 4, several mainstream Islamic groups launched
attacks on the legitimacy of Elijah Muhammad and the NOI. As national
spokesman for Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm defended the Messenger and
his teachings. Unlike his mentor, however, he tried to shield the NOI from
criticism by appropriating elements of Islamic discourse, especially pas-
sages from the Qur’an, to legitimate Muhammad’s beliefs. In a letter dated
November 24, 1962, for example, Malcolm wrote to the New York 
Amsterdam News to protest one Afghani Muslim’s critique of the NOI. 
88 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 96 ---
He cited Qur’an 20:102 as proof for the Islamic legitimacy of Muham-
mad’s view that all white people were blue-eyed devils destined to face di-
vine retribution at the end time. “The day when the trumpet is blown,”
Malcolm quoted the verse, “and we shall gather the guilty, blue-eyed, on
that day.” In a 1963 edition of the New York Times Magazine, however,
Robert Payne argued that Malcolm’s use of the text was faulty and that 
“all sinners, not only blue-eyed ones, are implicated in the judgement.” 
Indeed, though Malcolm’s translation of the verse was perfectly legitimate,
he seemingly had no idea how the “guilty, blue-eyed” persons mentioned
in the text had been traditionally deﬁned in tafsir, or classical Qur’anic
commentary. The “blue-eyed,” or zurqa, according to some commenta-
tors, can refer to the image of blue- or blind-eyed persons with black
faces—a deﬁnition that, if he had known about it, might have made Mal-
colm think twice before using this verse in support of an antiwhite the-
ology. Moreover, the “guilty,” according to some tafsir, can refer to crimi-
nals, polytheists, sinners, or disbelievers in the oneness of God—another
fact of which Malcolm seemed to have been unaware. The important
point is that, despite Malcolm’s intentions, he simply lacked the intellec-
tual resources to make a forceful defense of Muhammad using the terms of
Old World Islamic traditions.
6
Malcolm also criticized Muhammad’s naysayers as whites or “Uncle
T om” Muslims who had done nothing to advance the interests of blacks.
They failed to recognize, as Malcolm said in a March 24, 1961 speech at
the Harvard Law School, that Elijah Muhammad had a “new dispensa-
tion.” Comparing the NOI leader to Moses and Jesus, Malcolm argued
that Muhammad had been “raised up among his enslaved people at a time
when God was planning to restore them to a land of their own where they
could give birth to a new civilization.” Those whites who criticized the le-
gitimacy of this man, he said, were simply trying to “separate us from the
Muslim world.” As for immigrant critics of Muhammad, they had not
been successful “in converting one thousand Americans to Islam.” Elijah
Muhammad, on the other hand, “has hundreds of thousands of his fellow
ex-slaves turning eastward toward Mecca ﬁve times daily giving praises to
the great God Allah.” Of course, this claim was an exaggeration, if not an
outright falsehood. As observed in the previous chapter, very few members
actually practiced the Islamic salat, despite the fact that Muhammad had
encouraged them to do so in his prayer manual.
7
But in another sense, the fact that Malcolm now cited the daily
practice of prayer, one of the ﬁve pillars of Islam, as proof of the move-
ment’s legitimacy, showed just how much mainstream criticisms of the
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 89


--- PAGE 97 ---
movement were beginning to affect him. Particularly disturbing to Mal-
colm were the Muslim students who often confronted him about the dif-
ferences between the “true” Islam and the NOI. Concerned that NOI the-
ology might be mistaken for their own beliefs about Islam, these students
often accosted Malcolm on the streets of New York and along the college
lecture circuit. In 1962, one immigrant Muslim student at Dartmouth,
Ahmed Osman, traveled to NOI Mosque No. 7 to question Malcolm
about Islam. After grilling Malcolm in the question and answer section of
his talk, Osman came away “unsatisﬁed.” Malcolm himself seemed af-
fected by the encounter, for when Osman began to send Malcolm litera-
ture from the Islamic Centre in Geneva, Switzerland, he read it and asked
for more. In another incident, Arab students from UCLA surrounded
Malcolm after a March 1963 appearance on the Ben Hunter Show in Los
Angeles. After hearing the students argue that his belief in white devils 
was un-Islamic, Malcolm became quite disturbed, according to journalist
Louis Lomax, who was accompanying Malcolm at the time.
8
While Malcolm continued to defend Elijah Muhammad and his Is-
lamic dispensationalism throughout 1963, it is clear that by this time his
separation from his spiritual father had already begun. During a March 3
appearance on the Chicago television show, At Random, Malcolm rede-
ﬁned “white devils” to mean any human being who “intentionally or con-
sciously carries into practice the attributes or characteristics of the devil.”
While this was not yet a full denial of the belief that whites were by their
very nature evil, such a statement came a few months later when Malcolm
spoke on the Washington, D.C., radio program, Focus, aired over WUST
on May 12. “When you are a Muslim,” Malcolm said, “you don’t look at
the color of a man’s skin...y o u  look at the man and judge him according
to his conscious behavior.” This was the practice of Muslims in the Islamic
lands, he argued, and it should also be the practice of black Muslims in 
the United States. “[M]any people in this country think we are against the
white man because he is white... [but] we are against the white man be-
cause of what he has done to the black man.”
9
Though Malcolm remained the loyal national spokesman of Elijah
Muhammad throughout 1963, he was also questioning the morality of 
his leader. The previous year, Malcolm had visited three of Muhammad’s
secretaries, all of whom had given birth to the Messenger’s illegitimate
children. In April, he apparently confronted the Messenger about these 
relationships at Muhammad’s house in Phoenix. Furthermore, Malcolm
was clearly becoming frustrated by Muhammad’s prohibition against any
political activities. While Malcolm both dutifully publicized and obeyed
90 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 98 ---
Muhammad’s directive that no member of the NOI support or participate
in the March on Washington that year, Malcolm appeared at the march as
a “critical observer.” Notwithstanding his comments about the march as a
“farce” on Washington, Malcolm seemed to be unable to resist the chance
to be at this important event.
10
Finally, on December 1, Malcolm ofﬁcially rebelled by disobeying 
Elijah Muhammad’s directive that no Muslim minister comment on the
assassination of President Kennedy. On December 4, Muhammad sus-
pended Malcolm from his duties as national spokesman and demanded
his silence. Malcolm initially expressed acquiescence toward the order, but
statements made previously that year showed that part of Malcolm had al-
ready accepted the necessity of a separation from Muhammad long before
this time. On March 8, 1964, Malcolm announced that he was leaving the
movement for good. Four days later, he outlined his intentions for the fu-
ture at the Park Sheraton in New York. In his statement, Malcolm an-
nounced that he would embrace cooperation with other black leaders in-
terested in pursuing an activist strategy toward black liberation. “We must
control the politics and the politicians of our community,” he argued. At
the same time, Malcolm unveiled his plans to create the Muslim Mosque,
Inc. “I am and always will be a Muslim,” he said. “I am going to organize
and head a new mosque in New York City.” While Malcolm embraced
black nationalism as his political ideology, he upheld Islam as “the spiritual
force necessary to rid our people of the vices that destroy the moral ﬁber of
our community.” Speaking at Harvard College ten days later on March
18, 1964, Malcolm explicated his new position a bit further, stating that
“we believe that the religion of Islam combined with Black Nationalism 
is all that is needed to solve the problem” of the black community. Here
Malcolm deﬁned black nationalism as a comprehensive approach to social
life that included economic self-determination, moral renewal, racial
pride, and political involvement—a platform that sounded very much like
the program of Marcus Garvey.
11
In the meantime, however, Malcolm was also exploring Sunni Islam
and beginning to make more intimate contact with immigrant Muslims.
In particular, Malcolm turned to Dr. Mahmoud Youssef Shawarbi, a Uni-
versity of Cairo professor in the United States on a Fulbright grant to
teach at Fordham University. Malcolm knew of Shawarbi through the 
numerous immigrant and foreign Muslims, especially Muslim students,
who had accosted him during his various lectures and appearances before
the media. “Those orthodox Muslims whom I had met, one after another,
had urged me to meet and talk with a Dr. Mahmoud Youssef Shawarbi,”
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 91


--- PAGE 99 ---
he said in his Autobiography. Shawarbi encouraged Malcolm to make the
hajj, the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, and instructed him in the funda-
mental elements of Sunni Islam.12
Most scholars present the relationship between Shawarbi and Mal-
colm as a product of Malcolm’s reaching out toward Sunni Islam. While
this was certainly the case, it was not a one-way relationship. In fact, Mal-
colm converted to Sunni Islam at arguably the most important moment
in the history of Muslim missionary activity, or da‘wa, in North America.
In the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, most Muslims focused on da‘wa
as an activity to be conducted among other Muslims. Groups like the
Muslim Brothers in Egypt and the Society of the Call and Guidance in
South Asia aspired mostly to change Islamic practices within dar al-islam,
or Islamdom. Only the Ahmadiya movement committed serious resources
to spreading Islam among all non-Muslims and North Americans, espe-
cially. After World War II, however, da‘wa became entangled in world 
politics as the former European protectorates emerged into Arab nation-
states. On one level, da‘wa was emphasized as a part of these new states’
foreign policy in the West. By sponsoring Muslim missionaries in non-
Muslim states, they hoped to spread their inﬂuence abroad and soften
derogatory images of Islam.
13
In a more direct way, however, da‘wa was one of the secondary fronts
of what Malcolm Kerr called the “Arab Cold War,” especially the conﬂict
between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Egypt. These two states were
locked in ideological and military struggles from 1958 through the 1960s.
The ideological battle began shortly after Egyptian President Gamal Abd
al-Nassir successfully entered into a political union with Syria in the win-
ter of 1958. The United Arab Republic (UAR), as the two states became
known, signaled the growth of both revolutionary socialism and pan-
Arabism, the movement to unite all Arab peoples into one political entity.
A few months later, when revolution overturned the Iraqi monarchy and
an uprising occurred against President Sham‘un in Lebanon, monarchs
throughout the Middle East feared that Nassirism might actually succeed.
But, due to the failure of the UAR and the constantly shifting alliances
that characterized Middle Eastern politics, their fears were never realized.
The idea of Arab unity remained only a symbol—albeit one of paramount
importance—in Arab political culture during the following decade. As
such, aspiring revolutionaries aligned with Nassir might always use it to
upset the neocolonialist status quo. But while this ideological struggle pro-
vided the general context of tensions between Egypt and Saudi Arabia, the
two states also engaged in an actual military conﬂict through their in-
volvement in the Yemeni revolution of 1962. Here, too, monarchical
92 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 100 ---
forces faced the challenge of a socialist revolution that Nassir supported by
sending thousands of Egyptian troops.14
This conﬂict most certainly inﬂuenced the missionary efforts spon-
sored by Saudi Arabia, which established a new university in Medina com-
mitted to the training of Muslim missionaries in 1961. The following year,
as tension over Yemen escalated, the government supported the founding
of the Muslim World League, whose statement of purpose included a
commitment to da‘wa. An impressive array of Muslim personages at-
tended the organization’s inaugural meeting, including the Grand Mufti
of Saudi Arabia, Said Ramadan of Egypt, Allal al-Fasi of Morocco, and
Mawlana Maududi of Pakistan. Not surprisingly, the conference was
strongly anti-Nassirist, promoting a vision of pan-Islam that hoped to
counter the powerful Arab populist. Ramadan, like many other Arab mis-
sionaries, was a member of the Muslim Brothers, a politically minded reli-
gious group that had been forcefully repressed by Nassir.
15
A politicization of Islam also occurred among Muslim students in the
West. These were the same Muslims who continually hounded Malcolm
as he traveled the campus lecture circuit. In 1963, several students from 
a variety of countries gathered at the University of Illinois, Champaign-
Urbana to establish the Muslim Students Association (MSA). Among the
founding members were three Muslim Brothers from Egypt. Using their
positions on college campuses, these activists helped to make the MSA one
of the most successful immigrant-led organizations in the propagation of
Islam throughout North America.
16
By seeking the guidance of Mahmoud Youssef Shawarbi, another
Egyptian reportedly disliked by the Nassir regime, Malcolm unknowingly
thrust himself into the center of this new Saudi-ﬁnanced missionary activ-
ity. After training Malcolm in the rudiments of Sunni Islamic thought
and practice, Shawarbi gave Malcolm a letter of recommendation, a copy
of The Eternal Message of Muhammadby the renowned pan-Islamicist Abd
al-Rahman Azzam, and the phone number of Azzam’s son, who happened
to be married to the daughter of Saudi Prince Faysal. The elder Azzam was
one of pan-Islam’s most important ﬁgures. A father of Arab nationalism
and a distinguished Egyptian diplomat, Azzam was a chief architect of the
Arab League and served as its ﬁrst secretary general from 1945 to 1952.
But like so many others, he lost favor after Nassir came to power, ﬁnding
refuge in Saudi Arabia, where he became a leading pan-Islamic polemicist
and author.
17
His Eternal Message of Muhammad, still available in a 1993 edition,
was a primary example of a popular modern Islamic polemic that both
defended Islam against Western critics and advocated a vision of the ideal
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 93


--- PAGE 101 ---
Islamic nation-state. Islam, Azzam said, was a “faith, a law, a way of life, a
‘nation,’ and ‘state.’” Contrary to Western assumptions, Azzam implied,
Islam was a highly modern religious tradition that promoted tolerance, re-
moved superstition, and encouraged mercy, charity, industriousness, fair-
ness, and brotherhood in the hearts and minds of its adherents. Islam, ac-
cording to Azzam, also required that all political leaders enjoy the consent
of their fellow citizens. Islam, he implied, intrinsically possessed many ele-
ments of Western liberalism, but incorporated them into a theocratic form
of governance. The West, he argued, based its social life on materialism,
which produced modern colonialism and class struggle; as a theocratic sys-
tem, Islam eliminated such problems.
18
Whether or not Malcolm ever read this book is unclear. But Malcolm
did come under the inﬂuence of Azzam himself during the pilgrimage. 
On April 13, 1964, Malcolm departed JFK International Airport with a
one-way plane ticket to Jedda, Saudi Arabia. When Malcolm arrived on
the Arabian peninsula, Saudi authorities detained him for special inter-
rogation. After fretting for some time, Malcolm thought to telephone
Azzam’s son, Dr. Omar Azzam. Upon hearing word of Malcolm’s difﬁcul-
ties, the Azzams immediately interceded with the proper authorities. They
vouched for Malcolm when he faced an examination by the hajj court, the
legal entity that decides whether one is a legitimate Muslim able to partic-
ipate in the pilgrimage. In fact, Prince Faysal himself probably communi-
cated with the court on Malcolm’s behalf. In addition, the elder Azzam in-
sisted that Malcolm stay in his suite at the Jedda Palace Hotel. Later, the
Saudi government ofﬁcially extended its welcome when the Deputy Chief
of Protocol, Muhammad Abdul Azziz Maged, gave Malcolm a special car
in which to travel during his time in the kingdom.
19
The Azzams, Malcolm claimed in the Autobiography ,had nothing to
gain by their hospitality. This was surprising, Malcolm said, since he had
never known such light-complexioned people to be so generous to a black
man without expectation of advantage or favor. According to Malcolm,
this act led him to “reappraise the ‘white man.’” It was the ﬁrst moment,
he said, in which “I ﬁrst began to perceive that ‘white man,’ as commonly
used, means complexion only secondarily; primarily, it described attitudes
and actions.” Though Malcolm had expressed such sentiments in 1963,
well before he separated from the Nation of Islam or traveled to the Mid-
dle East, the Autobiography did not include such information. Instead, it
depicted the pilgrimage as a truly watershed moment in Malcolm’s spiri-
tual life. Malcolm also desired his trip to be viewed as such. In a letter
from Mecca that Malcolm sent to both friends and the press, he said 
94 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 102 ---
that the hajj represented the ﬁrst occasion in his life during which he had
experienced real brotherhood between peoples of all races. The pilgrims,
Malcolm said, “were of all colors....B u t  w e  w e r e  all participating in the
same ritual, displaying a spirit of unity and brotherhood that my experi-
ences in America had led me to believe never could exist between the
white and the non-white.” Islam, he said, had seemingly removed racism
from the white mind. All of America, he concluded, needed to believe in
the oneness of God if this kind of unity was to be realized across the At-
lantic. For the ﬁrst and perhaps last time, Malcolm imagined that Islam
might have the power to change people’s attitudes towards race.
20
This is exactly what his Saudi hosts hoped to hear. According to Mal-
colm, the elder Azzam had expressed such sentiments during dinner with
Malcolm before he left Jedda for Mecca. During that occasion, Azzam ar-
gued that Islam was a tradition free of racial prejudice from its very begin-
ning. He illustrated the point by claiming that the Prophet Muhammad
himself was a man of both black and white ancestries. He also confronted
the charge by Western critics that racism was as difﬁcult a problem in
Islam as it was in the West by blaming Western inﬂuence. “[T]he prob-
lems of color which exist in the Muslim world,” Azzam said, “exist only
where, and to the extent that, that area of the Muslim world has been 
inﬂuenced by the West.” Racism is foreign to the very nature of Islam,
Azzam indicated, and has only been practiced where Muslims have acted
in an un-Islamic fashion—that is, like Westerners. Even Prince Faysal
joined in the effort to help Malcolm understand the “true” meaning of
Islam. After Malcolm completed the pilgrimage, Prince Faysal invited him
for an audience at which, once again, Malcolm was assured that his special
treatment was offered freely, without any expectation of a quid pro quo.
Of course, the Prince then proceeded to quiz Malcolm about the Nation
of Islam, carefully suggesting that if what he had read in Egyptian papers
were true, they did not practice the “true” Islam. Further, the prince re-
minded Malcolm that due to the abundance of English literature on Islam
“there was no excuse for ignorance, and no reason for sincere people to
allow themselves to be misled.” Prince Faysal, in other words, wanted to
make sure that the message of his hospitality was clear: now that Malcolm
had experienced the “real” Islam, the royal implied, he should be able to
represent it properly in the United States.
21
Malcolm seemed to accept his Saudi hosts as sincere. If calculated, 
the interest shown in Malcolm by those connected to Saudi interests, like
Azzam, was by no means nefarious. While Azzam and the Saudi authori-
ties hoped to gain an ally in the United States, they were also assisting
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 95


--- PAGE 103 ---
Malcolm to achieve legitimacy and acceptance as a Sunni Muslim and an
international black leader. The problem for Malcolm was that even in the
mystical Holy Land, he could not ignore the power of race as a sociologi-
cal reality. Observing the masses of pilgrims at Mecca, Malcolm concluded
in a letter sent back to his followers in the United States that “there was a
color pattern in the huge crowds [of pilgrims]... where true brotherhood
existed among all colors, where no one felt segregated, where there was 
no ‘superiority’ complex, no ‘inferiority complex’—then voluntarily, nat-
urally, people of the same kind felt drawn together by that which they 
had in common.” No matter how strong the universalistic impulses of
Islam might shape its adherents, he implied, some natural impulse still led
humans to seek out their own color group. Moreover, in this same letter
Malcolm also wrote that he had continued to publicize the “evils and the
indignities that are suffered by the black man in America.” He had even
done so while on Arafat, which for many is the climax of the hajj.
22
While the hajj had been a personally meaningful event in Malcolm’s
life, it led him neither to question his essentialist views of race nor to de-
velop a strategy for black liberation based on a universalistic interpretation
of Islam. Islam, he concluded, may have the power to make all humans
feel equal to one another, but it did not lessen their desire to divide them-
selves into separate groups based on color. He also mentioned that Islam
seemingly removed racism from the white mind and publicized the ﬁght
for black liberation among his fellow pilgrims. But he did not reﬂect upon
a politics that might utilize Islamic universalism nor did he articulate any
speciﬁcally pan-Islamic strategy for black liberation. In fact, after Malcolm
left the sanctuary of the pilgrimage in April 1964, any liberating potential
of Islam for race relations in the United States seemed more distant in his
mind as he came to reﬂect more deeply on pan-Africanism during his tour
of the newly emerging African states.
PAN-AFRICANISM, MALCOLM’S PIVOTAL AFRICAN
TOUR, AND BLACK LIBERATION STRATEGY
In 1945, George Padmore helped to launch postwar pan-Africanism by
organizing an important conference in Manchester, England. Largely con-
trolled by delegates from British colonies, this conference differed from
past pan-African gatherings as indigenous Africans upstaged African-
American and West Indian representatives, including W . E. B. DuBois,
one of the fathers of the movement. During the 1950s, the intellectual
96 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 104 ---
center of pan-Africanism moved from London to Africa itself as the for-
mer colonies emerged as new nation-states. The Egyptian revolution of
1952, the Algerian struggle for independence, the 1955 Afro-Asian Con-
ference in Bandung, and the establishment of Guinea as an independent
state in 1958 all contributed to this phenomenon. Above all, however, the
career of Kwame Nkrumah propelled the new energy behind pan-African-
ism. Elected as Prime Minister of the Gold Coast in 1951, Nkrumah
quickly became an international ﬁgure, appearing in front of adoring
crowds throughout the world, including one in Harlem in 1956. In 1957,
Nkrumah became even more important to the history of pan-Africanism
after he led his country’s transition from the Gold Coast to the indepen-
dent state of Ghana. Nkrumah appointed George Padmore chief of the
Bureau of African Affairs, the umbrella under which Padmore organized a
1958 conference of the independent African states, including Ethiopia,
Liberia, Morocco, T unisia, Libya, Egypt, Sudan, and Ghana. At the end of
the same year, Padmore inspired the ﬁrst All-African Peoples’ Conference
to which representatives from every African state and colony were invited.
In 1963, the Organization for African Unity succeeded the Conference as
the major transnational body of African states. Postwar pan-Africanism
thus developed in the shadow of decolonization. As such, the one com-
mon characteristic that it shared was a “common rejection of white pre-
dominance and colonialism.” But many of its West African proponents, in
particular, also interpreted the movement as a call for racial solidarity and
cultural unity. It was this brand of pan-Africanism that Malcolm discov-
ered during his visit to Ghana following the pilgrimage.
23
After spending more than two weeks in Saudi Arabia, Malcolm de-
parted for Beirut on April 30, 1964. From Beirut, where he delivered a talk
on the failures of the civil rights movement, Malcolm traveled to Lagos,
Nigeria (via Cairo and Alexandria). There he underwent what might be
fruitfully seen as yet a third conversion. On May 8, Malcolm addressed a
group of Ibadan University students, ﬁrst at T renchard Hall, then at the
Student Union. At the second talk, students gave Malcolm a new name,
“Omowale,” meaning “the son who has come home.” According to Mal-
colm, he responded enthusiastically, telling them that he had never “re-
ceived a more treasured honor.” In fact, Malcolm consistently used words
like “thrilling” and “speechless” to narrate his trip in West Africa.
24
Writing from Lagos on May 10, Malcolm began to promote pan-
Africanism as his preferred strategy for black liberation. But he did
not abandon his role as African-American Muslim spokesperson, either.
While he still expressed the “hope that my Hajj to the Holy Cit y... will
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 97


--- PAGE 105 ---
establish the religious afﬁliation of the Muslim Mosque, Inc., with the 750
million Muslims of the world once and for all,” he also asserted that the
black struggle had an importance that went beyond concerns of confes-
sional afﬁliation. In fact, he argued that Muslims should concern them-
selves with oppression against blacks because it was a violation of the
“human rights ” of persons of African descent. “The Koran,” Malcolm
wrote, “compels the Muslim world to take a stand on the side of those
whose human rights are being violated, no matter what the religious per-
suasion of the victims is.” In this passage, he again indicated that he con-
ceived of Islam as an essentially universalistic tradition that required con-
cern for humans as humans. In effect, he said, Muslims should not
support pan-Africanism because they are pro-black or pro-Muslim; they
should support pan-Africanism because they are pro-human.
25
Still, Malcolm was beginning to think that his main mission in life
should be to develop support for pan-Africanism. In fact, his trip to
Ghana only cemented this commitment further. On May 10, the same
day that he dated his letter, Malcolm ﬂew to Accra, Ghana, where he be-
came an ofﬁcial guest of state. The newspaper compared his arrival to that
of W . E. B. DuBois, the American expatriate whom Nkrumah had treated
as black royalty. Malcolm met with Ghanaian ofﬁcials, addressed the par-
liament, and was honored at both a state dinner and by the Algerian and
Chinese ambassadors. “I can only wish,” he wrote, “that every American
black man could have shared my ears, my eyes, and my emotions through-
out the round of engagements which had been made for me.” By the end
of the trip, Malcolm uncharacteristically proclaimed that “I no longer had
any words.” In Malcolm’s meeting with President Nkrumah on May 15,
both agreed, according to Malcolm, that “Pan-Africanism was the key...
to the problems of those of African heritage.” In a letter penned four 
days earlier from Accra, Malcolm made his advocacy of pan-Africanism
even more explicit, comparing the black unity to that of worldwide Jewry.
“Just as the American Jew is in harmony (politically, economically, and
culturally) with world Jewry,” Malcolm wrote, “it is time for all African-
Americans to become an integral part of the world’s Pan-Africanists.”
Blacks need not physically immigrate to Africa, he said, as much as “we
must ‘return’ to Africa philosophically and culturally and develop a work-
ing unity in the framework of Pan-Africanism.”
26
But Malcolm was concerned that his views would spark criticism
among his Muslim benefactors, who might assume that he had reverted to
his old racist beliefs or that he had no intention of spreading the univer-
salistic message that they attempted to convey to him. In his Autobiogra-
phy, he assured them that “my reacting as I did presented no conﬂict with
98 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 106 ---
the convictions of brotherhood which I had gained in the Holy Land.” At
the same time, Malcolm maintained that a pan-African political agenda
was the most realistic strategy for awakening the revolutionary conscious-
ness of black America. Mass conversion to Islam, he seemed to say, was
simply an impractical solution to the race problem. This was because of
Christianity’s strong hold on the soul of black America. “America’s Ne-
groes,” he said, “are too indelibly soaked in Christianity’s double standard
of oppression” for Islam to have an adequate impact on them. What he
meant by this was a bit opaque. Did he believe that something other than
“religion” was needed to awaken black America? Or did he mean that one
could never expect enough black Americans to convert to Islam to make a
real difference? In this passage, at least, no clear answer emerged.
27
Malcolm soon became a leading voice for pan-Africanism, ﬁlling a
gap in the ideological spectrum that had existed throughout the previ-
ous decade, when no major group emerged in black America to trumpet
the values of Nkrumah’s and Padmore’s pan-Africanism. After visiting
Senegal, Morocco, and Algeria, Malcolm returned from this pivotal trip 
to New York on May 21, 1964. Back in the United States, he also cele-
brated his new status as a bona ﬁde Sunni Muslim leader. Moreover, Mal-
colm stepped up his criticism of Elijah Muhammad, making it seem as if
he were now ready to challenge the authority of his former mentor. Mal-
colm’s rhetorical jousting, however, was a dangerous game. After Malcolm
let it be known on June 8 that as many as six women were involved in the
Messenger’s sex scandal, he began to receive death threats. While Mal-
colm managed to announce the formation of an Organization of Afro-
American Unity (OAAU) on June 28, 1964, problems with the NOI only
escalated. Malcolm took others’ advice to disappear again and left New
York for Cairo on July 6, 1964. On this trip to the Middle East and Africa,
Malcolm attempted to juggle his commitment to pan-Africanism as a lib-
eration strategy with his newfound identity as a Sunni Muslim missionary.
It became clear, however, that Malcolm would not relinquish the ﬁght for
pan-African liberation, no matter what his Arab hosts said.
28
THE BIFURCATION OF POLITICS AND RELIGION:
PAN-AFRICANISM VS. ISLAM
On July 17, 1964, Malcolm attended the African Summit Conference 
in Cairo as a representative of the OAAU. Practically every African head 
of state was present at the meeting, which was the second such gather-
ing sponsored by the Organization of African Unity. President Nassir’s
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 99


--- PAGE 107 ---
welcoming address, a kind of retrospective of the past year, lauded the 
passage of the 1964 civil rights bill in the United States. Others at the con-
ference also gave the impression that they had better let American blacks
take care of their own problems. Malcolm sought to challenge both of
these positions. As an ofﬁcial observer at the conference, Malcolm sub-
mitted an eight-page memorandum that tried to convince African leaders
that “our problem is your problem.” America, Malcolm said, was good at
“trickery” when it came to civil rights, but the United States was actually
“the century’s leading neo-colonialist power.” Further, Malcolm asked
African support for measures to guarantee the human rights of Afro-
Americans by bringing the problem before the United Nations. In closing,
Malcolm beseeched the conferees not to replace European colonialism
with American dollarism.
29
Malcolm suspected, however, that his Muslim hosts and pro-Saudi
allies would once again take him only for a black nationalist. In a speech on
July 27 before Cairo’s Shubaan al-Muslimeen, a youth organization much
like the YMCA, Malcolm reassured his audience that his ﬁght for black lib-
eration did not contradict his desire to be a good Muslim. “[M]y ﬁght is
two-fold, my burden is double, my responsibilities multiple... material as
well as spiritual, political as well as religious, racial as well as non-racial,” he
declared. “I will never hesitate to let the entire world know the hell my peo-
ple suffer from America’s deceit and her hypocrisy, as well as her oppres-
sion.” Throughout the summer, Malcolm continued to press his case in
Egypt, speaking in Alexandria on August 4 and attending a second African
Summit Conference on August 21. It was during this second tour that the
Egyptian-sponsored Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs (SCIA) granted
Malcolm twenty scholarships for study at the University of al-Azhar,
arguably the most prestigious Islamic university in the world.
30
While Malcolm was clearly adopting pan-Africanism as the animating
force behind his politics, he did not relinquish his own personal interest in
Islam either. In September 1964, Malcolm left for another pilgrimage to
Mecca. During this ‘umra, or lesser pilgrimage, Malcolm underwent train-
ing as an evangelist by the World Muslim League. Shaykh Muhammad
Sarur al-Sabban, secretary general of the organization and a descendant 
of black slaves, oversaw his training. The University of Medina, like the
SCIA, granted Malcolm several scholarships for study there. According 
to Richard W . Murphy, then second secretary at the American embassy in
Jedda, Malcolm granted an interview to a Jeddan newspaper, al-Bilad, in
which he “took pains...t o  deprecate his reputation as a political activist
and dwelt mainly on his interest in bringing sounder appreciation of Islam
100 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 108 ---
to American Negroes.” It is difﬁcult to tell whether Malcolm was simply
telling his Saudi hosts what they wanted to hear or whether the account of
the Saudi newspaper on which Murphy based his memorandum distorted
Malcolm’s words. Perhaps this is what he actually believed at the time.
Whichever interpretation is correct, however, Malcolm clearly relished an-
other opportunity to focus on his “personal spiritual developmen t...f a r
away from politics.”
31
In October and November, however, it was back to politics. Through-
out these two months, Malcolm met with eleven African heads of state
and other VIPs, including Kenyan President Jomo Kenyatta and Ugandan
Milton Obote. Concerned that factionalism might tear Africa apart, Mal-
colm returned to New York on November 24, 1964, with a renewed de-
termination to ﬁght for the ideals of pan-African unity. From this point
until his death in February, Malcolm’s speeches became harshly critical 
not only of United States policy towards American blacks, but towards
African blacks, as well. Malcolm focused, in particular, on United States
support for Moise Tshombe’s junta in the Congo. In late 1960, CIA Di-
rector Allen Dulles spearheaded the effort to depose Patrice Lumumba,
the leader of the movement that had helped to win Congolese indepen-
dence from Belgium. In his place, the United States supported Moise
Tshombe, whose forces murdered Lumumba in January 1961. From No-
vember 1964 until February 1965, Malcolm cited the Congolese interven-
tion as one of the worst forms of United States deceit and wondered aloud
whether he should recruit a force of black American freedom ﬁghters to
tip the balance in favor of the anti-Tshombe forces.
32
In describing other reasons for his support of a pan-African struggle,
Malcolm also reafﬁrmed his essentialist view of black identity as a con-
tainer for cultural and biological traits shared by all persons of African 
descent. He voiced these views, for example, during a speech on Afro-
American history given at Harlem’s Audubon Ballroom on January 24,
1965. Following the lead of both Padmore and Nkrumah, Malcolm saw
black history as replete with evidence of the cultural unity of black hu-
mankind. Furthermore, he viewed knowledge of this past as essential to
knowledge of one’s true identity, knowledge of which would inspire new
“energy” and “incentive” in the struggle for black liberation. But to see the
real historical achievements of blacks, Malcolm said, one would have to 
ignore the “Negro History Week” version of “cotton pickers, orange grow-
ers, mammies, and uncles.”
33
Curiously, the version of black history that Malcolm offered in its
place sounded much like that of Noble Drew Ali and Elijah Muhammad.
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 101


--- PAGE 109 ---
Before the age of colonialism, Malcolm said, the ancestors of modern
blacks who peopled Africa, the Middle East, and India built great civili-
zations. While whites sat naked in Europe consumed by the hunger for
“raw meat,” blacks developed astronomy, the earth sciences, and architec-
ture. Slavery, he argued, stole this cultural inheritance from the Africans.
“They came here,” Malcolm stated, “from a civilization where they had
high morals; there was no stealing, no drunkenness, no adultery, fornica-
tion; there was nothing but high morals.” When the slaves arrived, how-
ever, “they found a country that had the lowest morals” since it was ﬁlled
“by prostitutes, by cutthroats.” Slaveholders, Malcolm asserted, turned
civilized Africans into their slaves by breaking up black families and con-
tenting slaves with Jesus. The result was a people who “had no language,
no history, no name.”
34
But, Malcolm argued in the style of Elijah Muhammad, the power-
lessness and immorality of modern black Americans ran counter to their
true nature as Africans. Echoing the essentialist racialism of Blyden and
Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm stated:
The Black man by nature is a builder, he is scientiﬁc by nature,
he’s mathematical by nature. Rhythm is mathematics, harmony is
mathematics . . . you’ve gotten away from yourself. But when you
are in tune with yourself, your very nature has harmony, has
rhythm, has mathematics. You can build. You don’t ever need
anybody to teach you how to build. You play music by ear. You
dance by how you’re feeling.
35
This was quite similar to a statement that Malcolm had made just weeks
earlier on December 16, 1964, at a gathering sponsored by the Harvard
Law School: “When you hear a black man playing music, whether it is jazz
or Bach, you still hear African music. The soul of Africa is still reﬂected 
in the music played by black men. In everything else we do we still are
Africans in color, feeling, everything. And we will always be that whether
we like it or not.”
36 That Malcolm continued to view black identity in
biologically and culturally essentialist terms was also indicated by his com-
ments on intermarriage during this period. When asked by an interviewer
for the British magazine Flamingo whether “mixed marriages promote
better human relations,” Malcolm answered thus: “Mixed marriages don’t
solve anything. What are the Black men trying to prove? Such ‘T oms’
really need psychoanalysis.” In another interview with Pierre Berton taped
on January 19, 1965, at CFTO-TV in T oronto, Malcolm conceded that
102 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 110 ---
intermarriage was “one human being marrying another human being,”
but also asserted that it was an unnatural phenomenon—a “reaction that
develops among the people who are victims o f... [a] negative society.”
37
While Malcolm continued to deﬁne black identity in essentialist
terms, he also argued for an Islam that transcended the bonds of any
group identity. In fact, he almost presented Islam as a necessary correc-
tive to his own racialism. “It is only being a Muslim which keeps me from
seeing people by the color of their skin,” Malcolm said during a speech
given at the London School of Economics on February 11. “And the real
religion of Islam doesn’t teach anyone to judge another human being 
by the color of his ski n... but the man’s deeds, the man’s conscious 
behavior, the man’s intentions.” Malcolm echoed this exact sentiment 
at nearly every speaking engagement during his last month, including a
February 15 meeting at the Audubon Ballroom and a speech at the Cory
Hill Methodist Church in Rochester, New York, on February 16.
38
But Malcolm was always just as quick, as he was in Mecca, to remind
his audiences that his commitment to this nonracialist tenet of Islam did
not preclude his participation in a speciﬁcally black liberation struggle. In
an address given on December 16, 1964, at the Harvard Law School, Mal-
colm stressed that “despite being a Muslim, I can’t overlook the fact that
I’m an Afro-American in a country which practices racism against black
people....[ W ]hether I’m Muslim, Christian, Buddhist, Hindu, atheist
or agnostic, I would still be in the front lines.” While religion preaches
brotherhood, Malcolm consistently said, most whites in America did not
practice it. In an address at the Ford Auditorium in Detroit on February
14, 1965, Malcolm argued that “I’m for the brotherhood of everybody,
but I don’t believe in forcing brotherhood upon people who don’t want it.”
Religion, Malcolm told New York Post reporter Timothy Lee on February
18, “is not enough. T oday the problems of the Negro go beyond reli-
gion.”
39
This comment did not mean that Malcolm disbelieved in Islam or
devalued his Islamic identity. But it did indicate that he deﬁned Islam
as a “religion” or a creed that could have limited impact in the achieve-
ment of his political goals. As a result, he chose pan-Africanism for his
“politics” while grasping Islam as his “religion”; Malcolm viewed both
identities as part of his own authenticity. But in holding to both, Malcolm
made it impossible to integrate his “religious” values with his “political”
beliefs, since his assumptions about the meaning of both pan-Africanism
and Islam pitted them against each other in his own mind. On the 
one hand, his pan-Africanism was informed by a classic form of racial 
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 103


--- PAGE 111 ---
essentialism—hence the comment that the black man’s African behavioral
traits would always be a part of him whether he liked it or not. On the
other hand, Malcolm viewed Islam as a religion that could have nothing to
do with a speciﬁcally racialist political struggle, given its emphasis on non-
racial unity. While it might be argued that Malcolm had found a perfectly
reasonable method of balancing his “political” commitment to the black
struggle with his “religious” beliefs in Islam, his bifurcation of religion and
politics had important consequences for his ability to determine the direc-
tion of his own Islamic commitments.
THE MEANING OF MALCOLM’S DOUBLENESS
Malcolm had ceded the authority to deﬁne the meaning of Islam (and
hence, the authority to decide what was legitimately Islamic) to his mis-
sionary sponsors like Shawarbi and Azzam. For Malcolm, these men were
synonymous with the “real” Islam. They spoke the language of the Qur’an,
while he did not. They were also Arabs, a people whose “image is almost
inseparable from the image of Islam,” as Malcolm put it.
40 And they held
the keys to Mecca, where Malcolm had experienced his second conversion
and gained conﬁdence in his own legitimacy as a “real” Muslim. It should
come as little surprise, then, that Malcolm allowed them to deﬁne what
was or was not the true Islam. Ramadan, Shawarbi, Azzam, and even
Prince Faysal had made it clear to Malcolm that Islam paid no heed to
race. If Malcolm were to practice the “true” Islam, they said, he could not
appropriate Islam in an explicitly black struggle. Where Malcolm surren-
dered the ideological ground was in accepting this argument. Once he
adopted their ideological requirements as a fundamental part of his own
Islamic identity, he could use Islam only in a universalistic way to support
a more general “human” liberation. He could not make an argument that
appropriated Islam in any particularistic way. Put another way, if Islam
could have nothing to do with issues of race, and Malcolm were a true
Muslim, then he could not mix his Islam with his pan-Africanism.
A written exchange between Said Ramadan and Malcolm illustrated
the fact that Malcolm seemed unable to break free of the ideas of his spon-
sors. Ramadan, the director of the Saudi-sponsored Islamic Centre in
Geneva, had asked Malcolm in September 1964 whether it was true that
“you still hold Black color as a main base and dogma for your drive under
the banner of liberation?” If so, Ramadan wanted to know, “[h]ow could a
man of your spirit, intellect, and worldwide outlook fail to see in Islam . . .
104 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 112 ---
a message that conﬁrm s... the ethnological oneness and equality of all
races, thus striking at the very root o f... racial discrimination?” Some-
time between February 13 and 20, 1965, Malcolm composed a rather
spirited reply, stating that “as a Black American I do feel that my ﬁrst re-
sponsibility is to my twenty-two million fellow Black Americans.” Mal-
colm then turned the tables on Ramadan, accusing the Muslim world of
ignoring racism in the United States. He also repeated a charge that he had
made while still in the NOI that Muslim missionaries focused on whites
rather than blacks.
41 But Malcolm had no answer to Ramadan’s main as-
sertion, which was that Islam strikes at the “very root” of “racial discrimi-
nation” and thus represents the best solution for America’s race problem.
Malcolm believed such an assertion to be unrealistic. But because he had
tied his legitimacy to Ramadan’s own Islamic universalism, he could not
offer any sort of Islamic approach to a more particularistic struggle.
At the same time, because of his essentialist views of black identity, he
could not imagine a black struggle that operated across racial lines or that
did not accentuate the particular needs of blacks. Since blacks around the
world shared a common experience and common traits, he argued, they
should join in a common struggle led by and for blacks. Such views
blinded Malcolm to other possible strategies for black liberation that
might pay more attention to the historical rather than essentialist mean-
ings of blackness. If the need to defend an essentialist black identity had
not been so great in his mind, perhaps he might have considered other
strategies for liberation that were pan-Islamic, multiracial, or socialist.
In contemplating the meaning of Malcolm’s assassination for Ameri-
can and Afro-American politics, some have speculated about how Mal-
colm would have reacted to the radicalization of the anti-war effort and
the black struggle. It was, after all, less than a year since he had announced
his ofﬁcial independence from Elijah Muhammad. I wonder, on the other
hand, whether Malcolm might not have also broken away from his Mus-
lim sponsors to develop his own Islamic response to black oppression that
paid more attention to race without reifying any “essential” black traits.
But assassins’ bullets silenced Malcolm at the Audubon Ballroom on 
February 21, 1965. After this loss, it would take exactly a decade before
another prominent African-American Muslim thinker would confront
Malcolm’s dilemma.
Malcolm X (1925–1965) 105


--- PAGE 113 ---
Chapter 6
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933),
Sunni Islamic Reform, and the
Continuing Problem of Particularism
INTRODUCTION
While Malcolm X has received the most scholarly attention of all the
ﬁgures covered in this study, W . D. Muhammad has received the least. 1
Born the seventh son of Elijah and Clara Muhammad in 1933, Wallace
grew up in the Nation of Islam as a member of Muhammad’s “royal fam-
ily.” Like Malcolm, however, the future leader questioned the legitimacy
of his faher’s teachings as early as the 1950s. By the 1960s, he had bro-
ken with his father in order to embrace Sunni Islam. Then, after the
death of Malcolm X, he reconciled with the Messenger. Throughout
that decade, he repeated the entire process, separating from the NOI
at least twice, only to seek readmission into his father’s ﬂock. It was al-
most miraculous that by 1974 Wallace positioned himself as his father’s
successor.
2
In this chapter, I will show how Wallace Muhammad inherited the
mantle of leadership from his father in 1975 and then led the movement
through a remarkable transformation toward the universalistic interpreta-
tion of Islam that Malcolm had promoted in his ﬁnal year. Speciﬁcally,
this chapter will explore how, in less than a decade, Wallace Muhammad
debunked the myth of Yacub, became an advocate of American patrio-
tism, and aligned the NOI with Sunni Islamic teachings and the Arab
Islamic world. In so doing, Wallace Muhammad faced questions not un-
like those confronted by Malcolm X. How, for example, would he advo-
cate a universalistic reading of Islam and simultaneously ﬁght for black
107


--- PAGE 114 ---
liberation? Would he abandon black particularism altogether or, like Mal-
colm, try to keep his “religion” separate from his “politics”?
I will argue that unlike Malcolm, Wallace Muhammad ﬁrst attempted
to blend elements of black particularism with his belief in a universalistic
Islam. Appropriating themes from the black consciousness movement, the
leader linked the Muslim identity of his followers to that of an African
Muslim ancestor named Bilal. But in associating Islam with this particu-
laristic identity, he faced powerful opposition from his immigrant Muslim
allies, who accused him of continuing the race-based Islam of his father. In
the face of that criticism, the leader abandoned these black consciousness
teachings by the 1980s, reafﬁrming what his immigrant allies argued was
the only “true” Islam—a universalistic Islam impossible to associate with
any particular group of human beings.
But in the 1980s, the leader again tried to put his own stamp on the
practice of Islam among black Americans. Rather than explicitly combin-
ing black particularism with his universalistic vision of Islam, however, he
claimed the right to interpret the seminal texts of Sunni Islam, including
both the Qur’an and Sunna, in view of the particular historical circum-
stances in which African-American Muslims lived and practiced. This was
a key moment in African-American Islamic thought and suggested a num-
ber of new directions. For Wallace Muhammad, it meant that African-
American Muslims should avoid relying solely on immigrant and foreign
interpretations of Islamic texts and instead form a comprehensive vision of
Islam that focused on speciﬁcally black issues.
I will also argue, however, that as Imam Muhammad, as he would
come to be called, set out to create his own original body of Islamic
thought, he offered two competing visions of social change that seemed to
pit a universalistic Islam against a particularistic black struggle. On the
one hand, his ofﬁcial “Islamic” view stressed individual responsibility as
the primary engine of lasting social change. On the other hand, when the
Imam discussed various solutions to problems plaguing black people, he
promoted collectivist solutions almost identical to those of his father.
Whether these two differing visions were complementary in the Imam’s
mind was never made clear. Even more importantly, the Imam did not ex-
plain or justify his collectivist thought in terms of any interpretation of
Islam. Though he had sounded the call for an African-American Islam
that incorporated aspects of particularism into an overarching vision of
universalism, he did not offer any details on how collective black struggle
might be informed by or understood in terms of an Islamic perspective.
108 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 115 ---
WALLACE MUHAMMAD
AS NOI APOSTATE AND LEADER
Born in Detroit, Michigan, in 1933, this son of Elijah Muhammad en-
tered life at a tumultuous time for the Nation of Islam. Disputes among
the leadership forced Elijah out of Detroit the following year, prompting
the leader to seek refuge at T emple No. 2 in Chicago. As outlined in chap-
ter 4, Chicago also proved to be a difﬁcult place for Elijah Muhammad,
who became an itinerant preacher from 1934 until the early 1940s. Then,
in 1942, Elijah Muhammad was sent to prison, where he remained until
1946. As a result, Wallace Muhammad barely knew his father as he
was growing up. His mother became his sole parent. During this time,
Clara Muhammad also played a key role in sustaining the movement in
her husband’s stead and inculcated NOI values and beliefs in her children,
as well.
3
Once Elijah Muhammad rejoined the family in 1946, the movement
began to expand signiﬁcantly due in large part to the leader’s successful
efforts to build an organizational infrastructure. These efforts included
the establishment of the University of Islam, where Wallace Muhammad
attended school. An elementary and secondary school, the “University”
offered standard subjects, religious education, and Arabic language. In
addition to working sporadically at the Oxford Electric Co. from 1952 to
1954, Wallace Muhammad received his only formal education at this
parochial institution. There, he studied Arabic with a number of native
speakers, including a Palestinian named “Ibrahim,” an Egyptian named
“Kamil,” and another Palestinian named Jamil Diab. Though Diab later
led a movement in Chicago to discredit Elijah Muhammad, during this
period Diab was actually in the employ of the Nation of Islam. According
to Wallace Muhammad, Diab mostly taught Arabic language, although he
occasionally introduced traditional Islamic concepts through his teaching.
4
As a result, Wallace looked more and more to the Qur’an as a source
of divine guidance. As a newly appointed minister of the NOI temple
in Philadelphia, he began in 1958 to introduce his own Qur’an-based
teachings to local followers. According to Wallace Muhammad, many
NOI members expressed interest in this new focus on Qur’an, especially
since he made certain that none of his statements directly contradicted 
his father’s doctrines. According to E. U. Essien-Udom, his use of the
Qur’an also increased his prestige as a movement leader among some
members in Chicago. In fact, despite Malcolm’s growing popularity with
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 109


--- PAGE 116 ---
the mainstream media, the “word” within the movement was that Wallace
would succeed his father as leader of the NOI. Essien-Udom, whose
account of the NOI remains the best ethnographic source on the move-
ment during the 1950s and early 1960s, claimed that “[s]everal followers
have told the writer that Muhammad assured them that ‘Allah has chosen
Minister Wallace to succeed him.’” Malcolm X himself may have believed
this, as he seemed to indicate on December 12, 1958, when he introduced
Wallace Muhammad as the son who was “following in the footsteps of
his father.” When Essien-Udom asked Wallace himself about the rumor,
Wallace replied that the “followers have come to look upon me as the
second man.”
5
In 1961, however, Wallace Muhammad’s important moves toward
leadership of the NOI temporarily came to an end when he had no choice
but to serve out a prison sentence for draft evasion. His incarceration 
followed a long saga in the courts, which began in 1953, when Wallace
had become eligible for the draft. At that time, he appealed to his local
Chicago draft board for conscientious objector status and was successful.
In 1957, he was then ordered to serve two years civilian duty at the Illinois
State Hospital in Elgin. After he failed to report, however, the federal gov-
ernment brought charges against him during the following year in United
States District Court, where he was indicted and convicted of draft eva-
sion. In April 1960, Muhammad was sentenced to three years, and after a
failed appeal, reported to the Sandstone Correctional Institution in Min-
nesota on October 31, 1961, to serve out his sentence.
6
The NOI responded by depicting Wallace’s sentence as the unjust per-
secution of the righteous. The December 1961 edition of Muhammad
Speaks carried a story whose headline announced that “Courts Jail Muslim
Ministers; Taught Negroes In Faith of Islam Religion!” Framing Muham-
mad’s conviction as a religious issue, the paper went on to say that these
religious “teachings...h a v e  been held to be criminal, although...  dem-
onstrations of racial violence such as lynching s...a r e  r egarded as ‘loyal
Americanism.’” Whether Wallace accepted such statements as true cannot
be known, although he later described his time in prison as important to
his own spiritual development. Sandstone, Wallace said, had afforded him
the opportunity to study the Bible and the Qur’an more extensively than
he had ever done before. It was also the ﬁrst time, he stated, that he had
begun seriously questioning his father.
7
Nevertheless, after he was paroled on January 10, 1963, Wallace
Muhammad continued to support the elder Muhammad’s movement. 
At the annual Savior’s Day convention held on February 26, Wallace 
110 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 117 ---
attempted to address the gathered followers, only to be thwarted by Mal-
colm X, who had been left in charge due to Elijah Muhammad’s ill health.
This incident, among others, created tension between Malcolm and the
rest of the “royal family,” who felt that Malcolm was becoming far too
powerful within the movement. Malcolm himself knew this and later that
spring sought to defuse the situation by writing an apologetic letter to Eli-
jah Muhammad. Curiously, however, the Autobiography of Malcolm X de-
picted the relationship between Wallace and Malcolm during this period
as being a harmonious one. After Malcolm became convinced that Elijah
Muhammad was guilty of adultery in late 1962, he turned to Wallace, 
of whom he “always had a high opinion ....I  felt that Wallace was Mr.
Muhammad’s most strongly spiritual son,” he wrote. “Always, Wallace and
I shared an exceptional closeness and trust.” According to Malcolm, Wal-
lace simply conﬁrmed during this meeting that his father was indeed the
immoral man whom Malcolm had described and doubted whether any-
thing could be done to defend him.
8
After Malcolm’s suspension in December 1963, Wallace became even
more embroiled in the controversy surrounding his father’s sexual behav-
ior. According to Malcolm, it was Wallace who had told him about the
Messenger’s improprieties. On January 2, 1964, Elijah Muhammad sent a
message to his son that Malcolm had implicated him in the whole mess.
Wallace Muhammad then requested a trial before his father, but he was
denied. After nearly half a year of isolation from the NOI, Wallace broke
with his father in May 1964, a couple months after Malcolm had an-
nounced his own independence in March. While working odd jobs to pay
his own bills, he also established the Afro-Descendant Upliftment Society,
which he hoped to use to support himself. The organization was never a
success, probably because Wallace was too busy worrying about his own
safety. Like Malcolm, Wallace feared that he might be murdered, and on
August 4, 1964, he went to the FBI and the local police hoping to obtain
some protection from what he described as the “punch-your-teeth-out”
squads in the NOI.
9
After the assassination of Malcolm on February 21, 1965, Wallace
kept quiet—at least for a little while. Five days later, on February 26, 
Wallace Muhammad approached the podium at the annual Savior’s Day
gathering in Chicago to reafﬁrm the legitimacy of his father’s teachings. 
A short speech of ﬁve minutes, Wallace’s mea culpa included a plea to be
accepted once again by the NOI membership as a “brother.” Such state-
ments seemed quite disingenuous, given both the duress under which
Wallace must have been operating and his actions in the following years.
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 111


--- PAGE 118 ---
From 1965 until 1971, Wallace was expelled from the movement at least
twice and perhaps as many as three to four times. Whatever personal ani-
mosity existed between him and his father seemed to take the form of a
running debate about the Islamic legitimacy of the elder Muhammad’s
teachings and the need to introduce more Sunni Islamic concepts into the
movement.
10
Given this, it is all the more remarkable and even curious that Wallace
eventually inherited the mantle of leadership from his father. While Elijah
Muhammad never publicly appointed a successor, he seemed to defer qui-
etly to his son’s efforts to secure his right to the throne throughout 1974
and early 1975. In New York, Wallace ﬂatly told National Secretary Abass
Rassoull and National Spokesman Louis Farrakhan that he would succeed
his father and speciﬁcally warned Farrakhan not to interfere. By 1975, it
seems that he had garnered the support of key members, including
Muhammad Ali, Herbert Muhammad, Raymond Sharrieff, Farrakhan,
and Elijah Muhammad, Jr.
11
Mattias Gardell speculates that the FBI might have helped Wallace
gain this position through its COINTELPRO operations. COINTEL-
PRO was a child of the Cold War era, when the FBI regularly conducted
counterintelligence operations against suspected Communists, white hate
groups, and the New Left. These operations often worked in the following
way: Bureau agents would penetrate the upper echelons of various social
or political movements, spread dissension, and plant false information,
hoping to destroy the movement from within. Beginning in 1967, how-
ever, the FBI expanded its COINTELPRO operations to include “Black
Nationalist-Hate Groups.” Encompassing nearly 360 separate operations,
this effort represented the second largest COINTELPRO of all. And, 
according to Frank Donner, the Nation of Islam was at the top of the 
Bureau’s list.
12
In 1968, the FBI’s ﬁeld ofﬁce in Chicago identiﬁed Wallace Muham-
mad as “the only son of Elijah Muhammad who would have the necessary
qualities to guide the NOI in such a manner as would eliminate racist
teachings.” How much the FBI actually assisted Wallace in his bid for the
position cannot be known due to key deletions in their ﬁles. But the Bu-
reau seemed to do what it could. In a January 7, 1969 letter from the 
Director’s ofﬁcer to Chicago Agent Marlin Johnson, a Bureau ofﬁcial
stated that after the death of Elijah Muhammad “a power struggle can be
expected....W e  should plan now to change the philosophy of the NOI
to one of strictly religious and self-improvement orientation, deleting the
race hatred and separate nationhood aspects.” The Bureau also reiterated
112 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 119 ---
that it viewed Wallace Muhammad as uniquely qualiﬁed to fulﬁll this
task. Chicago Agent Johnson responded by initiating an investigation into
Herbert Muhammad’s tax returns, hoping to remove him “as a possible
successor to his father as head of the militant black nationalist NOI.”
13
WALLACE MUHAMMAD’S
SUNNI REFORMATION OF THE NOI
Whether or not the efforts of the FBI helped Wallace Muhammad inherit
the leadership of the NOI, he did carry out a program of Sunni Islamic re-
form that, in a few short months, almost completely changed the charac-
ter of the NOI. The new leader made his ﬁrst appearance as his father’s
successor during the annual Savior’s Day convention on February 26,
1975, one day after the death of the seventy-seven-year-old Muhammad.
In an address to an audience of more than twenty-ﬁve thousand people at
the Chicago Amphitheater, he slowly laid the foundation of his “second
resurrection” by beginning to debunk the beliefs regarding the divinity of
NOI founder W . D. Fard. Fard, he explained, was not God himself but
“the manifestation of God to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.” Over
the following few years, he similarly reinterpreted almost all of his father’s
doctrines, claiming all the while that he was merely preserving the elder
Muhammad’s true legacy. The front page of the March 14, 1975 edition
of Muhammad Speaks emphasized this idea, featuring a large photograph
of Elijah Muhammad smiling down on his son, who was pictured in both
meek and authoritative poses. The headline proclaimed, “He Lives On!”
14
And yet, Elijah Muhammad’s intellectual legacy, especially his idea of
black chosenness, was clearly doomed. According to Wallace Muhammad,
being black did not mean that one was a god or even a member of the
chosen race; being black meant having the “black mind,” which was a
symbol for closeness to God. Moreover, he said, the Messenger never
preached against another human being because of his or her skin color.
No person, he paraphrased his father, should be hated on the basis of skin
color alone: “The Honorable Elijah Muhammad has said Himself, and
this is on record: ‘We do not teach hate.’” Furthermore, Wallace contin-
ued, white people were not actually devils. “I’m not calling those people
‘devil.’ I’m calling the mind that has ruled those people and you ‘devil.’”
Killing the white devil, said Wallace, did not mean physically snufﬁng out
his or her life. It meant making a white person relinquish his or her devil-
ish ways. “You can destroy a devil,” he asserted, “by destroying the mind
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 113


--- PAGE 120 ---
that the person has grown within them. If you can destroy the mind, you
will destroy the devil.” This allegorical destruction of racism was also
similar, he argued, to what his father really meant in predicting the end
of the world. Reinterpreting the passage of Ezekiel on which Muhammad
based his belief that a Mothership would obliterate white humankind,
Wallace argued that “Ezekiel saw this body as a wheel (Nation of Islam)
in a wheel (world community), the Revelator saw it as . . . a divinely re-
vealed community.” It was this community’s sheer moral force, the leader
implied, that would destroy all the evil that whites had brought about
in the world.
15
Then, in a June 15, 1975 address to twenty thousand people at
Chicago’s McCormick Place, he announced that whites would be allowed
to join the NOI. “There will be no such category as a white Muslim or
black Muslim. All will be Muslims. All Children of God,” said Wallace
Muhammad. In explaining the change in a CBS News interview with
Randy Daniels, Muhammad said that the NOI had banned whites previ-
ously because of their obsession with race or “color.” While the NOI
would continue to ﬁght such thinking among whites, the leader said,
“those... who identify with our thinking can come in and join u s...i n
giving moral direction to the world.” Of course, Wallace Muhammad re-
alized that the number of white members wanting to join would never be
very high. The decision was a symbolic one, allowing him to uphold the
idea of nonracialism while knowing full well that his movement would re-
main predominantly black.
16
Muhammad also concentrated on promoting the practice of the Old
World Islamic tradition of Ramadan. As announced in an August 29,
1975 edition of Muhammad Speaks, he directed his followers to celebrate
the dawn-to-dusk fast during the lunar month of Ramadan rather than
during the Christian Advent season. While he acknowledged the useful-
ness of his father’s policy of giving black Muslims something to celebrate
in place of Christmas, Muhammad said that it had now come time to
observe “the victorious completion of this fast with our Muslim Brothers
and Sisters the world over.” Later that year, on October 17, 1975,
Muhammad used the front page of his movement’s popular newspaper to
invite “all Muslims in Chicago” to gather at McCormick Place for the
traditional prayers preceding ‘id al-ﬁtr, the festival marking the end of
Ramadan. Also in October, the leader demanded that salat, the ritual
prayer performed by pious Muslim ﬁve times daily, be learned and
practiced by movement members. Then, in 1977, as many as three hun-
dred of Muhammad’s followers performed the hajj as guests of the Saudi
114 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 121 ---
government. The experience, as St. Louis resident Ahmed Ghani put it,
was “a chance to see al-Islam in its universal perspective.”17
In addition, Muhammad sought to align himself with the Arab Is-
lamic world, including Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States, who
identiﬁed in Wallace yet another potential black Muslim ally. On June 29,
1975, Muhammad addressed a crowd of thousands at Madison Square
Garden in New York. Many foreign dignitaries attended the gathering, al-
though the movement newspaper singled out Amin Hilmy, ambassador of
the Arab League, as particularly important. When President Anwar Sadat
of Egypt visited the United States in October 1975, the movement news-
paper covered the trip in three separate issues, highlighting pictures of
movement members and President Sadat taken at receptions and in greet-
ing lines. The November 14, 1975 edition dramatically depicted the
movement’s new focus on its partnership with the Arab Islamic world by
including an illustration of Arab and African-American males stretching
their hands out to each over the Atlantic Ocean. Above this picture was
written, “The Universal Nation of Islam.” Interestingly, under Elijah
Muhammad, the movement paper had previously featured a similar image
of two black men stretching their hands out to each other. These identi-
cal men were situated in Asia and Africa respectively and their hands met
over America, signifying the important role of American blacks in Elijah
Muhammad’s millennial vision. Under Wallace Muhammad’s leadership,
however, the image was used to stress interracial Muslim unity and the
nonracial character of Islam. President Sadat ofﬁcially recognized the rela-
tionship between Egypt and the organization by awarding the group
twelve scholarships to Egyptian universities.
18
Another change implemented by the leader involved his relationships
with black Christians. Instead of attacking black Christian leaders, he
sought closer ties with them, a transformation that produced more than
a few ironies. For instance, at a tribute to the late Elijah Muhammad
held on March 14, 1975, Muhammad Speaks columnist Ali Baghdadi sat
on the dais next to the Reverend Jesse Jackson, whom he had harshly crit-
icized only two months earlier in one of his columns. That same year,
Jackson’s Operation Push recognized the organization for its efforts to save
the black family. In 1977, Ibrahim Pasha, one of Muhammad’s closest ad-
visers, joined the Reverend Benjamin Hooks, then executive director of
the NAACP , in an interfaith tribute to the late Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
King, who had been dubbed a “foolish Uncle T om” by the old Nation
of Islam, was now recognized as one of the great African-American lead-
ers. In 1978, Wallace Muhammad also called for interfaith cooperation in
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 115


--- PAGE 122 ---
accomplishing similar social goals. Paraphrasing Qur’an 5:48, he called on
believers to join “together as in a race toward all that is good. Not only
Muslim with Muslim, but Muslim with Jew, Muslim with Christian. Let
us all go together.”
19
By the 1976 celebration of Savior’s Day, the leader even called for
Muslims to involve themselves in American politics and ﬂew the Ameri-
can ﬂag over the meeting. T wo years later, Wallace announced that the or-
ganization would celebrate “New World Patriotism Day” on July 4. It was,
according to the movement newspaper, “another great and signiﬁcant
move in the reformation of the membership into outstanding examples of
model American citizens.” The American ﬂag also appeared on the front
page of the newspaper. And children attending the movement’s school 
system recited the pledge of allegiance every morning. Then, in January
1979, a company run by Muslims closely associated with Wallace
Muhammad called Salaam International inked a twenty-two million dol-
lar contract with the United States Department of Defense to produce
food packs for the military.
20
T o symbolize these changes, Muhammad also altered the nomencla-
ture of the movement. He was no prophet, he announced in a March 21,
1975 interview in Muhammad Speaks, but a mujaddid, literally a renewer
of the faith. Moreover, he eschewed the title of “Minister” to become an
“imam,” a word in the African-American context that has come to mean a
spiritual and administrative Muslim leader. By July 1975, he no longer
called his father the “Messenger,” but the “Master.” And in February
1976, he renamed T emple No. 7 in Harlem after Malcolm X, who had
done so much to build that institution but who had left it to become a
Sunni Muslim. Then, in late October, the leader changed the name of the
organization itself to the World Community of al-Islam in the West
(WCIW). “We are not Black Muslims and never have been,” he said in an
interview with the New York Times. “We’re not black separatists. We’re a
world community—a community that encompasses everybody...w e  a r e
all just Muslims.” In 1977, the Imam announced that movement temples
would henceforth be called masjids, the Arabic word for mosque.
21
Despite this new era of interfaith cooperation and universalism, 
however, Muhammad did not abandon every perceivably particularistic
aspect of the movement. Like his father, Imam Muhammad continued 
to criticize the harmful psychological effects of Christianity’s depiction 
of Jesus as a white man. T o counter this, Muhammad founded CRAID,
the Committee to Remove All Images of the Divine in places of wor-
ship. CRAID was quite active during the latter half of the 1970s, staging
116 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 123 ---
protests nationwide. Muslims would travel to high-trafﬁc urban areas and
display signs that linked feelings of white superiority and black inferiority
to pictures of the white Jesus. CRAID thus offered a suggestive synthesis
of Islamic theology and the struggle for black liberation. CRAID allowed
believers to capitalize on older critiques of white Christianity as psycho-
logically harmful to blacks. But rather than simply replace the white Jesus
with a black version, as some African-American Christians and other
African Americans had done since the nineteenth century, CRAID sought
to banish images of God altogether. The goals of CRAID, then, were both
particularistic and universalistic: on the one hand, protesters hoped to rid
black America of the negative psychological consequences of a white God;
on the other, they were also advancing their belief in the One God and
their theological opposition to shirk, or the association of God with any-
thing other than the Divine itself. In so doing, CRAID created a version
of Islamic universalism that paid attention to speciﬁcally black concerns.
22
A UNIVERSALISTIC MUSLIM IDENTITY
WITH PARTICULARISTIC ASPECTS
The same was true for the Imam’s effort to redeﬁne black Muslim identity.
Though Imam Muhammad divorced himself from his father’s biological
views of blackness, he did adopt a deﬁnition of group identity that stressed
black ties to the African continent and to an African Muslim ancestor in
particular. In so doing, the Imam’s leadership showed the inﬂuence of
larger historical trends in the reconstruction of black identity during the
1960s and 1970s. The death of Malcolm X in 1965 marked the beginning
of a period in which blackness came to be deﬁned as a “cultural” identity
that included “authentically black” expressions of art, literature, music,
cuisine, coiffure, and language, among other traditions. Many African
Americans, while still hoping to integrate into the economic and political
fabric of America, embraced what they argued was a distinct African-
American culture within the United States. For many, “soul,” which might
be manifested in “giving skin” or cooking traditional Southern dishes, 
became an essential element of African-American authenticity as did the
speciﬁcally “African” aspects of blackness. Many young African Ameri-
cans donned new “Afro” hairstyles and sported “bubas, caftans, agbadas,
djellabas, and geles” designed with “colors and fabrics that would have
seemed exotic even to their most resplendently attired [African] fore-
bears.” New rituals that emphasized this “cultural” deﬁnition of black
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 117


--- PAGE 124 ---
identity were also created during this period. In December 1966, US
leader Ron Karenga celebrated the ﬁrst Kwanzaa, an alternative holiday 
to Christmas that included the exchange of heritage symbols, the ritualis-
tic lighting of candles, and communal drinking from the unity cup. In 
addition, Karenga advocated the teaching of Swahili to African-American
youth.
23
While the late 1960s are often associated in American historical mem-
ory with black political radicalism, it was these “cultural” aspects of the
black revolution that attracted the most support from African Americans
themselves, at least according to public opinion polls. For example, 21
percent of a pool of black interviewees polled by Newsweek in 1969
thought that a separate black nation-state should be formed. Thirteen per-
cent of the same pool stated that they favored “community control” over
integration as a way to succeed in America. In contrast, a 1970 Time poll
conducted by Louis Harris showed that 85 percent of his interviewees en-
dorsed black studies programs as important signs of “black identity and
pride,” while nearly half of the pool approved of the new Afro hairstyles.
Around 40 percent of blacks polled in Detroit in 1968 indicated their ap-
proval of dashikis while 80 percent said they enjoyed soul food and music.
Even if one discounts the accuracy of such instruments, the support for a
culturally distinct black identity seemed remarkable.
24
Black writers also sought to identify and contribute to this “self-
consciously distinct and meaningful black culture in the United States” by
contributing to a number of black publications, including The Black
World, The Journal of Black Studies, The Black Scholar,and Black Books Bul-
letin. In addition, black intellectuals seized black history as one of the
main forums of debate about black identity. These intellectuals focused
both on the oppressive nature of slavery and how the African spirit sur-
vived and even triumphed through this oppression; characters like Gabriel
Prosser, Nat T urner, and Harriet T ubman became key ﬁgures in this
new black consciousness. Journalist Alex Haley made perhaps the most
signiﬁcant popular contribution to this genre of historical literature in
writing his massive Roots. First published in Reader’s Digest during 1974,
the 688-page book told the story of how Haley’s search for his own ethnic
heritage led him back to a particular West African ancestor named Kunta
Kinte. Releasing the book in 1976 after twelve years of research, Haley
dedicated Roots “as a birthday offering to my country within which most
of Roots happened.”
25
The irony of Haley’s dedication should not be lost. Roots was not pri-
marily a story about slavery, but an immigrant narrative that showed the
118 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 125 ---
journey of the African-American people from West Africa to North Amer-
ica. Of course, the book gave a vivid account of the horrors of slavery, but
it concluded as a triumphant narrative about the promise of America.
“The story ends,” wrote Nathan Huggins, “with that onward, upward,
progressive vision fundamental to the American faith. Through Roots,
black people could ﬁnd a collective memory and be mythically integrated
into the American dream.” Haley did not celebrate his ancestor’s story 
to illuminate differences between himself and white Americans but to
show the similarities of their long journeys. “It is, ironically, because
Americans take so much for granted among themselves that they can dra-
matize their differences comfortably,” Werner Sollors has suggested. “Eth-
nic revivalism... only works in a context where values, assumptions, and
rhetoric are shared.”
26
Also seeking to highlight the authentic “immigrant” identity of
blacks, Imam Muhammad incorporated this brand of ethnocentrism into
his own movement. On November 1, 1975, he announced that he would
call himself “Bilalian,” a term referring to Bilal ibn Rabah, an African
companion of the Prophet Muhammad and the ﬁrst muadhdhin, or
prayer-caller, in Islam. Like Haley, Muhammad identiﬁed this ancestor as
an exemplary model for African-American identity. According to Muham-
mad, Bilal was “a Black Ethiopian slave who was an outstanding man in
the history of Islam. He was the ﬁrst muezzin (Minister) [sic] of Prophet
Muhammad (may peace be upon Him). He was so sincere and his heart
was so pure that the Prophet Muhammad and the other leaders of Islam
under him addressed him as ‘Master Bilal.’” African-American Muslims,
the Imam argued, had a “double connection with Bilal because he was a
Muslim and he was also a so-called African.”
27
The appropriation of Bilal, then, was not meant to separate black
Muslims from their nonblack Muslim brothers and sisters, but merely to
stake out a special place for them within the history of Islam. That Bilal
was East African, and not from West Africa, where most African Ameri-
cans claim their roots, was of no consequence. He was a viable symbol 
of black Muslim success. Bilal had thrown off the shackles of slavery 
by refusing to serve his master after taking the shahada, the declaration of
faith that makes a person Muslim. His example was lauded in a number 
of sources, including biographies that are still read in various African-
American Muslim communities.
28 Bilalian styles of dress, including the
“Bilalian” fez, were marketed in the newspaper, which was also renamed 
in Bilal’s honor. The Bilalian News children’s page even featured a word
puzzle about the historic ﬁgure. Printed next to an illustration of a man
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 119


--- PAGE 126 ---
performing the call to prayer, the puzzle read: “I was once a slave / Who
was very brave / I was a man without fear / who gave the ﬁrst prayer / in a
land where Arabia lay / and though there were great odds / I was not afraid
/ to proclaim the religion of God. Who am I?”
29 Following the example 
of their leader, nearly every active member of the movement came to call
themselves “Bilalian.” Some outsiders, including the Reverend Al Sharp-
ton, may have used the title as well.
30
Around 1978 or shortly thereafter, however, opposition to Muham-
mad’s appropriation of the African Muslim ancestor developed within
the immigrant and foreign Muslim communities. This criticism emerged
at the very time during which Muhammad had begun to cultivate closer
ties with Sunni Islamic groups, including the Muslim World League.
Muhammad Ali al-Harkan, secretary general of the League from 1976
to 1983, had praised Imam Muhammad for the changes that he had
implemented within the NOI. As a result, the Imam became an ofﬁcial
consultant and trustee of da‘wa activities sponsored by the Gulf States in
America. Moreover, Wallace Muhammad developed a working relation-
ship with the U.S.-based Muslim Students Association (MSA). Since its
founding in 1963 at the University of Illinois, the MSA had become
one of the best-organized Muslim associations in the United States. In
the middle 1970s, it purchased a huge farm in Plainﬁeld, Indiana
(located between Indianapolis and T erra Haute), which would serve
both as the headquarters of the MSA and its successor organization, the
Islamic Society of North America, founded in 1982. Functioning as an
umbrella organization through the 1970s, the MSA established a net-
work of Islamic publishing concerns, properties, and member organiza-
tions including the North American Islamic T rust, the Islamic T eaching
Center, the American Muslim Scientists and Engineers, and the Ameri-
can Muslim Social Scientists. In order to increase the number of for-
mally educated Islamic clerics and missionaries in the United States, the
MSA also helped to place these ﬁgures in various locations around the
country.
31
Wallace Muhammad hosted one such missionary. Through a relation-
ship with El Tigani A. Abugideiri, a leading ﬁgure within the MSA, Imam
Muhammad arranged for a Medina-trained Sudanese shaikh named
Muhammad Nur Abdallah to serve as imam of his mosque in Chicago. In
1978, Abdallah ﬁrst spent two weeks in Indiana with Abugideiri and then
left for his assignment at the main mosque of the new WCIW . Once in-
stalled as imam, Abdallah preached the Friday khutba, or sermon, wrote
articles for Bilalian News, and taught believers the rudiments of Sunni 
120 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 127 ---
Islamic practice, including the prayers. 32 By installing Abdallah as the
imam of his main mosque in Chicago, Imam Muhammad showed how 
serious his ties to the immigrant Muslim community had become. And
when quiet opposition to “Bilalism” was voiced in the immigrant commu-
nity, he decided to yield.
33 “We were experimenting...t r ying to ﬁnd a
solution to our identity problem,” Wallace Muhammad said in a 1993 in-
terview. “But Bilalian didn’t work for us. We were charged with a division
in Islam, of making Bilal our leader rather than the Prophet.”
34 By re-
deﬁning black identity in a way that claimed a particular historical space
within the universalistic Islamic heritage, the Imam jeopardized his rela-
tions with some of his immigrant Muslim allies.
But rather than abandon the title immediately, the Imam defended
the title on the grounds that it had little to do with Islam. “Bilalian,” the
leader tried to explain in an interview that appeared in the Bilalian News
on November 16, 1979,
is not a religious name. We have adopted the name Bilalian as an
ethnic name to replace other terms that we think are not as rich,
ethnically speaking. They are not as rich because to identify with
skin color is not as rich ethnically speaking as to identify with an
ancestor who identiﬁed with a great ideology....  W e  d o n ’ t  iden-
tify with Bilal only because he was Muslim, it’s mainly because he
was an African ancestor.
Of course, this statement ignored his original intent in 1975 to offer a
label that would incorporate his followers’ “double connection” with Bilal,
who was seen as equally black and Muslim. By 1979, the Imam claimed
that he had actually chosen the term “mainly because he [Bilal] was an
African ancestor” who also happened to serve as an exemplary ideologue.
The explanation, however, did not satisfy Muhammad’s critics. While
many of his followers continued to call themselves “Bilalian” for some
time afterward, Wallace Muhammad abandoned his ancestor, changing
the name of the Bilalian News to World Muslim Newsin 1980.
35
By giving up on this project during the early 1980s, Wallace 
Muhammad showed the extent to which he would go to maintain his 
integrity as a Sunni Islamic reformer in the eyes of his Muslim Arab allies.
The costs in terms of African-American autonomy, however, could be
quite high. Like Malcolm X, Wallace Muhammad relinquished an oppor-
tunity to insist on an interpretation of the Islamic heritage that paid atten-
tion to the particular interests and needs of many African Americans.
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 121


--- PAGE 128 ---
ISLAMIC MODERNISM, CONTEXTUALIZED
ISLAM, AND BLACK LIBERATION
But while he no longer tried to link any type of black particularism to his
universalistic vision of Islam, he did lay a theoretical foundation for an-
other kind of difference within Islam. This possibility emerged in the
1980s, as the Imam touted what might be seen as a form of “Islamic 
modernism.” Originally crafted during the latter nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries by Islamic reformers like Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and
Muhammad Abduh of Egypt, Sayyid Ahmad Khan of India, and Allal al-
Fasi of Morocco, Islamic modernism aspired to synthesize what its ideo-
logues identiﬁed as the fundamental ideals of modernity with Islam. As
John Esposito summarizes, “Islamic modernism did not seek to restore a
pristine past but instead wished to reformulate its Islamic heritage in re-
sponse to the political, scientiﬁc, and cultural challenge of the West. It
provided an Islamic rationale for accepting modern ideas and institutions,
whether scientiﬁc, technological, or political (constitutionalism and repre-
sentative government).” Moreover, for al-Afghani especially, “Islam was
the religion of progress and change, of reason and science, a religion with
a strong work ethic.” Perhaps most importantly for the history of Islamic
thought, Islamic modernists often proposed to reinterpret centuries of 
Islamic tradition, including the shari‘a, or the body of Islamic laws and
ethics, by using ijtihad, or individual interpretation. While Islamic mod-
ernism was in part an apologetic, justifying the usefulness of Islam in a
world where Muslims seemed increasingly irrelevant or powerless, it also
represented an important attempt to preserve and reinterpret aspects of
the Islamic heritage in light of radically changing historical conditions.
36
In a move reminiscent of many Islamic modernists, Imam Muham-
mad presented Islam throughout the 1980s as a tradition compatible
with notions of personal freedom, individualism, and democracy. “Amer-
ica,” the Imam argued in a Pittsburgh television program taped in 1983,
“is perhaps a place where the idea of freedom is developed to its highest
degree.” In one sense, he argued, this was advantageous, since “a person
can come and can live their life and do whatever they want as long as they
respect the laws of the land.” But in another sense, he stated, one also
has the freedom to be “uncivilize d...t o  b e  tossed about in the winds.”
The proper antidote to the more destructive side of freedom, he said,
was jihad, “not for the purpose of conquering lands or overthrowing
nations . . . [but] for the purpose of liberating the higher instincts, the
higher aspirations of man.” A proper jihad might include the struggle to
122 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 129 ---
become better educated, to lead by moral example, or to succeed in busi-
ness. While this meant that change was left to the individual, he admitted,
such voluntary effort was far better for a society than any imposed moral
or religious codes.
37
The individual’s struggle for a life richer in things both sacred and
profane is at the very heart of Islam, the Imam claimed in a 1987 inter-
view on the same television program. Equating Islam to American democ-
racy, the Imam argued that “our religion focuses on the individual as the
best safeguard [for society].” The Qur’an, the Imam said, “is not a Book to
call nations to a mission; it’s a Book that calls individuals to life.” By pro-
viding individuals with clear rules and daily rituals, the Imam stated, the
holy book shows individuals how to “give their whole life to God. And in
so doing, God lets you have your whole life.” The perpetuation of Islamic
religion itself also rests on the strength of an individual’s practice, accord-
ing to the Imam: “[An individual] should be able to come into a town
where there’s no Muslims and practice his religious life....H e  should be
able to conduct himself properly as a Muslim in business, properly as a cit-
izen in the country, as a neighbor to his neighbor who is non-Muslim...
he should be able to do all of that by himself.” In defending his attitudes
toward individualism, freedom, and democracy, the Imam turned both to
the Qur’an and the sunna, the traditions of the Prophet Muhammad.
Imam Muhammad argued that “if we ﬁnd ourselves faced with great difﬁ-
culty, we should turn not only to the Word of God in Qur’an, but we
should also turn to the Seerah,” or the biography of the Prophet. Prophet
Muhammad, the Imam said, was a “universal model” whose reaction to
any given circumstance could be used to understand and solve contempo-
rary problems and dilemmas.
38
For example, he applied the sunna to the question of Muslim partici-
pation in American democracy. Imam Muhammad argued that Islam
“promotes democratic processes. It sanctions and encourages the democra-
tic processes. In fact, our religion is a democracy.” While he did not
make clear exactly what it meant that Islam was a democracy, he said it
was incumbent on Muslims to become active in politics and he suggested
holding political awareness seminars to accomplish this end. “Our religion
teaches us that we should be active and supportive of all the good things
that a society has established,” Muhammad stated in 1984 on the same
program in Pittsburgh. This also meant that the Muslim should support
the state by paying taxes and joining the military. In explaining the Islamic
legitimacy of these views, the Imam utilized an important historical
parallel to the early history of Islam. Muslims in America, he said, were
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 123


--- PAGE 130 ---
religious minorities, much like the Jews and Christians of Islamic Arabia.
The Prophet Muhammad, according to the Imam, guaranteed these mi-
norities the right to practice their religion as long as they contributed 
“to the common needs of that new society that was formed” including, 
for example, the payment of a mandatory tax. The arrangement made 
between the early Islamic state and its religious minorities offered an in-
structive lesson for Muslims in the United States, according to the Imam.
“[I]f a Muslim state requires of non-Muslim citizens participation in the
support for the general welfare of the state, then if a Muslim is in a non-
Muslim state, he should accept to do the same.” Such cooperation with
the state assumed, the Imam noted, that the government “permits him to
practice his religion” and to live a Muslim life. If, for some reason, the state
no longer observed its duty to the Muslim citizen in this regard, the Imam
said, then he or she was no longer obligated to support the state. In fact,
the Muslim should be willing to take up arms in the ﬁght for religious
freedom. But for American Muslims, he argued, such a possibility was un-
realistic. “[W]e trust,” Muhammad stated, “that this country will remain
civilized and protect the rights of Muslims, as it protects the rights of other
minorities.”
39
The articulation of these arguments represented an important mo-
ment in the history of African-American Islamic thought. By looking to
the sunna as a primary source for his own thought, the Imam hoped to
apply the Prophet Muhammad’s reasoning to the historical circumstances
of African-American life. The Imam also argued that African Americans
should confront these sources themselves, rather than relying on others to
interpret them. Criticizing what he characterized as an unhealthy reliance
by African Americans on charismatic leaders, including Father Divine and
his own father, Imam Muhammad emphasized that believers needed only
the Qur’an in their search for God. “They say, ‘Well, what do you have
here, Brother Imam, that makes you so special?” the Imam asked rhetori-
cally. “The Qur’an, the Word of God,” he said. “You mean to tell me that
just you, and the Word of God . . .” “That’s right,” the Imam interrupted
himself. “Just me and the Word of God.” For Imam Muhammad, the act
of independent interpretation also required that blacks rely less on their
non-black brothers and sisters. “It is not enough for God to tell us through
another race, we still feel insecure,” the Imam said. “We feel unapproved
that we still have not been validated as a man. They are the master, and we
are the boys.” Obviously referring to immigrant Muslims, the Imam criti-
cized an act of which he himself was clearly guilty—that is, relying on im-
migrant sponsors to determine what behavior was or was not legitimately
124 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 131 ---
Islamic. In fact, he also called for the development of an African-American
school of ﬁqh, or Islamic jurisprudence.40
But having defended his right to interpret the texts of Islam in his par-
ticular historical circumstances, he did not articulate any new “Islamic”
approaches to the question of a particularistic black liberation. In fact,
he downplayed issues of race and racism, arguing that blacks had suffered
too long under an inferiority complex. Paraphrasing the Prophet Muham-
mad’s last sermon, the Imam argued that “there is no superiority of a white
over black or black over white. There is no superiority of . . . an Arab over
a non-Arab. The only criteria in this religion is . . . Taqwa—faith in God
and in good deeds.” Denying that his own color had been a burden to
him, the Imam implied that racism was like a mental ailment that the op-
pressed could treat with positive thinking. While he conceded that African
Americans were “treated differently” than persons of other racial back-
grounds, the Imam countered that “if you don’t accept that anyone has the
right to treat you differently, and as long as the law protects you, I think
you shouldn’t feel any burden.” The courts had been doing their part, the
Imam said; it was time for blacks to do theirs.
41
At the same time, however, he argued that blacks should develop and
celebrate a stronger sense of group identity. The Imam asserted, for exam-
ple, that the “Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was very careful not to un-
dermine or take away the native characteristics of people.” According to
the Imam, the Prophet indicated that people need not distance themselves
from “any healthy development and growth that they had, whether it was
ethnic or nationalistic.” Rather, he continued, they should preserve their
identity, as the Qur’an itself states: “[I]t is Allah who has made you a dis-
tinct people, tribes, etc., that you should know one another.” God, ac-
cording to the Imam, also showed divine approval for diversity by permit-
ting the Quraysh, the tribe of the Prophet, to remain a distinct people
after the advent of Islam. According to the Imam, someone might have
said, “This is going to be a Universal message. I am going to get rid of this
importance on Quraish.” The Prophet did not do so, said the Imam. In
fact, he argued, God even named a chapter in the Qur’an after the tribe.
42
Of course, the Imam did not remark—or choose to remark—just how
much controversy the special status of the Quraysh generated in the era of
classical Islam, a phenomenon mentioned in chapter 1. He also did not
comment on the fact that he had argued elsewhere for the view of Islam
as a “Universal message.”
Moreover, when forced to articulate how this sense of group identity
might beneﬁt blacks, his own program of social change contained no
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 125


--- PAGE 132 ---
allusions whatsoever to Islam. In fact, his platform sounded exactly like
that of Elijah Muhammad. In a Harlem address, Imam Muhammad de-
cried the lack of “social unity” among blacks, which he identiﬁed as “what
is wrong with us.” In fact, the Imam stated, “if you were really Black as a
race, if you were Black as an ethnic people, you would be able to progress
in this country.” In addition, the Imam said, many African Americans
were immoral people, whose “dope trafﬁc, prostitution, gambling, Black
on Black crime . . . [and] unnatural sex” had rendered them impotent to
effect social change. Moreover, the Imam advocated collective self-reliance
and “bootstrapping” to correct the economic disparities between African
Americans and other racial groups in the United States.
43
Denying the existence of any fundamental disadvantage for blacks
within the economic “system” of the United States, Muhammad called in
1983 for less dependence on the federal government and more cooperative
ventures between African Americans. In fact, the year earlier he had begun
a kind of cooperative buying club called the AMMCOP , the American
Muslim Mission Committee to Purchase 100,000 Commodities Plus.
While the cooperative was not ofﬁcially dissolved until 1986, it never
managed to achieve much success. Nevertheless, the Imam said, it was the
responsibility of African Americans and not the government to reestablish
a “tax base” in the inner city. “Muslims,” he explained, “can’t accept to live
in the world and see other people develop in business and... just be em-
ployed waiting for other people to create an opening for them. Allah says:
‘Seek the Hereafter with all means I’ve given you, but don’t neglect your
share of responsibility in the physical world.’”
44
In effect, the Imam seemed to be advocating two methods of social
change animated by different assumptions and values. On the one hand,
his Islamic modernism placed the responsibility of moral and economic
progress on the individual, who had been identiﬁed by the Qur’an, ac-
cording to Wallace Muhammad, as the “best safeguard” for society. For the
Imam, this focus on the individual reﬂected his notions of Islamic social
justice and equality; that is, the Imam understood Islam as a tradition that
values a person for his or her individual character and actions rather than
any group afﬁliation. On the other hand, the Imam also understood Islam
to sanction “ethnic” cohesiveness, which he said was lacking among
African Americans. Here he seemed to indicate that the onus of social
change was on the black community and not simply black individuals.
But rather than offering his own solutions to the problems of black Amer-
icans as a group, the Imam advocated the implementation of his father’s
126 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 133 ---
program for black uplift—and he did not explain, as he had done so well
in defending individualism, how this made sense in terms of Islam.
Put another way, the Imam understood values of individualism, ac-
quisitiveness, and democracy as universalistic Islamic themes. Morality,
economic success, and freedom were not the values of a particular people;
they were the very organizing principles of humanity. And yet, African-
American deﬁciency in these values, according to the Imam, was related
to their blackness. African Americans, he said, possessed social problems
that seemed to be particularly black. But since (for him) Islam could not
signify values of social change tailored for one group or another, the Imam
seemed unable to compose a program of social change in which Islamic
values served as the basis for communal action. Rather, he relied on the
race-oriented programs of his father, while still upholding the race-less
values of Islamic universalism.
IMAM MUHAMMAD’S LEGACY
In the span of less than a decade, Wallace Muhammad attempted to dis-
mantle the black particularistic tradition of Islam that had been the most
prominent strain of Islamic thought among African Americans since
World War II. In its place, he asserted the primal importance of Sunni Is-
lamic traditions and norms. Even more than Malcolm X, he distanced
himself from the black messianist foundations of African-American Islam,
including any essentialist notions of what it meant to be black. Instead, he
attempted to redeﬁne black identity in a way that incorporated blacks into
both an American immigrant narrative and Islamic history. When forced
to abandon this effort, he then sought to achieve a different goal: to create
an interpretation of Islam speciﬁcally suited to the needs of contemporary
African Americans. While he did not work out the details of this idea with
regard to a collective black struggle for liberation, he had claimed an im-
portant right. Blacks, he said, should ﬁnd an Islam whose meaning would
be determined within the black community and whose focus would be on
the betterment of black life. The defense of this idea represented a signiﬁ-
cant moment in the history of African-American Islamic thought, a mo-
ment whose implications I explore further in the following conclusion.
Wallace D. Muhammad (b. 1933) 127


--- PAGE 134 ---
Chapter 7
T oward an Islam for 
One People and Many
LOUIS FARRAKHAN AND THE
RECAPITULATION OF PARADOX
It would be wrong to conclude from the previous chapter that particular-
ism has vanished in African-American Islamic thought. In fact, its ongo-
ing presence can be seen quite clearly in the career of Minister Louis Far-
rakhan, leader of a reconstituted Nation of Islam (NOI). Born Louis
Eugene Walcott in Bronx, New York, on May 11, 1933, the future NOI
leader ﬁrst learned about the teachings of Elijah Muhammad through
Malcolm X, who was helping to start a temple in Boston at the time. Con-
verting to the NOI in the middle 1950s, Louis X, as he came to be called,
quickly achieved a great deal of success as a movement leader. Originally
serving as Malcolm’s assistant minister in Boston, the former calypso
singer composed a number of movement songs, including “A White Man’s
Heaven is a Black Man’s Hell,” in addition to authoring two important
movement plays called Orgena, a Negro Spelled Backwards and The Trial.
In 1964, after Malcolm left the movement, Elijah Muhammad appointed
Louis X as the Minister of Harlem’s T emple No. 7. He was even men-
tioned as a successor to Elijah Muhammad, as Malcolm X had been.
1
When Elijah Muhammad died in 1975, the man who had since be-
come Louis Farrakhan initially expressed his support of Wallace Muham-
mad. But tensions between the two men grew, especially after Muhammad
had Farrakhan replaced as minister of T emple No. 7 and brought him to
Chicago, where he could be watched more closely. After being sent on a
129


--- PAGE 135 ---
good will tour of the Caribbean, Farrakhan had had enough. Rallying sev-
eral NOI conﬁdants around him, he planned a resurrection of the old
NOI in 1977. Attacking Wallace Muhammad’s Sunni Islamic reforms as 
a misguided departure from Elijah Muhammad’s teachings, Minister Far-
rakhan charged that the new policies ignored the issue of racism. Any
form of integration was, he said, a “lullaby.” Racism was a global problem,
he argued in another interview. “I have visited Christian, Muslim, Social-
ist, and Communist countries,” Farrakhan said. “Wherever I found a plu-
rality of races, I consistently found the Black man on the bottom.”
2
Elijah Muhammad’s black dispensationalist Islam, he stated in effect,
was the only realistic answer to this problem. In fact, from the late 1970s
until today, Farrakhan has retained many aspects of the elder Muhammad’s
thought, especially by emphasizing the importance of Elijah Muhammad’s
prophetic status. In the early 1990s, Minster Farrakhan sought to legiti-
mate his own leadership of the NOI by describing his unique links to the
Messenger. He cited, for example, his kinship to Muhammad through the
marriage of two daughters to members of Elijah Muhammad’s family. He
also compared his relationship to Elijah Muhammad to that between Jesus
the Messiah and Paul, the great evangelist. Finally, he reported having ex-
perienced spiritual visions—including one in which he visited a UFO dur-
ing a trip to Mexico in 1985—that conﬁrmed the validity of Muhammad’s
teachings.
3
Like Elijah Muhammad before the early 1960s, Farrakhan justiﬁed
these views through interpretations of Islamic texts. He also incorporated
several elements of Sunni Islam into his movement, telling his followers, for
example, to observe the Ramadan fast not at Yuletide, as Elijah Muhammad
said, but according to the lunar calendar followed by other Muslims. In
addition, the Minister began to hold the main prayer meeting on Friday
rather than Sunday and encouraged followers to make the hajj. Finally, Far-
rakhan used historical parallels to the life example of the Prophet Muham-
mad to illuminate the meaning of his own mission. When Farrakhan pur-
chased the Stoney Island mosque in 1988 for some two million dollars, he
compared this act to the Prophet Muhammad’s triumphant return to
Mecca after a ten-year absence. When, in another example, he tried to ex-
plain his belief that Elijah Muhammad is not actually dead but in hiding, he
likened Elijah Muhammad’s disappearance to that of the Prophet’s escape
from Mecca before establishing his political community in Medina.
4
More recently, however, Minister Farrakhan has received a great deal
of attention from the national press not for the continuing presence of
such particularism, but for his participation in interracial and interfaith
130 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 136 ---
dialogue and activism. In a way, Farrakhan’s ecumenism might be dated to
April 18, 1993, when he performed the Mendelssohn violin concerto in
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, as a way “to try to do with music what
cannot be done with words and try to undo with music what words have
done.” Farrakhan was referring to the anti-Semitic remarks and attitudes
that had been expressed by him and other leaders of the Nation of Islam
during the 1980s and early 1990s. Felix Mendelssohn, of course, was born
a Jew, and by playing his violin concerto, Farrakhan was attempting to
offer a symbolic gesture of reconciliation.
5
But in the last few years, Minister Farrakhan and his representatives
have gone beyond such symbols, actively organizing demonstrations and
conferences with persons of different faiths and racial backgrounds. More-
over, the leader has explained such activity as an embodiment of universal-
istic Islamic principles. In fact, many of these efforts have been directed to-
ward other Muslims, including Imam Wallace Muhammad, the man with
whom Farrakhan separated in the late 1970s. On February 26, 1999, while
Minister Farrakhan was suffering from prostate cancer, Wallace Muham-
mad was invited to attend the NOI’s annual Savior’s Day convention in
Chicago. “Embraced with cheers, hugs and kisses,” according to the ofﬁ-
cial NOI press release, Imam Muhammad participated in Friday prayers
“in an effort to continue the process of resolving differences between the
communities of the followers of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad since
1975.” For his part, the Imam was quoted as saying that he “couldn’t resist
coming here knowing that the (Nation of Islam) was observing this day [of
prayers]” and added that the time when he and Farrakhan would be one
was coming “inshallah.” Interpreting the event through the lens of Islamic
universalism, Minister Farrakhan’s son, Mustapha, explained that it repre-
sented “an invitation of unity and brotherhood to the whole Muslim
ummah that wants to see freedom, justice, and equality.”
6
Similarly, Farrakhan has sought to strengthen ties to foreign Muslim
leaders and dignitaries by using the language of universalistic Islam. On
February 25, 2000, during the Second International Islamic Conference
in Chicago, an event held concurrently with the annual Savior’s Day con-
vention, Farrakhan proclaimed, “I love Allah, Prophet Muhammad, may
the peace and blessing of Allah be upon him. I love every Muslim on this
earth, no matter where they are, [or] what their color is.” A multiracial
crowd that included a representative of “Sheik Tantawi, the Grand Sheikh
of Egypt’s Al-Azhar University,” warmly received his remarks, according to
the ofﬁcial NOI press release. Speaking through a translator, “Sheik Farhat
. . . urged the Muslims to put aside their differences, unify themselves and
T oward an Islam for One People and Many 131


--- PAGE 137 ---
prepare for what’s being planned against those (striving to submit to
Allah’s will).”7 The ﬁnal communiqué issued on behalf of the Conference
stressed the need for Muslim unity, solidarity, and networking in respond-
ing to the oppression of Muslim persons around the world. It also resolved
to “regard, treat, and respect all Muslims as part and parcel of the one and
same Ummah (Community of Muslims)” and to “afﬁrm that the Brother-
hood and Sisterhood and unity of Islam transcend all barriers and differ-
ence of colors, language, place of residence or citizenship, and schools of
law.” Finally, the document called on Muslims to “promote mutual under-
standing and peaceful coexistence with other faith communities through
interfaith dialogue and joint action for the common good of all.”
8
These messages of racial harmony, interfaith dialogue, and “joint ac-
tion for the common good” informed much of Minister Farrakhan’s par-
ticipation in the Million Family March, an event held later that year in
Washington, D.C., on October 16. Supported in part by the Reverend
Sun Myung Moon and the Uniﬁcation Church, the march brought a 
multiracial and multifaith crowd of thousands to the west front of the
U.S. Capitol to hear Farrakhan, among others, speak on a variety of polit-
ical, social, and moral issues. In his address, Farrakhan argued that the
achievement of world peace and social justice depends on interfaith unity
and he chastised the children of Abraham who “recogniz e...G o d  a s  a  
father, and then turn around and slaughter each other.” The leader also
criticized the extent to which ethnic, racial, and national division had led
to violence and oppression around the globe. Paraphrasing Qur’an 49:13,
Farrakhan proclaimed that God “created you into tribes and families that
you may know one another and, parenthetically, not despise one another.”
One people is not better than another because of their race or their creed,
Farrakhan declared, but because of their “righteous conduct ....G o d  i s
just, and he’s no respecter of persons. It doesn’t matter what your color 
is, what your race is, with God it is righteousness that He is after.” That
righteousness, he said, must become manifest in the ﬁght for social justice
and a more equal distribution of world resources. But if humans truly
want a more just world, he continued, they must “rise above symbols [of
difference] into the substance of the oneness of God.”
9 Using similarly
universalistic arguments in his introduction to the Million Family March
National Agenda, Farrakhan drew on interpretations of both the Bible and
the Qur’an to argue that the family is the primary institution of all human
society. All families, he said, must be strengthened through increased ac-
cess to basic ﬁnancial and educational resources and opportunities.
10
Despite this progressive political agenda and the use of universalistic
Islamic language to support it, however, Minister Farrakhan has not aban-
132 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 138 ---
doned various components of Elijah Muhammad’s particularistic Islam.
Rather, Minister Farrakhan’s particularistic interpretations of Islam often
appear alongside his new universalism without any further comment. For
example, as of this writing, the ofﬁcial Nation of Islam website features a
version of the Muslim Program that contains statements that might be
viewed by most Muslims as entirely contradictory. In the second section of
that document, entitled “What the Muslims Believe,” the last numbered
item reiterates the traditional NOI belief in W . D. Fard’s divinity: “We Be-
lieve that Allah (God) appeared in the Person of Master W . Fard Muham-
mad, July, 1930; the long-awaited ‘Messiah’ of the Christians and the
‘Mahdi’ of the Muslims.” Then, immediately after this sentence, the fol-
lowing appears: “We believe further and lastly that Allah is God and 
besides HIM there is no god and He will bring about a universal govern-
ment of peace wherein we all can live together.”
11 For the vast majority of
Muslims around the world, the ﬁrst statement of belief in Fard’s divinity
constitutes a form of shirk, or the association of something with God—
an act often seen by Islamic scholars throughout history as the worst form
of unbelief. The second statement, however, contains a proclamation of
God’s Oneness in universalistic language with which most other Muslims
would agree. In the historical terms of scholarly Sunni Islamic discourse,
these statements seem wholly inconsistent: it is not possible to believe si-
multaneously that a human being appeared as God and that God is One.
But no further explanation is given in the NOI document, perhaps imply-
ing that for Minister Farrakhan, there is no contradiction in the two state-
ments. At the least, the inclusion of the statement of belief in God’s One-
ness allows NOI members to claim that their basic theological orientation
is not fundamentally different from that of most Muslims.
In making this claim, Minister Farrakhan has left behind the attempt
to deﬁne the Islamic legitimacy of the movement solely in terms of Elijah
Muhammad’s prophetic authority. In fact, Farrakhan’s use of Qur’an and
of basic Sunni theological principles are reminiscent of Malcolm X’s at-
tempts to bolster the Islamic authenticity of the NOI in the midst of
Sunni criticism during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Such attempts, it
will be recalled, did not result in the abandonment of particularism, but 
in fact in its perpetuation. Similarly, Farrakhan now combines particular-
istic and universalistic elements in a system of Islamic thought that links
universal human redemption with black chosenness. In his address to 
the participants of the Million Family March, for instance, Farrakhan still
stressed an Ethiopianist interpretation of the Bible that posits a special 
role for black people in God’s plan. Describing American slavery as “the
worst form of slavery ever in the history of the world,” Farrakhan repeated
T oward an Islam for One People and Many 133


--- PAGE 139 ---
themes familiar within particularistic African-American Islamic discourse:
“[T]here have never been a people,” he said, “that have lost their names,
their language, their culture, their religion, cut off from their history and
the knowledge of God and their religion, then sold as chattel slaves for
300 years.” Asking how a just God could allow such horror—even after
legal emancipation—the Minister argued that the suffering of African
Americans was a sign of their chosenness. “But I respectfully say to you
that it is written in the Bible,” he preached, “that God would choose a . . .
people who were despised and rejecte d... none ﬁts that description of
the lost sheep or lost people or lost brother more than the black man and
woman of America and the Western Hemisphere.”
12
While Farrakhan did not linger on this theme during his Million
Family March speech, he has expanded on this vision in other speeches
currently available through the ofﬁcial website of the NOI. In “Giving
New Meaning to Race,” for example, Minister Farrakhan reinterprets Eli-
jah Muhammad’s myth of Yacub to argue that the triumph of the chosen
does not mean the destruction of whites, but the end of racial division and
“race” itself. Repeating Elijah Muhammad’s claim that the black man was
the original man, Farrakhan asserts that race per se did not exist until “the
white man came to our planet and gave meaning to race.” That meaning,
he argues, “created hatred and mischief among the family of man.” But
“now we (Black people) are being called upon by Allah through the Hon-
orable Elijah Muhammad to give new and true meaning to race.” Though
Elijah Muhammad’s ﬁrst task was to uplift the black man and convince
him of his own worth, argued Minister Farrakhan, “we must [now] under-
stand that race has a beginning and race will have an ending.” In fact,
Minister Farrakhan argues that the end of racism and of race itself was ex-
actly what Elijah Muhammad had prophesied: “[N]ationalism will have
an end: racism will have an end: sexism will have an end: and humanity
will then have a new beginning.” But black people, he concludes, must
play a special role in this divine plan. “We must give new meaning to race
and end it forever. Black people must take it upon ourselves to end racism
once and for all.”
13
In espousing this black messianist vision of universal human redemp-
tion, Farrakhan evokes the earliest voices of African-American Islamic
thought. Like Blyden and Ali, he adopts both universalistic and particu-
laristic interpretations of Islam without exploring any of the contradic-
tions or tensions that these positions create. It is as if the opening themes
of African-American Islamic thought are recapitulated in a symphony
whose ﬁnal movement sounds very much like its ﬁrst. The questions
134 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 140 ---
raised by Farrakhan’s more recent pronouncements are the same questions
raised in examining the thought of the ﬁrst African-American Islamic
thinkers: Is there any important difference between being a black Muslim
and being a human Muslim? What is the nature of that difference, if there
is any? Is there any way of reconciling these two forms of Muslim identity,
or is the paradox evoked by these different representations of Islamic iden-
tity actually desirable?
In analyzing why such questions have not been more explicitly ad-
dressed by most of the thinkers covered in this study, I would like to sug-
gest that the use of certain essentialist interpretations of Islam and black
identity has been key to the unfolding of modern black Islamic thought.
Employed by black thinkers themselves, these constructs have acted as in-
tellectual constraints within which African-American Islamic thought has
operated and developed throughout its history. My concluding remarks re-
trace the genealogy of black Islamic thought by highlighting the prevalence
of such essentialism and by showing how more recent historically minded
interpretations of Islam implicitly challenge this style of Islamic thought.
ESSENTIALISM AND THE RECONSTRUCTION
OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN ISLAMIC THOUGHT
The essentialist style of Islamic thought, which can be seen most clearly in
Drew Ali, Elijah Muhammad, and Minister Farrakhan, contains starkly
ahistorical constructions of both black identity and Islam. For example, 
as shown in chapter 3, Noble Drew Ali described Islam as a natural phe-
nomenon that inextricably bound Islam to the very being of all nonwhite
persons. For Drew Ali, to be white was to be Christian; to be Asiatic was
to be Muslim. Hence, “Moors,” a national subgroup of the larger Asiatic
race, were also by nature Muslim. Moreover, despite the fact that Drew Ali
attempted to escape the prison of race by redeﬁning black identity in
terms of a nationalistic Moorish mythology, the effects of his system of
thought were to reinforce essentialist conceptions of black identity, in-
cluding an emphasis on racial purity. Though Elijah Muhammad did not
adopt Drew Ali’s Moorish mythology, I showed in chapter 4 how he es-
poused similarly essentialist and racialist views of both Islam and black-
ness. Reafﬁrming the inseparability of Islam from the identity of black
people themselves, Muhammad helped to establish a long-lasting intellec-
tual legacy of African-American Islamic particularism. In fact, after immi-
grant Muslims challenged Elijah Muhammad, he retreated further into an
T oward an Islam for One People and Many 135


--- PAGE 141 ---
ontologically particularistic interpretation of Islam. He seemed to have no
answer to his critics other than to entrench himself more deeply into his
own black Islamic metaphysic.
This essentialist style of thought can also be seen in Malcolm X, who
rejected the substance of Elijah Muhammad’s particularistic teachings, but
perpetuated many of his racialist assumptions about black identity, in-
cluding the belief in inherent black traits and characteristics. Based in part
on these views of black identity, Malcolm supported a particularistic ap-
proach to black liberation through his advocacy of pan-Africanism. At the
same time, Malcolm advanced an absolutist view of Islamic universalism
that, by deﬁnition, could not be used to support any sort of particularistic
struggle. At best, as outlined in chapter 5, Malcolm could claim a “double
burden”—both to his “race” and to his faith. In other words, as a result of
his essentialist views of both black identity and Islam, Malcolm seemed
unable to synthesize his “religion” with his “politics.” His essentialist
worldview became an intellectual barrier to appropriating Islam within
the context of a particularistic struggle for black liberation.
At the same time, this essentialist style did not limit the thought of
Blyden in such profound and direct ways. Like Minister Farrakhan in the
early 2000s, Blyden seemed far more comfortable with the ambiguity cre-
ated by his incongruous mix of both particularistic and universalistic
themes. Or perhaps he simply did not notice the logical contradictions
and the open-ended questions that his thought suggested. For example, he
never made clear whether Islam was a tradition well-suited for blacks be-
cause of particularistic reasons, like its tendency to encourage an explicitly
black self-determination, or because of universalistic reasons, like (what
was for Blyden) its essential message of human justice, dignity, and equal-
ity. Blyden also made an historical argument for the “salutary” effects of
Islam on the African character, coming closer than his American counter-
parts to rejecting overwhelmingly essentialist constructions of Islam. For
most of his life, however, Blyden remained an essentialist with regard to
matters of race, reafﬁrming nineteenth-century notions of both romantic
and scientiﬁc racialism. As shown in chapter 2, this orientation led Blyden
to adopt the idea that blacks were by nature “softer” and more “spiritual,”
and thus were necessary players in the salvation of the world that would
emerge as a result of the redemption of Africa.
Nevertheless, the fact that Blyden shifted rhetorical strategies so often
shows that, unlike Malcolm and Elijah Muhammad, his creativity seemed
somewhat less squelched by his own essentialist assumptions. In a sense,
this was also true for Noble Drew Ali, who maintained that while Islam
136 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 142 ---
was an exclusively nonwhite tradition, it also contained what Ali claimed
were the true teachings of “Love, T ruth, Peace, Freedom and Justice being
taught universally to all nations, in all lands.”
14 Of course, it was unclear
whether non-Muslims, who were by deﬁnition white, could experience
any true liberation, since only “Moorish Science” offered the gnosis neces-
sary to achieve such a state of being. But, like Blyden, Drew Ali seemed
quite comfortable with advocating contradictory or at least paradoxical
positions about the “nature” of Islam. For him, Islam contained both egal-
itarian and racialist elements. Whether Blyden and Drew Ali meant to
construct these paradoxical formulations is difﬁcult to know. Clearly, if 
either had desired a more logically consistent style of argument, then some
other explanations would have been needed.
My point here, however, is not to criticize the contradictions and am-
biguities expressed in their views. Nor am I trying to suggest that their
paradoxical formulations are necessarily subtler than the static deﬁnitions
of Islam offered by Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X. But I do want to
analyze the critical differences between their essentialist style of thought
and the intellectual orientation suggested by the thought of Wallace
Muhammad. More than any of these other thinkers, Wallace Muhammad
took seriously the role of historical context in articulating his visions of
both black identity and of Islam. The key moment in his shift away from
essentialism came, as I observed in chapter 6, when Wallace Muhammad
began to reconstruct black identity within the Nation of Islam during the
middle 1970s. Appropriating themes from the black consciousness move-
ment, Muhammad linked the Muslim identity of his African-American
followers to that of an African Muslim ancestor named Bilal. In effect, he
said that the true meaning of being black could be found in the proud his-
tory of black culture. For him, part of that history was also Islamic.
While Imam Muhammad abandoned “Bilalism” by the early 1980s,
he did not divorce himself from the idea that African-American Islam
must be seen in the light of its own particular historical context. For Imam
Muhammad, this commitment to history also involved a reinterpretation
of Qur’an and hadith in light of his own historical circumstances. For 
example, he compared Muslims in America to the Jews and Christians of
early Islamic Arabia. Relations between the early Islamic state and its mi-
norities offered an instructive lesson for Muslims in the United States, the
Imam said: “[I]f a Muslim state requires of non-Muslim citizens participa-
tion in the support for the general welfare of the state, then if a Muslim 
is in a non-Muslim state, he should accept to do the same.” Applying one
of the traditions of the Prophet Muhammad, Imam Muhammad argued
T oward an Islam for One People and Many 137


--- PAGE 143 ---
that the United States should guarantee minorities the right to practice
their traditions as long as they contributed “to the common needs of that
new society that was formed” including, for example, the payment of a
mandatory tax.
15
On the one hand, one might view this style of interpretation as yet 
another form of essentialism. After all, one could see the Imam as identi-
fying within the Sunna a certain essential principle—which in this case 
involves the obligations of all citizens regardless of confessional afﬁliation
or minority status—and then applying this principle within a speciﬁc his-
torical context. On the other hand, one might also interpret the Imam’s
hermeneutic as radically historicist. In other words, his use of the text
might also imply that the meanings of sacred text actually change, de-
pending upon the human context in which one interprets the text. When
followed to its logical conclusion, such thinking implies that there is no es-
sential meaning within Islamic texts—or that these core meanings remain
beyond human grasp—and to take this one step further, no essential deﬁ-
nition of Islam. Farid Esack, a South African Muslim scholar-activist, ar-
gues that such historicist interpretation is inevitable, whether conscious or
not: “Because every reader approaches the Qur’an within a particular con-
text it is impossible to speak of an interpretation of the qur’anic text ap-
plicable to the whole world. Meaning is always tentative and biased.”
16 For
Esack, then, the expression of “essential” Islamic principles will necessarily
reﬂect the biases of the person in support of them. Of course, this itself 
is an ontological position, reﬂecting a belief in the contingency of all
human life. Moreover, some Muslims, including Abdal-Hakim Murad,
have criticized Esack’s approach as an incoherent rejection of Sunni Is-
lamic tradition that recasts the Qur’an as a “miraculous preﬁgurement of
late twentieth-century Western ideals.”
17
But without deciding ﬁnally whether the Imam’s thought is essential-
ist or historicist, the key point for this study is that his style of thought
suggests new directions in confronting the tension between universalism
and particularism. For his attention to the role of historical context in 
determining the meaning of black identity and Islam suggests that differ-
ence, in all its forms, might be accepted and embraced more heartily by
Muslims challenged to respond both to the contingency of human life and
to what many Muslims view as the timeless core of the Islamic message.
Because circumstances change, the Imam’s thought implies, what might
be the most Islamic thing to do in one situation may not be the most 
Islamic thing to do in another. Of course, such thinking could lead to a
138 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 144 ---
crude relativism if Muslims do not agree on something common to all of
them. Put another way, if Islam is radically deconstructed, one might end
up only with competing forms of particularism. This situation could be
avoided, however, if participants in the discourse decide that something is
universal to them all—like a commitment to social justice or the centrality
of the Qur’an and the hadith.
Still, while a more historical view of Islam may help to carve out a
larger space for difference within Islamic thought, it does not mean that
the tension between universalism and particularism would suddenly dis-
appear. After all, it seems quite inevitable that as historical circumstances
shift, new particularistic challenges would be issued to norms that had 
become temporarily authoritative among certain groups and individuals.
The difference is that the debate over these norms might be more deliber-
ately reﬂective of its own contingency. Practically speaking, one of the is-
sues that participants might debate is the role of difference itself in Islam.
Just how much particularism should be allowed? For example, would 
a particularism that expressed chauvinism be tolerated? How would one
oppose such exclusionary arguments? Are there certain acceptable ways of
conducting an argument? In one sense, this very discussion has taken
place among some African-American Muslim leaders. For example, ac-
cording to Wallace Muhammad, he and Minister Farrakhan disagree
about the most fundamental tenets of Islam, but also expressly forbid their
followers from attacking each other based on these differences—a phe-
nomenon that was a real threat during the 1980s.
18 Perhaps more frequent
and more equitable dialogue can also take place among African-American
Muslims and their immigrant and foreign brothers and sisters. This dia-
logue might consider more seriously the historical importance of race and
slavery not only in the United States but in the Old World Islamic lands,
as well. In addition, more attention might be paid to the particular chal-
lenges within African-American Muslim communities and the meaning of
those problems for the practice of Islam in black America.
At the same time, making room for more historical contextualization
in Islamic thought need not lead to the demise of strong principles—
things worth dying for. Nor would the recognition of the contingency of
one’s thought need render one’s principles less meaningful or sincere. The
difference in recognizing the contingency of a principle is that one chooses
to adhere to a certain idea, rather than feeling compelled by tautological
necessity. That is, one is able to articulate several interrelated reasons for
believing the way one does, rather than simply saying that this is what the
T oward an Islam for One People and Many 139


--- PAGE 145 ---
tradition says to do. Of course, all the while one is deﬁning what is “essen-
tial” about Islam, but without reifying it outside of time and space.
For example, one might look at the tension between universalism and
particularism and conclude that paradox is needed to confront this ques-
tion. But unlike Blyden and Drew Ali, one would make explicit one’s con-
tradictions and explain them in terms of a larger vision that accounts for
one’s context. It could be argued, for instance, that humans should always
be dealt with as both one and many. T o treat all humans as one, for in-
stance, may be explained as an expression of the egalitarian impulse so
central to Islamic history. T o treat humans as many, however, may mean to
practice this ideal by focusing on the liberation of a particularly oppressed
minority, much in the same way that afﬁrmative action is meant to ad-
vance equality of opportunity among all. Perhaps an embrace of difference
may mean not to differ over issues of public policy but to allow for varia-
tion in ritual practice. Whatever the example, this simultaneous deﬁning
of Islam as both one and many may represent no real contradiction; in
fact, it may be the only practical way to achieve the ideals of Islam as de-
ﬁned by the Muslim community.
Imam Muhammad’s dynamic style of interpretation could very well
yield such approaches to problems still facing the contemporary African-
American Muslim community. Or perhaps other African-American Mus-
lim thinkers can rise to the level of national leadership in giving voice to
an African-American Islam that confronts the continuing challenges of 
inequality and diversity—not only in terms of race, but also in terms of
class, gender, sexual orientation, disability, and more. Realistically, any
strong challenge to the oppression of African Americans must emerge not
only from the small number of black Muslims in America, but from fellow
black Christians and persons without confessional afﬁliation, as well. So,
some sort of hermeneutical confrontation with interfaith activity and sec-
ularism will also be necessary in this struggle. The vitality of Islam in black
America itself may depend upon the abilities of its adherents to face such
questions in a bold and creative manner. “For the numerous Muslims who
experience existence as marginalized and oppressed communities or indi-
viduals,” writes Farid Esack, the venture of Islam “has to take place amidst
their own Meccan crucibles of the engagement between oppressor and op-
pressed, the Abyssinian sojourn amidst the gracious and warm hospitality
of ‘the other’ and the liberating praxis in Medina.”
19 In African-American
Islamic thought, such a journey has only begun—not because it has taken
a long time to develop, but because the journey ought always to be new.
140 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 146 ---
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1
1. See C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America,3rd ed. (Grand Rapids: William B.
Eerdmans, 1994). The other classic scholarly work on the movement is E. U. Essien-
Udom, Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962). More recent overviews of African-American Islam include Am-
inah Beverly McCloud, African American Islam (New York: Routledge, 1995) and
Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1997). Recent monographs on more limited topics include Louis
A. DeCaro, On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (New York: New
York University Press, 1996); Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad:
Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996); and
Claude Andrew Clegg III, An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Muhammad
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997).
2. Lawrence H. Mamiya, for example, calls the book “the best social history of the Na-
tion of Islam available” in an annotated bibliography of the movement. See “Nation of
Islam,” in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World, ed. John L. Esposito
(New York: Oxford, 1995), 3:235–8.
3. See Lincoln, Black Muslims, 26, 43, 63, 210.
4. Talal Asad, Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and
Islam (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), 39, 42, 47.
5. Abdulkader Tayob, Islam in South Africa: Mosques, Imams, and Sermons (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 1999), 10.
6. See L. Gardet, “Din,” in the Encyclopedia of Islam (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1962), 2:293–6,
and L. Gardet, “Islam,” in the Encyclopedia of Islam (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1978),
4:171–4.
7. Alisdair C. MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory(Notre Dame: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1984), 222.
8. Gustave E. von Grunewald, ed., Unity and Variety in Muslim Civilization (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1955), 17.
9. See Edmund Burke III’s conclusion to Marshall G. S. Hodgson, Rethinking World His-
tory (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 302, 315.
141
Notes


--- PAGE 147 ---
10. Marshall G. S. Hodgson, The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civi-
lization (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974), 2:80–1, 83, 87.
11. Talal Asad as quoted in the introduction to Barbara D. Metcalf, ed., Making Muslim
Space in North America and Europe (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).
But see also Asad, Genealogies of Religion, 18, 210–11. Asad suggests the necessity of
an “historical” essentialism: “It is like saying that the constitutive rules of a game de-
ﬁne its essence—which is by no means to assert that the game can never be subverted
or changed; it is merely to point to what determines its essential historical identity, to
imply that certain changes (though not others) will mean that the game is no longer
the same game.” This analogy helps to illuminate my distinction between Islam,
which can signify anything that Muslims say it signiﬁes, and certain traditions of
Islam, like Sunni and Shi‘i Islam, which have been characterized by speciﬁc constitu-
tive elements throughout their history.
12. Ernesto Laclau, “Universalism, Particularism, and the Question of Identity,” in The
Politics of Difference, eds. E. N. Wilmsen and P . McAllister (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996), 52, 57. And here my approach differs from that of Hodgson,
who argued that a “tradition does not lend itself indifferently to every possible opinion
or practice.” See Hodgson, The Venture of Islam,1:86.
13. Wilfred Cantwell Smith, T oward a World Theology: Faith and the Comparative History
of Religion (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1981), 4–5, 27–28.
14. Hodgson, Venture of Islam,1:26.
15. The third edition of Lincoln’s Black Muslims still insists on labeling the Nation of
Islam a Moslem sect. See Lincoln, Black Muslims, 217.
16. The most comprehensive work on the presence of African Muslims in the United
States during the 1800s is Allan D. Austin, African Muslims in Antebellum America:
Transatlantic Stories and Spiritual Struggles(New York: Routledge, 1997).
17. See Louise Marlow, Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997), 2–3, 97.
18. See H. T . Norris, “Shu‘ubiyyah in Arabic Literature,” in ‘Abbasid Belles-Lettres, ed.
J. Ashtiany et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 32; Hodgson, The
Venture of Islam,223; Roy P . Mottahedeh, “The Shu‘ubiyya Controversy and the Social
History of Early Islamic Iran,” IJMES 7 (1976): 180–1; and Norris, “Shu‘ubiyyah,”
36.
19. Marlow, Hierarchy and Egalitarianism, 35–6.
20. See Hamid Dabashi, Authority in Islam: From the Rise of Muhammad to the Establish-
ment of the Umayyads (New Brunswick: T ransition, 1989), 6–7; Mottahedeh,
“Shu‘ubiyya Controversy,” 164; and Dabashi, Authority in Islam, 131.
21. See Dabashi, Authority in Islam, 129; Hodgson, Venture of Islam, I:487–8; and E. A.
Salem, “Political Theory and the Institutions of the Khawarij,” Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Studies in Historical and Political Science 74 (1956): 63.
22. See Julius Wellhausen, The Religio-Political Factions in Early Islam,trans. R. Ostle and
S. Walzer (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1975), 20–1; Salem, “Political Theory,” 32;
Hodgson, Venture of Islam257–8; and G. Levi Della Vida, “Kharidjites,” Encyclopedia
of Islam (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1978), 4:1075.
142 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 148 ---
23. H. A. R. Gibb, Studies on the Civilization of Islam (Boston: Beacon, 1962), 10–13.
24. Mottahedeh, “The Shu‘ubiyya Controversy,” 175–8.
25. See especially Edward W . Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1979), and Culture
and Imperialism (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993).
26. See Yvonne Y. Haddad and Jane I. Smith, ed., Muslim Communities in North America
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994), xxv.
27. See C. Eric Lincoln and Lawrence H. Mamiya, The Black Church in the African Amer-
ican Experience (Durham: Duke University Press, 1990), 12–13.
28. See Orlando Patterson, Ethnic Chauvinism: The Reactionary Impulse (New York: Stein
and Day, 1977), 67; Wilson J. Moses, The Golden Age of Black Nationalism,
1850–1925 (New York: Oxford, 1978), 20; and Eddie S. Gaude, Jr., Exodus: Religion,
Race, and Nation in Early Nineteenth-Century Black America (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2000).
29. See Barbara J. Fields, “Ideology and Race in American History,” in Region, Race, and
Reconstruction: Essays in Honor of C. Vann Woodward, eds. J. Morgan Kousser and
James M. McPherson (New York: Oxford, 1982), 143–58; Michael O. Emerson and
Christian Smith, Divided by Faith: Evangelical Religion and the Problem of Race in
America (New York: Oxford, 2000), 7; and David R. Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness:
Race and the Making of the American Working Class(London: Verso, 1992), 9–15.
30. See Sterling Stuckey, “Identity and Ideology: The Names Controversy,” in Slave Cul-
ture: Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America (New York: Oxford,
1987), 193–244.
31. See further George M. Fredrickson, Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black
Ideologies in the United States and South Africa (New York: Oxford, 1995).
32. See Wilson J. Moses, Black Messiahs and Uncle T oms: Social and Literary Manipulations
of a Religious Myth (University Park, PA: Penn State University Press, 1993), 1.
33. See Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the
Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993),
4–13.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2
1. Hollis Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832–1912 (London: Ox-
ford University Press, 1967), 4–5.
2. Ibid., 16–17.
3. Ibid., 6.
4. Wilson J. Moses, The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850–1925 (New York: Ox-
ford, 1988), 11.
5. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, 13.
6. Edward W . Blyden, “The Call of Providence to the Descendants of Africa in Amer-
ica,” in Negro Social and Political Thought, 1850–1920,ed. Howard Brotz (New York:
Notes 143


--- PAGE 149 ---
Basic Books, 1966), 117–118. This piece was originally published in Edward W . 
Blyden, Liberia’s Offering(New York: J. A. Gray, 1862).
7. Reproduced in the New York Colonization Journal12 (July 1862) as quoted in Lynch,
Edward Wilmot Blyden, 28–29.
8. Blyden, “Call of Providence,” 117–8.
9. See Ira M. Lapidus, A History of Islamic Societies (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1988), 489–522.
10. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, 32–33.
11. Blyden to Rev. John L. Wilson, Board of Foreign Mission of the Presbyterian Church,
4 August 1860, Selected Letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden,ed. Hollis Lynch (Millwood,
NY: KTO Press, 1978), 42.
12. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden,15, 42. See also how Blyden downplays the wrenching
conﬂicts between the “natives” and colonials in “Call of Providence,” 123.
13. Blyden to Walter Lowrie, London, 21 June 1858, in Selected Letters, 75.
14. Edward W . Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1979), 3.
15. Edward W . Blyden, From West Africa to Palestine(Manchester: John Heywood, 1873),
37–42, 159–62, 180.
16. Ibid., 194–6, 145–9, 127.
17. Ibid., 104–5.
18. Blyden to Major Alexander Bravo, Acting Governor of Sierra Leone, Report of the
Expedition to Timbo, 10 March 1873, Selected Letters, 133–4.
19. Ibid., 138.
20. Edward W . Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race (1887; reprint, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1967), 173–88.
21. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, 142–3.
22. See George W . Stocking, Jr., Victorian Anthropology (New York: Free Press, 1987),
233–7.
23. Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race, 10–13.
24. Ibid., 37, 64.
25. Ibid., 242–4.
26. See Bernard Lewis, Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry (New
York: Oxford, 1990), 99–102.
27. Edward W . Blyden, The African Problem and Other Discourses Delivered in America in
1890 (London: W . B. Whittingham and Co., 1890), 83.
28. Edward W . Blyden, “Islam in Western Soudan,” Journal of the African Society 2 (Sept.
1902): 21, 24, 33.
29. George M. Fredrickson, Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies 
in the United States and South Africa (New York: Oxford, 1995), 69–70; Blyden, The
African Problem, 34; and Moses, The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 49. See also
144 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 150 ---
George M. Fredrickson, The Black Image in the White Mind: The Debate on Afro-
American Character and Destiny, 1817–1914 (Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University
Press, 1987).
30. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, xv, 53, 106, 111–12.
31. Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race, 113.
32. Ibid., 110–11.
33. Ibid., 224–26.
34. In his Qur’anic commentary, al-Tabari related that Luqman was “a thick-lipped, ﬂat-
footed slave.” See B. Heller and N. A. Stillman, “Lukman,” in Encyclopedia of Islam,
new ed. (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1983), 5:811–13.
35. Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race,228–31, and Edward W . Blyden, “The
Koran in Africa,” Journal of the African Society 14 (Jan. 1905): 162–3.
36. Blyden, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race, 233.
37. Ibid., v.
38. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, 70–77.
39. Edwin S. Redkey, Black Exodus: Black Nationalist and Back-to-Africa Movements,
1890–1910 (New Haven and London: Yale, 1969), 48, and Blyden, The African Prob-
lem, 14–15, 32.
40. Blyden, The African Problem, 80–81.
41. Redkey, Black Exodus, 54, 66–69, and Congressional Record, 21, 1890, pt. 1: 622–30.
42. See Edward W . Blyden, “Dedication,” in The Jewish Question (Liverpool: Lionel Hart,
1898) and p. 5 in the same.
43. Ibid., 8.
44. Ibid., 18–20.
45. Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden, xvi; Blyden, “Islam in the Western Soudan,” 20; and
Blyden, The Jewish Question, 11–13.
46. Blyden, The Jewish Question, 16, 21–24. Blyden seemed to ignore the prophecy in
Zephaniah 2:12: “You also, O Ethiopians, / shall be slain by my sword.”
47. See Edward Wilmot Blyden, African Life and Customs(1908; reprint, Baltimore: Black
Classic Press, 1994).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3
1. Peter Lamborn Wilson, Sacred Drift: Essays on the Margins of Islam (San Francisco:
City Lights Books, 1993), 6–7.
2. Ibid., 15–19.
3. See, for example, C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 3rd ed. (Grand
Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1994), 48; E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism: A
Search for an Identity in America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), 33;
Notes 145


--- PAGE 151 ---
and Aminah Beverly McCloud, African American Islam (New York: Routledge, 1995),
10. All of these books rely heavily on Arthur H. Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1944).
4. Col. J. T . Bissell to J. Edgar Hoover, 3/2/1943, HQ 62–25889, section 3 in FBI File
on the Moorish Science T emple of America (Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources,
1995), 413–415.
5. My copy of the Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple was reproduced from the
Moorish Science T emple’s FBI ﬁle, which also contains other movement documents
and the movement newspaper, Moorish Voice,published after Noble Drew’s death. For
Noble Drew’s scripture, see File 100–3095, 1/28/42, in HQ 62–25889, sect. 1 of the
version published by Scholarly Resources.
6. Much of Arthur Fauset’s oft-cited account of the Moors in Black Gods of the Metropo-
lis is derived from his involvement with the movement during this time. But in order
to reconstruct the origins and meanings of Moorish Science in the 1920s, we must be
careful not to assume that Fauset’s ﬁndings from 1944 apply to the 1920s. See File
100–3095, 1/28/42, and Bissell to Hoover, 3/2/43, in the FBI ﬁle. For an account of
the MST after 1925, see also Wilson, Sacred Drift, 29–50.
7. See Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience (Bloomington: In-
diana University Press, 1997), 90.
8. See Robert Hill’s introduction to The Marcus Garvey and United Negro Improvement
Associations Papers, ed. Robert A. Hill (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983),
xxxv–xl; Beryl Satter, “Marcus Garvey, Father Divine, and the Gender Politics of Race
Difference and Race Neutrality,” American Quarterly 48, no. 1 (March 1996): 44; and
George M. Fredrickson, Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in
the United States and South Africa(New York: Oxford, 1995), 153–60. While Garvey’s
was the largest black nationalist group, his was not the largest black organization, as
Fredrickson claims. According to Higginbotham, that distinction belonged to the 
National Baptist Convention, which had over 2.9 million members in 1916. See Eve-
lyn Brooks Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black 
Baptist Church, 1880–1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 6.
9. Randall K. Burkett, Garveyism as a Religious Movement (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow
Press, 1978), 48–49.
10. See Marcus Garvey and UNIA Papers,ed. Hill, 2:128, 311 and 3:23–4, 440, 502, 646.
11. Ibid., 3:307.
12. See Burkett, Garveyism, 178–81.
13. See Garvey to Sir Frederic Kenyon, Dir., British Museum, 8 October 1913 in Marcus
Garvey and UNIA Papers, 1:27; “A Talk with Afro-West Indians. The Negro race and
its Problems,” Kingston, Jamaica, ca. July-August 1914, in 1:55–64; and “Cate-
chism,” in 3:310–11.
14. See Hill, “General Introduction,” in Marcus Garvey and UNIA Papers, 1:xliv–xlv;
Randall Burkett, ed., Black Redemption (Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1970),
15; and T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience, 90.
15. Noble Drew Ali, Holy Koran of the MST ,59.
146 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 152 ---
16. See William E. Leuchtenburg, The Perils of Prosperity, 1914–32,2d ed. (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1993), 206–9.
17. See Roger Daniels, Not Like Us: Immigrants and Minorities in America, 1890–1924
(Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1997), 132–3, 139, 143; Reed Ueda, Postwar Immigrant
America: A Social History (Boston: St. Martin’s Press, 1994), 20, 22; and Walter Benn
Michaels, Our America: Nativism, Modernism, and Pluralism (Durham: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 1995), 14–15, 30–32, 78, 84.
18. Holy Koran of the MST ,3.
19. Ibid., 3, 56–59.
20. Ibid., 57–60.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid., 59.
23. See Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the
Mirror of Secular Thought (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996), 386–489, and “Introduction I”
in Modern Esoteric Spirituality, eds. Antoine Faivre and Jacob Needleman (New York:
Crossroad, 1992), xv–xix. For the role of esotericism in the making of Mormonism,
see John Brooke, The Reﬁner’s Fire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994).
Brooke shows how Mormonism appropriated freemasonry, divination, alchemy,
polygamous marriage, and counterfeiting into a syncretistic belief system that hoped
to bring about human perfection.
24. See Chicago Defender, 19 January and 9 February 1929.
25. Wilson reproduces a copy of the ﬂyer in Sacred Drift, 30.
26. See Hans A. Baer, The Black Spiritual Movement: A Religious Response to Racism
(Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1984), 9, 82–98; and Delores S. Williams,
Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-T alk(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis,
1994), 222–226.
27. See Baer, The Black Spiritual Movement, 92; Levi H. Dowling, The Aquarian Gospel of
Jesus the Christ: The Philosophic and Practical Basis of the Religion of the Aquarian Age of
the World and of the Church Universal, 6th ed. (London: L. N. Fowler, 1920), 13;
Edgar J. Goodspeed, Modern Apocrypha (Boston: Beacon Press, 1931), 15–17; Wil-
son, Sacred Drift, 19; and cf. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion, 449, 473. Wilson ﬁrst
pointed out that chapters 2 through 19 were from the Aquarian Gospel, though he
could not locate a source for the ﬁrst chapter. It, too, is from Dowling’s text, though
its source is the introduction.
28. See Dowling, Aquarian Gospel of Jesus Christ, 5–12, 31–32.
29. Cf. Holy Koran of the MST ,chapters 5, 6, 7, and 11, with Dowling, Aquarian Gospel of
Jesus Christ, chapters 18, 21, 22, and 32 on pages 44, 47–49, and 60–62.
30. Cf. Holy Koran of the MST ,chapters 2, 4, and 13–19 with Dowling, Aquarian Gospel
of Jesus Christ, chapters 1, 15, 47, 61, 65, 168, 178, 172, and 176 on pages 25, 40–41,
78–79, 93–94, 97–98, 239–240, 253–255, 244–246, and 250–251.
31. See “Introduction” in The Inﬁnite Wisdom (Chicago: De Laurence Co., 1923). For a
scholarly work on Tibetan Orientalism in the West, see Donald S. Lopez, Jr., Prisoners
Notes 147


--- PAGE 153 ---
of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1998).
32. See Sri Ramatherio, ed., Unto Thee I Grant, rev. ed (San Jose, CA: Supreme Grand
Lodge of the AMORC, 1953), 93–97; Stephen R. Prothero, “Rosicrucians,” in The
Encyclopedia of American Religious History, eds. Edward L. Queen et al. (New York:
Facts on File, 1996), 575–6; Frances A. Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment (Lon-
don: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1972), 220–223; and Harry Wells Fogarty, “Rosicru-
cians,” in The Encyclopedia of Religion, ed. Mircea Eliade, (New York: Macmillan,
1987), 12: 476–77.
33. Cf. the Holy Koran of the MST , 32–56 with Inﬁnite Wisdom, 27–102, or their exact
equivalent in the AMORC edition.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4
1. See “Genealogy of Elijah (Poole) Muhammad,” and biographical information in
Claude Andrew Clegg III, An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Muhammad
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997), 3–13. For an introduction to the New South, see
the classic work by C. Vann Woodward, Origins of the New South, 1877–1913 (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State Press, 1951); and Edward L. Ayers, The Promise of the New
South (New York: Oxford, 1992).
2. See Paul Boyer, When Time Shall Be No More: Prophecy Belief in Modern American Cul-
ture (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992), 1–92.
3. See Timothy E. Fulop, “The Future Golden Day of the Race: Millennialism and Black
Americans in the Nadir, 1877–1901,” in African-American Religion, eds. Timothy E.
Fulop and Albert J. Raboteau (New York: Routledge, 1997), 227–254; J. Carleton
Hayden, “James Theodore Holly (1829–1911): First Afro-American Episcopal
Bishop: Its Legacy to Us T oday,” in Black Apostles: Afro-American Clergy in the Twenti-
eth Century, eds. Randall Burkett and Richard Newman (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1978),
129–140; and J. T . Holly, “The Divine Plan of Human Redemption in Its Ethnologi-
cal Development,” AME Church Review 1 (Oct. 1884) as quoted in Fulop, “The Fu-
ture Golden Day,” 240.
4. William Seraile, Voice of Dissent: Theophilus Gould Steward (1843–1924) and Black
America (Brooklyn, NY: Carlson, 1991), 90, and Fulop, “The Future Golden Day,”
240–241.
5. Stephen Ward Angell, Bishop Henry McNeal Turner and African-American Religion in
the South (Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1992), 260–261; and Henry M.
T urner, “God is a Negro,” in Black Nationalism in America, eds. John H. Bracey Jr. et
al. (Indianapolis: Bobbs Merrill, 1970), 154–55.
6. Richard W . Thomas, Life for Us Is What We Make It: Building Black Community in De-
troit, 1915–1945 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), 26–27; and Clegg,
An Original Man, 13–14. For Muhammad’s biographical information, see FBI ﬁle
105–24822, section 12, SAC Chicago to FBI Director, 26 May 1969, in Scholarly Re-
sources, Reel 3, 112.
148 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 154 ---
7. See Thomas, Life for Us, 89–201.
8. Ibid., 66, and St. Clair Drake and Horace R. Cayton, Black Metropolis: A Study of
Negro Life in a Northern City, vol. 2 (New York: Harbinger, 1970), 419, 436. While
Gayraud Wilmore believed that the dissatisfaction with the Black Church was a result
of its deradicalization in this period, Randall K. Burkett has made a compelling case
against this argument. See “The Baptist Church in Years of Crisis: J. C. Austin and
Pilgrim Baptist Church, 1926–1950,” in African-American Religion, eds. Timothy E.
Fulop and Albert J. Raboteau (New York: Routledge, 1997), 311–340.
9. See Erdmann D. Beynon, “The Voodoo Cult among Negro Migrants in Detroit,”
American Journal of Sociology 43 (1938): 895–905.
10. Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), 51–53; Clegg, An Original Man, 21;
and Richard B. T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1997), 161–165.
11. Kemal H. Karpat, “The Ottoman Emigration to America, 1860–1914,” in IJMES 17,
no. 2 (May 1985): 175–209; Barbara Bilgé, “Voluntary Associations in the Old T urk-
ish Community of Metropolitan Detroit,” in Muslim Communities in North America,
eds. Yvonne Y. Haddad and Jane I. Smith (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1994), 381–405; and Barbara C. Aswad, “The Lebanese Muslim Community in
Dearborn, Michigan” in The Lebanese in the World: A Century of Emigration, eds. Al-
bert Hourani and Nadim Shehadi (London: I. B. Tauris, 1992), 170.
12. Alixa Naff, Becoming American: The Early Arab Immigrant Experience (Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1985), 15; Bilgé, “Voluntary Associations,” 387,
399; and Frances T wix, “Bektashi T ekke and the Sunni Mosque of Albanian Muslims
in America,” in Muslim Communities in North America, 359–380.
13. Yohanan Friedmann, “Ahmadiya,” in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic
World, ed. John L. Esposito (New York: Oxford, 1995), 1:54–7.
14. See T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience,110–129; Edward Curtis, “Islam
in Black St. Louis,” Gateway Heritage 17, no. 4 (Spring 1997): 33–34; and “T wo
Slave-Leaders of Islam—Bilal and Zaid,” Moslem Sunrise, October 1932/January
1933, 31–33.
15. Clegg, An Original Man, 41.
16. SAC Chicago to FBI Director, 26 May 1969, 7–8; Clegg, An Original Man, 78–97;
and cf. Malcolm X, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine, 1965),
209–210.
17. Ernest Allen, Jr., “When Japan was Champion of the Darker Races: Satokata Taka-
hashi and the Development of Our Own, 1933–1942,” The Black Scholar 24 (Winter
1994); T urner,Islam in the African-American Experience, 168–89; SAC Chicago to
FBI Director, 5/26/69, 7–8; and Joseph Hanlon, “‘Fifth Column’ Propaganda
Among Negroes in St. Louis Area T raced to Japanese,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5
March 1942.
18. See Curtis, “Islam in Black St. Louis,” 33–43; E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism:
A Search for an Identity in America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962),
Notes 149


--- PAGE 155 ---
70–71; and Elijah Muhammad, Message to the Blackman in America (Chicago:
Muhammad Mosque of Islam No. 2, 1965; reprint, Newport News: U.B. and U.S.
Communications Systems, 1992), 236, 241 (page citations are to the reprint edition).
19. Muhammad, Message to the Blackman, 170–1, 174, 200, 230.
20. For information on the production and editing of Muhammad’s most famous work,
see “Acknowledgements,” in Message to the Blackman.
21. Message to the Blackman,19, and Elijah Muhammad, The Supreme Wisdom: Solution to
the so-called Negroes’ Problem (1957; reprint, Newport News, VA: National Newport
News and Commentator, n.d.), 33.
22. Message to the Blackman, 31, 110–122. Notice, too, how the timeline utilizes the
number six, often interpreted by readers of the Book of Revelation as a sign of the
Beast or Antichrist.
23. Ibid., 116–9, The Supreme Wisdom, 30; and cf. H. H. Garnet, “The Past and the 
Present Condition, And the Destiny of the Colored Race,” in Black Nationalism in
America, ed. Bracey, 115–120. In 1848, Garnet said that while Africans were basking
in the light of civilization, Anglo-Saxons “abode in caves under ground, either naked
or covered with the skins of wild beasts. Night was made hideous by their wild shouts,
and day was darkened by the smoke which arose from bloody altars, upon which they
offered human sacriﬁce.”
24. The Supreme Wisdom, 16, 18, 42–43, and Message to the Blackman, 3, 298.
25. While it is not at all clear what Muhammad meant exactly by calling Fard the Mahdi,
most Muslims believe that the Mahdi is a ﬁgure who will appear on earth to usher in
an era of justice and true belief prior to the end of the world. As many traditions have
it, he will hail from the Prophet’s family; he will appear in a time of desperate need;
and his appearance will be accompanied by fantastic signs. For T welver Shi‘ism, the
most popular branch of Shi‘i Islam, the Mahdi is said to be the twelfth Imam, perhaps
hiding somewhere around Mecca. Some Muslims, however, have also believed in a
Second Coming of Jesus Christ and have disagreed about whether this would be the
same ﬁgure as the Mahdi. In addition, Muslims have posited that an Antichrist-like
Dajjal, or deceiver, would wreak havoc on the whole earth for perhaps forty days or
forty years near the end time. See Robert S. Kramer, “Mahdi,” 18–19, and Abdulaziz
Sachedina, “Messianism,” 95–99, in vol. 3 of The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern
Islamic World,in addition to William J. Hamblin and Daniel C. Peterson, “Eschatol-
ogy,” 440–442, in vol. 1 of the same.
26. Message to the Blackman, 1–11.
27. Ibid., 88, 265–291.
28. George Slusser and Eric S. Rabkin, eds., Fights of Fancy: Armed Conﬂict in Science Fic-
tion and Fantasy (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1993), 2; Hadley Cantril, The
Invasion from Mars: A Study in the Psychology of Panic(Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1940), 55, 58–60, 71, 133, 180; Howard Koch, The Panic Broadcast (Boston:
Little, Brown, and Co., 1970), 3; “Radio Listeners in Panic, Taking War Drama as
Fact,” New York Times,31 October 1938, 1.
29. Benson Saler, Charles A. Ziegler, and Charles B. Moore, UFO Crash at Roswell: The
Genesis of a Modern Myth (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997), 6,
150 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 156 ---
10–14, 146–47; see also Leon Festinger et al., When Prophecy Fails: A Social and Psy-
chological Study of a Modern Group that Predicted the Destruction of the World (New
York: Harper and Row, 1956).
30. The Supreme Wisdom, 26, 28–30, and Message to the Blackman, 304.
31. Louis A. DeCaro, Jr., On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (New
York: New York University Press, 1996), 136–7, and Essien-Udom, Black National-
ism, 80.
32. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 73–74, 313–19, and DeCaro, On the Side of My
People, 146–52.
33. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 317–19, and DeCaro, On the Side of My People ,
161–2.
34. Clegg, An Original Man, 136–42, and W . D. Muhammad, public address at Washing-
ton University in St. Louis, 9 October 1996.
35. Elijah Muhammad, Muslim Daily Prayers (Chicago: University of Islam, 1957).
36. “The Prayer Service in Islam,” in Muhammad Speaks, 15 October 1962, 8, and Mes-
sage to the Blackman, 136.
37. Message to the Blackman, 155.
38. “The Prayer Service in Islam,” in Muhammad Speaks, 15 November 1962, 8; 30 No-
vember 1962, 8; and 31 January 1963, 8.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5
1. See William L. Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and
American Culture, 1965–1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 245–6;
Malcolm X, Warner Home Video, Burbank, 1992; and James H. Cone, Martin &
Malcolm & America: A Dream or a Nightmare (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1993).
2. See Peter Goldman, The Death and Life of Malcolm X (Chicago: University of Illinois
Press, 1979); Eugene Victor Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the
Black Revolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981); Bruce Perry, Mal-
colm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America (Barrytown, NY: Station Hill,
1991); Robin D. G. Kelley, Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class
(New York: The Free Press, 1994), 161–182; Clayborne Carson, Malcolm X: The FBI
File (New York: Carroll and Graf, 1991), 17–53; and Louis A. DeCaro, Jr., On the
Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X(New York: New York University Press,
1996).
3. Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine
Books, 1987), 1–22. See also Carson, Malcolm X, 57–58; DeCaro, On the Side of My
People, 38–43; and Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy,42–152.
4. See Malcolm X, Autobiography, 39–190; Kelley, Race Rebels, 161–182; Carson, Mal-
colm X, 58–60; and DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 73–85.
5. See Malcolm X, Autobiography, 191–235, 236–287; Carson, Malcolm X, 60–64; and
DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 95–113.
Notes 151


--- PAGE 157 ---
10–14, 146–47; see also Leon Festinger et al., When Prophecy Fails: A Social and Psy-
chological Study of a Modern Group that Predicted the Destruction of the World (New
York: Harper and Row, 1956).
30. The Supreme Wisdom, 26, 28–30, and Message to the Blackman, 304.
31. Louis A. DeCaro, Jr., On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (New
York: New York University Press, 1996), 136–7, and Essien-Udom, Black National-
ism, 80.
32. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 73–74, 313–19, and DeCaro, On the Side of My
People, 146–52.
33. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 317–19, and DeCaro, On the Side of My People ,
161–2.
34. Clegg, An Original Man, 136–42, and W . D. Muhammad, public address at Washing-
ton University in St. Louis, 9 October 1996.
35. Elijah Muhammad, Muslim Daily Prayers (Chicago: University of Islam, 1957).
36. “The Prayer Service in Islam,” in Muhammad Speaks, 15 October 1962, 8, and Mes-
sage to the Blackman, 136.
37. Message to the Blackman, 155.
38. “The Prayer Service in Islam,” in Muhammad Speaks, 15 November 1962, 8; 30 No-
vember 1962, 8; and 31 January 1963, 8.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5
1. See William L. Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and
American Culture, 1965–1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 245–6;
Malcolm X, Warner Home Video, Burbank, 1992; and James H. Cone, Martin &
Malcolm & America: A Dream or a Nightmare (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1993).
2. See Peter Goldman, The Death and Life of Malcolm X (Chicago: University of Illinois
Press, 1979); Eugene Victor Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the
Black Revolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981); Bruce Perry, Mal-
colm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America (Barrytown, NY: Station Hill,
1991); Robin D. G. Kelley, Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class
(New York: The Free Press, 1994), 161–182; Clayborne Carson, Malcolm X: The FBI
File (New York: Carroll and Graf, 1991), 17–53; and Louis A. DeCaro, Jr., On the
Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X(New York: New York University Press,
1996).
3. Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine
Books, 1987), 1–22. See also Carson, Malcolm X, 57–58; DeCaro, On the Side of My
People, 38–43; and Wolfenstein, The Victims of Democracy,42–152.
4. See Malcolm X, Autobiography, 39–190; Kelley, Race Rebels, 161–182; Carson, Mal-
colm X, 58–60; and DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 73–85.
5. See Malcolm X, Autobiography, 191–235, 236–287; Carson, Malcolm X, 60–64; and
DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 95–113.
Notes 151


--- PAGE 158 ---
6. See DeCaro, 156–158, 166–167, 322 nn. 18–19; letter of Malcolm X, New York Am-
sterdam News, 24 November 1962, 39; and letter from Malcolm X and Payne’s reply,
New York Times Magazine,25 August 1963, 2.
7. Malcolm X, Malcolm X: Speeches at Harvard, ed. Archie Epps (New York: Paragon,
1991), 118–125.
8. See DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 159–60, 201–2.
9. Ibid., 162, and FBI ﬁle 100–399321, sec. 9, 5/23/63, in Carson, Malcolm X: The FBI
File, 237.
10. Carson, Malcolm X, 67, 69–70.
11. Malcolm X, Malcolm X Speaks, ed. George Breitman (New York: Grove Weidenfeld,
1990), 18–21, and Malcolm X, Malcolm X: Speeches at Harvard, 140–142.
12. See Marc Ferris, “T o ‘Achieve the Pleasure of Allah’: Immigrant Muslims in New York
City, 1893–1991,” in Muslim Communities in North America, eds. Yvonne Haddad
and Jane I. Smith (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994), 215; Malcolm
X, The Autobiography, 318; Perry, Malcolm, 261–264; and DeCaro, On the Side of My
People, 202–203.
13. See Reinhard Schulze, “Institutionalization [of da‘wa]” in The Oxford Encyclopedia 
of the Modern Islamic World, ed. John L. Esposito (New York: Oxford, 1995),
1:343–346.
14. Malcolm Kerr, The Arab Cold War, 1958–1964(London: Oxford, 1965), 21–2, 53.
15. Reinhold Schulze, “Muslim World League,” in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern
Islamic World,3:208–210, and Perry, Malcolm, 352.
16. See Gutbi Mahdi Ahmed, “Muslim Organizations in the United States,” in The Mus-
lims of America, ed. Yvonne Y. Haddad (New York: Oxford, 1991), 14; and Larry Pos-
ton, Islamic Da‘wah in the West(New York: Oxford, 1992), 79.
17. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 320; Perry, Malcolm, 261–264; and Yaacov Shimoni,
Political Dictionary of the Arab World(New York: Macmillan, 1987), 105–6.
18. See Abd al-Rahman ‘Azzam, The Eternal Message of Muhammad, trans. Caesar E.
Farah (Cambridge: Islamic T exts Society, 1993).
19. Malcolm X, The Autobiography,331–333, and DeCaro, On the Side of My People,206.
20. Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 335, 340–1.
21. Ibid., 335, 348.
22. Ibid., 344–5.
23. See Immanuel Geiss, The Pan-African Movement: A History of Pan-Africanism in Amer-
ica, Europe, and Africa (New York: Africana Publishing, 1974), 3–4, 385–430; and
George M. Fredrickson, Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in
the United States and South Africa (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),
278–284.
24. See Malcolm X, The Autobiography, 349–51, and Carson, Malcolm X, 75.
25. Malcolm X Speaks, 61.
152 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 159 ---
26. See The Autobiography, 353–360; Carson, Malcolm X, 75; and Malcolm X Speaks,
62–3.
27. The Autobiography, 352, 364.
28. See Carson, Malcolm X, 76–78, and Fredrickson, Black Liberation, 290.
29. Malcolm X Speaks, 72–77.
30. See DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 233, 238–9.
31. Perry, Malcolm, 322, and DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 239–41, 336 n. 17.
32. See Carson, Malcolm X, 79–80, and Malcolm X, February 1965: The Final Speeches,
ed. Steve Clark (New York: Pathﬁnder, 1992), 20–1.
33. See Malcolm X, Malcolm X on Afro-American History (New York: Pathﬁnder, 1990),
11–23.
34. Ibid., 27–46.
35. See Ibid., 30–31.
36. Malcolm X: The Speeches at Harvard, 182.
37. February 1965: The Final Speeches, 44; and Malcolm X Speaks, 197.
38. February 1965: The Final Speeches, 46, 84, 140, 148–149.
39. Malcolm X: The Speeches at Harvard, 164; February 1965: The Final Speeches, 104,
182.
40. February 1965: The Final Speeches, 255.
41. Ibid., 252–253.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 6
1. Since 1975, Wallace Muhammad has changed the spelling of his name a number of
times in addition to using an Arabic name, “Warithuddin.” For the sake of simplicity,
I have used his given name throughout this chapter.
2. See Zafar Ishaq Ansari, “W . D. Muhammad: The Making of a ‘Black Muslim’ Leader
(1933–1961),” American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 2, no. 2 (1985): 248–262;
and Claude Andrew Clegg III, An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Muham-
mad (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997), 245.
3. E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962), 81–82; Ansari, “W . D. Muhammad,” 245–253;
and Clegg, An Original Man, 98.
4. Ansari, “W . D. Muhammad,” 253–258; Wallace D. Muhammad, interview by author,
8 October 1996, St. Louis, MO; and Imam Darnell Karim, telephone conversation
with author, 22 January 1997, Harvey, IL.
5. Wallace D. Muhammad, interview, 1996, and Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 81.
6. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 267–8.
Notes 153


--- PAGE 160 ---
7. See Muhammad Speaks, December 1961, 32, and Clegg, An Original Man, 181–2.
8. FBI File 100–399321, sec. 8 in Clayborne Carson, Malcolm X: The FBI File (New
York: Carroll and Graf, 1991), 68, 322, and Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobi-
ography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine, 1987), 296–7.
9. Clegg, An Original Man, 206; Mohr to DeLoach, 2/25/65, FBI File 100–399321, sec.
16 in Carson, Malcolm X, 393–4; and SAC New York to FBI Director, 8/17/64,
quoted in Clegg, An Original Man, 222–224.
10. Clegg, An Original Man, 245, 333 n. 15.
11. Ibid., 273–6.
12. Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), 101, and Frank T . Donner, The Age of
Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America’s Political Intelligence System(New York:
Knopf, 1980), 178, 212–3.
13. See SAC Chicago to FBI Director, 100–35635-B, 4/22/68, as quoted in Gardell, In
the Name of Elijah Muhammad, 101; Donner, The Age of Surveillance, 213; and FBI
ﬁle 100–448006–626, 1/22/69, as quoted in Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muham-
mad, 101.
14. See “Elijah Muhammad Dead: Black Muslim Leader, 77,” New York Times,26 Febru-
ary 1975, 1, and “Saviour’s Day Address,” Muhammad Speaks, 14 March 1975, 1.
15. Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad, 103–5; “First Ofﬁcial Interview with the
Supreme Minister,” Muhammad Speaks, 21 March 1975, 12; Muhammad Speaks, 16
May 1975, 13, quoted in Martha F . Lee, The Nation of Islam: An American Millenar-
ian Movement (Lewiston: Edwin Mellen, 1988), 85; and Muhammad Speaks, 11 July
1975, 13, also quoted in Lee, The Nation of Islam, 86.
16. Paul Delaney, “Black Muslims Will End Longtime Ban on Whites,” New York Times,
17 June 1975, 9, and “Nation of Islam: The Alternative Culture for America,”
Muhammad Speaks, 25 July 1975, 1.
17. Muhammad Nur Abdallah, interview with the author, 12 January 1995, St. Louis,
MO, and Edward Curtis, “Islam in Black St. Louis: Strategies for Liberation in T wo
Local Religious Communities,” Gateway Heritage 17, no.4 (spring 1997): 39. Both
Abdallah and Ahmed Ghani were interviewed as part of a larger oral history project
conducted by the author in some of St. Louis’ Muslim communities.
18. Muhammad Speaks, 18 July 1975, 4, quoted in Lee, The Nation of Islam, 87; Muham-
mad Speaks, 31 January 1975, 1; and Clifton E. Marsh, From Black Muslims to Mus-
lims: The Transition from Separatism to Islam, 1930–1980 (Metuchen: Pathﬁnder,
1984), 96–7.
19. Muhammad Speaks, 17 October 1975, 3; “Interfaith celebration to highlight M. L.
King Jr. T ribute,” Bilalian News, 14 January 1977, 20; Bilalian News, 28 January
1977, 2; and “Historic Atlanta Address,” Bilalian News, 29 September 1978, 17.
20. Lee, The Nation of Islam,91; D. A. Williams and E. Sciolino, “Rebirth of the Nation,”
Newsweek, 10 March 1976, 33; Bilalian News, 3 March 1978, 3, quoted in Lee, The
Nation of Islam, 96; Steven T . Smith, “An Historical Account of the American Muslim
154 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 161 ---
Mission with Speciﬁc Reference to North Carolina,” (master’s thesis, Southeastern
Baptist Theological Seminary, 1984), 102; and Lee, The Nation of Islam, 97.
21. See “First Ofﬁcial Interview with the Supreme Minister of the Nation of Islam,”
Muhammad Speaks, 21 March 1975, 3; Charlayne Hunter, “Black Muslim T emple Re-
named for Malcolm X; Move Reﬂects Acceptance of Ex-Leader,” New York Times, 2
February 1976, 1; “Nation of Islam Changes name to Fight Black Separatist Image,”
New York Times,19 October 1976, 10; and Lee, The Nation of Islam, 93.
22. Curtis, “Islam in Black St. Louis,” 41.
23. See William L. Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and
American Culture, 1965–1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 171–2,
192–8, 245–6, 292–3.
24. Ibid., 17–8.
25. See J. David Hoeveler, Jr., The Postmodern Turn: American Thought and Culture in the
1970s (New York: T wayne, 1996), 120; Van Deburg, New Day in Babylon, 272–5,
292–3; and Alex Haley, Roots (Garden City: Doubleday, 1976).
26. Nathan Irvin Huggins, Black Odyssey: The African-American Ordeal in Slavery (New
York: Vintage Books, 1990), xlviii, and Werner Sollors, Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and
Descent in American Culture (New York: Oxford, 1986), 13–14.
27. This announcement appeared in several issues of the Bilalian News, including 7 No-
vember 1975.
28. See Muhammad Abdul-Rauf, Bilal ibn Rabah: A Leading Companion of the Prophet
Muhammad (N.p.: American T rust Publications, 1977); Bilal: The First Moezzin of
Islam, trans. Z. I. Ansari (Chicago: Kazi Publications, 1976); and H. A. L. Craig, Bilal
(London: Quarter Books, 1977).
29. Bilalian News, 9 January 1976, 32; Bilalian News, 28 November 1975, 25.
30. Imam Samuel Ansari, interview by the author, 29 March 1994, St. Louis, MO.
31. Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad, 108, and Gutbi Mahdi Ahmed, “Muslim
Organizations in the United States,” in The Muslims of America, ed. Yvonne Y. Had-
dad (New York: Oxford, 1991), 14–16.
32. Muhammad Nur Abdallah, interview by the author, 12 January 1995, Islamic Center
of Greater St. Louis (on the campus of St. Louis University), St. Louis, MO. Abdallah
is now leader of a mainly immigrant mosque located on Weidman Road in the St.
Louis suburbs.
33. I dub it “quiet” opposition because no extensive public record of the incident exists.
Further, neither Muhammad nor Abdallah has named the immigrant critics. Appar-
ently, the critics preferred to take care of this matter without a public row.
34. W . D. Muhammad, interview by the author, 19 December 1993, Airport Hilton
Hotel, St. Louis, MO. I was invited by St. Louis leader Samuel Ansari to interview the
leader with a small group of reporters before he gave a public address.
35. See Wallace Deen Muhammad, “On the name Bilalian,” Bilalian News, 16 November
1979, 17, and Lee, The Nation of Islam, 98.
Notes 155


--- PAGE 162 ---
36. See John L. Esposito, The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality? (New York: Oxford, 1992),
55–7; Albert Hourani, Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1970); and Marshall G. S. Hodgson, “The Islamic Heritage in the Modern
World,” in The Venture of Islam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974),
3:163–441.
37. W . Deen Mohammed, Focus on Al-Islam: A Series of Interviews with Imam W . Deen
Mohammed in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Chicago: Zakat Publications, 1988), 35–7.
38. Ibid., 95–6, 100.
39. Ibid., 4, 45, 48–9, 37.
40. W . D. Muhammad, Imam W . Deen Muhammad Speaks from Harlem, N. Y.: Challenges
that Face Man T oday(Chicago: W . D. Muhammad Publications, 1985), 29–36.
41. Mohammed, Focus on al-Islam, 38, 49–51.
42. Muhammad, Imam W . Deen Muhammad Speaks from Harlem, N. Y.,68–70.
43. Ibid., 116–7, 123–5.
44. Lee, The Nation of Islam, 100, and Mohammed, Focus on Al-Islam, 21.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 7
1. Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), 119–123.
2. Ibid., 125; Judith Cummings, “Black Muslim Seeks to Change Movement,” New York
Times, 19 March 1978, 12; and “Black Books Bulletin Interviews Minister Abdul Far-
rakhan,” Black Books Bulletin 6, no. 1 (1978): 44.
3. Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad, 125, 129–33.
4. Ibid., 192, 138, 128–9.
5. “Sending a Message, Louis Farrakhan Plays Mendelssohn,” New York Times,19 April
1993, C11, C16.
6. “Imam W . D. Muhammad joins Farrakhan followers at Saviours’ Day,” The Final Call:
On-Line Edition, 27 February 1999, /H20855www.noi.org/press-events/press02–27–99.html/H20856
19 February 2001.
7. “Farrakhan Welcomes Islamic Scholars From Around World,” The Final Call Online,
25 February 2000, /H20855www.noi.org/press-events/press-sd2k–25–2000.htm/H208561 March
2001.
8. “Final Communiqué from the Second Islamic Peoples Leadership Conference Held in
America,” Nation of Islam Online, 24–27 February 2000, /H20855www.noi.org/press-events/
islam_conf_communique2–28–2000.htm/H2085619 February 2000.
156 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 163 ---
9. “Remarks by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan of the National [ sic] of 
Islam, at the Million Family March,” Uniﬁcation Home Page, 16 October 2000,
/H20855www.uniﬁcation.net/news/news20001016.html/H208561 March 2001.
10. “Forward,” in Million Family March: The National Agenda,/H20855www.millionfamilymarch
.com/agenda/default.html/H208561 March 2001.
11. “The Muslim Program,” Nation of Islam Online, /H20855www.noi.org/program.html/H208561
March 2001.
12. “Remarks by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan,” 16 October 2000.
13. “Giving New Meaning to Race,” The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan Speaks,
/H20855www.ﬁnalcall.com/MLFspeaks/race.html/H2085619 February 2001.
14. Noble Drew Ali, The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple(Chicago, 1927), 37.
15. W . Deen Mohammed, Focus on Al-Islam: A Series of Interviews with Imam W . Deen
Mohammed in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Chicago: Zakat Publications, 1988), 48.
16. Farid Esack, Qur’an, Liberation, and Pluralism: An Islamic Perspective of Interreligious
Solidarity against Oppression (Oxford: Oneworld, 1997), 12–3.
17. “Review of Qur’an, Liberation, and Pluralism, ” Islamic Gateway, 4 March 1998,
/H20855www.ummah.net/bicnews/BICNews/Books/books15.htm/H208562 May 2001.
18. W . D. Muhammad, interview by author, 19 December 1993, St. Louis, MO.
19. Esack, Qur’an, Liberation, and Pluralism, 60.
Notes 157


--- PAGE 164 ---
159
PRIMARY SOURCES
Newspapers and Periodicals (V arious Dates)
Bilalian News (Chicago).
Chicago Defender (Chicago).
Moorish Voice(Chicago.)
Moslem Sunrise (Chicago).
Muhammad Speaks (Chicago).
Muslim Journal (Chicago).
New York Amsterdam News(New York).
New York Times(New York).
Pittsburgh Courier (Pittsburgh).
St. Louis Globe-Democrat (St. Louis).
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (St. Louis).
Government Documents
Congressional Record. Washington, D.C., 1890.
Various Federal Bureau of Investigation Files, 1942–1969.
Books, Articles, and Unpublished Materials
Abdul-Rauf, Muhammad. Bilal ibn Rabah: A Leading Companion of the Prophet Muham-
mad. N. p.: American T rust Publications, 1977.
Selected Bibliography


--- PAGE 165 ---
Ali, Noble Drew. The Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple.Chicago: N. p., 1927.
Ansari, Z. I., trans. Bilal: The First Moezzin of Islam. Chicago: Kazi Publications, 1976.
‘Azzam, Abd al-Rahman. The Eternal Message of Muhammad. T ranslated by Caesar E.
Farah. Cambridge: Islamic T exts Society, 1993.
“Black Books Bulletin Interviews Minister Abdul Farrakhan,” Black Books Bulletin 6, no. 1
(1978): 42–5, 71.
Blyden, Edward Wilmot. African Life and Customs. 1908. Reprint, Baltimore, MD: Black
Classic Press, 1994.
———. The African Problem and Other Discourses Delivered in America in 1890. London:
W . B. Whittingham, 1890.
———. Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race. 1887. Reprint, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1967.
———. From West Africa to Palestine.Manchester: John Heywood, 1873.
———. “Islam in Western Soudan.” Journal of the African Society 2 (Sept. 1902): 11–37.
———. The Jewish Question. Liverpool: Lionel Hart, 1898.
———. “The Koran in Africa.” Journal of the African Society 14 (Jan. 1905): 157–171.
———. Liberia’s Offering.New York: J. A. Gray, 1862.
———. “Mohammedanism in Western Africa,” Methodist Quarterly Review 53 (Jan.
1871): 62–78.
———. Sierra Leone and Liberia; Their Origin, Work and Destiny, A lecture Delivered in
Freetown, April 22, 1884. London: John Heywood, 1884.
Carson, Clayborne. Malcolm X: The FBI File. New York: Carroll and Graf, 1991.
Craig, H. A. L. Bilal. London: Quarter Books, 1977.
Dowling, Levi H. The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ: The Philosophic and Practical
Basis of the Religion of the Aquarian Age of the World and of the Church Universal.6th ed.
London: L. N. Fowler, 1920.
Farrakhan, Louis. A T orchlight for America.Chicago: FCN Publishing, 1993.
Garvey, Marcus. Marcus Garvey: Life and Lessons. Edited by Robert A. Hill et al. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1987.
———. More Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey. Edited by E. U. Essien-Udom
and Amy Jacques-Garvey. T otowa, NJ: Frank Cass, 1977.
———. Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey. Edited by Amy Jacques-Garvey. 1923.
Reprint, New York: Atheneum, 1986.
———. “A Talk with Afro-West Indians. The Negro race and its Problems.” Kingston, 
Jamaica, ca. July–August 1914.
Haley, Alex. Roots. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday, 1976.
Hill, Robert A., ed. The Marcus Garvey and United Negro Improvement Associations Papers.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983.
160 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 166 ---
The Inﬁnite Wisdom. Chicago: De Laurence Co., 1923.
Lynch, Hollis, ed. Selected Letters of Edward Wilmot Blyden. Millwood, NY: KTO Press,
1978.
Malcolm X. By Any Means Necessary: Speeches, Interviews and a Letter by Malcolm X.Edited
by George Breitman. New York: Pathﬁnder, 1970.
———. Black Man, Listen. Detroit: Broadside Press, 1969.
———. The End of White World Supremacy: Four Speeches by Malcolm X. Edited by Ben-
jamin Goodman. New York: Merlin House, 1971.
———. February 1965: The Final Speeches. Edited by Steve Clark. New York: Pathﬁnder,
1992.
———. The Last Year of Malcolm X. Edited by George Breitman. New York: Schocken,
1968.
———. Malcolm X on Afro-American History.1967. Reprint, New York: Pathﬁnder, 1990.
———. Malcolm X: The Last Speeches.Edited by Bruce Perry. New York: Pathﬁnder, 1970.
———. Malcolm X: The Man and His Ideas.Edited by George Breitman. New York: Merit
Publishers, 1965.
———. Malcolm X Speaks. Edited by George Breitman. New York: Grove Press, 1966;
New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1990.
———. Malcolm X: Speeches at Harvard. Edited by Archie Epps. New York: Paragon,
1991.
———. Malcolm X T alks to Young People.2d ed. New York: Pathﬁnder, 1969.
Malcolm X and Alex Haley. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York: Ballantine, 1965.
Muhammad, Elijah. Accomplishments of the Muslims. Chicago: Muhammad’s Mosque No.
2, 1974.
———. The Fall of America. 1973. Reprint, Newport News, VA: National Newport News
and Commentator, 1990.
———. How to Eat to Live. Book 1. 1967. Reprint, Newport News, VA: National New-
port News and Commentator, n.d.
———. How to Eat to Live. Book 2. 1972. Reprint, Newport News, VA: National New-
port News and Commentator, n.d.
———. Message to the Blackman in America.Chicago: Muhammad’s Mosque No. 2, 1963.
———. Muslim Daily Prayers. Chicago: University of Islam, 1957.
———. The Muslim Flag. Chicago: Muhammad’s Mosque of Islam No. 2, 1974.
———. Our Saviour Has Arrived. 1974. Reprint, Newport News, VA: National Newport
News and Commentator, 1993.
———. The Supreme Wisdom: Solution to the So-Called Negroes’ Problem. 1957. Reprint,
Newport News, VA: National Newport News and Commentator, 1992.
Selected Bibliography 161


--- PAGE 167 ---
Muhammad, Wallace D. An African American Genesis. Chicago: Progressions Publishing
Co., 1986.
———. As the Light Shineth from the East. Chicago: WDM Publications, 1980.
———. Book of Muslim Names. Chicago: Honourable Elijah Muhammad Mosque No. 2,
1976.
———. Focus on al-Islam. Chicago: Zakat Publications, 1988.
———. Imam W . Deen Muhammad Speaks from Harlem, N.Y.: Challenges that Face Man
T oday.Chicago: W . D. Muhammad Publications, 1985.
———. Al-Islam Unity and Leadership. Chicago: Sense Maker, 1991.
———. Lectures of Emam Muhammad. Chicago: Zakat Propogation [sic] Fund Publica-
tions, 1978.
———. The Man and Woman in Islam. Chicago: The Honourable Elijah Muhammad
Mosque No. 2, 1976.
———. Prayer and al-Islam. Chicago: Muhammad Islamic Foundation, 1982.
———. Religion on the Line: Al-Islam, Judaism, Catholicism, Protestantism. Chicago:
W . D. Muhammad Publications, 1983.
———. The T eachings of W . D. Muhammad (Elementary Level).Chicago: The Honourable
Elijah Muhammad Mosque No. 2, 1976.
———. The T eachings of W . D. Muhammad (Secondary Level).Chicago: The Honourable
Elijah Muhammad Mosque No. 2, 1976.
Ramatherio, Sri, ed. Unto Thee I Grant. San Jose, CA: Supreme Grand Lodge of the
AMORC, 1953.
SECONDARY SOURCES
Books, Articles, and Unpublished Materials
Ahlstrom, Sydney E. A Religious History of the American People. New Haven: Yale, 1972.
Angell, Stephen Ward. Bishop Henry McNeal Turner and African-American Religion in the
South. Knoxville, TN: University of T ennessee Press, 1992.
Ansari, Zafar I. “Aspects of Black Muslims Theology.” Studia Islamica 53 (1981): 
137–76.
———. “W . D. Muhammad: The Making of a ‘Black Muslim’ Leader (1933–1961).”
American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 2, no. 2 (1985): 245–253.
Asad, Talal. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and
Islam. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.
Austin, Allan D. African Muslims in Antebellum America: Transatlantic Stories and Spiritual
Struggles. New York: Routledge, 1997.
162 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 168 ---
Baer, Hans A. The Black Spiritual Movement: A Religious Response to Racism.Knoxville, TN:
University of T ennessee Press, 1984.
Baldwin, James. The Fire Next Time.New York: Dell, 1962.
Beynon, Erdmann D. “The Voodoo Cult among Negro Migrants in Detroit.” American
Journal of Sociology 43, no. 6 (1938): 894–907.
Boyer, Paul. When Time Shall Be No More: Prophecy Belief in Modern American Culture.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992.
Bracey, John H., Jr. et al., eds. Black Nationalism in America.Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Mer-
rill, 1970.
Brooke, John L. The Reﬁner’s Fire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Brotz, Howard, ed. Negro Social and Political Thought, 1850–1920. New York: Basic
Books, 1966.
Burkett, Randall, ed. Black Redemption. Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1970.
———. Garveyism as a Religious Movement. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1978.
Burkett, Randall, and Richard Newman, eds. Black Apostles: Afro-American Clergy in the
Twentieth Century.Boston: G. K. Hall, 1978.
Cantril, Hadley. The Invasion from Mars: A Study in the Psychology of Panic. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1940.
Clegg III, Claude Andrew. An Original Man: The Life and Times of Elijah Muhammad.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997.
Cone, James H. Martin & Malcolm & America: A Dream or a Nightmare. Maryknoll, NY:
Orbis, 1993.
Curtis, Edward. “Islam in Black St. Louis: Strategies for Liberation in T wo Local Religious
Communities.” Gateway Heritage 17, no. 4 (spring 1997): 30–43.
Dabashi, Hamid. Authority in Islam: From the Rise of Muhammad to the Establishment of the
Umayyads. New Brunswick and London: T ransaction, 1989.
Daniels, Roger. Not Like Us: Immigrants and Minorities in America, 1890–1924. Chicago:
Ivan R. Dee, 1997.
DeCaro Jr., Louis A. On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X. New York:
New York University Press, 1996.
Denny, Frederick M. An Introduction to Islam. 2d ed. New York: Macmillan Publishing
Co., 1994.
Donner, Frank T . The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America’s Political Intel-
ligence System. New York: Knopf, 1980.
Drake, St. Clair, and Horace R. Cayton. Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a North-
ern City. Vol. 2. New York: Harbinger, 1970.
Esack, Farid. Qur’an, Liberation, and Pluralism: An Islamic Perspective of Interreligious Soli-
darity against Oppression. Oxford: Oneworld, 1997.
Esposito, John L. The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality?New York: Oxford, 1992.
Selected Bibliography 163


--- PAGE 169 ---
Esposito, John L., ed. The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World.New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Essien-Udom, E. U. Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1962.
Faivre, Antoine, and Jacob Needleman, eds. Modern Esoteric Spirituality.New York: Cross-
road, 1992.
Fauset, Arthur H. Black Gods of the Metropolis. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1944.
Festinger, Leon, et al. When Prophecy Fails: A Social and Psychological Study of a Modern
Group that Predicted the Destruction of the World. New York: Harper and Row, 
1956.
Fredrickson, George M. The Black Image in the White Mind: The Debate on Afro-American
Character and Destiny, 1817–1914. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1987.
———. Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in the United States and
South Africa. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Fulop, Timothy E., and Albert J. Raboteau. African-American Religion. New York: Rout-
ledge, 1997.
Gardell, Mattias. In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of
Islam. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996.
Gates, Henry L., Jr. “A Reporter at Large: The Charmer.” New Yorker(29 April and 6 May
1996): 116–131.
Geiss, Immanuel. The Pan-African Movement: A History of Pan-Africanism in America, 
Europe, and Africa. New York: Africana Publishing, 1974.
Goldman, Peter. The Death and Life of Malcolm X. Chicago: University of Illinois Press,
1979.
Goodspeed, Edgar J. Modern Apocrypha. Boston: Beacon Press, 1931.
Gould, Stephen Jay. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W . W . Norton, 1981.
Haddad, Yvonne Y., ed. The Muslims of America. New York: Oxford, 1991.
Haddad, Yvonne Y., and Jane I. Smith, eds. Muslim Communities in North America.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1994.
Hanegraaff, Wouter J. New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of
Secular Thought. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.
Hanna, Samir A. and George H. Gardner. “Al-Shu‘ubiyyah Up-Dated: A Study of the 20th
Century Revival of an Eighth Century Concept.” Middle East Journal 20 (1966):
335–52.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black
Baptist Church 1880–1920. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Hodgson, Marshall G. S. Rethinking World History: Essays on Europe, Islam, and World His-
tory. Edited by Edmund Burke III. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
164 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 170 ---
———. The Venture of Islam: Conscience and History in a World Civilization. 3 vols.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974.
Hoeveler, J. David, Jr., The Postmodern Turn: American Thought and Culture in the 1970s.
New York: T wayne, 1996.
Hourani, Albert. Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age.Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970.
Hourani, Albert, and Nadim Shehadi, eds. The Lebanese in the World: A Century of Emigra-
tion. London: I. B. Tauris, 1992.
Huggins, Nathan Irvin. Black Odyssey: The African-American Ordeal in Slavery. New York:
Vintage Books, 1990.
Karpat, Kemal H. “The Ottoman Emigration to America, 1860–1914.” IJMES 17, no. 2
(May 1985): 175–209.
Kelley, Robin D. G. Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class. New York:
The Free Press, 1994.
Kerr, Malcolm. The Arab Cold War, 1958–1964. London: Oxford University Press, 
1965.
Koch, Howard. The Panic Broadcast. Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1970.
Laclau, Ernesto. “Universalism, Particularism, and the Question of Identity.” In The Poli-
tics of Difference, edited by Edwin N. Wilmensen and Patrick McAllister, 45–58.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Lapidus, Ira M. A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1988.
Lee, Martha F . The Nation of Islam: An American Millenarian Movement. Lewiston, NY:
Edwin Mellen, 1988.
Leuchtenburg, William E. The Perils of Prosperity, 1914–32. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993.
Lewis, Bernard. Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry. New York: Ox-
ford, 1990.
Lincoln, C. Eric. The Black Muslims in America. 3rd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: William B.
Eerdmans, 1994.
Lincoln, C. Eric and Lawrence H. Mamiya. The Black Church in the African American Ex-
perience. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1990.
Livingston, Thomas W . Education and Race: A Biography of Edward Wilmot Blyden. San
Francisco: Glendessary Press, 1975.
Lynch, Hollis. Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832–1912. London: Oxford
University Press, 1967.
MacIntyre, Alisdair C. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. Notre Dame, IN: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1984.
Mamiya, Lawrence H. “From Black Muslim to Bilalian: The Evolution of a Movement.”
Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion 21, no. 2 (June 1982): 138–52.
Selected Bibliography 165


--- PAGE 171 ---
———. “Minister Louis Farrakhan and the Final Call: Schism in the Muslim Movement.”
In The Muslim Community in North America, edited by Earle Waugh et al. Edmonton:
University of Alberta Press, 1983.
Marlow, Louise. Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1997.
Marsh, Clifton E. From Black Muslims to Muslims: The Transition from Separatism to Islam,
1930–1980. Metuchen, NJ: Pathﬁnder, 1984.
Martin, T ony. Race First. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1967.
McCloud, Aminah Beverly. African American Islam. New York: Routledge, 1995.
Metcalf, Barbara D., ed. Making Muslim Space in North America and Europe. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1996.
Michaels, Walter Benn. Our America: Nativism, Modernism, and Pluralism. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1995.
Moses, Wilson J. Black Messiahs and Uncle T oms: Social and Literary Manipulations of a 
Religious Myth. University Park, PA: Penn State University Press, 1993.
———. The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850–1925. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1978.
Moses, Wilson J., ed. Classical Black Nationalism: From the American Revolution to Marcus
Garvey. New York: New York University Press, 1996.
Mottahedeh, Roy P . “The Shu‘ubiyya Controversy and the Social History of Early Islamic
Iran.” IJMES 7 (1976): 161–182.
Naff, Alixa. Becoming American: The Early Arab Immigrant Experience. Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1985.
Norris, H. T . “Shu‘ubiyyah in Arabic Literature.” In ‘Abbasid Belles-Lettres, edited by 
J. Ashtiany et al. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Patterson, Orlando. Ethnic Chauvinism: The Reactionary Impulse. New York: Stein and
Day, 1977.
Perry, Bruce. Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America. Barrytown, NY: 
Station Hill, 1991.
Poston, Larry. Islamic Da‘wah in the West.New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Raboteau, Albert J. A Fire in the Bones: Reﬂections of African-American Religious History.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1995.
Redkey, Edwin S. Black Exodus: Black Nationalist and Back-to-Africa Movements,
1890–1910. New Haven: Yale, 1969.
Roediger, David R. The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working
Class. London: Verso, 1992.
Said, Edward W . Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books, 1979.
Saler, Benson, Charles A. Ziegler, and Charles B. Moore, UFO Crash at Roswell: The Gene-
sis of a Modern Myth. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997.
166 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 172 ---
Satter, Beryl. “Marcus Garvey, Father Divine, and the Gender Politics of Race Difference
and Race Neutrality.” American Quarterly 48, no. 1 (1996): 43–76.
Seraile, William. Voice of Dissent: Theophilus Gould Steward (1843–1924) and Black Amer-
ica. Brooklyn, NY: Carlson, 1991.
Shimoni, Yaacov. Political Dictionary of the Arab World.New York: Macmillan, 1987.
Slusser, George, and Eric S. Rabkin, eds. Fights of Fancy: Armed Conﬂict in Science Fiction
and Fantasy. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1993.
Smith, Steven T . “An Historical Account of the American Muslim Mission with Speciﬁc
Reference to North Carolina.” Master’s thesis, Southeastern Baptist Theological Semi-
nary, 1984.
Sollors, Werner. Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American Culture. New York: 
Oxford, 1986.
Stanton, William. The Leopard’s Spots: Scientiﬁc Attitudes toward Race in America,
1815–59. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960.
Stocking, George W . Victorian Anthropology. New York: The Free Press, 1987.
Stuckey, Sterling. The Ideological Origins of Black Nationalism. Boston: Beacon Press, 
1972.
Thomas, Richard W . Life for Us Is What We Make It: Building Black Community in Detroit,
1915–1945. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992.
T urner, Richard Brent. Islam in the African-American Experience. Bloomington, IN: Indi-
ana University Press, 1997.
Ueda, Reed. Postwar Immigrant America: A Social History. Boston: St. Martin’s Press, 
1994.
Van DeBurg, William L. New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American
Culture, 1965–1975. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Von Grunebaum, Gustave E., ed. Unity and Variety in Muslim Civilization.Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1955.
Waugh, Earle H. and Frederick M. Denny, eds. The Shaping of an American Islamic Dis-
course: A Memorial to Fazlur Rahman. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998.
Wellhausen, Julius. The Religio-Political Factions in Early Islam. T ranslated by R. C. Ostle
and S. M. Walzer. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing, 1975.
Williams, Delores S. Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-T alk.Mary-
knoll, NY: Orbis, 1994.
Wilson, Peter Lamborn. Sacred Drift: Essays on the Margins of Islam. San Francisco: City
Lights Books, 1993.
Wolfenstein, Eugene Victor. The Victims of Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black Revolution.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.
Woodward, C. Vann. Origins of the New South, 1877–1913. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State Press, 1951.
Selected Bibliography 167


--- PAGE 173 ---
Wright, Louis E. “The Political Thought of Elijah Muhammad: Innovation and Continu-
ity in Western T radition.” Ph.D. diss., Howard University, 1987.
Wuthnow, Robert. Christianity in the Twenty-First Century: Reﬂections on the Challenges
Ahead. New York: Oxford, 1993.
Yates, Frances A. The Rosicrucian Enlightenment. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1972.
168 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 174 ---
INDEX
169
Abdallah, Muhammad Nur, 120–121,
154n. 17, 155nn. 32, 33
Afro-Descendant Upliftment Society,
111
Ahmad, Ghulam, 71
The Ahmadiya Movement, 70–71, 92
Ali, Muhammad (formerly Cassius Clay),
112
Ali, Noble Drew (formerly Timothy
Drew): 1, 7, 15, 16, 18, 64, 74, 85,
134; ahistorical elements in the
thought of, 135, 137; the ambiguous
particularism of, 61–62, 136–137;
and the Black Shriners, 25;
esotericism in the thought of, 56–61;
and Garveyism, 46; hagiography of,
47; as leader of Moorish Science
T emple, 47–48; moral teachings of,
60; overview of, 17; particularism in
the thought of, 46, 54, 61–62,
136–137; universalism in the thought
of, 46, 61–62, 136–137; use of The
Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ by,
58–59; use of Rosicrucian texts by,
59–61; views of, on black identity
and black nationalism, 52–56; views
of, on Islam, 46, 54–56
AMMCOP , 126
Ansari, Samuel, 155 n. 34
The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ,
58–59, 147n. 27
The Arab Cold War, 92–93
Asad, Talal, 3, 142n. 11
Autobiography of Malcolm X, 86, 94, 111
al-Azhar, University of, 100, 131
Azzam, Abd al-Rahman, 93–95, 104
Azzam, Omar, 94
Baghdadi, Ali, 115
Bilal ibn Rabah: appropriation of, by 
Edward W . Blyden, 36; appropriation
of, by Wallace D. Muhammad, 108,
119–121, 137; and classical Islam, 8
The Black Church: deradicalization of,
149n. 8; the importance of, from
1880 to 1920, 14; in the thought of
Elijah Muhammad, 65, 68
black consciousness movement, 117–119
black identity. See identity
black liberation. See liberation
black messianism. See messianism
The Black Muslims in America (Lincoln),
2, 142n. 15
The Black Shriners, 45
Blyden, Edward Wilmot: 1, 15, 17, 18,
61, 74, 85, 134; appropriation of, in
Garvey movement, 50–51; and black
messianism, 22, 33–43; and
civilizationism, 24–5, 29–30, 36, 42;
contact of, with West African
Muslims, 28–29; early career of
23–25; essentialism in the thought of,
136; overview of, 16; particularism in
the thought of, 22–23, 33–43; and
the publication of Islam, Christianity,
and the Negro Race, 37–38; trip of, to
the Holy Land, 26–28; universalism
in the thought of, 22–23, 33–43;
views of, regarding Islam, 25–33,
36–37; and Zionism, 40–42


--- PAGE 175 ---
Burke, Edmund, III, 4
Burkett, Randall K., 49, 149n. 8
Cairo, IL, 48
Carson, Clayborne, 87
Chicago, IL, 45, 47–48, 71, 72, 109,
113, 114, 129, 131
Christianity: effect of, on thought of 
Elijah Muhammad, 64–67; and
Islamic views of the Messiah, 
150n. 25; views of Edward W . Blyden
toward, 21–23, 25–26, 27, 29–32,
36–37; views of Elijah Muhammad
toward, 63, 74, 78; views of Malcolm
X toward, 99; views of Noble Drew
Ali toward, 54–56, 59; views of
Wallace D. Muhammad toward, 
117
civil rights movement, 73, 80, 97, 100
COINTELPRO, 112
contingency, historical, 138–140
CRAID, 116–117
Dabashi, Hamid, 9
dan Fodio, Uthman. See Fodio, Uthman
dan
da‘wa, 92–93, 120
Dawud, Talib Ahmad, 80–81
DeCaro, Louis A., Jr., 87, 141n. 1
democracy, 123, 127
Detroit, MI, 67–68, 69–70
Diab, Jamil, 81, 109
difference: and the practice of Islam, 12,
139–140; views of Edward W . Blyden
on, 33–34; views of Noble Drew Ali
on, 52–56; views of Wallace D.
Muhammad on, 125
din. See religion
dispensationalism, 64–67, 79, 89
double consciousness, 85
Dowling, Levi H., 58–69 
Drew Ali, Noble. See Ali, Noble Drew
DuBois, W . E. B., 85, 96, 97
Dulles, Allen, 101
Esack, Farid, 138, 140
esotericism: and African-American
women, 57; deﬁnition of, 56; in the
thought of Elijah Muhammad, 78; in
the thought of Noble Drew Ali,
57–61
essentialism: in African-American Islamic
thought, 135–138, 140; in the
thought of Edward W . Blyden, 136;
in the thought of Elijah Muhammad,
135–136; in the thought of Malcolm
X, 101–103, 136; in the thought of
Noble Drew Ali, 135; in the thought
of Wallace D. Muhammad, 137–140;
in the study of Islamic societies, 4
Essien-Udom, E. U., 109, 110, 141n. 1
Ethiopianism: 15; in the thought of 
Edward W . Blyden, 35–36, 42, 
145n. 46; in the thought of Louis
Farrakhan, 133–134; in the thought
of Marcus Garvey, 49–50
Fard, W . D.: 63, 64, 81, 150n. 25; the
ethnic identity of, 69; the meaning
of, for Elijah Muhammad, 76, 83; the
relationship of, to Elijah Muhammad,
68–69, 70; in the thought of Louis
Farrakhan, 133; in the thought of
Wallace D. Muhammad, 113
Farrakhan, Louis (formerly Louis Eugene
Walcott): 20, 112; and the creation of
a new Nation of Islam, 130; early
career of, 129–130; particularism in
the thought of, 129–130, 133–135;
relationship of, with Wallace D.
Muhammad, 112, 130, 131, 139;
universalism in the thought of,
130–132, 133, 134; views of, on
racism, 130
Fauset, Arthur Huff, 146nn. 3, 6
Faysal (prince of Saudi Arabia), 93,
94–95, 104
Federations of Islamic Associations in the
U.S. and Canada, 81
Fodio, Uthman dan, 25–26
Fredrickson, George M., 33, 49, 146n. 8
Freemasonry, 45
From West Africa to Palestine (Blyden),
26–28
170 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 176 ---
Gardell, Mattias, 112
Garnet, Henry Highland, 75, 150n. 23
Garveyism, 46, 48–51, 146n. 8
Garvey, Marcus, 17–18, 46, 48–51
Geertz, Clifford, 2–3
Ghani, Ahmed, 115, 154n. 17
Goldman, Peter, 87
The Great Depression, 68, 70
The Great Migration, 17, 67
Great Pyramids (of Egypt). See Pyramids
Greene, Claude D., 48
Grunebaum, Gustave von, 4
Haddad, Yvonne Y., 12
hajj. See pilgrimage
Haley, Alex, 118–119
Hanegraaf, Wouter, 56
The Hate that Hate Produced, 80, 88
Hawkins, John, 76
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 17,
146n. 8
Hilmy, Amin, 115
historicism, 138
Hodgson, Marshall G. S., 5, 142n. 12
Holly, James Theodore, 65–66
Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple,
16, 48, 51, 53, 56–61
Hooks, Benjamin, 115
Huggins, Nathan I., 119
Hurley, George Willie, 57–58
‘id al-ﬁtr, 114
identity: 1; disputes over, among African
Americans, 14–15; and essentialist
notions of blackness, 135–137; views
of Edward W . Blyden on, 33–35;
views of Elijah Muhammad on,
63–64, 75, 135–136; views of 
Malcolm X on, 85, 90, 103–104,
136; views of Noble Drew Ali on, 46,
52–56, 61–62, 135; views of Wallace
D. Muhammad on, 113, 117, 119,
121, 125–127, 137
immigrants: in Detroit, 69–71; the
impact of, on Elijah Muhammad, 64,
79–83; relationship between 
Malcolm X and, 89, 90, 91–92,
100–101, 104; relationship between
Wallace D. Muhammad and, 108,
114, 155n. 33
Indian Citizenship Act, 52–53
individualism, 123, 127
The Inﬁnite Wisdom, 59–60
interfaith activities: of Louis Farrakhan,
132; of Wallace D. Muhammad,
115–116
Islamic Center of Washington, D.C., 81
Islamic Centre of Geneva, Switzerland,
90, 104
Islam, Christianity, and the Negro Race
(Blyden), 37–38, 50
Islamic modernism. See modernism,
Islamic
Jackson, Jesse L., Jr., 115
Jamal, Ahmad, 81
jihad, 25, 122–123
Karenga, Ron, 118
Kelley, Robin D. G., 87
Kenyatta, Jomo, 101
Kerr, Malcolm, 92
Kharijites, 8–10, 11
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 11, 73, 80, 86,
115
Koran. See Qur’an
Laclau, Ernesto, 5–6
Lee, Spike, 86
Lewis, Bernard, 32
liberation: 1; deﬁnition of, 15; and
Ethiopianism, 15; ideas of, in the
thought of Edward W . Blyden,
21–23; ideas of, in the thought of
Noble Drew Ali, 46, 55–56, 60–61;
views of Elijah Muhammad on,
63–64, 78; views of Louis Farrakhan
on, 130, 132; views of Malcolm X
on, 91, 99–100, 103; views of 
Wallace D. Muhammad on, 117, 127
Liberia’s Offering(Blyden), 24
Lincoln, C. Eric, 2, 13, 73, 141n. 1,
142n. 15
Little, Earl, 87
Index 171


--- PAGE 177 ---
Little, Louise, 87
Lumumba, Patrice, 101
MacIntyre, Alisdair, 4
Malcolm X: 1, 16, 19, 72, 107, 116,
117; conversion of, to Sunni Islam,
89, 91–92, 94–95; impact of
immigrant and foreign Muslims on,
91–96; impact of pan-Africanism on,
96–99, 101–104; life of, before 1960,
86–88; overview of, 19; particularism
in the thought of, 85–86, 92, 94–96,
96–105; pilgrimage of, to Mecca, 92,
94–96; relation of, with Wallace D.
Muhammad, 111; separation of, from
Elijah Muhammad, 89–91, 99;
travels of, to West Africa, 97–99,
101; universalism in the thought of,
85, 98, 103–105; use of Qur’an by,
88–89, 98; views of, on black
nationalism, 91
Mamiya, Lawrence H., 141n. 2
Marlow, Louise, 8
McCloud, Aminah Beverly, 141n. 1
McGuire, George Alexander, 49–50
Mendelssohn, Felix, 131
Message to the Blackman in America
(Muhammad), 74, 82
messianism: in the Ahmadiya movement,
71; in the thought of Edward W . 
Blyden, 22, 33–42; in the thought of
Elijah Muhammad, 76; in the
thought of Louis Farrakhan, 133
Michaels, Walter Benn, 53
millennialism: the effects of, on Elijah
Muhammad, 65–67; views of Elijah
Muhammad on, 76–77, 79
Million Family March, 132
modernism, Islamic, 122
Moon, Sun Myung, 132
Moorish Science T emple, 47–48
Moses, Wilson Jeremiah, 24
mothership, 77, 114
Mottahedeh, Roy, 10
Mounds City, IL, 48
Muhammad, Clara (Evans), 67, 68, 
107
Muhammad, Elijah (formerly Elijah
Poole): 1, 7, 15–16, 18, 62, 85, 107,
113, 129; and clean living, 79; early
career of, 67–68, 72; elimination of
universalism in the thought of, 81–84;
millennialism of, 76–78; impact of
immigrant Muslims on, 64; as leader
of the Nation of Islam, 72–73; and the
mothership, 77–78; opposition to, by
other Muslims, 80–81; overview of,
18; particularism in the thought of,
63–64, 73–77, 78–80, 82–84,
135–136; references to, by Louis
Farrakhan, 130; relationship of, with
W . D. Fard, 68–69; teachings of,
regarding Christianity, 74, 78;
teachings of, regarding Islam, 72–79;
teachings of, regarding prayer, 81–83;
upbringing of, 64–65; views of, on
gender, 74; views of, on God, 76; views
of, on the Prophet Muhammad, 75
Muhammad, Prophet (of Arabia): 5, 8;
references to, by Louis Farrakhan,
130, 131; views of Elijah Muhammad
on, 75; views of Marcus Garvey on,
50; views of Wallace D. Muhammad
on, 121, 123, 124, 125, 137–138
Muhammad, Wallace D. (a.k.a. Warith
Deen Muhammad and W . D. 
Mohammed): 1, 16; and American
patriotism, 116, 123–124; approach
of, to Qur’an and Sunna, 108, 109,
116, 123–125, 126; appropriation of
Bilal ibn Rabah by, 108, 119–121;
black consciousness in the thought of,
117–119; on black liberation, 117,
127; early career of, 109–112;
education of, 109; Islamic modernism
in the thought of, 122–127; names
of, 153n. 1; overview of, 19–20;
particularism in the thought of,
107–108, 117–121, 125, 127,
137–140; relationship of, with
African-American Christians, 
115; relationship of, with Elijah
Muhammad, 110–111; relationship
of, with immigrant and foreign
172 Islam in Black America


--- PAGE 178 ---
Muslims, 108, 114, 120–121, 155n.
33; relationship of, with Louis
Farrakhan, 112, 130, 131, 139;
relationship of, with Malcolm X,
111; and the Sunni reformation of
the Nation of Islam, 113–117;
upbringing of, 107, 109; universalism
in the thought of, 107–108, 114,
121, 126–127, 137–140; views of, on
black identity, 113, 117, 119, 121;
views of, on race, 113–114; views of,
on social change, 126–127
Murad, Abdal-Hakim, 138
Murphy, Richard W ., 100
Muslim Brothers (of Egypt), 3, 92
Muslim Mosque, Inc., 91, 98
Muslim Students Association, 93, 120
Muslim World League, 93, 120
“The Myth of Yacub,” 75, 83, 134
Naeem, Abdul Basit, 79–80
Nassir, Gamal Abd al-, 92, 99–100
nationalism: deﬁnitions of, 13; and
Garveyism, 48–51; and the Nation of
Islam, 73; views of Edward W . 
Blyden on, 21–22, 24–25, 28, 34,
42; views of Elijah Muhammad on,
73; views of Louis Farrakhan on, 134;
views of Malcolm X on, 91; views of
Noble Drew Ali on, 46, 52–56,
61–62; views of Wallace D. 
Muhammad on, 116
National Origins Act, 52–53
Nation of Islam (NOI): 2, 48; names
changes of, 116; origins of 68–69;
Sunni reformation of, under Wallace
D. Muhammad, 113–117; surveillance
of, 112; under the leadership of Elijah
Muhammad, 72–73
Nkrumah, Kwame, 97, 98, 101
Noble Drew Ali. See Ali, Noble Drew
NOI. See Nation of Islam
Obote, Milton, 101
orientalism: in the ﬁeld of Islamic
studies, 4; in the thought of Edward
W . Blyden, 26–27, 30, 32
Organization of African Unity (OAU),
97, 99
Organization of Afro-American Unity
(OAAU), 99
Osman, Ahmed, 90
Padmore, George, 96–97, 101
pan-Africanism, 85, 96–99, 101–104,
136
particularism: in African-American
Islam, 12–20, 135–140; in classical
Islam, 7–12; and deﬁnitions of
blackness, 14; theoretical discussion
of, 1, 11; in the thought of Edward
W . Blyden, 22–23, 33–43, 136; in
the thought of Elijah Muhammad,
63–64, 73–77, 78–80, 82–84; in the
thought of Louis Farrakhan,
129–130, 133–135; in the thought of
Malcolm X, 85–86, 92, 94–96,
96–105; in the thought of Noble
Drew Ali, 46, 54, 61–62; in the
thought of Wallace D. Muhammad,
107–108, 117–121, 125, 127,
137–140
Perry, Bruce, 87
pilgrimage: of Akbar, Elijah, and 
Herbert Muhammad, 81; comments
on, by Louis Farrakhan, 130; of
Malcolm X, 92, 94–96, 97–98; of
Wallace D. Muhammad’s followers,
114–115
prayer, 81–83, 89, 114, 131, 132
The Pyramids (of Egypt), 27–28
Qur’an: 18; Ahmadiya translation of, 71;
interpretations of, by Edward W . 
Blyden, 32, 36–37; interpretations 
of, by Elijah Muhammad, 75, 78, 
82; interpretations of, by Louis
Farrakhan, 132, 133; interpretations
of, byWallace D. Muhammad, 108,
116, 123–125, 126, 137–138; and
scholarly deﬁnitions of Islam, 5, 138;
use of, by Malcolm X, 88–89, 98; use
of, to challenge social inequality, 7,
11, 32, 33, 98
Index 173


--- PAGE 179 ---
race: deﬁnitions of, 14; views of Edward
W . Blyden on, 33–34, 38–39; views
of Elijah Muhammad on, 75; views
of Louis Farrakhan on, 132, 134;
views of Malcolm X on, 95–96,
101–103, 136; views of Noble Drew
Ali on, 46, 52–56; views of Wallace
D. Muhammad on, 113–114, 125,
126
racism: effects of, on the rise of African-
American Islam, 13; in the life of 
Edward W . Blyden, 23–24;
theoretical absence of, in Islam, 32,
95; views of Louis Farrakhan on, 130,
134; views of Wallace D. Muhammad
on, 125
Ramadan (fast), 114–115, 130
Ramadan, Said, 93, 104
relativism, 139
religion: 1–2; deﬁnitions of, 3; problems
of deﬁning Islam as, 3
Rosicrucianism, 46, 60
al-Sabban, Muhammad Sarur, 100
Sadat, Anwar, 115
Said, Edward, 11, 26–27
salat. See prayer.
Satter, Beryl, 49
Shabazz, tribe of. See “Myth of Yacub”
shahada, 119
Sharpton, Rev. Al, 120
Shawarbi, Mahmoud Youssef, 91–92, 93,
104
shirk, 117, 133
Shu‘ubiyya movement, 10–11
slavery: and the early presence of
Muslims in the United States, 6–7;
views of Elijah Muhammad on, 
74, 78
Smith, Jane I., 9
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, 6
Sollors, Werner, 119
Stanton, Dakota, 80–81
Steward, Theophilus Gould, 66
Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs, 100
theosophy, 46
tradition: deﬁning Islam as, 3–4;
studying Islam as, 6
Tshombe, Moise, 101
T urner, Henry McNeal, 66–67
T urner, Richard Brent, 48, 141n. 1
UFOs, 77–78, 130
‘umra. See pilgrimage
United Negro Improvement Association
(UNIA), 17, 49–51, 68, 87
Universal Hagar’s Spiritual Church,
57–58
universalism: in African-American Islam,
12–20, 136–140; in classical Islam,
7–12; elimination of, in the thought
of Elijah Muhammad, 81–84;
theoretical discussion of, 1, 11,
12–15; in the thought of Edward W .
Blyden, 22–23, 33–43, 136; in the
thought of Louis Farrakhan,
130–132, 133, 134; in the thought of
Malcolm X, 85, 98, 103–105; in the
thought of Noble Drew Ali, 46,
61–62; in the thought of Wallace D.
Muhammad, 107–108, 114, 121,
126–127, 137–140
University of al-Azhar. See al-Azhar,
University of
University of Islam, 109
Unto Thee I Grant, 59–60
Wilkins, Roy, 80
Wilmore, Gayraud S., 149
Wolfenstein, Eugene, 87
World Community of al-Islam in the
West, 116
174 Islam in Black America

