=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: John G. Jackson~Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 19
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:07.430235
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization 
A Critical Review of the Evidence of Archaeology, Anthropology, History and 
Comparative Religion: According to the Most Reliable Sources and Authorities 
By John G. Jackson (1939)
 
"It is pretty well settled that the city  is the Negro's great 
contribution to civilization, for it was in Africa where the 
first cities grew up." E. Haldeman-Julius  
"Those piles of ruins which you see in that narrow valley 
watered by the Nile, are the remains of opulent cities, the 
pride of the  ancient kingdom of Ethiopia. … There a 
people, now forgotten, discovered while others were yet 
barbarians, the elements of the arts and sciences. A race 
of men now rejected from society for their sable skin and 
frizzled hair, founded on the study of the l aws of nature, 
those civil and religious systems which still govern the 
universe." Count Volney  
"The accident of the predominance of white men in 
modern times should not give us supercilious ideas about 
color or persuade us to listen to superficial theories about 
the innate superiority of the white -skinned man. Four 
thousand years ago, when civilization was already one or 
two thousand years old, white men were just a bunch of 
semi-savages on the outskirts of the civilized world. If 
there had been anthropologists in Crete, Egypt, and 
Babylonia, they would have pronounced the white race obviously inferior, and might have discoursed 
learnedly on the superior germ-plasm or glands of colored folk." Joseph McCabe  
 
  
The late Professor George A. Dorsey noted that "H. G. Wells' heart 
beats faster in nearly every chapter of his Outline of History , 
because he cannot forget that he is Nordic, Aryan, English British, 
white, civilized." (Why We Behave Like Human Beings , p. 40.) This 
patriotic zeal of Mr. Wells' has, in truth, caused him to suppress 
certain facts that do not fit into his pet theories. In the latest edition 
of his Outline of History , Mr. Wells ends his chapter on The Early 
Empires with the following remarks: "No less an authority than Sir 
Flinders Petrie gives countenance to the idea that there was some 
very early connection between Colchis (the country to the south of 
the Caucasus) and prehistoric Egypt. Herodotus remarked upon  a 
series of resemblances between the Colchians and the Egyptians."


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
(Wells' New and Revised Outline of History , p. 184, Garden City, 1931.) It would have 
been proper for Wells to have quoted the remarks of Herodotus, so as to give us 
precise information on  the series of resemblances between the Cholchians and the 
Egyptians. Why he did not do so we shall now see. In Book II, Section -104, of his 
celebrated History, Herodotus states: "For my part I believe the Colchi to be a colony of 
Egyptians, because like them they have black skins and frizzled hair." (See any English 
translation of The History of Herodotus. The translation by Professor George Rawlinson 
is the best. See also W.E.B. DuBois, The Negro, p. 31, and Count Volney's Travels in 
Egypt and Syria, Vol. I. pp. 80–81.) After discussing the civilizations of Egypt, Babylonia 
and India, Wells had already referred to them as a "triple system of white man 
civilizations." ( Outline of History , Chap. X III, Sect. 5, p. 175) On concluding that the 
civilization of Egypt was a white man civilization, he naturally would be careful not to 
quote the above passage from Herodotus. 
Most history texts, especially the ones on ancient history, start off by telling us that there 
are either three, four or five races of man, but that of those races only one has been 
responsible for civilization, culture, progress and all other good things. The one race is 
of course the white race, and particularly that branch of said ra ce known as the Nordic 
or Aryan. The reason for this is obvious; the writers of these textbooks are as a rule 
Nordics, or so consider themselves. However, prejudice alone will not account for this 
sort of thing. There is a confusion among historians and an thropologists concerning the 
proper classification of races, and this confusion is used by biased writers to bolster up 
their preconceptions. It is therefore necessary that we discuss the subject of race 
classification in a rational manner before proceeding further. 
The early scientific classifications of the varieties of the human species were 
geographical in nature. The celebrated naturalist, Linneaus (1708 –1778), for instance, 
listed four races, according to continent, namely: (1) European (white), (2) A frican 
(black), (3) Asiatic (yellow), and (4) American (red). Blumenback, in 1775, added a fifth 
type, the Ocieanic or brown race. This classification is still used in some grammar 
school Geographies, where the races of man are tabulated as: Ethiopian (bla ck), 
Caucasian (white), American (red), Mongolian (yellow) and Malayan (brown). During the 
year 1800, the French naturalist, Cuvier, announced the hypothesis that all ethnic types 
were traceable to Ham, Chem and Japhet, the three sons of Noah. After that d ate race 
classification developed into an amazing contest; a struggle which still rages. By 1873, 
Haeckel had found no less than twelve distinct races of mankind; and to show the 
indefatigable nature of his researches, he annexed twenty -two more races a fe w years 
later, bringing the grand total of human types up to thirty -four. Deniker, in 1900, 
presented to the world a very imposing system of race classification. He conceived of 
the human species existing in the form of six grand divisions, seventeen divis ions and 
twenty-nine races. And despite all this industry among anthropologists, ethnologists and 
the like, there is yet no agreement on the classification of races. Where one 
anthropologist finds three racial types, another can spot thirty -three without t he least 
difficulty.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
The Classifiers of race, however, regardless of how abundantly they disagreed with 
each other as to the correct groupings of human types, were of unanimous accord in the 
belief that the white peoples of the world were far superior to t he darker races. This 
opinion in still very popular, but modern science is making it hard for intelligent people to 
accept the fallacy. Many years ago the German philosopher, Schopenhauer, remarked 
that, "there is no such thing as a white race, much as thi s is talked of, but every white 
man is a faded or bleached one." Schopenhauer possessed keen and sagacious 
foresight on this point. For example, the English scholar, Joseph McCabe, expresses 
the following view as the consensus of opinion among modern anthr opologists: "There 
is strong reason to think that man was at first very dark of skin, woolly -haired and flat -
nosed, and, as he wandered into different climates, the branches of the race diverged 
and developed their characteristics." (Key to Culture, No. 11, p. 10.) 
Professor Franz Boas, the nestor of American anthropologists, has divided the whole 
human race into only two divisions. This classification of Boas' is admirably explained by 
Professor George A. Dorsey: 
Open your atlas to a map of the world. Look  at the Indian Ocean: on the 
west, Africa; on the north, the three great southern peninsulas of Asia: on 
the east, a chain of great islands terminating in Australia. Wherever that 
Indian Ocean touches land, it finds dark -skinned people with strongly 
developed jaws, relatively long arms and kinky or frizzly hair. Call that the 
Indian Ocean or Negroid division of the human race. 
Now look at the Pacific Ocean: on one side, the two Americas; on the 
other, Asia. (Geographically, Europe is a tail to the Asiatic k ite.) The 
aboriginal population of the Americas and of Asia north of its southern 
peninsula was a light -skinned people with straight hair, relatively short 
arms, and a face without prominent jaws. Call that the Pacific Ocean or 
Mongoloid division. (Why We Behave Like Human Beings, pp. 44–45.) 
Professors A. L. Kroeber and Fay -Cooper Cole are of the opinion that the peoples of 
Europe have (been) bleached out enough to merit classification as a distinct race. This 
would add a European or Caucasoid division to the Negroid and Mongoloid races of the 
classification proposed by Professor Boas. If we accept this three -fold division of the 
human species, our classification ought to read as follows: the races of man are three in 
number; (1) the Negroid, or Ethiopian o r black race; (2) the Mongoloid, or Mongolian or 
yellow race; and (3) the Caucasoid or European or white race. This is the very latest 
scheme of race classification. 
Now that we have straightened out ourselves on the issue of the classification of races, 
we may property turn to the main subject matter of this essay, i.e., the ancient 
Ethiopians and their widespread influence on the early history of civilization. In 
discussing the origin of civilization in the ancient Near East, Professor Charles 
Seignobos in his History of Ancient Civilization , notes that the first civilized inhabitants 
of the Nile and Tigris-Euphrates valleys, were a dark-skinned people with short hair and


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
prominent lips; and that they are referred to by some scholars as Cushites (Ethiopian s), 
and as Hamites by others. This ancient civilization of the Cushites, out of which the 
earliest cultures of Egypt and Mesopotamia grew, was not confined to the Near East. 
Traces of it have been found all over the world. Dr. W. J. Perry refers to it as the Archaic 
Civilization. Sir Grafton Elliot Smith terms it the Neolithic Heliolithic Culture of the 
Brunet-Browns. Mr. Wells alludes to this early civilization in his Outline of History , and 
dates its beginnings as far back as 15,000 years B.C. "This peculiar development of the 
Neolithic culture," says Mr. Wells, "which Elliot Smith called the Heliolithic (sun -stone) 
culture, included many or all of the following odd practices: (1) Circumcision, (2) the 
queer custom of sending the father to bed when a child is born, known as Couvade, (3) 
the practice of Massage, (4) the making of Mummies, (5) Megalithic monuments (i.e. 
Stonehenge), (6) artificial deformation of the heads of the young by bandages, (7) 
Tattooing, (8) religi ous association of the Sun and the Serpent, and (9) the use of the 
symbol known as the Swastika for good luck. … Elliot Smith traces these associated 
practices in a sort of constellation all over this great Mediterranean / Indian Ocean -
Pacific area. Where one occurs, most of the others occur. They link Brittany with Borneo 
and Peru. But this constellation of practices does not crop up in the primitive home of 
Nordic or Mongolian peoples, nor does it extend southward much beyond equatorial 
Africa. … The firs t civilizations in Egypt and the Euphrates -Tigris valley probably 
developed directly out of this widespread culture." (Outline of History, pp. 141–143). 
This ancient civilization is called NEOLITHIC by Wells. This is a mistake; for we have 
overwhelming evi dence that these ancient peoples had long passed out of the New 
Stone Age stage of culture, and were erecting edifices which could only have been 
constructed by means of hard metal tools. Iron is the very backbone of civilization, and 
the Iron Age began ve ry anciently in Africa. The researches of scholars like Boas, 
Torday and DuBois would lead us to believe that the art of mining iron was first 
developed in the interior of Africa, and that the knowledge of it passed through Egypt to 
the rest of the world. (See W.E.B. DuBois, The Negro, pp. 114 –116, Home University 
Library, New York and London, 1915.) 
In modern geography the name Ethiopia is confined to the country known as Abyssinia, 
an extensive territory in East Africa. In ancient times Ethiopia extended over vast 
domains in both Africa and Asia. "It seems certain," declares Sir E. A. Wallis Budge, 
"that classical historians and geographers called the whole region from India to Egypt, 
both countries inclusive, by the name of Ethiopia, and in consequence th ey regarded all 
the dark-skinned and black peoples who inhabited it as Ethiopians. Mention is made of 
Eastern and Western Ethiopians and it is probable that the Easterners were Asiatics 
and the Westerners Africans." ( History of Ethiopia , Vol. I., Preface, by Sir E. A. Wallis 
Budge.) In addition Budge notes that, "Homer and Herodotus call all the peoples of the 
Sudan, Egypt, Arabia, Palestine and Western Asia and India Ethiopians." (Ibid., p. 2.) 
Herodotus wrote in his celebrated History that both the Western Ethiopians, who lived in 
Africa, and the Eastern Ethiopians who dwelled in India, were black in complexion, but 
that the Africans had curly hair, while the Indians were straight -haired. (The aboriginal 
black inhabitants of India are generally referred to  as the Dravidians, of whom more will 
be said as we proceed.) Another classical historian who wrote about the Ethiopians was


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Strabo, from whom we quote the following: "I assert that the ancient Greeks, in the 
same way as they classed all the northern natio ns with which they were familiar as 
Scythians, etc., so, I affirm, they designated as Ethiopia the whole of the southern 
countries toward the ocean." Strabo adds that "if the moderns have confined the 
appellation Ethiopians to those only who dwell near Egy pt, this must not be allowed to 
interfere with the meaning of the ancients." Ephorus says that: "The Ethiopians were 
considered as occupying all the south coasts of both Asia and Africa," and adds that 
"this is an ancient opinion of the of the Greeks." Then we have the view of Stephanus of 
Byzantium, that: "Ethiopia was the first established country on earth; and the Ethiopians 
were the first who introduced the worship of the gods, and who established laws." The 
vestiges of this early civilization have been  found in Nubia, the Egyptian Sudan, West 
Africa, Egypt, Mashonaland, India, Persia, Mesopotamia, Arabia, South America, 
Central America, Mexico, and the United States. Any student who doubts this will find 
ample evidence in such works as The Voice of Afri ca, by Dr. Leo Froebenius; 
Prehistoric Nations, and Ancient America, by John D. Baldwin; Rivers of Life, by Major-
General J. G. R. Forlong; A Book of the Beginnings  by Gerald Massey; Children of the 
Sun and The Growth of Civilization , by W. J. Perry; The N egro by Professor W.E.B. 
DuBois; The Anacalypsis , by Sir Godfrey Higgins; Isis Unveiled  by Madam H. P. 
Blavatsky; The Diffusion of Culture , by Sir Grafton Elliot Smith; The Mediterranean 
Race, by Professor Sergi; The Ruins of Empires , by Count Volney; The Races of 
Europe, by Professor William Z. Ripley; and last but not least, the brilliant monographs 
of Mr. Maynard Shipley: New Light on Prehistoric Cultures  and Americans of a Million 
Years Age . (See also Shipley's Sex and the Garden of Eden Myth , a collect ion of 
essays, the best of the lot being one entitled: Christian Doctrines In Pre -Christian 
America.) These productions of Mr. Shipley, have been issued in pamphlet form in the 
Little Blue Book Series, published by Mr. E. Haldeman-Julius, of Girard, Kansas. 
The efforts of certain historians to classify these ancient Cushites as Caucasoids does 
not deceive honest historical students any longer. This may well be illustrated by a 
passage from the pen of our scholarly friend Bishop William Montgomery Brown: "Fo r 
the first two or three thousand years of civilization, there was not a civilized white man 
on the earth. Civilization was founded and developed by the swarthy races of 
Mesopotamia, Syria and Egypt, and the white race remained so barbaric that in those 
days an Egyptian or a Babylonian priest would have said that the riffraff of white tribes a 
few hundred miles to the north of their civilization were hopelessly incapable of 
acquiring the knowledge requisite to progress. It was southern colored peoples 
everywhere, in China, in Central America, in India, Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt and 
Crete who gave the northern white peoples civilization." ( The Bankruptcy of Christian 
Supernaturalism, Vol., p. 192.) 
Quite a few Egyptologists have defended the idea that the anc ient Egyptians 
originally came from Asia. There never was any evidence to back up this view; and the 
only reason it was adopted, was because it was fashionable to believe that no African 
people was capable of developing a great civilization. Geoffrey Parso ns refers to 
Egyptian civilization in his Stream of History , p. 154, New York & London, 1932, as 
"genuinely African in its origin and development." Herodotus came to the same


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
conclusion over 2,000 years ago, but he is not taken seriously by the majority of modern 
historians, except where his facts agree with certain theories of said historians. Theories 
are more precious to some scholars than facts, even when the facts flatly contradict 
their theories. Dr. Froebenious, the great German anthropologist, has e xamined the 
ruins of ancient cultures in southern, eastern and western Africa, of an antiquity rivaling 
those of Egypt and Sumer. Sir John Marshall and Dr. E. Mackay have uncovered the 
remains of a great Dravidian civilization in India, which rose to its p eak over 5,000 years 
ago. The newspaper generally report these discoveries as startling and unexpected. 
They tell us that nobody ever dreamed that these ancient nations ever existed. This 
novelty, however, does not exist for real students. Anyone familiar with the works of G. 
Elliot Smith, W. J. Perry, Sir Godfrey Higgins, Dr. H.R. Hall, Sir Henry Rawlinson, John 
D. Baldwin, Gerald Massey and General Forlong, will not be surprised at the very novel 
archaeological discoveries announced by the press. Since we are dealing with historical 
sources and authorities, a study of the researches of Sir Henry Rawlinson, the Father of 
Assyriology, on the Ethiopians in the ancient East, is in order. The following extract is 
condensed from an essay entitled: On the Early History of Babylonia: 
1. The system of writing which they brought with them has the closest affinity 
with that of Egypt —in many cases indeed, there is an absolute identity 
between the two alphabets.  
2. In the Biblical genealogies, Cush (Ethiopia) and Mizraim (Eg ypt) are 
brothers, while from the former sprang Nimrod (Babylonia.)  
3. In regard to the language of the primitive Babylonians, the vocabulary is 
undoubtedly Cushite or Ethiopian, belonging to that stock of tongues 
which in the sequel were everywhere more or less mixed up with the 
Semitic languages, but of which we have probably the purest modern 
specimens in the Mahra of Southern Arabia and the Galla of Abyssinia.  
4. All the traditions of Babylonia and Assyria point to a connection in very 
early times between E thiopia, Southern Arabia and the cities on the lower 
Euphrates.  
5. In further proof of the connection between Ethiopia and Chaldea, we must 
remember the Greek tradition both of Cepheus and Memnon, which 
sometimes applied to Africa, and sometimes to the count ries at the mouth 
of the Euphrates; and we must also consider the geographical names of 
Cush and Phut, which, although of African origin, are applied to races 
bordering on Chaldea, both in the Bible and in the Inscriptions of Darius. 
(Essay-VI, Appendix, B ook-I, History of Herodotus , translated by 
Professor George Rawlinson, with essays and notes by Sir Henry 
Rawlinson and Sir J. G. Wilkinson.) 
The opinions of Sir Henry Rawlinson are reinforced by the researches of his equally 
distinguished brother, Professor George Rawlinson, in his essay On the Ethnic Affinities 
of the Races of Western Asia, which directs our attention to: "the uniform voice of 
primitive antiquity, which spoke of the Ethiopians as a single race, dwelling along the 
shores of the Southern Oc ean from India to the Pillars of Hercules." ( Herodotus, Vol. I., 
Book. I., Appendix, Essay XI., Section -5.) Rawlinson adds an explanatory note to this


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
section of his essay, which we here reproduce: "Recent linguistic discovery tends to 
show that a Cushite or Ethiopian race did in the earliest times extend itself along the 
shores of the Southern Ocean from Abyssinia to India. The whole peninsula of India 
was peopled by a race of their character before the influx of the Aryans; it extended 
from the Indus alon g the seacoast through the modern Beluchistan and Kerman, which 
was the proper country of the Asiatic Ethiopians; the cities on the northern shores of the 
Persian Gulf are shown by the brick inscriptions found among their ruins to have 
belonged to this rac e; it was dominant in Susiana and Babylonia, until overpowered in 
the one country by Aryan, in the other by Semitic intrusion; it can be traced both by 
dialect and tradition throughout the whole south coast of the Arabian peninsula." 
In the study of ancient affairs, folklore and tradition throw an invaluable light on historical 
records. In Greek mythology we read of the great Ethiopian king, Cepheus, whose fame 
was so great that he and his family were immortalized in the stars. The wife of King 
Cepheus was Queen Cassiopeia, and his daughter, Princess Andromeda. The star 
groups of the celestial sphere, which are named after them are called the ROYAL 
FAMILY—(the constellations: CEPHEUS, CASSIOPEIA and ANDROMEDA.) It may seem 
strange that legendary rulers of ancient Ethiopia should still have their names graven on 
our star maps, but the voice of history gives us a clue. A book on astrology attributed to 
Lucian declares that: "The Ethiopians were the first who invented the science of stars, 
and gave names to the planets, not at random and without meaning, but descriptive of 
the qualities which they conceived them to possess; and it was from them that this art 
passed, still in an imperfect state, to the Egyptians." The Ethiopian origin of astronomy 
is beautifully explained by Count Volney in a passage in his Ruins of Empires, which is 
one of the glories of modern literature, and his argument is not based on guesses. He 
invokes the weighty authority of Charles F. Dupuis, whose three monumental works, 
The Origin of Co nstellations, The Origin of Worship and The Chronological Zodiac, are 
marvels of meticulous research. Dupuis placed the origin of the zodiac as far back as 
15,000 B.C., which would give the world's oldest picture book an antiquity of 17,000 
years. (This estimate is not as excessive as it might at first appear, since the American 
ast5ronomer and mathematician, Professor Arthur M. Harding, traces back the origin of 
the zodiac to about 26,000 B.C) In discussing star worship and idolatry, Volney gives 
the follo wing glowing description of the scientific achievements of the ancient 
Ethiopians, and of how they mapped out the signs of the zodiac on the star -spangled 
dome of the heavens: 
Should it be asked at what epoch this system took its birth, we shall 
answer on the testimony of the monuments of astronomy itself, that its 
principles appear with certainty to have been established about seventeen 
thousand years ago, and if it be asked to what people it is to be attributed, 
we shall answer that the same monuments, su pported by unanimous 
traditions, attribute it to the first tribes of Egypt; and reason finds in that 
country all the circumstances which could lead to such a system; when it 
finds there a zone of sky, bordering on the tropic, equally free from the 
rains of the equator and the fogs of the north; when it finds there a central 
point of the sphere of the ancients, a salubrious climate, a great but


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
manageable river, a soil fertile without art or labor, inundated without 
morbid exhalations, and placed between two  seas which communicate 
with the richest countries; it conceives that the inhabitant of the Nile, 
addicted to agriculture from the facility of communications, to astronomy 
from the state of his sky, always open to observation, must have been the 
first to pass from the savage to the social state; and consequently to attain 
the physical and moral sciences necessary to civilized life. 
It was, then, on the borders of the upper Nile, among a black race of men, 
that was organized the complicated system of the wor ship of the stars, 
considered in relation to the productions of the earth and the labors of 
agriculture. … Thus the Ethiopian of Thebes named stars of inundation, or 
Aquarius, those stars under which the Nile began to overflow; stars of the 
ox or bull, tho se under which they began to plow, stars of the lion, those 
under which that animal, driven from the desert by thirst, appeared on the 
banks of the Nile; stars of the sheaf, or of the harvest virgin, those of the 
reaping season; stars of the lamb, stars of the two kids, those under which 
these precious animals were brought forth. … Thus the same Ethiopian 
having observed that the return of the inundation always corresponded 
with the rising of a beautiful star which appeared towards the source of the 
Nile, and seemed to warn the husbandman against the coming waters, he 
compared this action to that of the animal who, by his barking, gives notice 
of danger, and he called this star the dog, the barker (Sirius). In the same 
manner he named the stars of the crab, those where the sun, having 
arrived at the tropic, retreated by a slow retrograde motion like the crab of 
Cancer. He named stars of the wild goat, or Capricorn, those where the 
sun, having reached the highest point in his annuary tract, … imitates the 
goat, who delights to climb to the summit of the rocks. He named stars of 
the balance, or Libra, those where the days and nights being equal, 
seemed in equilibrium, like that instrument; and stars of the scorpion, 
those where certain periodical winds bring vap ors, burning like the venom 
of the scorpion. (Volney's Ruins of Empires , pp. 120 –122, New York, 
1926) 
The traditions concerning Memnon are interesting as well as instructive. He was 
claimed as a king by the Ethiopians, and identified with the Pharaoh Amuno ph or 
Amenhotep, by the Egyptians. A fine statue of him is located in the British Museum, in 
London. Charles Darwin makes a reference to this statue on his Descent of Man which 
is well worth reproducing: "When I looked at the statue of Amunoph III, I agreed with two 
officers of the establishment, both competent judges, that he had a strongly marked 
Negro type of features." The features of Akhnaton (Amennhotep IV), are even more 
Negroid than those of his illustrious predecessor. That the earliest Egyptians were 
African Ethiopians (Nilotic Negroes), is obvious to all unbiased students of oriental 
history. Breasted's claim that the early civilized inhabitants of the Nile Valley and 
Western Asia were members of a Great White Race, is utterly false, and is supported by 
no facts whatsoever. A similar racial bias is shown by Elliot Smith in his work, The


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Ancient Egyptians and Their Influence Upon the Civilization of Europe , p. 30, New York 
& London, 1911. "Not a few writers," says he, "like the traveler Volney in the 18 th 
century, have expressed the belief that the ancient Egyptians were Negroes, or at any 
rate strongly Negroid. In recent times even a writer so discriminating as Ripley usually is 
has given his adhesion to this view." (The writers referred to here, are Count Volney, the 
French Orientalist and Professor William Z. Ripley, of Harvard University, an eminent 
American Anthropologist.) Professor Smith is convinced that these men are wrong, 
because he holds that there is a "profound gap that separates the Negro from the rest of 
mankind, including the Egyptian." ( Ancient Egyptians, p. 74.) Another English scholar, 
Philip Smith, is far more rational in discussing this point: 
No people ha ve bequeathed to us so many memorials of its form 
complexion and physiognomy as the Egyptians. … If we were left to form 
an opinion on the subject by the description of the Egyptians left by the 
Greek writers we should conclude that they were, if not Negro es, at least 
closely akin to the Negro race. That they were much darker in coloring 
than the neighboring Asiatics; that they had their frizzled either by nature 
or art; that their lips were thick and projecting, and their limbs slender, 
rests upon the auth ority of eye-witnesses who had traveled in the country 
and who could have had no motive to deceive. … The fullness of the lips 
seen in the Sphinx of the Pyramids and in the portraits of the kings is 
characteristic of the Negro. ( The Ancient History of the East, pp. 25 -26, 
London, 1881.) 
We read of Memnon, King of Ethiopia, in Greek mythology, to be exact in Homer's Iliad, 
where he leads an army of Elamites and Ethiopians to the assistance of King Priam in 
the Trojan War. His expedition is said to have started from the African Ethiopia and to 
have passed through Egypt on the way to Troy. According to Herodotus, Memnon was 
the founder of Susa, the chief city of the Elamites. "There were places called 
Memnonia," asserts Professor Rawlinson, "supposed to have been built by him both in 
Egypt and at Susa; and there was a tribe called Memnones at Moroe. Memnon thus 
unites the eastern with the western Ethiopians, and the less we regard him as an 
historical personage the more must we view him as personifying  the ethnic identity of 
the two races." ( Ancient Monarchies , Vol. I, Chap. 3.) The ancient peoples of 
Mesopotamia are sometimes called the Chaldeans, but this is inaccurate and confusing. 
Before the Chaldean rule in Mesopotamia, there were the empires of t he Sumerians, 
Akkadians, Babylonians and Assyrians. The earliest civilization of Mesopotamia was 
that of the Sumerians. They are designated in the Assyrio -Babylonian inscriptions as 
the black -heads or black -faced people, and they are shown on the monuments  as 
beardless and with shaven heads. This easily distinguishes them from the Semitic 
Babylonians, who are shown with beards and long hair. From the myths and traditions 
of the Babylonians we learn that their culture came originally from the south. Sir Henr y 
Rawlinson concluded from this and other evidence that the first civilized inhabitants of 
Sumer and Akkad were immigrants from the African Ethiopia. John D. Baldwin, the 
American Orientalist, on the other hand, claims that since ancient Arabia was also 
known as Ethiopia, they could have just as well come from that country. These theories


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
are rejected by Dr. II. R. Hall, of the Dept. Of Egyptian & Assyrian Antiquities of the 
British Museum, who contends that Mesopotamia was civilized by a migration from 
India. "The ethnic type of the Sumerians, so strongly marked in their statues and 
reliefs," says Dr. Hall, "was as different from those of the races which surrounded them 
as was their language from those of the Semites, Aryans, or others; they were decidedly 
Indian in type. The face -type of the average Indian of today is no doubt much the same 
as that of his Dravidian race ancestors thousands of years ago. … And it is to this 
Dravidian ethnic type of India that the ancient Sumerian bears most resemblance, so f ar 
as we can judge from his monuments. … And it is by no means improbable that the 
Sumerians were an Indian race which passed, certainly by land, perhaps also by sea, 
through Persia to the valley of the Two Rivers. It was in the Indian home (perhaps the 
Indus valley) that we suppose for them that their culture developed. … On the way they 
left the seeds of their culture in Elam. … There is little doubt that India must have been 
one of the earliest centers of human civilization, and it seems natural to suppo se that 
the strange un -Semitic, un-Aryan people who came from the East to civilize the West 
were of Indian origin, especially when we see with our own eyes how very Indian the 
Sumerians were in type." ( The Ancient History of the Near East , pp. 173–174, London, 
1916.) Hall is opposed in his theory of Sumerian origins by Dr. W. J. Perry, the great 
anthropologist, of the University of London. "The Sumerian stories or origins themselves 
tell a very different tale," Perry points out, "for from their beginnings t he Sumerians 
seem to have been in touch with Egypt. Some of their early texts mention Dilmun, 
Magan and Meluhha. … Dilmun was the first settlement that was made by the god Enki, 
who was the founder of Sumerian civilization. … Magan was famous among the 
Sumerians as a place whence they got diorite and copper, Meluhha as a place whence 
they got gold. Dilmun has been identified with some place or other in the Persian Gulf, 
perhaps the Bahrein Islands, perhaps a land on the eastern shore of the Gulf. … In a 
late inscription of the Assyrians it is said that Magan and Meluhha were the archaic 
names for Egypt and Ethiopia, the latter being the south -western part of Somaliand that 
lay opposite." ( The Growth of Civilization , pp. 60 –61, 2 nd Edition, Harmondsworth, 
Middlesex, England, 1937, Published by Penguin Books, Ltd.) 
Another great nation of Ethiopian origin was Elam, a country which stretched from the 
Tigris River to the Zagros Mountains of Persia. Its capital was the famous city of Susa, 
which was founded about 4,000 B.C., and flourished from that date to its destruction by 
Moslem invaders about the year 650 C.E. (Christian Era). In speaking of the Elamites, 
H. G. Wells H. H. Johnston, to have been Negroid in type. There is a strong Negroid 
strain in the modern p eople of Elam." ( Outline of History , p. 166.) Archaeological 
evidence favors this view. Reginald S. Poole, the English Egyptologist noted that: 
"There is one portrait of an Elamite (Cushite) king on a vase found at Susa; he is 
painted black and thus belong s to the Cushite race." (Quoted by Professor Alfred C. 
Haddon, in his History of Anthropology , p. 6, London, 1934. Thinker's Library Edition, 
published by Watts & Co., 5 & 6 Johnson's Court, Fleet St., London, E. c.-4, England.) 
 We cannot devote much spac e to the early inhabitants of India, though they were 
beyond all doubt an Ethiopic ethnic type. They are described by Professor Lynn 
Thorndike as "short black men with almost Negro noses." ( Short History of Civilization ,


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
p. 227, New York, 1936.) Dr. Will Durant pictures these early Hindus as "a dark-skinned, 
broad-nosed people whom, without knowing the origin or the word, we call Dravidians." 
(Short History of Civilization , Part I, p. 396, New York, 1935.) The student is advised to 
consult pp. 650 –666, of t he new edition of Sir John A. Hammerton's Wonders of the 
Past, in which there is an instructive article, with fine illustrations, by S. G. Blaxland 
Stubbs, entitled: Wonder Cities of Most Ancient India. That Mr. Stubbs is a candid writer 
may be seen from the following excerpt: 
The early Aryan literature of India, the Hymns of the Rigveda, which, it is 
commonly agreed, date from about 1,000 B.C., speak of the people whom 
the proud Aryan invaders found in India as black -skinned barbarians, 
Dasas or slaves. Bu t Aryan pride of race has received something of a 
shock from archaeological investigations carried out by Sir John Marshall 
and, more recently, by Dr. E. Mackay in the valley of the Indus. Here 
ample evidence has been found of a race whose complex civiliza tion and 
high culture were equal, and in some respects superior to those of early 
Mesopotamia and Egypt. 
These Asiatic black men were not confined to the mainland, for we are informed by no 
less an authority than Sir Harry H. Johnston, that: 
In former time s this Asiatic Negro spread, we can scarcely explain how, 
unless the land connections of those days were more extended, through 
Eastern Australia to Tasmania, and from the Solomon Island to New 
Caledonia and even New Zealand, to Fiji and Hawaii. The Negroi d 
element in Burma and Annam is, therefore, easily to be explained by 
supposing that in ancient times Southern Asia had a Negro population 
ranging from the Persian Gulf to Indo -China and the Malay Archipelago. 
(See An Introduction to African Civilizations , by Willis N. Huggins. Ph.D. 
and John G. Jackson, pp. 188–190, New York, 1937.) 
Most readers of history know about the Celts, ancient inhabitants of Europe, whose 
priests were known as the Druids. It is generally thought that these Celts were 
Caucasoids, but Sir Godfrey Higgins, after much study came to the conclusion that they 
were a Negroid people. Higgins wrote a ponderous volume entitled The Celtic Druids. In 
the following passage from his Anacalypsis he modestly refers to it as an essay: "In my 
essay on the Celtic Druids, I have shown that a great nation called Celtae, of whom the 
Druids were the priests, spread themselves almost over the whole earth, and are to be 
traced in their rude gigantic monuments from India to the extremity of Britain. The 
religion of Buddha of India is well known to have been very ancient." (Higgins is here 
referring to the first Buddha, who is supposed to have lived between 5,000 and 6,000 
years ago, and not to Gautama Buddha who lived about 600 years B.C. There were at 
least ten Buddhas mentioned in the sacred books of India.) "Who these can have been 
but the early individuals of the black nation of whom we have been treating I know not, 
and in this opinion I am not singular. The learned Maurice says Cuthies (Cushites), i.e. 
Celts, built the great temples in India and Britain, and excavated the caves of the


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
former; and the learned mathematician, Reuben Burrow, has no hesitation in 
pronouncing Stonehenge to be a temple of the black curly -headed Buddha." 
(Anacalypsis, Vol. I, Book I, Chap. IV, New York, 1927.) 
Though it is generally believed that Columbus discovered America, it is now definitely 
known to students of American archaeology that Columbus came late. Professor Leo 
Weiner has written a three volume work, Africa and the Di scovery of America, in which 
he argues that the New World was discovered by Africans long before the time of 
Columbus. Professor Weiner was led to this conclusion partly from the following 
evidence: 
1. African works in American Indian languages.  
2. Vases and pi pe-bowls found in the ruins of the Mound -Builders, showing 
Negro faces on their surfaces.  
3. The presence of African foods in America, such the peanut and the yam.  
4. The totemic organization of the Amerindians tribes, very similar to African 
totemism. (Totemi sm is a sort of primitive theory of evolution. For 
instance, certain tribes are divided into clans, and each clan is, as a rule 
named after some species of animal. Let us suppose a tribe is divided into 
four clans, bearing the following names: (1) eagle, ( 2) Bear, (3) Crow and 
(4) Wolf. A member of the Bear Clan will consider himself as descended 
from bears, a member of the Wolf Clan will tell you that he is a wolf and 
that all of his ancestors were wolves, and so on; this clan ancestor being 
known as the Totem. There are numerous definitions of totemism, the best 
I have come across being the following one by Professor A. VB. Haddon: 
"Totemism, as Dr. Frazer and I understand it in its fully developed 
condition, implies the division of a people into several t otem kins, or as 
they are usually termed, totem clans, each of which has one or sometimes 
more that one totem. The totem is usually a species of animal, sometimes 
a species of plant, occasionally a natural object or phenomenon, very 
rarely a manufactured a rticle. … The totems are regarded as kinsfolk or 
protectors of the kinsmen, who respect them and refrain from killing and 
eating them. There is thus a recognition of mutual rights and obligations 
between the members of the kin and their totem. The totem is  the crest of 
symbol of the Kin." We see vestiges of totemism in our political 
organizations; for example, the Democratic DONKEY and the republican 
ELEPHANT. Baseball clubs present an even better example of totemistic 
atavism; for instance, who has not heard of baseball teams bearing such 
names as: TIGERS, CARDINALS, BEARS, BEES, BISONS , etc.) Weiner's 
theories have not been kindly received by his colleagues. Professor H. J. 
Spinden sneers sarcastically in the following condensed extract from 
Culture, the Diffusion Controversy, pp. 53–54, New York, 1927: 
"Professor Weiner solves the riddle of old American civilizations 
with an Arabico -Mandingo lexicon and derives everything of 
importance in the New World from the highly civilized coast of


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Gambia and Sierra Leone. From brightest Africa came the principal 
American food plants, the Mayan calendar and the Mexican 
religion. It may be added that Professor Weiner swarms his 
Negroes across the Atlantic in no less than fifty voyages before 
Columbus." 
The Indian was  not the original American. Professor Ales Hrdlicka of the Smithsonian 
Institution, as authority on the Amerinds, contends that the ancestors of the Indians 
came from Asia via Bering Strait 10,000 years ago. American civilization is older than 
that. The ru ins of Tiahuanaco, in Bolivia, according to Dr. Rudolph Muller, a noted 
German astronomer, are between 10,000 and 14,000 years old. The remains of this 
ancient city show that it was inhabited by a highly civilized people. (See an article 
entitled "The Olde st City in the World," by A. H. Verrill, in the N. Y. Herald -Tribune 
Magazine, July 31, 1932.) Excavations in Mexico have produced equally startling 
results. Dr. Maximus Neumayer, a distinguished Brazilian archaeologist, in cooperation 
with a group of Mexi can archaeologists, has made a very thorough study of the 
pyramids and monuments in the vicinity of Mexico City. He estimates the monument of 
Cuicuilco to be about 13,000 years old. An interesting feature of this structure is that it 
resembles the Assyrio -Babylonian type of architecture, bearing a striking resemblance 
to the Tower of Babel as it has been restored by the Assyriologists. Dr. Neumayer also 
examined the pyramids of Teotihuacan, which he estimates to be 4,500 years of age. 
He thinks that these p yramids were built by a people akin to the Egyptians; and from 
their arrangement, suggests that they form a sort of model of the solar system, with a 
pedestal in the center, representing the sun. We must also mention the discoveries of 
Professor Ramon Mena , Curator of the Department of Archaeology of the Mexican 
Government. This scientist explored the ruins of the great city of Palenque, and 
concluded that the ancient metropolis was built over 10,000 years ago. He also found 
that the inhabitants of the city  were familiar with the manufacture and use of Stucco. 
The celebrated French archaeologist, Desiree Charnay, unearthed statues around 
Mexico City, more than fifty years ago, with faces showing Negroid features. Pictures of 
some of them may be seen in Ignat ius Donelley's Atlantis, pp. 174 -175. Donnelly also 
has illustrations of two similar statues, one from Palenque and the other from Vera 
Cruz. Finding that the Indians show both Mongoloid and Negroid ethnic traces, Charnay 
justly concluded that the Amerinds  were a mixed race of both Asiatic and African 
ancestry. (See The Ancient Cities of the New World , by Desiree Charnay.) We have 
perfectly reliable proof of the presence of men of the Ethiopian race in pre -Columbian 
America. Father Roman, one of he first Ca tholic missionaries to arrive in the New 
World, records that a tribe of black men came from the south and landed in Haiti, and 
that they were armed with darts of guanin (a composition of gold, silver and copper), 
and were known as the black Guaninis. "Thes e might have been the Negroes of 
Quareca, mentioned by Peter Martyr d'Angleria, or some other American Negro nation," 
asserts De Roo, "the like of which there were many, as we may see in Rafinesque's 
Account of the Ancient Black Nations of America . Such ar e the Charruas of Brazil, the 
black Carabees of St. Vincent in the Gulf of Mexico, the Jamassi of Florida, the dark 
complexioned Californians who are perhaps the dark men mentioned in the Quiche 
traditions and by some old Spanish adventures. Such, again, i s the tribe of which


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Balboa saw some representatives in his passage of the Isthmus of Darien in the year 
1513. It would seem from the expressions made use of by Gomara, that these were 
Negroes." ( History of America Before Columbus , pp.306 –307, by P. De Roo , 
Philadelphia and London, 1900.) Spanish and Portugese explorers found colonies of 
black men on the eastern coasts of South and Central America, and in Yucatan and 
Nicaragua. De Roo quotes John T. Short, author of The North Americans of Antiquity , 
New York, 1880, on the similarity of African and American languages, as follows —"It is 
worthy of note that several eminent scholars have observed the remarkable similarity of 
grammatical structure between the Central American and certain transatlantic 
languages, especially the Basque and some of the languages of Western Africa." 
(History of America Before Columbus, pp. 164–165.) 
Most of us are familiar with the Mayan civilization of Yucatan and Central America, 
since American archaeologists have devoted many years  of intensive research to these 
territories. Among the speculations concerning the origin of this culture, those of 
LePlongeon and Raquena are the most valuable. Professor Rafael Requena, a 
Venezuelan archaeologist, holds that there was once an island in t he Atlantic Ocean, of 
continental dimensions, known to the ancients as Atlantis, that this island was settled by 
Egyptians, who in turn established colonies in America before the submergence of 
Atlantis. The findings of Professor Augustus LePlongeon are of  great interest. This 
Franco-American archaeologist discovered the ruins of a palace in Chichen Itza in 
1874. He found in this structure, known as Prince Coh's Palace, pictographs and 
inscriptions which he was able to decipher. The story, as unraveled by L ePlongeon, 
may be read by the student in Queen Moo and the Egyptian Sphinx , where the 
professor gives his interpretation of the inscriptions and reproductions of the 
pictographs. Mrs. LePlongeon's work, Queen Moo's Talisman, might also be consulted. 
The story runs roughly as follows: 
About 11,000 years ago, two brothers Princes of Yucatan, sought the 
hand of the ruling monarch of the land, Queen Moo, in marriage. The 
brothers were named Coh and Aac, respectively. Prince Coh was the 
successful suitor; which so enraged Prince Aac that he stabbed his 
brother through the heart with a stone knife, which, needless to say, 
caused his death. Then Aac attempted to force Queen Moo to wed him. 
The Queen, rather than submit, decided to flee to Atlantis. On reaching 
the coast she learned that great earthquakes had submerged Atlantis 
beneath the sea; so she sailed for Africa instead, and ended her journey in 
Egypt. There she was hailed as Queen, and erected the Sphinx as a 
memorial to her slain husband. 
The foregoing story  sounds like a fable, but there is probably a core of fact in it. If the 
Sphinx, with its Ethiopian face, is a memorial to an ancient Mayan prince, it shows that 
the Mayas were of African origin.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
Where flows the river Nile,  
The queen found rest;  
There once again her days  
With peace were blessed.  
Did Moo a giant Sphinx from  
Out of the ground  
Cause to arise, and  
Thus Coh's fame renew?  
Did she immortalize  
Her consort true?" 
(Queen Moo's Talisman, p. 65, by Alice D. LePlongeon.)  
  
That Atlantis was connected with the history of ancient Ethiopia there can be little doubt. 
The Greek philosopher, Proclus, stated in his works that he could present evidence that 
Atlantis at one time actually existed. He cited as his authority The Ethiopian History of 
Marcellus. In referring to Ethiopian history to prove the existence of Atlantis, Proclus 
plainly infers that Atlantis was a part of Ethiopia. (See Cory's Ancient Fragments of the 
Phoenician, Carthaginian, Babylonian, Egyptian and Other Author s, London, 1876. See 
also, Maynard Shipley's New Light on Prehistoric Cultures  and Bramwell's Lost 
Atlantis.) Although there is scientific evidence that an island of continental dimensions 
once existed in what is now the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, many students of the 
problem of Atlantis have located it in other parts of the globe, particularly in Central 
America and Africa. Count deProrok ways that Atlantis, in the dimness of antiquity, 
covered the region now occupied by the Sahara Desert. Kirchmaier pl aced it in South 
Africa and Froebenius in West Africa. In reviewing James Bramwell's Lost Atlantis, Mr. 
Lewis Gannett states that: "The German anthropologist Frobenius definitely locates it in 
Nigeria, whose ancient civilization he relates to that of the E truscans and the 
Assyrians." (New York Herald-Tribune, Mar. 3, 1938.) Doctor Froebenius found ruins of 
palaces, terra cotta fragments and beautiful statuary in Jorubaland, a district in Nigeria 
between the Niger River and the Atlantic Ocean; and he heard a mong the Jorubians 
legends of an ancient royal city and its palace with walls of gold, which in the long ago 
had sunk beneath the waves. The German scholar, Eugen Georg, is a keen student of 
the Atlantis question, and the following remarks of his are worthy of our attention: 
The new age that began after the disappearance of Atlantis was marked 
at first by the world -wide dominance of Ethiopian representatives of the 
black race. They were supreme in Africa and Asia … and they even 
infiltrated through Southern Europe. … During the present era —that is the 
last 10,000 years —the white race…has come to possess the world. 
According to the occult tradition, Semitic peoples developed wherever the 
immigrating white colonists from the north were subjugated by the black 
ruling class, and inter -mixture occurred, as in oldest Egypt, Chaldea, 
Arabia and Phoenicia." ( The Adventure of Mankind , by Eugen Georg, pp. 
121–122, New York, 1931.)


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
So far we have given little or no attention to the evidence of comparative religion. The 
study of ancient religious history is important, for religion, like philosophy, changes but 
slowly. Institutional religion, being conservative and static in its outlook, has preserved 
much ancient lore that would have otherwise been lost to the modern stud ent. The 
Greek philosopher Xenophanes (572 –480 B.C.), pointed out a profound truth when he 
observed that the gods men worship very closely resemble the worshippers. In the 
words of this ancient sage: "Each man represents the gods as he himself is. The 
Ethiopian as black and flat -nosed the Thracian as red -haired and blue -eyed; and if 
horses and oxen could paint, they would no doubt depict the gods as horses and oxen." 
This being the case; when we find the great nations of the world, both past and present, 
worshipping black gods, then we logically conclude that these peoples are either 
members of the black race, or that they originally received their religion in toto or in part 
from black people. The proofs are abundant. The ancient gods of India are shown wit h 
Ethiopian crowns on their heads. According to the Old Testament, Moses first met 
Jehovah during his sojourn among the Midianites, who were an Ethiopian  tribe. We 
learn from Hellenic tradition that Zeus, king of the Grecian gods, so cherished the 
friendship of the Ethiopians that he traveled to their country twice a year to attend 
banquets. "All the gods and goddesses of Greece were black," asserts Sir Godfrey 
Higgins, "at least this was the case with Jupiter, Baccus, Hercules, Apollo, Ammon. The 
goddesses Benum, Isis, Hecate, Diana, Juno, Metis, Ceres, Cybele were black." 
(Anacalypsis, Vol. I, Book IV, Chap. I.) Even the Romans, who received their religion 
mainly from the Greeks, admitted their debt to Egypt and Ethiopia. This may be well 
illustrated by th e following passage from The Golden Ass  or Metamorphosis, by 
Apuleius. The author, as an initiate of the Isis cult is represented as being addressed by 
that goddess: "I am present; I who am Nature, the parent of things, queen of all the 
elements … the prim itive Phrygians called me Pressimunitica, the mother or the gods; 
the native Athenians, Ceropian Minerva; the floating Cyprians, Paphian Venus … the 
inhabitants of Eleusis, the ancient goddess Ceres. Some again have invoked me as 
Juno, others as Bellona, o thers as Hecate, and others Rhamnusia; and those who are 
enlightened by the emerging rays of the rising sun, the Ethiopians, Ariians and 
Egyptians, powerful in ancient learning, who reverence by divinity with ceremonies 
perfectly proper, call me by my true  appellation, Queen Isis." (Doane's Bible Myths , 
Note, p. 478.) 
A study of the images of ancient deities of both the Old and New Worlds reveal their 
Ethiopic origin. This is noted by Kenneth R. H. Mackezie in T. A. Buckley's Cities of the 
Ancient World, p. 180: "From the wooly texture of the hair, I am inclined to assign to the 
Buddha of India, the Fuhi of China, the Sommonacom  of the Siamese, the Zaha of the 
Japanese, and the Quetzalcoatl of the Mexicans, the same, and indeed an African, or 
rather Nubian, origin." Most of these black gods were regarded as crucified saviors who 
died to save mankind by being nailed to a cross, or tied to a tree with arms outstretched 
as if on a cross, or slain violently in some other manner. Of these crucified saviors, the 
most prominent were Osiris and Horus of Egypt, Krishna of India, Mithra of Persia, 
Quetazlcoatl of Mexico, Adonis of Babylonia and Attis of Phrygia. Nearly all of these 
slain savior -gods have the following stories related about them: They are born of a 
virgin, on or near Dec. 25th (Christmas); their births are heralded by a star; they are born


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
either in a cave or stable; they are slain, commonly by crucifixion; they descend into 
hell, and rise from the dead at the beginning of Spring (Easter), and finally ascend into 
heaven. The parallels between the legendary lives of these pagan messiahs and the life 
of Jesus Christ as recorded in the Bible are so similar that progressive Bible scholars 
now admit that stories of these heathen Christs have been woven into the life -story of 
Jesus. (These remarkable parallels are discussed and interpreted in a pamphlet, 
Christianity Before Christ, by John G. Jackson, New York, 1938.) 
The late Mr. Maynard Ship ley, President of The Science League of America, made a 
very scholarly study of the various mythologies and religions of the world, and in the 
concluding passage of a brilliant essay, Christian Doctrines in Pre-Christian America, he 
offers a profoundly thought-provoking statement: 
That the ancient pagan creeds, legends and myths —part of the universal 
mythos—should be found embodied in the religion of the ancient 
Mexicans, and that all these again are found to be but the original sources 
of the modern orthod ox Christian religion, is by no means inexplicable, 
and need not be attribute to the subtlety of the Ubiquitous Devil. The 
explanation is that all religions and all languages of the civilized races of 
men had a common origin in an older seat of civilization. 
Where that original center of culture was is another story. 
The evidence seems to show that the "original center of culture," referred to by Mr. 
Shipley, was that vast domain known to the classical geographers and historians as 
Ethiopia. A study of religious images throws much light on this early civilization. The tau 
(T-shaped) cross is thought by many Christians to be a unique emblem of their faith. 
The fact is that this cross is of ancient Ethiopian origin. In the words of an outstanding 
student of sy mbolism: "The Ethiopic form of the tau is an exact prototype of the 
conventional Christian cross; or, to state the fact in its chronological relation, the 
Christian cross is made in the exact image of the Ethiopian tau." ( Sex Symbolism. P. 9, 
by William J,  Fielding, Little Blue Book No. 904.) The cross was known to all the great 
ancient nations, and was sometimes shown with the image of a man upon it. The 
Church Father, Minucius Felix, writing in the early part of the third century, severely 
rebukes the Pagans for their adoration of crosses: "I must tell you that we neither adore 
crosses nor desire them; you it is ye Pagans … for what else are your ensigns, flags 
and standards, but crosses gilt and beautiful. Your victorious trophies not only represent 
a cro ss, but a cross with a man upon it." Commenting on the preceding extract, the 
American scholar, T. W. Doane, notes that: 
It is very evident that this celebrated Christian Father alludes to some 
Gentle mystery, of which the prudence of his successors has de prived us. 
When we compare this with the fact that for centuries after the time 
assigned for the birth of Jesus Christ, he was not represented as a man 
on a cross, and that the Christians did not have such a thing as a crucifix, 
we are inclined to think that the effigies of a black or dark-skinned crucified


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
man, which were to be seen in many places in Italy even during the last 
century, may have had something to do with it. ( Bible Myths, p. 197, 7 th 
Edition.) 
The same writer also refers to "the Mexican cruc ified god being sometimes represented 
as black," and that "crosses were also found in Yucatan, as well as Mexico, with a man 
upon them." (Ibid., p. 201.) 
The numerous black madonnas and infants in European cathedrals are discussed in 
detail by Sir Godfrey Higgins in The Anacalypsis, Vol. I, Book IV, Chap. I, to which the 
interested student is referred. However, the remarks of Mr. Shipley on this point are 
worthy of our attention: 
Very suggestive is the fact that representations of the virgin mother and 
infant savior are often black. This is true in the case of the paintings and 
images of Isis and Horus, of Devaki and Krishna, and in many cases of 
Mary and Jesus. The most ancient pictures and statues in Italy and other 
parts of Europe, which are adored by the  faithful as representations of the 
Virgin Mary and the infant Jesus, reveal the infant draped in white, but 
with face black and in the arms of a black mother. … How does it happen 
that the Virgin Mother of the Mexican Savior-God so closely resembled the 
Black Virgins of Egypt and Europe? Had they not all a common origin?"  
(Sex and The Garden of Eden Myth, pp. 50–51, by Maynard Shipley, Little 
Blue Book No.1188.) Mr. A. H. Verrill, an American archaeologist, visited 
an Indian shrine in a small town in Guate mala a few years ago, and found 
that on a special festival day Indians traveled to this little church to bow 
down to the image of a Black Christ. From the attendant ceremonies, 
Verrill judged the rite to be of Mayan origin. (see Verrill's Old Civilizations 
of the New World , New York, 1938.) The Mayas possessed knowledge of 
the arts and sciences equivalent to that of the ancients of the Old World, 
but upon that we cannot dwell, since limitations of space forbid it. The 
reader is referred to Professor Paul Ra din's fine book on the American 
Indians, where after surveying the marvelous scientific achievements of 
the Mayas of Yucatan and Central America , Dr. Radin admits that: "No 
excavations have ever revealed to us any civilization of a simpler nature 
from whi ch this very elaborate culture could possibly have been 
developed." (The Story of the American Indian , p. 77, Garden City, 1937.) 
Egypt and Western Asia tell the same story. "In each case we have a 
standard or measuring-rod of authentic historical record," declares Samuel 
Laing, "of certainly not less than 8,000 and more probably 9,000 or 10,000 
years, from the present time; and in each case we find ourselves at this 
remote date, in the presence, not of rude beginnings, but of a civilization 
already ancient  and far advanced. We have populous cities, celebrated 
temples, an organized priesthood, an advanced state of agriculture and of 
the industrial and fine arts; writing and books so long known that their 
origin is lost in myth; religions in which advanced ph ilosophical and moral


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 19 
 
Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization  John G. Jackson (1939) 
ideas are already developed; astronomical systems which imply a long 
course of accurate observations. How long this prehistoric age may have 
lasted, and how many centuries it may have taken to develop such a 
civilization, from the pri mitive beginnings of Neolithic and Paleolithic 
origins, is a matter of conjecture. All we can infer is, that it must have 
required an immense time, much longer than that embraced by the 
subsequent period of historical record." (Human Origins, by Samuel Laing, 
p. 30, London, 1913.) 
Much more could be said on this subject, but since this essay is 
addressed mainly to readers who have little time for the study of history, it 
must be made as concise as possible. The numerous citations from 
standard scientific and historical works, it is hoped, will be of some benefit 
to students who are out of reach of large public libraries, or who lack the 
leisure time necessary for reading and research along these lines.

