=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Knowledge Of Self A Collection of Wisdom on the Science of Everything.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 33
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:09:46.458615
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Title Page


--- PAGE 2 ---
KNOWLEDGE OF SELF  
A COLLECTION OF WISDOM ON THE  
SCIENCE OF EVERYTHING IN LIFE  
EXCERPTS INTRODUCTION 
The following excerpts come from Knowledge of Self: A Collection of 
Wisdom on the Science of Everything in Life . Knowledge of Self  is an anthology 
of writings from Gods and Earths from around the world, addressing 
elements of the true teachings of the Nation of Gods and Earths, also 
known as the Five Percenters. The book contains 256 pages of essays 
from 50+ Gods and Earths from every walk of life imaginable. Our 
diversity is illuminated by the unique perspectives of single parents and 
nonprofit directors, high school dropouts and postdoctoral researchers, 
individuals both free and incarcerated, novices and elders, as well as 
Iranian chefs, Chinese community workers, and Dominican martial arts 
instructors. This groundbreaking book assembles all these beautifully 
diverse elements to present the big picture that is the Nation of Gods 
and Earths. It is available online, as well as in Black bookstores 
everywhere, for only $9.95. 
EXCERPTS CONTENTS 
EXCERPTS INTRODUCTION ................................................. 2 
EXCERPTS CONTENTS ........................................................... 2 
BOOK INTRODUCTION........................................................... 3 
THE POWER OF THE MIND ................................................... 5 
EM-POWER-U............................................................................. 7 
THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU.......................... 8 
SAVE THE BABIES.................................................................... 9 
LOST IN THE WILDERNESS................................................. 10  
GOD HAS NO RELIGION....................................................... 11  
DID I DO THAT? ...................................................................... 13  
IS BEAUTY ONLY SKIN DEEP? ........................................... 15  
EARTH BY NATURE ............................................................... 18  
SOMOS ORIGINALES............................................................. 20  
BIAN XING ................................................................................ 22  
BLACK GOD ............................................................................. 26  
WHY IS THE BLACK MAN GOD?........................................ 28  
ORDERING INFORMATION................................................. 33


--- PAGE 3 ---
BOOK INTRODUCTION 
C’BS Alife Allah - New Heaven (New Haven, CT) 
Sunez Allah - Mecca (Harlem, NY) 
Supreme Understanding Allah - Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
It has been written on the walls of temples since man’s earliest 
history: Know Thyself!  Knowledge of Self isn’t some New Age, Hippie, 
feel-good philosophy. Nor is it an ancient, religious doctrine of some 
kind. No one is asking you to burn incense, grow dreadlocks, make 
animal (or human) sacrifices, wear sandals, do yoga or drink cyanide-
laced Kool-Aid for a charismatic leader. No, fortunately, that isn’t what 
Knowledge of Self is about. You don’t have to beg, pray, meditate, fast, 
or give your money or things away in order to obtain knowledge of self. 
All that is required is that you be sincere, courageous and that you pay 
attention.  
To know one’s self is a gift that all of humanity deserves to be 
presented with. To be imparted with the awareness to constantly explore 
one’s ideas in the most empowering manner. To delve into one’s nature 
truthfully and share in a way that betters all. To have the greatest 
weaponry available to identify and protect oneself from any enemy’s 
oppressive measures. These are achieved supremely with the knowledge 
of self. 
The Nation of Gods and Earths teaches we are the creators of our 
entire universe and subsequent reality. Yet it did not begin with us. Since 
the earliest recorded times, many of our ancestral cultures and 
civilizations have shared the idea of man as God, the woman as the 
Earth, and the mathematical nature of the universe. Throughout history, 
this teaching has emerged, been repressed, and reemerged again. In this 
way, the element of the “Five Percent” in society is a timeless reality. 
However, the Nation of Gods and Earths truly adds on a unique 
perspective in many enlightening ways.  
First, these great teachers did not search or wait for the “right” 
student to present themselves and their revolutionary ideas. Rather, they 
presented themselves to the world as God or Earth - without fear or 
hesitation - and allowed potential students from any and all walks of life 
to inquire. This is a departure from the nomadic Sufis imparting insight 
in the worlds of fundamentalist Islam, and then slipping away to see 
another day, or the Taoist masters who lived as mountain men, away 
from society’s ill. The Gods and Earths have openly shared their 
understanding regardless of the consequences. The consequences have 
been great, from the risk of self-contradiction and hypocrisy, to being 
ostracized from one’s family and community, from direct oppression


--- PAGE 4 ---
and harassment by the existing power structure, to outright 
assassination. Still, the Gods and Earths continued to teach. 
Second, the foundation of the teachings - the Supreme Mathematics 
- made such a complex subject as the universe and its workings, 
impressively simple to understand. This innovation and insight into the 
science of everything in life produced a methodology ready for 
application by anyone of any age group. This process also elevates the 
insightful teachings of the Nation of Islam, extracted and refined as our 
120 lessons, into a mathematical system of study and development. In 
fact, though the truth we study is certainly ageless, the development of 
the Five Percent into the Nation of Gods and Earths as it exists today 
exemplifies the exact development most needed today. That is, a culture 
that makes sense of our identity, the reality of God, nature, and 
mathematics, and need for sweeping social change, yet goes about this 
work without the trappings of belief and religious thinking. Thus, the 
“science” of everything in life. 
Third, we learn that we are the truth we seek in each and every 
problem or inquiry. A knowledge of self becomes the most empowering 
tool known because it is an actualizing of what is otherwise only factual 
information. The Original man is God/The Original woman is the 
Earth. This is true. Yet, through the living process of knowledge of self, 
I am this truth, and I prove it true. What is within us that enables us to 
survive and thrive? Knowing oneself, the answer presents itself. It is the 
intention of the editors of this book that, in reading, you will come to 
find answers of your own. More importantly, you will come upon more 
questions. And in the actions you take thereafter, you will discover the 
science of everything in life. 
There are thousands, possibly hundreds of thousands of Gods and 
Earths who live and teach the principles named above. In the pages that 
follow, you will get a chance to explore some of their perspectives. This 
text is the first of its kind because is not a history book, biography, 
ethnography or how-to guide, but an anthology, or collection, of 
writings from individuals representing nearly every walk of life 
encompassed in our Nation. Young and old, male and female, free and 
incarcerated, high school dropout and postdoctoral researcher. This may 
be considered a “Black book,” but in this culture, “Black” is inclusive of 
the Puerto Rican, Dominican, Iranian, Bengali, Native American, and 
Chinese authors you’ll meet within these pages. This is a Nation of great 
diversity, in thought and experience. Thus, you will find many differing 
perspectives and methods of presentation. Some will resonate with you 
more than others. As the editors, it has been our goal to provide you 
with the most comprehensive picture of who we are and what we teach 
as a Nation. It is up to you, the reader, to “take the best part” for


--- PAGE 5 ---
yourself. Even in doing so, however, read every word. Understanding 
will come in time, and will come sooner if you should follow up  after your 
reading as recommended by the authors. In the intense experience that 
is to follow these pages, you may just begin to discover the “science of 
everything in life.”  
Peace,  
The Editors  
THE POWER OF THE MIND 
Lord Jamar - Brand Nubian 
I’d been wanting to get into the 
acting field for some time, but part of 
me felt like, “Okay, I’ll get into this 
music thing, then someone’s going to 
see me, like, ‘Oh I need you to be in a 
movie.’” That was something that was 
always in my head but I never 
verbalized it, so it never happened.  
I used to watch the show Oz  like, 
“Damn, I love this show, but I need to 
be on this show. They really need me. 
They need some Gods up in here! They have a show about jail, and 
we’re damn sure represented in the penal system, especially in New 
York, so I was like they need to have some Gods on here. And if they’re 
going to have a God on here it needs to be me, you know what I mean?  
I don’t know nobody at HBO - nobody, nothing, I’m just meditating 
like, “I need to be on here.” Watching it every week, “I need to be on 
here,” and I vocalized it. I finally said it out loud to my manager at the 
time. I’m like listen man, get me in a movie, something. The best he 
could do was send us to a premiere. It was the HBO premiere for The 
Sopranos  when it was first coming out. So we went to that, and boom, a 
bunch of people from Oz  were there, supporting HBO. We end up 
meeting with some of the people that work on the show, and it turns 
out a lot of them – white and Black - were fans of Brand Nubian. So I 
ended up exchanging numbers with Dean Winters, the white guy who 
played O’Reilly on the show. Through him, I met the creator of the 
show. One day, Winters called me like, “Would you ever want to be on 
the show?” Of course I responded, “Yeah I want to be on the show!”  
Next thing I know, Tom Montana, the creator of the show, says he 
wants to have a meeting with me. So I go down to the meeting, and 
Montana starts talking to me like I’m already on the show. I didn’t do 
nothing, I didn’t read nothing! I could’ve been illiterate for all they


--- PAGE 6 ---
knew! But he was just talking to me like, “We want you on the show but 
we don’t know in what capacity,” and he’s asking what I would do. So I 
told him, “Listen, I’m not doing any homosexual stuff and, honestly, I 
don’t want to play no cop.” So they were like, “Well, we’ve just got to 
figure out a character for you and then figure out a crime that got you in 
there.”  
So I said, “Have you ever heard of the Gods and Earths?” He 
hadn’t. I gave him a basic synopsis of the Gods and Earths, how we 
represent in the penile system and all that. And I let him know that we 
teach that the Black man is God. He looks at me and says, “So if the 
Black man is God, does that mean the white man is the devil?” I looked 
this man – the white creator of the show - right in his eye and said, “Yes 
it does.”  
At first, it was silence. 
Then, he responds, “I like it, I like that.” He liked it. That was the 
defining moment, because anybody else who wasn’t sure of themselves, 
or sure of what they’re dealing with, or just plain nervous, thinking, 
“Damn, if I say the white man is the devil that means he’s not going to 
give me the job.” Not me. I looked the top dude in his eye because he’s 
no bigger than me. Not physically, but as a person. I’m God so there’s 
no higher than God. Just because you’re the creator of the show doesn’t 
make you more supreme than me. I said, “Yes, it does mean that the 
white man is the devil.” He says, “I like it.” 
He put me in as Supreme Allah, a name I suggested in homage to a 
brother I used to run with, who’s currently incarcerated. He wrote the 
part and then wrote everything else for my character based on my input. 
I felt it was important that the Gods be represented, because I hadn’t 
seen the Gods on film since this movie called Short Eyes  back in the day 
with Chris Mayfield. That was a movie that had me excited when I first 
saw it because they talked about Yacub and had the Gods in there 
building for real! I was like, “Wow, this is great!” 
But since then, I hadn’t seen nothing featuring the Gods, as far as a 
movie or a TV show. So I was like, now I have a chance to bring the 
Gods to a more global stage and a different life than just music. I did 
Oz longer than any other rapper they had on there. I did a season and a 
half before my character got killed. And that opened up a lot of doors 
for me. I ended up doing Law and Order , Third Watch , The Sopranos , and 
I’ve done a few different independent films. I’ve also been doing voice-
over work with ESPN. A lot of people don’t know that, for the past few 
years, I’ve been the voice of the Winter and Summer X Games. Doing 
Oz  opened the door for me, but it was really the power of the mind, it 
was me focusing and meditating on something that physically brought 
me to that place. Do you understand what I’m saying?


--- PAGE 7 ---
EM-POWER-U 
Mecca Wise Understanding - Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
Tiffany always had a hard time saying “no.” When she was just 
thirteen years old she had her first sexual 
experience. She tried to say no…all she 
knows is that she left feeling abused and 
ashamed. This was her first recollection of 
being taken advantage of, but certainly not 
her last. Males and females alike always 
seemed to have her doing things that she 
never wanted to do or didn’t totally feel 
comfortable with. She sort of just went with 
the flow, never really having her own 
agenda. 
She thought back to her many casual 
sexual experiences, in cars, alleyways, 
garages, and playgrounds to name a few. All of those interactions were 
short lived. And remember she never really wanted to. She thought 
making ‘them’ happy just might make her happy or at least make them 
want, accept, or value her. And although those interactions didn’t last 
very long some of their effects did. There were the psychological ones 
from those two abortions, the emotional ones from the STDs, and the 
physical ones from the two children that were conceived. The fathers 
were never heard from again. 
 She thought about the obsession that she has with food. She had 
been off and on diets since age ten and had never been secure with her 
body. She felt her breasts were too small, and her butt was not round or 
plump enough. She couldn’t fathom this was a part of the reason why 
she let men have their way with her. 
She thought going to the club every weekend would satisfy her. She 
spent most of her paycheck on weave, makeup, and outfits. She just had 
to find the perfect jeans that would make her ass look more appealing, 
only to find herself in those similar short lived interactions.  
She thought that she had found the right ‘one’ with Rick. She felt 
that he completed her. And although he was abusive, insensitive, and 
had many affairs she felt that she needed him. She didn’t know when or 
how to let go, or who else would ever love her. 
Somewhere along the road she picked up a cigarette habit…a weed 
habit…and an alcohol habit. She even tried stripping at a local adult 
club…where she nearly picked up a worse drug habit. Many times she 
felt alone, with no one to talk to, being that she never seemed to get 
along with other women. Once she even contemplated suicide.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Tiffany couldn’t figure out why she always ended up with the same 
kind of men, in the same situations, with the same kind of drama. She 
didn’t want to accept the fact that it was no one’s fault but her own.  
Tiffany’s story isn’t very unique. Does it sound familiar? Ladies, can 
we accept the fact that some parts of Tiffany belong to us? 
♦ Many females suffer from low self esteem which leads to 
destructive behaviors like unprotected casual sex and drug and 
alcohol abuse. 
♦ Many females are no stranger to unhealthy or abusive 
relationships/attachments. 
♦ Many females are unhappy/ insecure with their body image. 
♦ Many females exploit themselves. 
♦ Many females feel their value is based on sexual appearance/skills. 
♦ Many females are riddled with the guilt, worry, fear, and regret 
enabling them to move forward in life. 
Here are some possible solutions:  
Since change starts within us, we must begin to love and appreciate 
ourselves and our sisters. Many of us have the same struggles and fears. 
Realize we are powerful and beautiful. Set boundaries in relationships 
whether with male or female. If you don’t value you, then who will? 
Realize that we are so much more than sexual beings. Pursue meaningful 
relationships of longevity based on values and strong foundations. Look 
at what we want to change about us whether mentally or physically. The 
changes won’t occur over night, but even small steps will help us reach 
our goals. Have confidence in ourselves and the courage to overcome 
our fears. Changing our minds isn’t easy but it is the first step to 
changing our lives.  
Women, are we willing to break the cycle, change our thoughts, use 
our brain power vs. our sexual power, learn the beauty of who we really 
are, start a new journey, and get the knowledge of ourselves? Let us 
begin.  
THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU 
Cappadonna – Wu Tang Clan 
Wu Tang in the house! Stand up. This is Cappadonna, aka Original 
Tazim Great Mind. The science to my name is: C.onsider A.ll P.oor 
P.eople A.cceptable, D.on’t O.ppress N.or N.eglect A.nyone.  
As a child I realized that I was the true and living God when I 
realized that I had an arm, leg, leg, arm, and supreme head. I realized 
right from wrong and knew I had the power to make right or to make 
wrong. That’s when I realized I was in control. The mind controls the


--- PAGE 9 ---
body, not vice versa. Everything started 
from a thought, from one mind all 
appeared. Allah means all. There is no 
separation; even Yacub came from the 
original man. It all comes from one entity. 
All comes from the true and living God. 
We now must elevate. Now is the time to 
end all devilishment. The devilishment 
starts from within. It’s our moods that 
cause rain, hail, snow & earthquakes. It’s 
time to make a change. Pressure bursts 
pipes, and it’s time to release all the 
pressure. We control all the signs and 
symbols. We make that. We’re the reason for all of it.  
“I am not a man, I am the Universe itself.”- Morihei Ueshiba, Aikido and the Harmony of Nature 
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
Don’t fear the end of the world. The “end of the world” only means 
its time to end the B.S. It’s time to introduce a new kingdom into the 
minds of the people. It’s not a physical thing. All that means is that it’s 
the end of how we seen the world before. The end of “the world” is a 
figure of speech, because the end of the devil’s time is now. It’s time to 
come out of this government and end all devilishment. Now is the time 
to create our own heaven. Heaven don’t cost anything, because heaven 
is created in the mind.  
Peace to all Gods and Earths, man, woman, and child. One more 
thing, you can’t keep a good man down, cause after him there will be 
another one. Please educate all children equally, even divine evils. Let 
them know who the god of civilization is! P.roper E.ducation A.lways 
C.orrect E.rrors! 
SAVE THE BABIES 
C’BS Alife Allah - New Heaven (New Haven, CT) 
Here are fifty things that one can do to assist in the growth and 
development of the youth in one’s community. 
1.  Make time for them. 
2.  Listen to them. 
3.  If you are bi-lingual, teach them a second language. 
4.  Teach them a trade such as carpentry, electrical work, cutting hair, 
or plumbing. 
5.  Teach them how to cook, sew, or about hygiene. 
6.  Teach them how to write.


--- PAGE 10 ---
7.  Teach them how to research. 
8.  Teach them the difference between fact 
and opinion. 
9.  Encourage them to stay aware of the 
news (at home and abroad). 
10.  Walk them through 120 (Don’t just 
“give” it to them on a piece of paper). 
11.  Volunteer to be a mentor/big 
brother/sister. 
12.  Teach them how to eat to live and the 
effect of things that go into their bodies. 
13.  Teach them how to walk safely through the “ghetto” (i.e., how to 
traverse that land). 
14.  Take them on trips out of the city. 
15.  Take them to a movie and talk about it afterwards. 
16.  Teach them to excel in whatever they do. 
17.  Spend enough time with them to recognize their weaknesses and 
come up with a plan together on how to overcome them. 
18.  Teach them about conservation whether it be on an ecological level 
(recycling) or on an economical level (savings). 
19.  Show them, by example, how to interact with all of the human 
families of the planet Earth no matter what ethnic group, 
nationality or caste. 
20.  Teach them history and show the connection between the past and 
present. 
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
LOST IN THE WILDERNESS 
Wyking Allah - Morocco (Seattle, WA) 
Imagine yourself having been dropped in 
the middle of a jungle. You are now 
surrounded by wild animals and poisonous 
plants…and you’re totally ignorant to this 
environment. What do you think your chances 
for survival are if you don’t know an 
earthworm from a killer cobra, nor edible fruit 
from poisonous berries? What do you think 
your fate will be? Naturally, you are easy prey, 
as you don’t have any means of protecting or 
preserving your life. Thus, your lack of 
knowledge is the biggest obstacle to your 
survival.


--- PAGE 11 ---
This is actually the reality of the world you live in. It’s like a jungle 
and your job is to navigate and survive long enough to find whatever 
treasure may be found. However, there are hostile conditions, all kinds 
of predators and prey, plants that nourish and replenish and poisonous 
plants that take life. Your job is to distinguish one from another and to 
know who and what you are dealing with at all times.  
First you must recognize and control the animal instincts in yourself. 
You are not an unthinking beast. Second you must know that every 
person you see with two eyes, two ears, a mouth, is not necessarily a 
functioning human being. Some ARE unthinking beasts. Your job is to 
observe the dominant characteristics of those you encounter and deal 
accordingly. Knowledge, wisdom and understanding are your best 
defenses. It’s survival of the fittest, so you’ll need to exercise your mind. 
Picture a baby rabbit who hasn’t yet been taught by the adult rabbits. 
What happens when a baby rabbit does not have knowledge of itself to 
know that it is a rabbit…and it begins to hang out with the wolf? 
Eventually, when the wolf gets hungry enough, that rabbit becomes 
breakfast, lunch or dinner. Not because the wolf doesn’t “like” the 
rabbit, but because the nature of the wolf is to eat things like rabbits to 
survive. The first law of existence is self-preservation.  
In order to preserve its own existence or survive, the rabbit must: 
♦ Know its kind 
♦ Identify threats to its existence 
♦ Identify its historical enemy 
♦ Avoid things that are destructive to its existence 
♦ Avoid its natural enemy 
These stories are meant to illustrate the importance of knowledge of 
self and “knowing the ledge” (awareness of what to do and what NOT 
to do). How do we learn how to navigate the jungle? How does the 
story of the rabbit apply to us? 
GOD HAS NO RELIGION 
Transcript of an Interview with Allah the Father 
Protect the child. Show him [that] if he doesn’t do right he is going 
to go to jail, just like the Muslims [teach]. I’m not against anyone, but 
they are really teaching their children not to smoke, drink or do anything 
to require other people to follow their standards. Now, I don’t teach the 
child not to smoke. I teach him to get the understanding of it! Because I 
don’t have no religion, because that doesn’t do anything for him. Now if 
you taught the child under religion like the Muslims, they say no


--- PAGE 12 ---
smoking. And if you do smoke, they 
send you out. They can force - what? 
Religion!  
You can’t win nothing by force. If 
you give the child something to fight 
for, then show him what he is fighting 
for, he’ll win this war. And you’ve got 
to have the manpower to do it…So 
you got to keep the children together 
and you got to kill all religion. Other 
than that you are going to lose all 
fighting in them…And the Five 
Percenters, I’m teaching them that 
they can’t go on religion because 
religion has never did anything for 
them. Like my mother, she said, “Jesus, Jesus, Jesus.” I know he’s over 
there in Jerusalem, dead in the earth, because he hasn’t showed me 
nothing!… 
Now I was in the Army. I don’t teach them not to go in the Army. I 
went and I came back. I saw action. I got the Bronze Star. I got all these 
medals. Now I came back home. I didn’t benefit from it [in terms of] 
luxury, but I did benefit by knowing how to teach a man. They teach a 
man to make a boy a man. This is what I did. I don’t teach them not to 
drink. I teach them to keep their mouth what? Shut! And listen and 
learn. Because I might tell them to drink…to get to that man I want to 
get to. Just like the United States teach the FBI… 
All my people are against me because they thought that I was 
supposed to have came out, when I came from Mattawan, and joined 
them - and I haven’t joined any of them yet and I’m not going to join 
them because I’m civilized. We don’t talk about nobody on religion, 
politics, war and protest in the United States…Because religious people 
fight against one another. You can’t tell me they don’t because they do!  
They’ll tell me that, “Why should you tell the child not to eat swine?” 
I say, “Why? It’s in your Bible, in Leviticus and Deuteronomy.” I’ll 
show them where they are not even good religious people…In the Bible 
it teaches that Jesus had many disciples but they only had knowledge 
and wisdom. Jesus was the thirteenth. He had knowledge and 
understanding. He was the only one that they had to kill. Because why? 
He had knowledge and what? Understanding! Where the other ones had 
the knowledge and wisdom, they had to go and get Jesus. He was the 
only healer. You understand that?  
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗


--- PAGE 13 ---
DID I DO THAT? 
HELL YEAH , YOU DID ! 
Allah Universal - Starksville, MS 
Today’s Supreme Mathematics is Knowledge (1) Understanding (3). 
The 13th degree of the 1-40 states:  
Q: But brings rain, hail, snow and earthquakes?  
A: They continue daily to teach the 85% that all 
that they see such as rain, hail, snow and earth-
quakes is caused by that so-called mystery-god, 
that no one will be able to see until he dies, and 
this is believed by the 85%, while the 10% 
knows that when a man dies, he will never be 
able to come back and tell the living whether he 
lied or not…  
WHAT YOU KNOW (1), 
BECOMES WHAT YOU SEE (3)  
In the above degrees, we can interpret the “rain, hail, snow and 
earthquakes” as the various circumstances of your life. Where do they 
come from? A mystery god (something outside of yourself)…or you?  
This lesson of Life, shows and proves how one is NEVER a victim, 
and is actually THE cause of all situations in their life, like it or not. We 
are all Masters of Self, knowingly, or unknowingly. Knowing and 
Understanding it is the difference between Living/Freedom, and just 
going through the motions.  
Everything that you know has been acquired not only by the 5 
senses, but also by genetic inheritance, osmosis, subliminal influence, 
inductive and deductive reasoning, and just plain old intuition (aka the 
6th sense), along with other processes not mentioned here. The five 
senses in the average person, makes up about 10% of their mental 
powers, which is the conscious mind, not much at all really. There is still 
another 90% of our mental activity that is still right there, ready to be 
used by those who Know and Understand how to access it.  
Ever hear the saying “believe none of what you hear, and only some 
of what you saw”? Well, there is a lot of truth to that. Let’s say that the 
windows on your car had 90% tint, and you could only see 10% of 
whatever light is coming into those windows. would you drive across 
your state or country behind that tint, and expect to make it safely? 
Probably not, unless you know the roads by heart.  
Yet, “they” advocate daily that your five senses are the only tools 
you have to know and see the world. Bullsh*t! Your subconscious mind 
is MUCH more powerful. It, unlike the conscious mind, is always in


--- PAGE 14 ---
operation, always processing the data that your five senses takes in, 
keeping you breathing and your heart beating, digesting your food, 
cleaning out toxins, fighting diseases in the body, reflecting on your 
past, planning your future, asking you what you think about the person 
next to you in the passenger seat, telling you how you feel emotionally, 
AND commanding your body on how to drive that car without thinking 
about it! If you fall asleep behind the wheel, it produces the dreams that 
you experience, and runs the internal alarm clock that wakes you up 
(and then tells you to watch the f*cking road!). F*ck a computer, the 
subconscious mind is THE Ultimate Multi-Tasker!!! Basically, anything 
that you do without having to think about it is being done by the 
subconscious mind.  
The conscious mind uses the brain and spinal cord as its main tools 
(cerebro-spinal nervous system), and the subconscious mind uses what’s 
known as the sympathetic nervous system, which is ruled by the solar 
plexus (your 2nd brain mass, under your diaphragm). And the SOLAR 
plexus is the literal SUN OF MAN (Refer to 8° in the 1-40; and John 
1:9). You know those hearty laughs that some people have, that seem to 
light up a room and get everybody else laughing? Well, that’s the Solar 
Plexus at work. That’s where your mind literally shines its light on the 
world! It, along with the cerebro-spinal system, is what transmits and 
receives every thought that you’ve ever had, and will have, as well as the 
ones you are having now. and let’s not forget about the thoughts of 
those around you (watch the company you keep). They together 
produce your aura, or “magnetic,” and that’s what ultimately attracts 
EVERYTHING that EVER comes to you in LIFE! The good, the bad, 
and the ugly of it ALL!  
There is NO mystery to this! I’m sure by now, a lot of you have 
heard of “The Secret,” and/or the “Law of Attraction.” For starters, it is 
not a “secret” (21°, 1-40), hasn’t been for quite some time, all of the 
prophets and great teachers taught it in one way or another. As a man 
thinketh, so is he. “And the Word was made Flesh.” (John 1:14). As 
above, so below. What things so ever ye desire, when ye pray, believe 
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.” (Mark 11:24). And the list 
goes on... 
A SIMPLE EXAMPLE OF HOW IT WORKS…  
I see an attractive woman, and the thought, “Oh sh*t! I gotta have 
that!” comes up. That’s my conscious mind at work, one of my senses 
(sight) sparked a desire, for what my subconscious mind already knows 
that it likes. My subconscious mind, as a reaction, begins to feed to me 
ideas on what I should say to her, and then tells my conscious mind to 
move my legs and walk over to her. “Hey, how you doing? I don’t know 
you, but um, I got the feeling that I’m about to know you real well” (and


--- PAGE 15 ---
no, I don’t use this line all the time, only when it’ll work. It’s what 
follows that line that does the work. Women HATE for a man to say 
something stupid, and vice versa, but anyway). She laughs, another sense 
(hearing) tells my conscious mind how cute her voice is, while my 
subconscious mind starts feeding me thoughts of how her voice would 
sound moaning and hitting that high note. I start breathing a little bit 
harder, now I can smell her perfume. More desire. Subconscious mind 
working harder to come up with questions to interview her, see where 
her head is at, etc...All the while, I’m keeping a smile on her face, 
stimulating HER conscious and subconscious mind, drawing her in 
more and more, so now we’re both lighting up the room, yada yada 
yada, I see her later that day, she comes up to me to spark convo. She 
has now been officially “attracted.” We end up exchanging phone 
numbers, and then I’m back to what I was doing before I saw her. The 
desire has been sparked, the seed has been planted; now I leave it alone 
and let my subconscious mind do the rest. She calls a couple of days 
later, more mind to mind contact, etc. and you know where the rest of 
this goes if you play your cards right.  
How many times have you gone through this scenario, without 
thinking about what caused all of this to happen? (9°, 1-40)  
The point of it is. The subconscious mind, is the most POWERFUL 
FORCE IN YOUR LIFE! What you go through in your everyday life, 
starts with in your mind, and ends up becoming your physical reality! 
The subconscious mind is what moved and controlled you until you 
were about 6 years old (22°, 1-40). Your conscious mind is hired about 
that time as the security guard of the subconscious mind, saying what 
thoughts go in and get stored away, to be attracted later in life. It literally 
creates the circumstances to bring that about, and that has been 
happening ALL OF YOUR LIFE! Whether you notice it or not, it is a 
Universal Law, whatever is in your subconscious mind, good or bad, is 
brought to you, one way or another. That being the case, how can you 
EVER have the AUDACITY to blame ANYONE else for YOUR 
situations that YOU CREATED?!  
“Sun know you are Allah!  Never deny yourself of being Allah, even if the whole world denies you, never deny yourself 
because it’s your own doubt that can stop you from being Allah!” – The Father Allah 
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
IS BEAUTY ONLY SKIN DEEP? 
I Medina Peaceful Earth – Power Born (Pittsburgh, PA) 
 “Read not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted,  
but to weigh and consider.” -- Francis Bacon, Sr.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Women all over the world have been dressing modestly for centuries 
and continue to do so today. It is absolutely nothing new. A woman’s 
appearance and specifically her style of dress is an indicator of how she 
feels about herself, her thought process, her experiences, exposure and 
her values. When we get up in the morning and select what we will wear 
for the day, we are consciously and subconsciously sending a message to 
all those we encounter saying, “This is who I am!” So what message are 
you trying to project? What first impression are you trying to make?  
When a woman puts on a power suit or 
business casual clothing, she is projecting 
the message that she is striving to look and 
be professional. When you see her you may 
think she may be going to work or to a 
conference or an important meeting. When 
a woman wears a long silky dress with a 
shawl and heels, you know that she is 
probably going to a somewhat classy formal 
event. When a woman wears a police 
uniform, you assume she’s a cop…unless 
it’s Halloween. When a woman wears 
“African” garb, she projects the message 
that she probably has somewhat of an 
African centered view on life or she has a 
different cultural perspective.  
When a woman wears a crotch length mini-skirt, a tube top, and 
some hooker boots, where if you bend over or sit without your legs 
crossed, your goodies are exposed for the world to see, what message is 
she conveying?  
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
Different countries produce different cultures, different standards of 
beauty, and different perspectives on how a woman’s body is viewed. In 
the United States, a woman’s body is a commodity that is objectified 
through the process of long-standing sexism. Women are socialized to 
be sex objects and men are socialized to chase it, so when ya put it out 
there like that, you’re like a walking advertisement for some of the 
sexual pleasures he may get once he pulls you. In this country, it’s just 
too much to ask for a man who hasn’t yet deconstructed his own 
thoughts and life experiences yet, socialized as he has been, to not think 
that way when he sees a woman walking around half naked. Remember, 
he’s constantly exposed to the same images as you, and he is socialized 
to desire a woman who looks like that.


--- PAGE 17 ---
As a woman who has only been consciously dressing modestly for 
about four years now, thinking back to when I first decided to embark 
on the journey of getting the knowledge of self and striving to be a 
productive citizen in the Nation of Gods and Earths, I had to conduct 
an analysis of every part of myself, and a large aspect of that was getting 
to the root of my dress code. Women of my society who are called 
Earths, usually wear what is called “3/4ths,” because 3/4ths of the 
planet Earth’s surface is covered by water and as self-respecting women 
and Queens, we dress modestly and cover our hair to show the world a 
different paradigm of womanhood and a positive standard of beauty… 
that you can be beautiful, intelligent, smell good, and have ambitions 
without all your goodies hangin’ out. 
Coming to this conclusion and accepting modesty as a part of my 
way of life was very difficult, but very rewarding in the end. It was 
difficult because I had to study myself, and through a logical process of 
being asked and asking myself questions, I came to the conclusion that I 
used to wear revealing clothes to boost my self-esteem and attract 
attention, because I was not as confident as I should have been with my 
other attracting powers. I knew I was fairly intelligent but I also knew 
that I had it goin’ on physically and coupled with media images and 
popular standards of beauty in the wilderness of North America, music 
videos, movies, Miss America Pageants, magazines, you name it, I 
thought that this was how I had to dress to get the attention I wanted. 
Showin’ skin was in baby! It was deep, and I realized that my thoughts 
and feelings about this went back as far as the third grade (be careful of 
what your little girls are exposed to! They are picking up messages that 
are integrated into their subconscious that will shape how they 
consciously express themselves.). 
I fought this concept and thought that my mental did not have to 
match my physical…that I could still be smart, nice, community minded 
and active, love and build with the babies, and wear what I wanted. Back 
then, I didn’t really understand the importance of consistency and 
discipline. Due to the barrage of distractions that we are exposed to and 
integrate on a daily basis, consistency is a challenge in the United States 
in 2009. I suppose you could say I was tryin’ to be ‘revolutionary but 
sexy.’ Looking back, I now realize how much of a contradiction that 
was. Real revolutionaries had other things on their mind beyond striving 
to appear to be sexy all the time. Not to say that a woman can’t feel 
sensual or comfortable with her sexuality, however, there is a time and 
place for everything, and having “sexy” as one of the dominant themes 
of my existence didn’t really make sense. As my God says, “Civilized 
people do things inside.” So “sexy” was not the legacy I wanted to leave 
behind.


--- PAGE 18 ---
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
EARTH BY NATURE 
RIGHTEOUS BY CHOICE  
Sci-Honor Devotion - Born Power Truth (Bridgeport, CT) 
Earth is the title that the 
righteous Black women of the 
Nation of Gods and Earths 
carries with pride. She is the 
Mother of Civilization and 
Queen of the Universe. The 
planet Earth is the 3rd planet 
from the sun and is 93 (9=Born 
and 3=Understanding) million 
miles away from that energy 
source. Here, she is able to 
born understanding, or give birth to the best part mentally and 
physically. She is secure in her position and it is through her perfect 
position that she sees her greatness and understands the divinity of her 
proper placement in the universe. The planet weighs 6 sextillion tons. 
The number 6 is significant in that it is considered in mathematics to be 
a perfect number. This means that when all of its factors are added up 
(1+2+3), you get the number you started with, which in this case is 6. 
So when you put the knowledge (1), Wisdom (2) and Understanding (3) 
together, you get equality (6). Also, the number 6 is half the sum of all 
of its divisors. 1+2+3+6 = 12 / 2 = 6. Therefore, it is balanced. The 
number 6 (Equality) is significant to life and plays an important role in 
the carbon atoms existence on the periodic table. Its atomic number is 
6, meaning that there are 6 protons in its nucleus. Carbon is the basis 
for all organic life, down to the shape of the honey comb cell and even 
the smallest snowflake with each 6 sided figure having a unique pattern 
of its own. 6 is a number that represents balance. The Earth is balanced 
as everything that exists has a duality. She too is balanced and is in tune 
with and honors her feminine attributes and qualities. The Earth is not 
composed of just dirt, but is blessed with rich, fertile soil which with 
proper nourishment can produce great mental and physical seeds. She is 
not walked on, but carries and supports life. When the Black woman 
saw herself as being Divine, her thoughts changed, and her behavior 
followed.  
The planet Earth is covered approximately 3/4th (3 = understanding 
and 4 = culture/freedom) under water. The refined Black woman 
covers herself approximately 3/4th of the way, which will often if not


--- PAGE 19 ---
always include her head being covered with a crown because she 
understands her culture and is free to be refined in it. By doing so, she 
keeps her best part which she considers to be her precious jewels 
preserved for those and only those who deserve it. Those precious 
jewels are her mind and womb, which both have the ability to bring 
forth life. She is not interested in sharing or giving up her goods so 
easily. Her goal is to remain refined and respected. She is not striving to 
be looked at in a lustful way by men. She knows her worth and knows 
that being Sexy or being a Diva are not what she aspires to be. She is 
capable of being so much more. She walks with dignity and self respect, 
has high Self Esteem, and embraces her natural self.   
She is the 1st teacher and leads by example. Those who are around 
her see her wisdom through the example that she sets. She is an example 
of Refined Womanhood and does not “lose” herself when in the 
company of uncivilized people. She holds true to her culture always. She 
also sets the standards by which her daughters want to aspire and her 
son’s would want their wives to be. She is a person that she herself 
would admire, respect, and keep close as a friend / sister.  
The Earth has a Wise Dome and applies wise words, ways, and 
actions, respectfully. She is a P.O.E.T. This means that she applies 
P.roper O.rder while E.xecuting the T.ruth using Supreme Mathematics 
as her guide. She is loyal, dedicated and devoted to righteousness. She 
has positive thoughts and ideas and communicates them clearly and 
refined when articulating and adding Wisdom to the Cipher (20) and 
stands on that square which is 360 degrees of completion, The Truth. 
She is not swayed negatively with emotion, yet uses her emotion to 
continue to propel her toward 
truth. The Earth is humble yet 
firm, flexible but not weak, and 
confident but not cocky. She is 
a student and a teacher, thus 
will do the knowledge first 
before ever manifesting a 
thought. She is constantly 
aspiring to gain wisdom, so, she 
learns through trial and error by 
taking the best part of every 
situation and placing value on 
the jewels that she has received. 
She is capable of studying many 
sciences and remaining grounded in her Supreme Mathematics, while 
taking the best part of the science. When she is in need of information, 
advice or assistance, she will not hesitate to seek it, humbly.


--- PAGE 20 ---
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
SOMOS ORIGINALES  
(W E ARE ORIGINAL ) 
Sha-King Cehum Allah - Power Born (Pittsburgh, PA) 
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
Indigenismo  has been a double-edged sword. While unifying in many 
ways, it has been used at the hands 
of the elites to reshape ‘Latin 
American’ society in their 
particular image and taste. They 
purported that the average 
everyday Latino was a ‘ mestizo ,’ a 
‘mixture’ of Spanish, Indian and 
African. However, this perspective 
was adopted to create a false sense 
of ‘equality’ throughout society and 
served their purposes as a 
compliment to nationalism, 
attempting to erase any evidences or situations that could potentially 
spark future revolutions and revolts. The ‘Indian-ness’ of indigenismo  
served to distinguish between being looked at as ‘white’ and being 
looked at as ‘black,’ which was far worse for the intellectual overseers. 
Once formulated, this concept was then packaged in the form of 
literature and sent out to penetrate the mindset of the people. Yet all the 
while, telling the masses of Indian/African people that the majority of 
Indians died out or had mixed with the Africans so much that no one 
was actually ‘Black’ or ‘African’ or ‘Indian’ anymore. And thus, Carol 
Amoruso, also noted in her series about recent immigrants to the United 
States: “The new Latinos come mostly from the Latin American 
mainland where the culture is more “indio” and European.” Most 
people from countries such as Mexico, Peru or El Salvador will claim to 
have “no black in them” when this is far from the truth. Nowadays, 
biologically speaking, while most people who are so called Puerto Rican, 
Dominican or Cuban have Indian, African and European blood, so do 
many other people throughout the Caribbean, Central and South 
America. The presence of Afro-Indio culture and blood has always been 
very abundant, even after the decimation of the people, especially 
population wise. On page 29 of Black Indians , author William Loren 
Katz states: “By 1650 Mexico alone had an African-Indian population 
(some with white ancestry) of one hundred thousand. A new race was 
being born.”


--- PAGE 21 ---
Many Mexica  continue the propaganda that Mexicans are not ‘Black,’ 
and that only certain towns and neighborhoods have “black blood.” 
Through media, we look over these people as ‘Mexicans,’ not aware of 
their unique history. They too, have had considerable amounts of 
African blood infused into them, although they may contest it. 
Especially mi gente  from Cuscatlan  or as the devil now calls “El Salvador.” 
Descendants of the Pipil  peoples, who are actually of the Maya, Salvi’s or 
Salvadorenos  have been institutionally and systemically conditioned to 
think they are different from Africans and have no African blood in 
them. They have been the victims of a vicious campaign, similar to that 
which took place in the Dominican Republic under Presidente Rafael 
Trujillo when he made every effort to ‘whiten’ society by killing 
thousands of Haitians and reducing the African presence in the 
Dominican Republic down to a myth. This is truth, not a conspiracy 
theory, and far from a mere political ploy to ‘unite’ the two groups of 
Original people under false bonds for the benefit of bi-partisan struggle. 
Many brothers and sisters who are Indigenous and are of the Pan-
Indigenous Diaspora actually exist within the African Diaspora as well. 
With this truth in mind, while someone may choose to embrace one 
people over the other (usually due to upbringing or life experience), we 
must strive to embrace both, as both peoples are who we are.  
It is very important to understand our relationship to each other and 
that we are really all one family - we are all of the ‘Black family.’ We, 
however, exist within distinct degrees when judged by our melanin 
expressed through the skin organ, which we call ‘shades of black’ within 
the Nation of Gods and Earths, defined as: black, brown and yellow. 
“Black” is typically seen as just a ‘color’ and most often associated with 
‘skin’ color, but it isn’t a stagnant or fixed idea. It is dynamic. What is 
“Black” in social standards varies with countries and cultures to be sure, 
which is the reason why so many so-called Latinos are reluctant to 
embrace the term. We also must look at the world and universe around 
us. Do not be blinded by the illusion of the daytime, for even our 
ancestors knew that the universe and space is black. The illumination of 
the Sun was born out of the blackness of this space and subsequently 
everything else in the universe and our solar system. The first organism 
of our intellectual and social capabilities to manifest presence on our 
planet, human being, has been recognized in science and anthropology 
as “black.” This does not mean that we’re ‘as’ black as the universe, but 
a manifestation, in the physical degree, and a supreme embodiment of 
the sub-atomic intelligence that drives energy through its different forms 
and brings forth life and matter. The word ‘black’ has more of a political 
connotation for us as human beings, especially nowadays, so someone 
who is referred to as ‘Black’ isn’t literally ‘black.’ And within the Nation 
of Gods and Earths we use it to define all people of color, regardless of


--- PAGE 22 ---
their shade, as a term of solidarity and reverence for our common 
origin, whether cosmic or in terms of civilizations. Still, in the 
mainstream, Puerto Ricans (along with other so-called Latinos) who 
assert our Blackness are not only outcast by those who identify more so 
with their Spanish conqueror than their African ancestors, but are also 
shunned by so-called African Americans who do not see us as ‘Black.’ 
Regardless whether someone is Navajo, Quechua, Mandinga, Ghanaian, 
or even Hmong or Pinoy, they are “Black.”  
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
BIAN XING  
THE MARTIAL LAW OF THE MARTIAL ARTS : PART #3: HUMANITY  
Nahlejj Eternal Allah - Medina (Brooklyn, NY) 
“Man follows the ways of Earth,  
The Earth follows the ways of heaven,  
Heaven follows the ways of Tao,  
Tao follows its own ways.” - Lao Tzu  
We are following our own Tao, boundless 
universal consciousness, the divine reasoning of 
the God(s) and Earth(s) executing Supreme 
Mathematics through the Martial Laws 
manifesting freedom on the material plane. Each 
and Every Way. The Three Treasures Martial 
Arts is the foundational gate to advancing the 
self through higher Martial Arts. Learning how 
to apply the martial precepts to everyday living 
and life’s social endeavors. Maintaining the 
harmony in our daily conflicts or subliminal 
mental and spiritual battles in every walk of life.  
HUMANITY-REN  
The divine trinity of Man, Woman and Child. 
Humanity the rebellious child of Heaven and Earth 
representing the duality and constant struggle to co-exist 
society; never yielding to absolute peace.  
Man being the medium or the bridge between Heaven and Earth 
(Father and Mother). Consisting of part Heaven ( Shen : Mind-Spirit-God) 
and part Earth ( Jing : physical-essence-elements) Man harnesses the 
power of the earth-elements to fulfill the totality of the infinite 
realization of Self.  
All purpose is revealed by man and the universe is interpreted by 
him and is understood through the arts, through language, through


--- PAGE 23 ---
music, the writings, the symbols and creativity. For as long as man exists 
through the eternal illusion of time the universe and the collective 
consciousness will continue to be made known to the unknown masters. 
Man being the essence of God, the transcendent power of his greatness 
or the central medium of the universal cohesion.  
“The way of the superior man may be found, in its simple elements, in the intercourse of common men and women; but in its 
utmost reaches, it shines brightly through Heaven and Earth.” - Confucius 
HUO  is the Chinese pinyin for fire, closely 
resembling the Ren , the character for Humanity. For 
Man is indeed the walking living fire in the earth-body 
emanating through the vehicle of bio-chemical 
transmutation, thus executing the Jing  of Bian-Xing, changing all forms 
of life and atmosphere. In return, nature responds positively and 
negatively; simultaneously producing both yin and yang. It is measured 
and balanced by the Martial law of heaven and the mandate of heavenly 
order is given to those receptive incarnate soul-beings; Shi  meaning 
God-Man. Shi  is the root word to Shifu  (Monk-Warrior-Scholar-Sage) 
who receives the vibrations of Harmony to be fulfilled on the plane of 
the lower earth society.  
This being the reason why we meditate, study and practice the 
Martial Law of the Martial Arts, to build our skill (FU ) through hard 
work ( GUNG ). As our ancestors and the enlightened Masters and high 
priest Shamans of the east, we are cultivating Qi so that we may 
effortlessly ward-off fear, ignorance, disease and unrighteousness. 
Finding peace through the refinement of Self; radiating light among the 
uncultivated souls of Humanity.  
THE THREE TREASURES IN HEAVEN AND EARTH  
“As it is in heaven, so it is below”  
8 Foundational Lessons:  
All things are parallel from the highest to the lowest equation. For 
example, let’s look at the universe’s numerical symmetry and similarities. 
Everything is symbolic to the Infinite Self in its complete definition.  
1.  In heaven there are the three great luminous jewels. The Sun, 
Moon, and Stars are the main component in recording the 
chronological history of the celestial movements and astrological 
laws written in the sky so that man may know himself. 
Anthropomorphically represented in ancient Kemet as the deities 
Ausar (Osiris), Auset (Isis) and Heru (Horus).  
2.  The human representation is Man, Woman, and Child.  
3.  Within the body there is the San Cai  of Jing  (essence), Shen  (spirit) 
and Qi  (vital life force).


--- PAGE 24 ---
4.  On the Earth it is fire, water, and soil; the natural tools of the 
master builders of civilization.  
5.  Organically, on the plane of matter, it is protons, electrons, and 
neutrons.  
6.  In the mental aspect of master-scholar, Shi  (God), the foundation of 
Knowledge, Wisdom and Understanding are the keys to unlocking 
inner truths and the lure of mystery, religion and philosophy socially 
executed through the state of freedom, justice and equality.  
7.  In the martial arts realm the three jewels of Shaolin Gung-fu is the 
Gung  (work-practice), Ge dou  (fighting-ability), Taolu (formless-form 
or Bian-Xing).  
8.  Then we have the three jewels of Buddhism. The first of course is 
Buddha (the highest spiritual potential in all beings), secondly is the 
Dharma  (the teachings of Buddha), third is the Sangha  (the 
community of the enlightened ones).  
These are but a few parallel concepts that comprise the root origins 
of our natural culture where we practice and aspire to bring about a 
revival of the ancient arts.  
No, we are not Monks.  
We do various forms of meditation, fast and eat raw or healthy 
vegetarian foods and study holistic medicine, we cultivate our mind in 
the arts and sciences, practicing daily Gung-fu, Qigong and building on 
the universal concepts of Supreme Mathematics. Now is that enough to 
be considered a Daoist? Maybe. Who cares? Don’t get caught up. Our 
martial arts existed since the beginning that never began. The Shaolin 
and the Wudang are our Chinese brothers who have perfected and 
preserved what our ancestors left for us. Our martial art dates back to 
the first civilization of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro in the Indus Valley, 
the Cushitic (Black) tribe of Dravidian Dalits who practiced the first 
martial arts known to Asia, Kalari-payattu , itself deriving from Ethiopia. 
We have taken it upon ourselves to salvage all the teachings of the 
Martial Arts as well as elevate it in order to bring it back to the original 
people of the planet. All nations have developed their own forms of 
defense. Even the Young God(s) and Earth(s) in Harlem N.Y.C. who 
study Three Treasures Martial Arts are innovatively advancing the art to 
a supreme level. I hope no one takes offense to us not keeping it 
traditionally Chinese or Shaolin. Much love goes out to the monks and 
other Asiatics; we welcome all and respect all. Thank you for sharing a 
bit of your culture and now we will continue to advance ours.  
GUNG- FU 
Most martial arts masters would agree that there is more to the arts 
than just brutishly throwing blows and kicks. All sincere practitioners 
must take the time to contemplate the reasons why they are practicing


--- PAGE 25 ---
martial arts, think about what they are really trying to accomplish, as 
well as consider the fact that they can get seriously hurt or cause 
someone else permanent injuries possibly resulting in the tragic death of 
another human being. Now can you sleep well after committing such a 
savage act?  
In the process of learning martial arts one is always going through 
introspection to weigh and judge self circumstances so that the heart 
and soul will remain pure and balanced with the right intention. So the 
main emphasis should be placed on the self-awareness of the martial 
arts practitioner in his/her early stages. The Higher Self will then 
automatically confront the lower Self when it is acting in disaccord with 
the Martial Law of the Martial Arts. Self analytical questions are then 
posed by the Higher Self such as: do you really have to fight? Do you 
just want to take your frustrations out on another human being, simply 
because you can? What level of force should you use? Do you have a 
choice? Do you have something to prove to yourself? This is the 
internal duality that can make the difference between life and death. 
Again, we are made of Shen , the Divine Spirit that makes us in the 
likeness of the Buddha.  
“Your mind is the Buddha. Don’t use a Buddha to worship a Buddha.” 
 - Bodhidharma, The Zen Teaching of Bodhidharma, as translated by Red Pine 
Let us understand the time and sacrifice that it takes to master the 
skill of making split-second decisions effectively for the purpose of 
preserving life. True defensive fighting starts with the mastery of the 
third eye. One must have the utmost sincerity and dedication to be able 
to advance in the martial arts so that you will be strong and able to fight 
the temptations known as “the spirit of the flesh” as taught to me by 
Sigung Bobby Lee Whitaker. The flesh complains about being tired and 
hungry, wanting to fulfill its pleasures. The flesh is weak and tries to 
persuade the mind to be weak by tempting the mind to stop practicing 
the rigorous training of the soul. The body is affected by the mind and 
the mind is affected by the body. The ultimate goal of the sincere 
practitioner is that the mind would become the absolute master and the 
body the complete servant. The body effortlessly carries out the will of 
the mind. This is where reaction is psychically demonstrated. There is 
no thought, just absolute knowing-the complete execution of the laws 
and techniques. Qi is produced in precise amount bringing forth the just 
balance in the universal equilibrium. Life can then continue its cycles; 
and the harmony is again maintained within the social state of man. The 
inner peace and humanity is temporarily at rest as long as there is the 
natural control of the forces of Self duality.  
Peace Omitofo!


--- PAGE 26 ---
BLACK GOD 
Aikuan Allah - Cipherland (Oakland, CA) 
The Black Man is God. The methods in which we express this 
fundamental aspect of our teachings is supported by our ideal of God. 
Once we have become aware of our true identity it’s only natural to 
strive to be consistent with the best part of our character. On this 
particular road we adopt certain basic approaches that assist us in 
staying in tune. Consequently our Supreme Mathematics, and Supreme 
Alphabets are essential in navigating to the best and most useful part of 
any endeavor.  
“When you know yourself, your “I-ness” vanishes and you know that you and God are one and the same.” - Ibn Arabi 
(d. 1240 CE), also known as As Shayk Al Akbar (The Great Sheikh)  
Once enlightened, it becomes more 
apparent that we have to be accountable, 
responsible and strive to make our 
environment more civilized. Also standing 
firm and not being easily influenced by the 
segment of the population whose ways and 
actions are ignorant and manipulative. This 
involves managing your power effectively and 
keeping your thoughts and emotions in check. 
Making excuses should no longer be reasons 
for lack of accomplishment or falling victim 
to poor judgment. The enlightened realize 
that the results we have in our lives are the 
sum total of the decisions we’ve made in the past. Therefore our future 
will be the result of the decisions we make today in the present.  
“I am free from spite, arrogance and greed,  
I am God, I am God, I am God.” - Farid-ud-Fin Attar (d. 1220 CE) 
In order to travel the right path and get to where you want to be in 
life your God birth-right has to transcend into action. The realization of 
God as Self does little without God-Orderly-Direction. One of the ways 
to determine your God-Orderly-Direction is to determine the pros and 
cons of the decisions you make before taking action. The “pros” can be 
looked at as gas stations for your journey, while the “cons” can be seen 
as roadblocks or detours. The vehicle that is the best equipped will have 
a better chance to reach its destination, no matter the terrain. Having a 
positive mental attitude is paramount in having God-Orderly-Direction. 
I’m not advocating being so self-absorbed that you become detached 
from reality and not aware of the challenges that persist. What I am 
saying is find time to reflect on your situation and be proud of your


--- PAGE 27 ---
progress. Know that because you’re doing what you set out to do your 
environment is becoming better.  
The mind is consistently processing information in a way that moves 
us in particular directions. Even on the subconscious level, the mind is 
distorting, deleting, and generalizing. So, before the mind can work 
efficiently, we must get a clear understanding of what our determined 
idea will be. When the mind has a defined target, it can focus, direct, 
refocus, and redirect until it reaches its intended goal. If it doesn’t have a 
defined target, its energy is wasted. It’s like a person with the world’s 
greatest voice who has no idea why he/she is in front of a microphone. 
What would happen if a sculptor changed their mind about what they 
were sculpting every five minutes? That’s what it’s like when you try to 
put your life together without having a determined idea. When you 
know what the outcome of your determined idea will be, you give your 
mind a clear picture of which kinds of information being received by the 
nervous system need high priority. You give your brain the clear 
messages it needs to be effective. Then you’re able to make Knowledge 
Born!  
Grab a sheet of paper and pencil and create your future. Don’t even 
start unless you have allotted some time to do this exercise. Now find or 
create a place where you can relax and be undisturbed. Set aside at least 
an hour to do this. You’ll agree that your future is worth the time. 
You’re going to learn how to set goals and determined ideas. You’re 
going to make a map of the roads you want to travel in your life. You’re 
going to figure out where you want to go and how you expect to get 
there. DO THE KNOWLEDGE:  Do not put any limitations on 
what’s possible. You are the makers of your universe. It’s your world! 
Remember, if you don’t design your life your life will be the result of 
someone else’s design without your best interest in mind.  
EXERCISE 1  
1.  Set your determined idea in positive terms. Say what you want to 
happen. Too often we say what we don’t want to happen. For 
example don’t say, “I don’t want to be broke anymore. Instead say, 
“I will do the necessary things to increase my wealth.”  
2.  Be as specific as possible. How does your determined idea look, 
feel, smell? Become fully associated as if you already have 
accomplished your goal. The more specific you are the more you 
will empower your mind to create what you desire. Also be sure to 
set a completion date or time period.  
3.  Have an evidence procedure. Know how you will feel, and what 
you will see and hear after you have achieved your outcome. Once 
you have accomplished something check it off. Be passionate about 
it.


--- PAGE 28 ---
4.  Be in control. Your determined idea must be initiated and 
maintained by you. It must not be dependent upon other people 
having to change themselves for you to be satisfied. Make sure your 
idea reflects things you can affect directly. Own up to what goes 
right and wrong in your cipher. It is you that possess the power to 
Build or Destroy.  
5.  Verify that your outcome is ecologically sound. That is, project into 
the future the consequences of your actual goal. Your outcome 
must be one that benefits all the human families of the planet 
Earth. 
WHY IS THE BLACK MAN GOD? 
Supreme Understanding Allah - Allah’s Garden (Atlanta, GA) 
INTRODUCTION  
The following essay is a brief attempt to present and explain the 
godhood of the Black man for contemporary readers. I have made 
significant effort to limit the technical vocabulary, so as to ease the pace 
of reading, and to avoid clogging the passages 
with overly technical details and footnotes. The 
following arguments are summaries, and not 
meant to cover the immense body of 
knowledge and wisdom available on these 
topics. Although some references are provided, 
the reader is encouraged to seek further 
information on their own. Good questions 
produce good answers. To be fair, I have also 
included a few of the common counter-
arguments I have heard, as well as brief 
responses. The reader is encouraged, above all, 
to read with an open mind.  
THE ORIGINAL MAN 
It is important that we first establish that the Black man is the first 
man, or the original man. Several major anthropological studies have 
documented this widely accepted fact. All peoples descend from him, 
either naturally or unnaturally. Europeans have even created fake fossils 
like the Piltdown man to try to discredit and distort the origins of 
humanity and place the first man in Europe. The earliest fossils of man 
have been found in South Africa and East Africa. Further information 
can be found in The African Origin of Civilization  by Cheikh Anta Diop. 
Forbidden Archaeology: The Hidden History of the Human Race  by Michael 
Cremo contains a wealth of evidence detailing the earliest existence of


--- PAGE 29 ---
highly-advanced humans throughout the world, far predating even the 
earliest accepted date of three million years ago. 
Original means the origin of all that follows. In stating that the Black 
man is the original man, many of the references that appear in the 
following pages, referring to “man,” can be understood to refer to the 
archetype of man himself, the Black man. Some authors have advocated 
that the true human is the hue-man, or man of color, and that mankind 
refers to the “kind of man” that followed. 
THE FATHER OF CIVILIZATION 
Blacks developed the first civilizations. Throughout the ancient and 
prehistoric world, Blacks have been the founders of all known 
civilizations. Examples include: (a) the first dynasties of ancient China, 
(b) the pre-Hellenic Minoan and Mycenean civilizations which birthed 
ancient Greece and Rome, (c) the ancient Egyptians of course, (d) the 
pre-Semitic Chaldeans, Babylonians, Sumerians, and their other middle 
Eastern neighbors, (e) the Kushites and other obviously Black 
civilizations in the continent known as Africa, (f) the Olmecs, the early 
Mayans and other Black pre-Columbian civilizations of the Americas 
(including the Black Indians Columbus met upon his initial voyages 
here), (g) the ancient Black civilizations of the Indus river valley in India, 
(h) and the Black civilizations of ancient Europe. Evidence of these 
claims can be found in African Presence in Early Asia  edited by Runoko 
Rashidi, African Presence in Early Europe, African Presence in Early America , 
and They Came Before Columbus  by Ivan Van Sertima, and The African 
Origin of Civilization  by Cheikh Anta Diop. Further evidence can be 
found on numerous articles, available on the internet, authored by Clyde 
Ahmad Winters, Runoko Rashidi, and dozens of others. Much of this 
information, and more, should also be available online at the Global 
African Presence  website. (www.cwo.com/~lucumi/runoko.html) 
THE SOURCE OF THE WORLD’S LEARNING 
Until the contemporary attempts by Europeans to discredit the 
capabilities of Blacks, the Black man has been regarded as surpassing all 
people and nations in his wisdom and intellect. Visitors from far-off 
lands studied among the Black teachers of Ancient Egypt in the Mystery 
Schools. Socrates and other Greeks regarded as the fathers of European 
philosophy were trained at these schools by Blacks. Plato, Socrates’ 
student, challenged the Greek concept of God, which was in fact a 
Europeanized version of the Black gods of Egypt. Plato, not having met 
the true and living Gods himself, appeared disgruntled with the human 
flaws of the otherwise supreme Greek gods.  
The Greeks were, until the era of Plato, still praising and 
worshipping the Black men of Egypt. These facts are documented in


--- PAGE 30 ---
George G. M. James’ Stolen Legacy  and Martin Bernal’s Black Athena . 
Examples include Zeus and Hercules, who were modeled after Osiris 
and Horus, and the Black god Imhotep, who is revered in the primary 
creed of medicine, the Hippocratic Oath. These Black individuals were 
not mythical figures, but historical men of note. After Plato, the idea of 
a transcendent, immaterial deity became popular. This is known as Neo-
Platonic thought. Most of the religious traditions of this region 
(Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) were influenced heavily by this way of 
thinking.  
Other examples of the Black man’s reputation as the source for the 
wisdom of sages are the famed Library of Alexandria in Egypt (burned 
by Europeans), and the Universities of Timbuktu. Also important is the 
learning of the Black Moors, who ruled Spain for 700 years (711-1492 
AD) and taught the Europeans much of what they know now. It was in 
fact the Moors who brought Europe out of its Dark Ages, much as it 
was Blacks who brought Europeans out of the caves to teach and 
civilize them some four thousand years ago. Books on these topics 
include Ivan Van Sertima’s Golden Age of the Moor and Paul Lawrence 
Guthrie’s Making of the Whiteman . 
THE SUPREME BEING 
All living matter is subservient to the Black man’s rule. Given the 
premise of Darwin’s theories regarding the survival of species, it is 
evident that all life until this point has culminated in the development of 
the supreme Black man, beginning with the simplest one-celled 
organism. All living things are bound to the universal laws of 
mathematics, the language in which God, as the creator, wrote the 
universe, and in which God, as man, speaks and lives. 
∗  ∗  ∗  ∗       ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗       ∗∗ ∗∗    
COUNTER-ARGUMENTS 
There is only one God, not many. 
As polytheistic as it sounds to say that Black men are Gods, the 
statement is anything but. There is only one God, and that God is THE 
Black man. The Black man is a unified whole, much as the water on the 
earth is in reality one connected body that is split into different regions, 
or containers. We share a mind at its highest level. This mind is the one 
that designed the universe in the language of mathematics, and set the 
processes by which all natural systems would continue to operate. 
While, at our conscious level, many of us are focused on eating and 
talking, there is a higher level to our consciousness that functions on the 
wavelength of intelligent design.  
It sounds racist to say the Black man is God.


--- PAGE 31 ---
God is the Original Man. The primordial man, the first physical 
vehicle for God’s immanent presence on Earth, was a Black body. 
Throughout the universe, Blackness prevails as the origin of all things. 
Black body radiation, Black holes, and the presence of melanin in space 
tell us a great deal. The first humans, of course, were Black. Today, the 
Black man is found throughout the Earth in a variety of shades and 
hues. Many of them are natural descendants of the original Black 
genotype, while others are admixtures resulting from miscegenation with 
whites. Who are whites then? Paul Lawrence Guthrie, in Making of the 
Whiteman , documents the creation and exile of the white race, who 
would forever change the course of human and social development on 
this planet. Numerous theories abound as to the origins of the white 
race, none of them entirely plausible. The vast differences between 
white people and Black people could only result from selective breeding, 
as Darwin noted, not from any evolutionary process. And certainly not 
simply due to cold weather, as African Presence in Early Europe by Ivan 
Van Sertima documents the presence of Blacks having lived in arctic 
regions for thousands of years without their skin lightening. At any rate, 
the statement of Black Godhood is a positive statement and one of 
affirmation, not of condemnation of other people.  
It sounds chauvinist to say the Black man is God. 
Just as the Sun and Moon occupy important places and roles in the 
solar system, so do Man and Woman. An immense body of scientific 
research details the significant physical, mental, emotional, and social 
differences between males and females. Stating that the Black man is 
God is not meant to degrade or debase the Black woman, but to affirm 
HIS role, and not take anything away from hers. God represents the 
creative force in the universe. In all scriptural and mythological 
accounts, God somehow “impregnates” either the Earth, the celestial 
void, or the blackness of space, to produce life and/or the universe. The 
planting of the seed would be futile without the fertile soil in which to 
plant it. Early mythology related the woman to the Earth, the receiver 
and bearer of life. Many of these ancient societies eventually abandoned 
the worship of the Black God, the Father God, as He was described as 
distant and unconcerned with human affairs. Instead, the focus shifted 
to the Earth Mother, who was celebrated and praised for her fertility 
and the sustenance she provided. Today, we refer to the Black woman 
as a Queen, as the Mother of Civilization, and as the Earth.  
There is no God. 
Several authors have addressed the debate between intelligent design 
and the possibility that this universe, this Earth, and humanity, were the 
products of chance and coincidence. The likelihood of just one atom 
simply phasing into existence by chance is so remote that it can’t be


--- PAGE 32 ---
calculated fairly. The evidence for intelligent design is great. However, it 
doesn’t point to the immaterial, invisible God of the Creationists, but to 
the culmination of God on Earth, the 
Black man, as its source. Much as a 
computer program can be written to 
repeat in cycles, or concentric spirals, 
of activity, history has followed a 
natural set of laws and patterns to 
produce this exact stage of 
development. The original writer for 
this program, or history, was the 
infinite (since the beginning) Black mind, present in the ultimate (final) 
Black man. An examination of history will lead one to question the 
probability of coincidental events, the aligning of real events and 
prophecy, the cyclical or spiral nature of all development, and why on 
earth is the same spiral that one can find in the formation of the 
universe’s galaxies and the currents of the Earth’s waters, present in our 
own fingertips? 
The Black man can’t be God or the Black man wouldn’t be living 
in such depraved conditions. 
This argument appears to make a great deal of sense. Why on earth 
would GOD be dancing around on BET like a clown, flashing guns and 
money amidst a bunch of gyrating scantily-clad women? Or why would 
GOD be trapped in the slums in abject poverty, with the highest 
incarceration rates in the country, failing to educate himself or uplift his 
people, and instead choosing to smoke, drink, and fornicate his life 
away?  
Well, for beginners, this deplorable image of the Black man is, in 
great part, more of a construction of the media, than an accurate 
representation of the GLOBAL Black man. The Black man is a unified 
whole, comprised of peoples of color from all over the world, 
representing a multitude of different behaviors, attitudes and lifestyles. 
One thing these peoples have in common is their oppression by white 
supremacy (also known as European imperialism, British colonization, 
American capitalism, manifest destiny, the Crusades, Christian 
conversion, etc.).  
“If the soul is left in darkness, sins will be committed.  
The guilty one is not he who creates the sin, but he who creates the darkness.” - Victor Hugo 
The results of this system in America have been especially tragic. 
Black people, kidnapped from peaceful and prosperous homelands, 
were sold in the Americas, stripped of their language, ideologies, and 
culture, and brainwashed. The brainwashing never ceased. In fact, 
examination of the Willie Lynch letters shows us that further


--- PAGE 33 ---
brainwashing was instrumental in continuing the oppression of the 
Black male beyond his physical bondage.  
In the Bible it states that “the last shall be first and the first shall be 
last.” During the time the Egyptians were building pyramids, Europeans 
were creating large mounds of waste in Europe. The garbage piles these 
cavemen created were often so large, they have evolved into modern-
day hillsides. Today, the reverse seems true. But there is a sleeping giant 
awaiting awakening. Even in the worst of conditions, in jails and ghettos 
throughout the U.S., Black men continue to awaken to the knowledge of 
themselves and begin the journey back to their true nature. For every 
individual walking in darkness and chasing the American dream of 
money and sex, there is another individual walking up out of that sleep 
and seeing God in the mirror. 
“The 500 years of resistance have not been in vain.  
From 500 years of resistance we pass to another 500 years in power.” - Evo Morales 
ORDERING INFORMATION 
AVAILABLE ONLINE AT: 
www.knowledgeofself.viviti.com  
www.knowledgeofself.us 
www.myspace.com/knowledgeofselfbook 
www.amazon.com 
www.hustleandwin.com 
www.lavoerevolt.blogspot.com 
www.originalcreations.blogspot.com 
FOR WHOLESALE ORDERS: 
Email: mecca@hustleandwin.com 
 righteous.addon@gmail.com 
 sunez97@gmail.com 
Or visit one of the above sites and check for instant wholesale 
purchashing. You can order copies of Knowledge of Self  wholesale for as 
little as $3.50 a copy! 
 
PEACE!

