=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Kwame Nkrumah's Politico-Cultural Thought and Politics.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 218
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:09:35.206832
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
AFRICAN STUDIES  
HISTORY, POLITICS, ECONOMICS,  
AND CULTURE 
Edited by  
Molefi Asante  
Temple University 
A ROUTLEDGE SERIES


--- PAGE 3 ---
AFRICAN STUDIES: HISTORY, 
POLITICS, ECONOMICS, AND CULTURE  
MOLEFI ASANTE, General Editor 
KWAME NKRUMAH’S CONTRIBUTION TO PAN-AFRICANISM 
An Afrocentric Analysis 
D.Zizwe Poe 
NYANSAPO (THE WISDOM KNOT) 
Toward an African Philosophy of Education 
Kwadwo A.Okrah 
THE ATHENS OF WEST AFRICA 
A History of International Education at Fourah Bay College, Freetown, Sierra Leone 
Daniel J.Paracka, Jr. 
THE ‘CIVIL SOCIETY’ PROBLEMATIQUE 
Deconstructing Civility and Southern Nigeria’s Ethnic Radicals 
Adedayo Oluwakayode Adekson 
MAAT, THE MORAL IDEAL IN ANCIENT EGYPT 
A Study in Classical African Ethics 
Maulana Karenga 
YORUBA TRADITIONAL HEALERS OF NIGERIA 
Mary Adekson 
IGBO WOMEN AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION IN SOUTHEASTERN 
NIGERIA, 1900–1960 
Gloria Chuku 
KWAME NKRUMAH’S POLITICO-CULTURAL THOUGHT AND POLICIES 
An African-Centered Paradigm for the Second Phase of the African Revolution 
Kwame Botwe-Asamoah


--- PAGE 4 ---
KWAME NKRUMAH’S 
POLITICO-CULTURAL 
THOUGHT AND POLICIES 
AN AFRICAN-CENTERED PARADIGM FOR THE SECOND PHASE 
OF THE AFRICAN REVOLUTION 
Kwame Botwe-Asamoah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Routledge 
New York & London


--- PAGE 5 ---
Published in 2005 by  Routledge  270 Madison Avenue  New York, NY 10016  
http://www.routledge-ny.com/ 
Published in Great Britain by  Routledge,  2 Park Square  Milton Park, Abingdon  Oxon OX14 
4RN  http://www.routledge.co.uk/ 
Copyright © 2005 by Taylor & Francis Group, a Division of T&F Informa. 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group. 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 
 “To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis 
  or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to  
http://www.ebookstore.tandf.co.uk/.” 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any  form or 
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,  including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,  without permission 
in writing from the publishers. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication  Botwe-Asamoah, Kwame.  Kwame Nkrumah’s 
politico-cultural thought and policies: an African-centered  paradigm for the second phase of the 
African revolution/Kwame Botwe-Asamoah.  p. cm.—(African studies: history, politics, 
economics, and culture)  Includes bibliographical references and index.  ISBN 0-415-94833-9 
(hardcover: alk. paper)  1. Nkrumah, Kwame, 1909–1972—Political and social views. 2. Ghana—
Politics  and government—To 1957. 3. Gh ana—Politics and government—1957–1979.  4. 
Ghana—Cultural policy. 5. Pan-Africanism. I. Title. II. Series: African studies  (Routledge (Firm))  
DT512.7.N57B68 2005  966.705’1’092–dc22 
ISBN 0-203-50569-7 Master e-book ISBN 
ISBN 0-203-57819-8 (Adobe e-Reader Format) 
ISBN 0-415-94833-9 (Print Edition)


--- PAGE 6 ---
This book is dedicated to two great mothers whose wisdom and guidance changed the 
lives of their children. First, to Nkrumah’s mother, Nyaniba, who dragged Nkrumah 
several times to school until he gave in to her demand. Finally, to my loving mother, 
Akua Awusiama, who also dragged me to school on two occasions. She died four months 
after I had left her in Ghana for the US in December 1993. I was all that she had in this 
world. Her living spirits, since her untimely death and that of my father, Ohene Kwaku 
Owusu Botwe, have been the driving force throughout the research and the writing of this 
book.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents 
  
   Preface   viii 
   Acknowledgments   xiii 
   List of Abbreviations   xiv 
  
Chapter One 
  Introduction: The Raison d’Etre of Kwame Nkrumah’s 
Politico-Cultural Thought    
1 
Chapter Two   Critical Discourse on Kwame Nkrumah’s Life and Works   16 
Chapter Three   Kwame Nkrumah’s Politico-Cultural Thought   37 
Chapter Four   The Political Policies of Kwame Nkrumah   71 
Chapter Five   Post-Independence Political Policies   96 
Chapter Six   Nkrumah’s Cultural Polices: The State and the Arts   118 
Chapter Seven   Nkrumah’s Cultural Policy: The National Theater Movement 
and the Academy   140 
Chapter Eight   Conclusion   166 
  
   Bibliography   175 
   Index   182


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
Preface 
Growing up in both Gold Coast, later Ghana, I witnessed much systematic campaign 
against Kwame Nkrumah’s political, social and cultural thought and policies. In my 
elementary schools, some of my teacher s openly condemned his alleged communist 
ideology in the classrooms. One particular teacher told us that with communism, we were 
“all going to wear khaki uniforms and line up everyday for rationed food with our 
parents.” 
The Odekro (owner of town) of my town Ettokrom in Dr. J.B. Danquah’s (a founding 
member of the United Gold Coast Convention and a leading opponent of Nkrumah) 
constituency said that Nkrumah was an athe ist; in addition, he denounced him for siding 
with Nasser in Egypt’s war with Israel in  1956, whom he described as “the chosen 
children of God.” In the in tellectual community, Nkrumah was also accused of lowering 
the educational standards because of his policy on Africanization of the curriculum of the 
educational system in the country; this included his decree abolishing a pass in the 
English language as the sole criteria for obtaining the secondary school certificate. An 
added frequent accusation was an alleged to ffee (candies) that Nkrumah frequently 
dropped from the ceiling into the hands of th e Young Pioneers, which the Christian God 
could not do, when asked. Between 1955 and February 1966, his foes, both within and 
without Ghana engaged in vicious lies about him as well as a well-organized 
assassination attempts on his life. 
In fact, no political leader or ruler in Ghana, to date, has experienced terrorist attacks 
in terms of constant bomb throwing, a f ace-to-face gun shot and ambushes as Nkrumah 
did. Furthermore, the kind of economic sa botage and political de stabilization campaign 
against his government at the national and inte rnational levels is unparalleled in Ghana’s 
political history. Yet, in spite of the hostile and violent environment in Ghana, the 
national unity as well as the rapid cultural, social, economic transformation and industrial 
development achieved for the country within the short span by Nkrumah’s government 
will go down in African history as one of the most remarkable periods of post-
independence achievements. 
These positive acclamations notwithstanding, I saw the heroic struggle of Nkrumah 
and his adoration by the ordinary people, including the majority of the inhabitants of my 
village and neighboring towns and urban cente rs. He was viewed as a god-sent savior. 
While many Ghanaians praised and adored him as a great visionary leader, others 
continued to see him as Africa’s inimitable leader. 
Historically speaking, no African political leader, past or present, has more completely 
personified the political, economic and cultural liberation and unity of Africa than did Dr. 
Kwame Nkrumah. As the father of African nationalism, he advanced the cause of African 
liberation and engendered an understanding of th e insidious nature of neo-colonialism. 
He stands forth as one of the few pivotal political leaders of the twentieth century. The 
formation of the African Union in South Africa in the summer of 2001, though a shift 
from Nkrumah’s African-centered union government, to promote rapid economic


--- PAGE 10 ---
development of the continent is an attestation to the foresight and vision of Nkrumah’s 
policy on Pan-Africanism. 
Nkrumah’s unparalleled accomplishments regarding African liberation as well as his 
incomparable leadership skills and achievements in terms of national unity, social, 
educational, economic transformation and industrial projects in Ghana came to be buried 
by the kind of systematic misinformation warfare following the CIA orchestrated military 
coup that overthrew his government on February 24, 1966 (Stockwell 1978:160 and 201). 
It is this politically orchestrated misinformation which has come to serve as a model for 
discourse on Nkrumah’s political and cultural philosophy and policies by his foes and 
some of his admirers. 
Studies on the nature of the political and cultural institutions of the Nkrumah era have 
been carried out without adequate reference to colonial legacies. Even when such a 
connection is made it has often ignored the contradiction between the thinking patterns of 
the European trained African scholars, and politi cal and cultural activists in charge of the 
institutions one hand, and Nkrumah’s African-centered vision, on the other. Also, the 
major error by Nkrumah’s critics is their failu re to acknowledge the fact that he was the 
only African leader at the time to formul ate an African-centered socio-philosophical 
system as a guiding principle for post-independence Ghana and Africa’s socio-economic 
transformation. 
Nkrumah inherited a fragmented country besieged by an insidious colonial legacy, 
such as Eurocentric economic, judicial and educational systems, law enforcement and 
military institutions, civil service administrative superstructure, infectious diseases and 
uneven socio-economic development. Other aspects of the colonial legacy included 
illiteracy, ignorance, superstitions and undemo cratic and violent behaviors of the 
embittered parochial and ethnic based political parties. All these were more difficult to 
combat than the anti-colonial struggle. Thus , the tendency of such critics to compare and 
contrast, inter alia,  the ideas of African revolutionaries like Cabral and Fanon with 
Nkrumah’s ideas at the anti-colonial stage and the post-independence politico-cultural 
philosophy and policies are thus inappropriate. Also, any discourse that lumps together 
the ontological nature of both the anti-colonial struggle and that of the post-independence 
socio-political and cultural revolution, especially in the context of the cold war politics, 
with respect to Nkrumah’s Ghana, would be an intellectual aberration. 
Another common error among scholars of post-independence socio-economic and 
cultural transformation in Nkrumah’s Ghana has been the tendency to present them in a 
linear fashion. Rooted in Eurocentric perspective, this linear approach has tended to 
reduce Nkrumah’s integrated educational, economic, cultural and Pan-African agenda 
into separate entities for abstract analysis. As a consequence, culture has come to be seen 
as an entity by itself having no place in  African political, economic and social 
transformation. Theater, they say, should not  be mixed with political ideology (Agovi, 
1989:8). Not only is such a persp ective an antithesis to African  aesthetics, but it has also 
led to several false assumptions on the role of theater in socio-economic transformation 
in Ghana. In the final analysis, some politicians, and intellectuals in Ghana refer to 
Nkrumah’s politico-cultural and economic theories and policies as outdated and of no use 
for the current dilemmas. Yet, while this  same populace complain bitterly about the 
abrogation of Nkrumah’s socio-economic a nd education services  resulting from his


--- PAGE 11 ---
rational thinking, they ironically cry for a Eurocentric political system and Adam Smith’s 
laissez-fair economic theories and policies formulated in 1776. 
This book synthesizes and analyzes the relationship between Kwame Nkrumah’s 
politico-cultural philosophy and policies as an Afrocentric paradigm for the second phase 
of the African revolution. It also argues for the relevance of his theories and policies in 
today’s Africa. The book examines and anal yses three aspects of Nktumah’s politico-
cultural thought from a holistic standpoint. First,  his socio-political philosophy returns to 
traditional African ethics, humanistic values and an egalitarian mode of production to 
formulate a new socio-economic system for post-independence Africa. Second, the 
institutional aspect of his cultural thought offered an African-centered framework for 
institutional development. Third, his thought  on creative culture also provided for an 
African-centered perspective to undergird the intellectual and artistic endeavors of the 
School of Music and Drama, with specific reference to the National Theater Movement, 
This integrative cultural thought thus offered an African-centered prototype for the 
statutory cultural institutions in the society and in the acad emy. It is this holistic 
framework of Nkrumah’s Pan-African politico-cu ltural agenda that is often ignored by 
several scholars and his critics. 
In writing this book, I have attempted to  analyze Kwame Nkru mah’s politico-cultural 
philosophy and policies. In doing so, I realize my limitations as regards the data upon 
which the book is written. The research was based on qualitative, ethnographic and 
Afrocentric research methods. As the Afrocentric research scholar Kershaw (1989:47) 
puts it, “the unity between theory and praxis is possible only if praxis occurs before 
construction.” Accordingly, the theory was developed during the data collection process 
or grounded in the data. 
The data collection consists of primary and secondary materials as well as interviews. 
The primary materials included Kwame Nk rumah’s major speeches and works, his 
government’s policy statements, parliame ntary instruments, committees’ reports, 
documents on the Arts Council of Ghana, th e Institute of African Studies and this 
researcher’s personal experience as a student in the School at the time. The cognate 
secondary materials consisted of studies  done by scholars on Nkrumah’s political 
thought, his cultural policies, and the educational and artistic institutions of the era. 
I interviewed renowned and well-informed Ghanaian scholars and cultural activists. 
They include those who were responsible for the implementation of Kwame Nkrumah’s 
politico-cultural policies, and those who have headed theater institutions in Ghana. It 
provided me the opportunity of stepping into the minds of those persons who saw, 
participated in and/or experienced what is popularly described as the era of Ghana’s 
cultural revolution. Critical among them were Professor Emeritus J.H.Nketia, Honorable 
Kojo Botsio and His Excellency Ambassador Kofi Awoonor. In addition, I interviewed 
two military officers who were members of the President Own Guard Regiment at the 
time of the military coup on February 24, 1966, and who have fi rst hand information 
about Nkrumah’s military support to the liber ation fighters in Africa. Retired Colonel 
David Gbon Zanleringu, was the commander of the President Own Guard Regiment, and 
handled some aspects of the training of the African freedom fighters in Ghana. Retired 
Colonel Kwasi Oteng, a Second Lieutenant at the time, was the most senior officer on 
duty at the time of the coup, whose forces f ought the invading forces till the arrival of his 
commanding officer, Colonel Zanleringu.


--- PAGE 12 ---
The advantage I had in the research is my familiarity with the political history, 
Nkrumah’s political philosophy, language, and the cultural movement of the time. Also, I 
was one of the pioneering students at the School of Music and Drama, the performing arts 
wing of the Institute of African Studies. Prio r to my admission into the School of Music 
and Drama in 1965, I was a Young Pioneer voluntary organizer responsible for the 
performing arts wing of the movement in Koforidua. Additionally, I was a member of the 
Eastern Regional Arts Council’s Drama Club of Koforidua. 
Many discourses on Kwame Nkrumah may continue to turn up, but without any depth 
in “African centered method,” as he implor ed, such disquisition would be unavailing. 
This book thus provides an Afrocentric framework for further discourses on Kwame 
Nkrumah’s socio-economic policies, his educational philosophy and policies, and his 
vision of a Pan-African socialist union government, embracing the Diasporan Africans.


--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---
Acknowledgments 
First, I would like to express my unqualified gra titude to two of my former professors at 
Temple University in Philadelphia, Dr. Kariamu Welsh and Dr. Dr. Abu Shadow Abarry, 
for their inspiration and academic direction throughout my studies at Temple. I am most 
grateful to Nana Okru Asante Peasah (Dr. Molefi Kete Asante) Kyidomhene of Akyem 
Tafo for his vision and boldness in the creation of the first doctoral degree in Africology 
in the world. In effect, his groundbreaking Afrocentricity not only afforded me the 
opportunity to acquire stimulating intellectual tools in the study of African phenomena, 
but it also inspired this book. Also, I must  acknowledge with gratitude the empowerment 
of Dr. Terry Kershaw’s holistic pedagogy in research methods. Here, I must thank Dr. 
Kwesi Yankah of the University of Ghana, Dr. Samuel Gyasi Obeng of Indiana 
University at Bloomington and Dr. Buba Misawa of Washington and Jefferson University 
for their comments on some parts of the manuscript. My thanks also go to my colleague 
at the University of Pittsburgh, Dr. Paula Da vis for her valuable suggestions towards the 
end of the project, as well as Dr. David Ghogomu of Allderdice High School in 
Pittsburgh for his assistance in proofreading the typeset. To Dr. Joseph Adjaye at the 
University of Pittsburgh, I say “thank you very much for your encouragement.” I must 
also thank the Project Editor of this book, Randy Burling for his amazing understanding 
and patience. 
I am also grateful to Professor Emeritus J.H.Nketia, the late Professor A.M.Opoku, 
His Excellency Kofi Awoonor and the late Honorable Kojo Botsio for sharing their 
personal working relationship with Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah and their insights on 
the subject matter of this project. My special thanks go to Retired Colonel David Gbon 
Zanleringu, former Commander of the President Own Guard Regiment and Retired 
Colonel Kwasi Oteng also of the President Own Guard Regiment for sharing their 
personal knowledge regarding Nkrumah’s logistical and material support to the African 
freedom fighters. My thanks also go to the following persons for availing themselves for 
the interviews on a short notice: Dr Kofi Anyidoho, Professor Sandy Arkhurst and Dr. 
Ibn Abdallah Mohammed of the University of Ghana. To the staff at the National 
Archives of Ghana, I say, “thank you for the urgency with which you attached to the 
assistance I sought from you.” 
My heartfelt and deepest gratitude goes to  my very good friend, Kofi Yamoa, who 
provided me with moral, emotional and brotherly support for this book. Finally, I am 
most indebted to my wonderful children: Adjoa Nyaniba, Ohene Kwaku, Abena, and Lily 
for their countless sacrifice throughout my res earch and the writing of this book. In fact, 
the true reward for them is the successful completion of this book. 
Me de Onyame ne nanamon da mo ase pii.


--- PAGE 15 ---
List of Abbreviations 
ARPS Aborigines Rights Protection Society 
CE Common Era 
CIA Central Intelligence Agency 
CPP Convention People’s Party 
CYO Committee for Youth Organization 
GCP Ghana Congress Party 
MAP Moslem Association Party 
NCBWA National Congress of British West Africa 
NLM National Libe ration Movement 
NPP Northern People’s Party 
POGR President Own Guard Regiment 
OAU Organization of African Unity 
UGCC United Gold Coast Convention 
UN United Nations 
WANS West African National Secretariat


--- PAGE 16 ---



--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter One  
Introduction: The Raison d’Etre of Kwame 
Nkrumah’s Politico-Cultural Thought 
White domination a God-given right?  
No, says Kwame Nkrumah.  
Wrong to treat black men right?  
Nonsense, exclaims Nkrumah.  
And right to black men wrong?  
No, shouts Kwame Nkrumah.  
Enslaving, exploiting, oppressing,  
Dehumanizing Africans— 
Say all this our accursed lot?  
Never! Vowed Kwame Nkrumah  
Things wrong must be put right. 
(Timothy, 43:1963) 
Kwame Nkrumah was born on September 22, 1909 at Nkroful in the Western region of 
Ghana. On the eighth day of his birth, his father named him after a relative, Kofi Nwia. 
His parents were poor and illiterate. Though his father was a goldsmith, he was respected 
for his wise counsel by those who sought his advice about traditional issues and domestic 
affairs. Nkrumah’s mother on the other hand was a petty trader. It was during his father’s 
departure to Half-Assini, a seaport, for greener pastures that Nkrumah was born. His birth 
brought good fortune to both his parents. His father’s commerce flourished while his 
mother’s business became “bewildered at the amazing way in which she encountered 
success after success” (Ibid: 19). 
Nkrumah, Timothy further indicates, acco mpanied his father, Kofi Ngolomah 
whenever he went on trek as he (Nkrumah) displayed great powers of observation. 
Consequently, his parents decided to supplement the monetary gifts presented to them at 
Nkrumah’s birth “with the proceeds from thei r work with a view” of sending him to 
school (Ibid: 20). In 1915, his parents sent him to Roman Catholic Elementary School at 
Half-Assini. It was here that Nkrumah led his first “positive action” campaign to 
embarrass his class teacher as he urged his classmates to stay home during the visit of the 
Inspector of Schools (Ibid: 20). As Nkrumah (1957:11) explains, “we were not fond of 
the teacher because of his frequent use of the stick (to flog them), often we thought 
without just cause.” 
However, in the tradition of the Asona royal family, Nkrumah had to learn from his 
parents and the Elders of Nzima, from chil dhood, the history, traditions and customs of 
his people. In his Black Star, Davidson (1973:19) describes Nkrumah’s early life as “a 
shy child who preferred to stand and listen to his elders rather than merely run with the 
crowd.” As he brought himself “close to the customs of his people, he sucked in


--- PAGE 18 ---
knowledge of the challenges of life, and dreamed dreams about the power a man can have 
to meet and overcome them. It was a habit of mind that stayed with him” (Ibid: 19). 
Though both his parents decided that he should go to school, the early source of 
influence on his view of life perhaps came from his mother. She dragged him there 
several times when he found his first da y of school “so disappointing” (Nkrumah, 
1957:6). Nkrumah describes his mother “as a most worthy and vigilant protector, her 
quite decisive moments…gave her a natural leadership” (Ibid: 5). When he complained to 
her one day for not giving him brothers and sisters as the only child of his mother, she 
pointed to the trees and said: “you see the bi g trees? They stand alone!” (Forward Ever, 
1977:2). 
His favorite delight during school break was gathering his class-mates under a shady 
tree for casual discussions. After Sunday school, Nkrumah would take a long walk with 
his friends to the beach under coconut trees  and engage in a coconut feast while 
discussing current affairs. His special qualities at the Roman Catholic Elementary School 
attracted the attention of the Headmaster of the school, Reverend Father George Fisher. 
Hence, after completing the Standard VII examination (Middle School Leaving 
Certificate examination), he was made a pupil teacher at his alma mater. He was so small 
that he had to stand on a table to teach. While teaching at Axim, Nkrumah embarked on a 
substantial research into Nzima history. He was elected Secretary of the African Club, a 
literary and social organization; thereafter, he was elected the first General Secretary of 
Nzima Literature and Cultural Association.  
After Nkrumah’s one year of teaching Fath er Fisher sent him and his colleagues, 
Dominic C.Cobina and J.Edward to the Government Teacher Training College at 
Achimota in Accra. Due to his “unmanageable” behavior at Achimota, he was punished 
by the prefects and monitors. Yet, he paid great attention to his studies and participated in 
extra-curricular activities, such as concerts and sports. More importantly, “he delivered 
lectures and made persuasive speeches” (Timothy: 21). 
It was while he was a student at Achimota Training College that Dr. Kwagyir Aggrey 
first aroused Nkrumah’s cultural nationalism. Aggrey lectured the students about the 
great achievements of the African people long before the arrival of the Europeans. He 
constantly advised the young African students to study hard so that they could help 
liberate Africa from colonial rule. Nkrumah late r decided to further his education in the 
United States, in order to devote the rest of his life toward the liberation of Africa from 
European colonialism. It was also Aggrey  who introduced Nkrumah to the ideas and 
ideals of W.E.B.Du Bois and Marcus Garvey (Taylor, 1990:87). 
But it was “the coming of Azikiwe,” whic h became an “electric shock to the younger 
ranks of intellectuals, like Nkrumah” (Davidson, 1973:24). Nkrumah had left Amisano in 
December 1934 for a visit to Accra, where he met Azikiwe, who was then Editor of the 
African Morning Post;  also, he met Wallace Johnson the Editor of the African Sentinel 
and founder of the Youth League. Azikiwe’s lectures, speeches, and articles fired his 
imagination for the emancipation of the African from thralldom. Through private talks, 
Azikiwe urged Nkrumah to go to his alma mater, Lincoln University in the United States 
and “to come back with th e Golden Fleece” (Ibid: 24). This  led him to recapture Dr. 
Aggrey’s prophesy and inspirational lectures to go to the land, which had produced such 
Pan-African pioneers like Aggrey, Marcus Garvey and Du Bois. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     2


--- PAGE 19 ---
Consequently, Nkrumah went ahead to pursue further education at Lincoln University, 
where he obtained two Bachelors degrees in Theology as well as in Economics and 
Sociology. Additionally, he earned a Master of Science degree in Education and a Master 
of Arts degree in Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania. While finalizing his 
doctoral degree in philosophy, Nkrumah abruptly left for England in 1945 to study Law 
at Gray’s Inn as well as pursue a doctora l degree in Political Science at the London 
School of Economics (Nkrumah, 1957:51). It is common knowledge that with a few 
chapters completed, Nkrumah had a disagreement with his advisor on the content of his 
dissertation on ethnophilosophy; rather than write and publish material with which 
Nkrumah disagreed, he left the doctoral pr ogram. He had originally proposed “The 
Philosophy of Imperialism, with Special Reference to Africa,” as the topic for his thesis, 
which his advisor Dr. Morrow at the University of Pennsylvania rejected (Sherwood, 
1996:63). 
While a graduate student at the Univer sity of Pennsylvania, Nkrumah became 
instrumental in the establis hment of an Institute of African Languages and Culture 
through his organizing skills. He sacrificed hi s academic work to bu ild the institute on 
solid foundations. He also started translating “his dream of organizing all Africans in the 
United States” with the hope that they might one day return home to serve Africa. His 
dedication and intensive work led to “the first General Conference of Africans in 
America” held in September 1943 (Timothy: 32). 
It was also while a student in the United States that Nkrumah started putting his 
thoughts on paper regarding the ruthless nature of colonialism on the African continent. 
By 1943, he had become immersed with po litics delivering open-air lectures regarding 
the suffering of African people and the ultimate overthrow and extinction of colonialism 
and imperialism. What is more, Nkrumah started to envisage “a West African Federation, 
and, together with Nnamdi Azikiwe of Ni geria and Durosimi Johnson of Sierra Leone, 
they planned on returning home” to step up strong agitation against colonial rule in the 
region (Ibid: 32–33). Nkrumah’s boss at Sunship Building Dry Dock Company in 
Chester, Pennsylvania also confirms this when described him: 
Kwame Nkrumah was the only African there. He was popular and well 
respected and had discussions with his colleagues about Africa. He had a 
vision of returning to the Gold Coast and in spite of the persuasion of 
friends, he insisted on returning to Africa. (Ibid: 26). 
In Pennsylvania and adjoining states, Nkrumah forfeited social life and made it his [first] 
duty “to return to Africa and join in the struggle for its liberation from the tentacles of 
imperialism” (Ibid: 27). His popularity and commitment to return to Africa earned the 
admiration of his classmates at Lincoln so much that they voted him the “Most 
Interesting.” They composed a little ditty in his honor for the class year book: 
‘Africa is the beloved of Nkrumah’s dreams;  
Philosopher, thinker with forceful schemes.  
In aesthetics, politics, he’s in the field;  
Nkrumah’s, “tres interessant,” radiates appeal.’ (Ibid: 27) 
Introduction     3


--- PAGE 20 ---
Thus Nkrumah’s determination to fight against colonialism and imperialism in Africa 
became obvious to his classmates, professors and friends in the US.  
Kwame Nkrumah’s thoughts on colonialism lay the foundation of his political and 
cultural philosophy. He found colonialism crude and overt in terms of economic 
exploitation. Besides, it was also insidious as it dehumanized the cultural personality of 
the African. As noted by several writers (Agovi, 1990; Davidson, 1969; Ngugi, 1986; 
Okot p’Bitek, 1966; Rodney, 1981; Nkrumah, 1963), African culture and world view: 
epistemology, cosmology, aesthetics and axiology were severely attacked by the 
European Christian missionaries, tourist and anthropologists, during colonialism. The 
nature of education and the body of literature  produced during coloni alism invented “the 
so-called inferior traits” of the African (Diop, 1974:25). The sel f-proclaimed civilizing 
mission by European colonialists and the missionaries was depicted as a “duty of 
humanity” to raise the African to the level of “other men.” It was this dehumanization 
campaign which, Diop (Ibid: 25) points out, “finally deeply affected” the cultural 
personality of the African. Thus, through phy schological, coercive and brutal methods, 
the Europeans effectively dislocated the African from his cultural center and “placed him 
on the margins of their cultural context” (Asante, 1993:54). 
Because culture carries rules for thinki ng, the European, during colonialism, 
introduced a type of educational system that transported total European cultural 
nationalism to their colonies in Africa. What they introduced, Rodney (1982:240) points 
out, was a new set of formal education whic h partly supplemented and partly replaced 
those which were in existence before the advent of colonialism. In the process, this 
system instilled a sense of affinity towards all things European. It was also a type that 
trained the African to assist the colonial ad ministrators at the lo west rank and to staff 
privately owned Europeans companies (Ibid: 240). 
In effect, the educational system was characterized by absurdities in the transportation 
of Eurocentric education into Africa. In the British colonies like the Gold Coast (now 
Ghana) and Nigeria, the school system trained the students to be inferior copies and 
caricatures of the English man. Being disl ocated, the African st udents became “neither 
fish nor foul, as they were denied” information about “their African past and told they 
had no present” (Ibid: 205). In the schools that I attended, we were given instructions in 
plant life which I could not understand, even though my father was a well known-
herbalist in our region. We were taught that Mungo Park “discovered” River Niger, while 
David Livingston “discovered” Lake “Victoria,” when in fact Africans led these two 
European tourists to the waters. The most absurd thing was the description of Africa as 
the “dark continent,” which we had to learn.  Our history lessons were about Europe and 
the white man’s activities in Africa. We were made to believe that we had no culture and 
history to be proud of, and that our people had made no contribution towards human 
civilization. 
From the onset, the educational system  accorded high priority to Christian 
instructions. Operated by the Euro-Christian missionaries hunting for African converts, as 
Ani (1993:161) explains, the African heads we re filled with devotional hymns, their 
psyches infused with submissive Christian attitudes. The missionary schools inculcated in 
the students Christian theology, cosmology, and western individualistic ethos, thereby 
dislocating their African identity, destroying their commitment to African collective or 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     4


--- PAGE 21 ---
communalistic ethos and erasing “their sense of patriotic responsib ility to Africa” (Ibid: 
161). 
Church services or attendance was compulsory in the school system. In the schools 
that I attended and taught, Wednesday mornings  were set aside for church service, in 
addition to daily morning devotion (particularly the Presbyterian Church) and Sunday 
church services. The Bible was used to urge the African to turn hi s cheek in the face of 
brutality and exploitation. It also drove home the message that everything would be good 
for the brutalized and exploited African in “heaven.” The African was associated with the 
biblical Ham, and the snake that tempted Eve. Both were used as favorite themes in some 
of the churches that I attended. Accordingly,  accepting Christ as the Savior was to save 
the African from the alleged curses on the descendants of Ham (King, Jr., 1967:72–73). 
The Christian God, Jesus, the saints, and all the apostles were presented as whites with 
blue eyes in the churches. African cosmology, religion, spirituality, medicine, music, 
dances and plastic arts were equated with th e workings of the devil. Consequently, the 
African converts had to make confessions for observing these to Christian priests in order 
to be forgiven. Based on personal experien ce, students were punished by flogging for 
having participated in or watched any of the alleged instruments of the devil. 
The creed of the Christian church in some parts of Africa was one of violent 
proselytization. Ani (1993:161)  discloses that the missionaries burned down the Bwiti 
chapels in Gabon, “where this syncretistic religious movement was seen as a possible 
nurturing ground for African nationalism. By this violent behavior, the role of the church 
as an aggressor in the military and imperialistic pursuit during colonialism is made 
transparent. As Ani (Ibid: 161) further point s out, the church’s “civilizing mission” was 
therefore a pretext. 
The Christian missionaries as partners in the colonial enterprise were also made 
manifest in their preaching of “the gospel of heaven and hell” (Ogun and Irele (1978:17), 
whereby sin and evil were equated with the African culture and personality. To enter 
heaven thus meant that the African converts had to abandon their entire cultural heritage 
and inadvertently adopt European cultural na tionalism. The Christian ideology was thus 
an “ideally fashioned weapon for the destruction of the self-image and value system of 
the African” (Ani: 162). In their proselytization, the missionaries convinced themselves 
that those they sought to c onvert had no religion. In setti ng new value systems in the 
colonies, the church stressed humility, docility  and acceptance of whatever misfortune 
fell on the African. 
As such, European cultural imperialism and Christian ideology were inseparable. The 
assumption of the missionaries was that if the African had to be a docile and loyal 
servant, his allegiance to Africa had to be broken. Total admiration for everything 
European had to be instilled in him, in addition to his unquesti onable obedience to the 
white man. Thus, through the Christian missionaries’ proselytization, the African 
neophytes, at the time of independence, had been reduced to objects acted upon by the 
European colonizers. 
Under the guise of their so-called “civilizing mission,” the European colonists and 
missionaries invented doctrines of African inferiority to rationalize colonialism and the 
holocaust of the enslavement, and to guide all European activities in Africa. These racist 
doctrines and colonial assimilationist policies resulted in “cultural isolation of the African 
past while they encouraged a deliberate sense of repudiation of the developed African 
Introduction     5


--- PAGE 22 ---
heritage,” Agovi (1990:1) explains. And as agencies responsible for the enforcement of 
the racist doctrines, the missionaries and their schools manipulated and shaped the 
cultural consciousness of the African on Western mores. 
The invention of the doctrines of African inferiority based on the reports supplied by 
the early European missionaries and travel ers were championed by racist European 
scholars. Prominent among such infamous European scholars were the eighteenth century 
Scottish philosopher, David Hume and the nineteenth century German philosopher, 
Georg Hegel. Hume writes: 
I am apt to suspect the Negroes and in general all the other species of men 
to be naturally inferior to whites. There never was a civilized nation of 
any other complexion than white or even an individual eminent either in 
action or speculation, no ingenious manufacturers among them, no art, no 
science. (1875:252) 
Referring to Africa, Hegel states: 
This is the land where men are children, a land lying beyond the daylight 
of self conscious history, and enveloped in the black color of night. At this 
point, let us forget Africa not to mention it again. Africa is no historical 
part of the world. (1956:99) 
The characteristics of such views are not only aggressively ethnocentric, but they are also 
Eurocentric, hegemonic and dangerous; they relegate African culture and African thought 
to the status of non-existence. In effect, He gel’s influence in sociology, history, political 
science, and philosophy, Asante point outs, remains prominent and insidious (Asante, 
1990:35). 
Regrettably, these doctrines, Nkrumah (1963:35) observes, came to be accepted by the 
European-trained African scholars. They had been conditioned to disbelieve in the 
importance of their culture; “they see only outdated religious practices, initiation 
symbols, ill-assorted and purely functional cult objects, folktales and proverbs, 
superstition and magic” (Sow, 1979: 11). Thus, having lost sel f-definition of his cultural 
personality and identity during colonialism, the African, especially the “educated” one, 
became culturally dislocated, and has since wa lked in the shadows of the white man, 
Julius Nyerere once postulated. Location, Asante (193:57) explains, is “a process of 
explaining how human beings come to make decisions about the external world which 
takes into consideration all the attitudes and behavior which constitutes psychological 
and cultural plaee.” It also refers to a “p lace from which all concepts, ideas, purposes, 
and vision radiate” (Ibid: 53). 
Nkrumah’s views on racism as well as th e Pan-African perspective can also be 
gleaned from his life experiences in the United States and England. His life in the United 
States was characterized by poverty. To co mbat this, he did odd jobs including selling 
fish in New York City and serving as a waiter on ships during vacations. In New York, 
he slept on benches, and in a subway train; in Philadelphia, he attempted sleeping in the 
train station and a public park with another African student. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     6


--- PAGE 23 ---
Everywhere he went in the United States, Nkrumah noticed racism and the effect of 
Jim Crow Law on the lives of African Ameri cans. On one occasion, he was refused a 
glass of water in a cafe in Baltimore because of his African features. “The place for you, 
man, is the spittoon outside,” the white waiter told him (Nkrumah, 1957:42). His survey 
work in the African Ameri can communities, which took him to six hundred homes in 
Philadelphia, became an eye-opener for him re garding the “racial problem in the United 
States” (Ibid: 42). 
In London, he was as short of money as he was in the United States. He used to go 
“round the dustbins of hotels and cafes to look for food. Sometimes, he found fish heads, 
which he took back to the office of the West African Students’ Union and made a fish 
stew for himself and friends” (Forward Ever, 1977:10). 
Shortly after Nkrumah’s arrival in London, he and George Padmore of Trinidad 
became joint secretaries of the organizing committee of the Fifth Pan-African Congress 
in Manchester in England, October 1945. He wrote a declaration to the colonial people of 
the world, which was accepted by the Congre ss. Later, Nkrumah was appointed General 
Secretary with W.E.B.Du Bo is as Chairman of the Working committee of the Pan-
African movement. Shortly afterwards, he initiated the establishment of a West African 
National Secretariat and became its first secret ary. The inner core of this secretariat 
formed “The Circle;” its goal was to “prepare  for revolutionary work in any part of the 
continent” (Ibid: 9). It was at this point in 1947 that he was invited to return to the Gold 
Coast to serve as General Secretary of the United Gold Coast Convention. 
Two political organizations, the Gold Coast League and Gold Coast National Party 
had merged and needed his kind of leadership to resolve the ethnic divisions between 
them. Subsequent to his arrival in Gold Coast, now the Republic of Ghana, civil 
disobedience activities erupted in the c ountry. His non-violen t “Positive Action” 
campaign in 1950 caused a major strike in the entire country, for which he was 
imprisoned; he was released after a land slide victory in the first national election in 
1951. Here, it is imperative to point out that it was while in prison, observing and 
listening to the other inmates that Nkrumah concluded, “No man is born a criminal;” and 
that, it is society which turns men into criminals “and the only way to change things is to 
change social conditions” (Nkrumah, 1957:132). 
By 1949, he had broken ranks with the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC) due to 
strategic and ideologi cal differences and formed his ow n political party, the Convention 
Peoples Party (CPP). He became Leader of G overnment Business, with the country still 
under colonial rule, in 1951. In 1953, in a ma jor speech titled, “The Motion of Destiny,” 
he demanded from the British government an ear ly date for Ghana’s full independence. 
In 1954, his political party won the second general election in the country. A third 
general election was held in 1956 and Nkrumah’s party, again, won a decisive victory in 
all the regions of Ghana. On March 6, 1957, Ghana became an independent country, with 
Nkrumah as the Prime Minister. On July 1, 1960, Nkrumah was elected President when 
the country became a republic. 
In 1945, Du Bois had invited Nkrumah to the membership of the international 
committee, which drew up the four resolutions on the colonial question for the United 
Nations; these resolutions became part of th e UN’s Charter on the Declaration of Human 
Rights. Also Kwame Nkrumah and Du Bois authored the two declarations at the fifth 
Pan-African Congress in Manchester, 1945. These declarations provided the ideological 
Introduction     7


--- PAGE 24 ---
framework and plan of action for the decol onization of the entire African continent. 
Hence, on the eve of Ghana’s political independence on March 6, 1957, Nkrumah 
enshrined the Pan-African project with a political will stating that, the independence of 
Ghana is meaningless unless it is linked up with the total liberation of Africa (Nkrumah, 
1937b:107). And indeed, Ghana provided logistical support, financial, material and 
human resources (incl uding civil service personnel and t eachers) to some of the newly 
independent African states and the liberation movements, from Algeria to South Africa. 
Jomo Kenyatta acknowledged this at a public meeting in London, 1959, when he stated 
that the independence of Ghana had marked the end of the European domination of 
Africa (Esebede, 1994:106). 
Nkrumah’s aphorism that “Seek ye first the political kingdom and all other things shall 
be added,” (Marais, 1972:204) should be unders tood as an indispensable step toward a 
total liberation of African people. Thus, without political independence, there was no 
channel the African could go through to transform the society. In order words, “if you are 
not free as a political agent, or if somebody  else is telling you what to do,” Awoonor 
explained in our interview on January 10, 1997,  “there is no way you can determine your 
own direction as a nation.” 
Immediately after Ghana’s independence in 1957, Nkrumah summoned the then seven 
independent African heads of state to a historic meeting that took place in Accra between 
April 15 and 22, 1958. In addition to re solutions on politics, economy and culture, 
Nkrumah urged the African leaders to assert their own African personality and to develop 
according to their own ways of life, custom s, traditions and cultures (Esebede: 165). In 
December 1958, an All-African Peoples Confer ence was also held in Ghana. Diasporan 
Africans and the would-be leaders of the liberation movements within the continent 
attended this conference. Then, a series of meetings which took place between 1959 and 
1963, amidst ideological differences, eventually culminated in the birth of the 
Organization of African Unity. Henceforth, the liberation of Africa from European 
colonialism, neocolonialism and imperialism, the dignity and agency of African people in 
global affairs, dominated Nkrumah’s life till his death in 1972. 
In 1960, Nkrumah saw the need for resurgen ce in African culture and personality and 
the creation of institutions that would give expressions to the intrinsic values of Africa. 
He saw these “as part and parcel of the socio-economic emergency of Ghana, and later 
on, of course, of the African continent,” Awoonor established in our interview on January 
8, 1997. Nkrumah had a grasp of the perpetual Euro-American ethnocentric hegemony 
that had marginalized the African, and reduced him to an object. As Asante (1988:700) 
notes, “Nkrumah, more than any of his contemporary political colleagues,” “wanted to 
see our views translated into political power.”  
In most of his work, Nkrumah criticized those who wrote about African history in 
which the African became an appendage of Europ ean history. He also pointed out that if 
such scholars paid any homage to Africa at all, they treated African experiences purely as 
“a dark long period of darkness for which our forefathers were redeemed by the 
benevolence of Europe,” Awoonor pointed out in my interview with him on January 8, 
1997. Nkrumah also addressed the dehumanizing nature of the European slave trade, 
colonial exploitation, institutional racism that had marginalized and pushed African 
people back, and the urgent need for the recovery of the African personality. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     8


--- PAGE 25 ---
It was against the backdrop of the alle ged African inferiority as well as the 
marginalization of the African that Nk rumah formulated his political philosophy, 
Consciencism—as an African-centered paradigm for the second phase of the African 
revolution. Various critics have misunders tood or devalued this concept; Diagne 
(1979:163) citing Marcien Towa, reinforces the idea that Nkrumah’s attempt to formulate 
“a modern African political philosophy in his Consciencism” was merely “a Marxist 
discussion of philosophy and a critique of Western thought.” Though some aspects of the 
analysis can be found in Marxist social thought, a materialist conception of society, 
Consciencism, was an attempt at fashioning out an African-centered socio-political 
philosophy to supplant the legacy of colonial social thought. What is more, it came to 
serve as a guide to Africa’s socio-economic transformation based on African ethics, 
humanist value and an egalitarian way of life, of which theater was to play a crucial role. 
Critical to Nkrumah’s political philosophy  was his cultural thought and policies, 
which were aimed at restoring African cultural heritage and integrating them into the new 
Africa. These policies were meant to bring a complete fusion between African culture 
and politics through which the African personality  could find its highe st expression. To 
this end, he saw theater as an intellectual forum whereby the vital values in African 
heritage and African personality could be examined and recovered to influence the socio-
economic aspirations of the new Africa. 
In his inaugural speech at the Institute of African Studies, October 25, 1965, Nkrumah 
insisted on the resuscitation of the glories and achievements of the African past, in order 
to inspire the new generation with a vision of  a healthier future. Th e speech spelt out his 
cultural thought as a guiding principle for all th e cultural institutions in Ghana. He also 
pointed out that African studies developed in Euro-American universities had largely 
been influenced by the concepts of colonial studies, which were still under the shadow of 
colonial ideologies and ment alities (1992:13). And the need to  combat them in terms of 
re-interpretation and a new assessment of the factors making up the African past was 
Nkrumah’s primary concern. This necessitated the formulation of a new paradigm in all 
intellectual and creative endeavors, such as African history, culture, language and the arts 
“in new African centered ways,” (Ibid: 14). 
Nkrumah, in his speech, “The African Genius,” clearly identified the School of Music 
and Drama, the performing arts wing of the Institute of African Studies, as the nucleus of 
the National Theater Movement. He urged the School to disseminate information on 
African arts through research and by developing new forms of dance, music, drama and 
creative writing that were consistent with the African traditions, and also expressed the 
ideas and aspirations of the people in post-independence Africa. Therefore, the cultural 
institutions and the National Theater Movement  in Ghana were to take cognizance of the 
impact of the transplanted European cultural nationalism on the African, especially his 
dislocation from his culture and history. It also meant that the implementation of 
Nkrumah’s politico-cultural polic ies was to take into account the insidious nature of 
colonial legacy in terms of European cultural ideology and theater tradition. Otherwise, 
colonial legacy, more than  anything else, could become  the major obstacle in the 
implementation of Kwame Nkrumah’s cultural policies, in the context of socio-economic 
transformation. And the political fulcrum that Nkrumah addressed was the intellectual 
and ideological recovery of the African person, from which everything else would flow. 
It also meant that, “without struggling to free ourselves from being appendage to the 
Introduction     9


--- PAGE 26 ---
global economic systems, we would remain enslaved,” Awoonor summed up in our 
interview. This holistic perspective is important to stress within the work, life, times and 
the politico-cultural philosophy of Kwame Nkrumah. 
Nkrumah lived a simple but disciplined and complex life. Before going to his office, 
he would get “up at four in the morning” and “exercise for the next 30 to 45 minutes, 
possibly five times around the track of Flagstaff house with his sorrowful security guards 
puffing reluctantly along with him.” This was followed by meditation, yoga, reading and 
answering correspondence…by 6:30 A.M.” Next, he would play tennis with friends like 
Dr. Shandorf, Sonny Proven cal, Genoveva, his elder s on Francis and his fiancée 
Margaret, who later became his wife (Kanu, 1982:72). 
Before breakfast he would dictate his letters and then get ready for his office. His diet 
was very simple and vigorous. He ate very little meat, preferring juice and vegetables. 
For his breakfast, he would “add hot water to his fresh pineapple juice.” He liked 
Ghanaian traditional food, especially those with palm soup. When ambassadors from 
other countries went “to present their credentials” to him, he would make a “pretence at 
drinking a sip of sherry and champagne.” He simply reviled alcohol (Ibid: 22). 
Because of his fear of the Western im perialists’ intrigues to undermine his 
determination to transform Ghana and un ite Africa, Kanu points out, Nkrumah became 
impatient. This, perhaps, drove him not to leave work unfinished; hence, he would work 
himself and others…into a state of exhaustion,  Kanu further evinces. Hard work was also 
motivated by his duty to fulfill his vision. For his recovery from fatigue, he would “go 
into an anteroom, and there do some yoga…standing on his head; then come upright.” 
This was followed by “a quick shower” and then returns to office within ten minutes to 
continue his work (Ibid: 29), Nkrumah had several days in every “month during which he 
fasted.” Additionally, he set aside days fo r meditation, which according to him was to 
discipline and invigorate his mind and body strongly. As to why he “was hurrying too 
fast for his people,” Nkrumah would say, “I must go on, Time is against me” (Ibid: 20), 
Hence, Nkrumah, Kanu intimates, “became a di fficult man to get away from his work.” 
And “it became the be-all and end-all of ev erything,” sometimes spending eighteen to 
twenty hours a day in office with his staff (Ibid: 44). 
Aside from all the hard work, Nkrumah love d conversation, music, literature, art, 
science, philosophy and politics. He also adored children, and derived pleasure from 
mingling with the children and became a father figure to all the children in the school he 
set up on the grounds of the Flagstaff House. “He was the real family man,” and “his 
children were something special to him,” Kanu (Ibid: 64–65) elucidates. Furthermore, 
Nkrumah “was an extremely polite ma n, honouring all his women friends and 
acquaintances, however tiring the practice might have been” (Ibid: 59–60). Besides, he 
had adoration for gardening (Ibid: 65). 
Nkrumah’s return to the vanguard of the liberation of Ghana and Africa, after twelve 
years of intellectual and political education abroad, was marked with personal trials and 
sacrifices, including several attempted assassination on his life. While in prison with the 
rest of the “Big Six” for Nii Kwabena Bonne’s nationwide boycott campaign, the ex-
servicemen’s peaceful demonstration, and th e subsequent uprising,  his colleagues (the 
Big Six) blamed him for the people’s unrest. They went to the extent of blaming “Ako 
Adjei for his part in recommending” Nkrumah to the group (Nkrumah 1957:82). He was 
singled out and rearrested for suspicious left wing leanings; while being taken away he 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     10


--- PAGE 27 ---
came “face to face with a squad of uniform police each pointing a gun at” him (Ibid: 81). 
Nkrumah’s declaration of Non-Violent Positive Action and civil disobedience, strikes, 
boycotts and non-cooperation with the Britis h colonial government  on January 8, 1950 
was met with strong condemnation and charges by three forces. First, he was summoned 
to appear before the Ga Sate Council, with two ex-members of the U.G.C.C.’s Working 
Committee in attendance, to explain his action. Second, the Eurocentric kings, led by Sir 
Tsibu Darko and Nana Ofori Attah II, summoned him to Dodowa and subjected him to 
abuses “couched in such undignified language” (Ibid: 113), in the manner of a 
paternalistic reprimand. Third, the British Colonial government a rrested him on January 
22, 1950 for the Positive Action campaign agains t British colonial rule; he served one 
year in prison out of the three years sentence. 
Systematic assassination attempts on his life as well as terrorism became the language 
of his political opponents. In his response to Nkrumah’s declaration of Positive Action, 
Dr. J.B.Danquah had this to say: 
It is obvious that the law, as far as Kwame Nkrumah is concerned, must 
go according to him. In my opi nion that those who go against 
constitutional authority must expect to pay it with their neck. (Ibid: 120) 
Eventually, Danquah’s statement foreshadowed the most violent attacks on any president 
and members of his youth movement in the annals of Ghana. While Nkrumah was resting 
and working from his house with his secretary and others because of a terrible cold on the 
evening of November 10, 1955, the house was bombed. Between 1955 and 1958 there 
were several more assassination attempts on his life. Also, there was another plan to 
shoot him at the airport, as he was about to depart for a state visit to India (Forward Ever, 
1977:47–48). On July 7, 1961, two bombs exploded in Accra, one wrecking Nkrumah’s 
statue in front of the Parliament House (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah, 1995:ix). 
The most dreadful of all the attempts on Nk rumah’s life was the one that occurred at 
Kulungugu on August 1, 1962. Nkrumah was returning form a state visit to Upper Volta, 
now Burkina Faso, and had got out from his car to speak to the school children among the 
crowd who had gathered to greet him, when a bomb contained in a bouquet carried to 
him by a schoolgirl e xploded. It “killed several and in jured many others.” Nkrumah 
sustained serious injury” (Ibid: ix). The victims’ bodies bled from cuts caused by the 
splinters from the bomb. Nkrumah was rushed to the nearest hospital for surgery. In the 
process, Nkrumah refused to have any device to deaden his pain while the operation went 
on (Forward Ever: 47). 
In August and September 1961, there we re two separate bomb explo sions on 
Nkrumah’s life. On September 9, 1962, another bomb exploded near the “Flagstaff 
House, the official residence of the President, when the Ghana Young Pioneers Orchestra 
Band was entertaining the audience to modern Ghanaian Music” (Tetteh, 1999:104). This 
explosion killed one person and injured others. On September 18, 1962, two bombs again 
went off in Accra killing and injuring several people. One of these bomb blasts occurred 
in Lucas House in Accra, wher e nine children fell dead on the spot as their intestines 
gushed out of their bodies (Ibid: 104). This was followed by another bomb explosion on 
September 22, 1962. Consequently, a state of emergency on Accra and Tema with dusk 
to dawn curfew was declared. 
Introduction     11


--- PAGE 28 ---
Again, another bomb exploded on January 23, 1963 at a CPP rally in Accra Sports 
Stadium shortly after President Nkrumah had left the scene. This explosion killed over 
twenty people and more than four hundred pe ople were injured; among the victims were 
children of the Young Pioneers movement (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah: ixi). The 
question is, why the repeated bomb throwing at the Ghana Young Pioneers? In the words 
of Tetteh, the anti-Nkrumah forces saw in the Young Pioneers movement “the source of 
permanent power if allowed to last for at least one generation or 35 years” (Tetteh: 93). 
Having failed in their attempts to assassinate Nkrumah through the bomb blasts, the 
Opposition, including senior po lice officers, posted a po lice officer Seth Ametewe on 
guard duty at the Flagstaff House on January 1, 1964, to shoot him. Nkrumah recounts 
the incidence as follows: 
It was at 1 P.M. in the garden of the Flagstaff House. I was leaving the 
office to go for lunch when four shots were fired at me by one of the 
policemen on guard duty. He was no marksman, though his fifth shot 
succeeded in killing Salifu Dagarti, a loyal security officer who had run 
towards the would-be assassin as soon as he spotted him among the trees. 
The policeman then rushed at me, trying to hit me with his rifle butt. I 
wrestled with him and managed to throw him to the ground and to hold 
him there on his back until help came, but not before he had bitten me on 
the neck. (Nkrumah, 1968:41) 
Eventually, the repeated assassination attempts on his life caused Nkrumah to remain 
“alone within himself” (Kanu: 40). 
After Nkrumah’s overthrow, many in the opposition party admitted having been 
involved in the assassination attempts on his life. During the Excemption Committee’s 
hearings, Obetsebi Lamptey’s name came out as having been involved in organizing 
several bomb explosions which caused “the d eath of thirty innocent people and seriously 
injured many others” (Ibid: 128). Prior to these acts of terrorism, there had been an 
abortive coup on November 20, 1958, carried out by Major Awhaitey; the coup was 
planned by R.R.Amponsah, (who later becam e a Minister of Trade in Busia’s 
government), and others in the opposition party, to seize Nkrumah and certain members 
of his cabinet.  
In addition to internal politics driving the assassination attempts on Nkrumah’s life, 
there is well-documented evidence that his Pa n-African crusade aroused consternation in 
the international political order as well, specifically in the West. Agyeman attests to this 
when he writes: 
There is nothing new about assaults on Pan-Africanism. African leaders 
from Marcus Garvey through Patrice Lumumba to Kwame Nkrumah were 
systematically sought out and victimized precisely for reasons of their 
commitment to the cause of Pan-Africanism. Garvey was jailed in the 
United States on a trumpeted-up charge of mail fraud exactly when his 
Back-to-Africa movement was gathering steam; nothing about Lumumba 
caused greater consternation in the West and triggered Eisenhower’s order 
for his assassination than his accord with Nkrumah to combine their two 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     12


--- PAGE 29 ---
countries of the Congo…and Ghana into a nucleus of a Union of African 
States; and Nkrumah’s overthrow by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA) came in the wake of a NAT O meeting that his Pan-African 
exertions in such places as the Congo and within such structure as the All-
African Trade Union Federation (AAT UF) threatened western interest. 
(Agyeman, 1997:3) 
This revelation dismisses as speculative the accusation that Nkrumah was overthrown 
because of his absence from Gh ana to become a peacemaker in Vietnam. Nkrumah, as 
Kanu (1982:41) points out, “knew that he was always in danger.” …which could “have 
paralyzed the faculty of any man.” On the contrary, “Nkrumah’s personality was only 
whetted by the knowledge of imminent danger.” In this case, the overthrow of his 
government was only a matter of time. 
The hideous thing after the CIA inspired coup, was the attempt by the coup makers to 
get his eighty years old “mother to say that Nkrumah was not her son,” at gun point. She 
was dragged to a Commission of Inquiry and questioned whether Nkrumah was her real 
son. Though almost blind, she refused to tell such a lie; instead, she fearlessly told them 
she would stay alive to see her son return to her in Ghana (Ibid: 54). Another crude and 
immoral campaign to disgrace Nkrumah was the dragging of his niece, a high school 
student at the time, to the Commission to be “quizzed as to the real relationship between 
her and Nkrumah” (Awoonor: 212). Therefore, Birmingham’s statement that Nkrumah’s 
father was unknown and “was probably a Liberian” (1998:10) was part of the rumors that 
were said about him during and after the anti-colonial struggle. 
Nkrumah as a victim of iniquitous lies, prior to the CIA insp ired military coup in 
1966, is noticeable when Komla Gbedemah, a fo rmer leading member of the CPP, told 
the CIA agents in London and Lome “that Nkrumah had murdered several of his 
ministers…and was on the brink of ‘popular collapse’” (Mahoney, 1983:184). Joining the 
chorus of falsifiers was Professor K.A.Busia (then in Lome and other exile staging 
grounds) who provided a testimony to US senate  subcommittee that “Ghana is the center 
for subversive Communist activities in West Africa” (Ibid: 185). 
The greatness of a historical personality s hould not be measured by his achievements 
in an environment of peace, order and a bundances; it should be measured against the 
grave difficulties in which the achievements were made. Kwame Nkrumah’s unparalleled 
socio-economic, educational, industrial, scientific, technological, agricultural and cultural 
accomplishments in the post-co lonial Ghana, as well as his unmatched contribution 
towards the African liberation struggle, was carried out in the environment of systematic 
internal and external destabilizing campaigns, terrorism, death threats on his life, external 
economic sabotage and the absence of decolonized African thinkers and brainpower. As 
Agyeman concludes, Nkrumah was “Africa’s most champion of political integration” 
(1997:22). In Genoveva Kanu’s summation, 
Kwame Nkrumah was never a god; he was an astute politician, an 
indefatigable leader, an able statesman; above all, he was human, he was a 
man with a dream, a man with vision for Africa-a great man. (Kanu: 143) 
Introduction     13


--- PAGE 30 ---
But, to understand the energy of his ideas and thoughts, “we must return him to the 
context of global history of which he was a keen student of the power play of forces,” 
Awoonor urged in our interview on January 8, 1997. In 1954, The World Veterans 
Federation awarded its 1954 World Peace Prize to Nkrumah. He also received Lenin 
Peace Prize for 1961. The choosing of Nk rumah in December 1999 by the African 
listeners of the British Broadcasting Corpor ation as Africa’s “Man of the Millennium” 
(Poe, 2002:15) affirms his greatness. Yet, operating from personal vendetta, a constricted 
black cultural nationalism and a Eurocentric paradigm, most of his critics ignore and 
overlook these facts in their discourse on Kwame Nkrumah and his politico-cultural 
philosophy and policies.  
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     14


--- PAGE 31 ---



--- PAGE 32 ---
Chapter Two  
Critical Discourse on Kwame Nkrumah’s Life 
and Works 
It is common knowledge that Kwame Nkrumah was one of the world’s historical 
personalities in the twentieth century. He has been titled, among other things, the “Black 
Star” (Davidson 1973) and the “pride of  Africa” (Cudjoe, 1995:322). In Cabral’s 
estimation, he was “one of the greatest men mankind has seen this century” (1980:114). 
James (1977:63–64) cites him as one of the four men including Lenin, Gandhi and Mao 
Tse-Tung “who have substantially altered the shape and direction of world civilization in 
the last fifty years of” the twentieth century . “He was,” James continues, “one of the 
greatest leaders of African struggles whom Africa has produced” (1996:573). 
A study on Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultura l thought is very difficult to locate. 
Similarly, I have not come across any study on the correlation between his politico-
cultural thought and cultural policies or cultu ral institutions, specifically his vision of 
African personality and its restoration thr ough a theater movement. The few fragmented 
literature of the era tends to play dow n the place of culture in socio-economic 
transformation in Nkrumah’s Ghana. 
In fact, it will be difficult to understand Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought [without] 
linking it with his political and economic id eas. In other words, his politico-cultural 
thought is inextricably linked to his Pan-African political ag enda. As this study shows, 
Nkrumah’s socio-economic theory was rooted in African culture, namely African ethics, 
humanism and an egalitarian way of life. A holistic approach is, therefore, necessary for a 
fair assessment of the implications of his politico-cultural thought, 
Writing in Kwame Nkrumah: A Study of His In tellectual Development In The United 
States 1935–45,  Nelson states that themes in Nkrumah’s writings were influenced by 
Western thoughts in general and United States in particular . They included the academic 
segment and his life experiences (Ibid: 5). At Lincoln University, he won various prizes; 
his fellow students voted him the “most outstanding” among them. His paper on “Labor 
Problems in Africa” won him the “Robert Fl eming Labree Memorial prize in Social 
Science” (Ibid: 68). He was also cited for Robert Nassau Prize for being the best 
candidate in his class at the theological department. Delivering the graduation oration 
class of 1939, Nkrumah chose for his topic, “Ethiopia Shall Stretch Forth Her hand Unto 
God” (Ibid: 71–72). 
At the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Selwyn Robert’s criticism of United States 
institutions of learning impacted Nkrumah’s thinking and inspired him with a concept of 
purpose and method of theoretical criticism of  education. The former believed that 
“education should prepare the masses for their various confrontation in society,” Nelson 
(Ibid: 82) writes. It was at the College of Education that Nkrumah was seriously exposed 
to the philosophy of Marx, Hegel, Lenin and Engels. For instance, in his response to


--- PAGE 33 ---
Hegel’s philosophy, Nkrumah “wrote to Dr. B unche of his efforts to construct a rival 
system” of thought and his plan for the future of Africa (Ibid: 82–83). 
The re-emergence of Garvey and the hardsh ips of the depression years formed the 
social and intellectual fabric of the society of Philadelphia, where Nkrumah spent most of 
his time. His socio-historical experiences in the United States were based on his 
interaction with the American social environm ent. It was this direct experience, formal 
and informal education, which became a ma jor factor shaping Nkrumah’s intellectual 
foundation and forming the basis of his conceptual views of colonialism, socialist 
development and African unity. Thus, these external environmental factors and his early 
upbringing in Ghana informed “his holistic outlook on life” (Ibid: 110 and 113). 
Nelson (Ibid: 243) posits that Nkrumah’s Philosophical Consciencism regards 
socialism with African unity as the definition of “desirable society in Africa.” It also 
provides the theoretical basis for the concep t of socialism inclusive of African unity. 
Consciencism becomes a rediscovery, in mode rn terms, “of that communalism which is 
the basis of traditional African society so that African unity is definitely intertwined in an 
organic sense with Nkrumah’s concept of socialism” (Ibid: 241). It follows that 
communalism manifests itself in African un ity and “responsibility of many for one;” 
thus, socialism “can and is the defense of the principles of communalism in a modern 
setting” (Ibid: 241), with Philosophical Consciencism serving as the intellectual 
instrument of socialism in Africa. 
Writing in Kwame Nkrumah: The years Abroad 1935–1947,  Sherwood (1996:13), 
states that the political activities of the early African nationalists and anti-colonial 
movements in Ghana informed Nkrumah’s nationalist thought before his departure to the 
United States. He took with him a legacy of intellectual and political ferment from 
Kobina Sekyi, S.R. Wood, I.T.A.Wallace Johnson, Nnamdi Azikiwe and Kwegyr Aggrey 
(Ibid: 25). Other legacies were the political agitation movements of the Aborigine Rights 
Protection Society, the Nati onal Congress of British West Africa, The African Academy 
at Sekondi and the cocoa farmers holdup, all occurring during the decades of youthful 
Kwame Nkrumah (Ibid: 13–14). 
The African Academy, for instance, aimed at challenging Europe’s evaluation of its 
superiority. At its inaugural meeting on July 27, 1930, E.T Tackie emphasized that: 
It is no longer possible to regard Western Civilization as a just and 
permanent testimonial to the superi ority of a Colour, Race, Nation, a 
Governor or a Religion… For who does not know that some of the 
eminent fathers and Writers of Primitive Church, Tertulian Augustine (the 
Bishop of Hippo), Clemens, Alxeandrinus, Cyril were Africans?…that 
Solon, Plato, Pythagoras and others of the Master spirits of ancient Greece 
performed pilgrimages to Africa in search of knowledge? (Ibid: 16) 
Sherwood further indicates that the influences that were added to this legacy during 
Nkrumah’s twelve years in United States and Britain resulted from his involvement in 
several political and social activities in Philadelphia, New York City and his university 
education, especially at the University of Pennsylvania (Ibid: 16). 
Three major themes appeared in all of Nkrumah’s speeches to students, his public 
speeches, church sermons, namely immediate independence of Africa, creation of United 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     17


--- PAGE 34 ---
States of Africa and socialism. Speaking to undergraduate students at Howard University 
in February 1943, Nkrumah “made a fervent plea for the inimediate independence of 
Afriea” (Ibid: 80). He also advocated for the creation of “a commonwealth of all nations, 
that all may be free, [would] ensure worl d peace…this is a people’s war of national 
liberation,” Nkrumah further declared. Thus, “peace cannot be expected if half are freed 
and half are enslaved. Africa of yesterday is gone forever. The youth of today will build a 
new Africa as there are already many united youth movements under the leadership of 
natives trained in the US.” Hence, “we must begin with Federation of States of West 
Africa,” Sherwood cites from the “The Afro-American” (Ibid: 80). 
In his cautionary note, Dr. Morrow, Nkrumah’s doctoral dissertation advisor at the 
University of Pennsylvania, informed Dr. Flowers that “No matter what a paper was 
supposed to be on, Nkrumah always twisted it around to write on Africa freedom and 
anti-colonial struggle. Otherwise, his pape rs were excellent. He could have been a 
brilliant scholar if he’d stuck to the topic” (Ibid: 63). A manifestation of his commitment 
to African liberation is contained in a letter he wrote to Dr Morrow suggesting “The 
Philosophy of Imperialism, with Special Reference to Africa” as his doctoral degree 
dissertation. Nkrumah rationalized the topic he had suggested by stating that “for many 
years, I have accumulated material to that e ffect, and consequently should like to make a 
more detailed study of it with reference to the major thought-trends of Europe in the 19th 
and 20th century” (Ibid: 63). 
Though he had attended meetings and participated in conventions of Marcus Garvey’s 
UNIA and West Indies National Council in New York, Nkrumah chose Marxist socialism 
as his guiding light (Ibid: 81). “Ray Logan thought that the Philosophy of Marx and 
Lenin,” Sherwood quotes, “impressed Nkrumah as being the best adaptable to the 
solution of colonialism.” Nkrumah, thus, “supported the concept of West African unity as 
a prelude to a Pan-African Movement for the liberation of the whole continent” (Ibid: 
83). 
Another manifestation of Nkrumah’s uncompromising stand on African liberation, 
based in an interview Dabu Gizenga had w ith Professor Newton Hill in 1974, concerns 
the part of a Nubian slave in a play he relu ctantly accepted to act. “He read the part with 
distaste as the passages selected by Professor Hill;” but he happily agreed to play the part 
when he discovered that, at the end of the play, the Nubian took over the ship after a 
mutiny (Ibid: 33). 
Sherwood’s work provides new and rare bibliographical materials on the social, 
political and private life of Nkrumah. However,  she fails to establish the place of this 
legacy of African nationalism that he took with him to the United states and what was 
added abroad, in Kwame Nkrumah’s major speeches and writings on political ideology, 
cultural thought and African personality. Th e book contains some  presumptuous and 
misleading statements. According to her, Nkrumah never acknowledged the legacy of 
Sekyi, Wood, Wallace Johnson, Azikiwe, except Aggrey; “it was there,” she says, “it is 
what formed him and must have shaped hi s thinking about the future of Africa” (Ibid: 
25). She also dismisses as romanticizing th e statement of Ms. Jean Hutson, a retired 
curator of Schomburg library, that Nkrumah “u sed to smell of fish,” on those days he 
visited the library.” Miss Hutson who only worked  at the library for a very few weeks in 
1936,” she writes, “it is possible that both informants, undoubtedly having read 
Nkrumah’s autobiography, have conflated and somewhat romanticized their memories of 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     18


--- PAGE 35 ---
those long-ago days.” Thus, while claiming to be filling in the gaps Nkrumah was unable 
to recollect in his autobiography, in the midst of the anti-colonial struggle in Gold Coast, 
Sherwood appears to be a guardian of morals. 
The fact is that Nkrumah himself acknowledged the legacy of those early African 
nationalists on his political life. In 1932, he accredited S.R. Wood, th e then Secretary of 
the National Congress of British West Africa as the one “who introduced me to politics.” 
According to Nkrumah (1957:21), “Wood knew more about Gold Coast history than any 
other person I have ever met and we had a long conversation together.” He 
wholeheartedly supported Nkrumah’s idea of furthering his education in the United 
States and “wrote me a testimonial, which I still posses, to help me gain admission to 
Lincoln University” (Ibid: 21). 
Sherwood was not mindful of the fact that  it was while Nkrumah was teaching at the 
Roman Catholic Seminary at Amissano, in 1934, and was contemplating on becoming a 
member of Jesuit Order, that “articles in The African Morning Post” edited by Namdi 
Azikiwe revived his African nationalism. Af ter hearing Azikiwe’s speech and meeting 
him in Accra that Nkrumah became “grea tly impressed by him” and was “more 
determined than ever to go to America” (Ibid: 22). Wallace Johnson might have written 
some of the articles. Nkrumah, however , accredited, “Johnson as the first Labour 
organizer in West Africa by forming the Youth League” (Ibid: 22). What we need to bear 
in mind is that Nkrumah was at the time an ordinary African young man trying to define 
his mission in life with his Teacher’s Certifi cation. And it is his prerogative to identify 
those personalities, as indicated in his autobiography, which impacted his life immensely 
at the time. 
In his “Kwame Nkrumah’s Ideology,” Afari-Gyan (1991:167) sees Nkrumah’s 
response to colonialism purely from an economic standpoint. Nkrumah’s political 
ideology, he argues “must be seen as a cons equence of colonialism” and its attendant 
capitalist economic exploitation. Nkrumah, he notes, reiterated the Le ninist position that 
colonialism resulted “from the need for raw ma terials to feed European industries.” The 
colonialist exploited, oppressed, circumscribed the human rights of the colonized African 
people and treated them “as inferiors in practically all aspects of life” (Ibid: 167). 
Consequently, the African people, Afari-Gyan  continues, “came to be ridden with fear 
and apathy, and to adore things associated with the colonial masters” (Ibid: 168). 
Accordingly, at the time of independence, the colonialists had “left behind immense 
obstacle to” socio-economic development. Aside from the lack of physical and social 
infrastructures for development, “the peopl e were ei-ther uneducated or had been mis-
educated” (Ibid: 168). Hence, Nkrumah, Afari-Gyan elucidates, sought to diversify the 
country’s economy in order to promote indus trial growth and expand its educational 
system. But above all was the challenge to restore the people’s self-confidence, to 
develop a personality of their own, to “seize the initiative and become creative pioneers 
in their country’s development,” that Nkrumah set as his ultimate goal. 
Nkrumah, Afari-Gyan (Ibid: 169) further indicates, did not only reject capitalism, but 
he also cautioned against an uncritical adoption of socialism pursued elsewhere. “There is 
only one socialism, and that is scientific socialism;” there are different paths to it 
“dictated by the specific circumstance and condition of a particular country at a given 
definite historical period,” he quotes Nkrumah. Socialism in Nkrumah’s view was not to 
recapture its structure, but the communal spirit in traditional A frican society. And 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     19


--- PAGE 36 ---
Philosophical Consciencism was intended to give a theoretical basis for his socialist 
ideology for a continental African government. It follows that in Nkrumah’s assessment, 
the threat of the forces of neocolonialism was “too strong for any one nation to defeat 
alone” [Ibid: 169]. 
The danger in limiting Nkrumah’s political ph ilosophy to the analysis of colonial 
capitalist exploitation, as Afari-Gyan discusses, can result in limiting the solutions to 
colonial legacies to what Lenin once describes as “economism.” Nkrumah recognized 
racism as the critical factor of the submergence of African personality. Racism, he 
argues, “is intricately linked with class struggle; the removal of one ensures the removal 
of the other” (1970:27). Like Cabral, Nkrumah understood the importance of culture in 
combating colonialism. 
John Henrik Clarke’s commentary on Kwame  Nkrumah’s political career can simply 
be described uncorroborated in terms of substance and facts of history. Besides its 
distortion of Ghana’s history between 1482 and Ghana’s attainment of political 
independence under Nkrumah in 1957, it turn s Ghana’s political history upside-down. 
First, his claim that “the Go lden Stool of the Asante” is “equivalent to the Ark of the 
Covenant to Africans of Ghana” (Clarke, 1991:79) results from his lack of knowledge as 
regards the ethnic composition in Ghana, specifically the bitter rivalry between the 
Asante kingdom and several other Akan kingdoms as well as centuries old disputes with 
other ethnic groups in the country. 
The Fante, from which Casely-Hayford hailed, collaborated with the British regarding 
the capture and exile of the Asante’s King Prempeh, because of the latter’s wars of 
expansionism. The Fante also  fought with the British in the Yaa Asantewa’s War of 
1900. It is therefore a serious misrepresentation of facts when Clarke asserts that Casely-
Hayford, a Fante, “converted the demand for the return of their [Asante] royalty into a 
demand for their independence.” 
Secondly, Clarke’s statement that, “from the beginning of European” encroachment, 
“as reflected in King Asa’s [Ansa] speech to the Portuguese in 1482, the indigenous 
rulers of this country suspected foreign rule and found different ways to fight against it 
through nearly 500 years of its presence, from 1481 to 1957,” is not only an exaggeration, 
but it also does not measure up to the facts of history. For instance, on July 25, 1503, the 
paramount king “of Efutu and a thousand others were baptized on Santiago Hill,” outside 
King Kwamina Ansa’s township, Elmina (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah, 1995:xx). In fact, 
King Ansa’s people, the Fantes, were the first in today’s Ghana to totally embrace Euro-
Christian religion and, Western traditions and cultural values. The most infamous Elmina 
Castle, where many African captives were inhumanly kept before the middle passage, 
was situated on King Ansa’s ground. Also, the exiled Asante King Prempeh was kept in 
this infamous castle for three years before his deportation to Gambia and Seychelles 
Island respectively. 
Third, Queen Yaa Asantewa was not the queen of Asante; she was the queen of 
Edweso, and thus could not be a relative of King Prempeh as Clarke claims (1996:79). 
The main Akan adversaries of the Asante after 1700 were the Brong (Bono), Fante, 
Dwaben (founding member of the Asante union) and Akyem. For instance, the Akyem 
were the first to defeat the Asante in the War of 1717, during which the latter’s king, Osei 
Tutu, was captured and beheaded by the former (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah: xxiv). It 
must be pointed out that the grounds for the Yaa Asantewa war of 1900 included, inter 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     20


--- PAGE 37 ---
alia, the return of the Asante’s exiled king, Prempeh [and] the resumption of the 
European slave trade (Ibid: xlv). 
The National Congress of British West Afri ca was formed by Casely-Hayford in 
March 1920 (Timothy, 1963, 154) at a time when  Asante was not a part of the British 
Gold Coast Colony. Also, Casely-Hayford could not have passed on the “mantle of 
responsibility” “to Joseph Danquah” as Clar ke further (1991:80)  claims. Casely-
Hayford’s African-centered vision of Pan-African nationalism, race pride, and the return 
to and the study of African civilization were diametrically opposed to those of Danquah. 
The fact is, it was Nkrumah who actually built on Casely-Hayford’s vision and ideas and 
made several references to the them in his political speeches and writings. 
Clarke further alleges that Danquah, as an  old schoolmaster of Nkrumah, was “now 
among the opposition, did not oppose the indepe ndence of Ghana, but he opposed some 
of the radical methods being used by Nkrumah” to bring about Ghana’s independence 
(Clarke: 80). In the first place, Dr. Jose ph B.Danquah was a British trained lawyer who 
returned to the Gold Coast in 1931 to practice law in a Eurocentric judicial system. He 
was neither a school teacher nor a headmast er of any school. Nkrumah on the other hand 
was a “Head Teacher of the Elmina Catholic  School from the early part of 1931” for a 
year, and “then transferred to take charge of the Catholic Junior School in Axim” 
(Timothy: 21). Therefore, how could Danqua h have become Nkrumah’s teacher, or 
headmaster, as stressed by Clarke? Second, with the arrest of Nkrumah by the British 
Colonial government for sed ition in respect of the Positive Action campaign in 1950, 
Danquah gladly said that “the wolf had been driven away” (Birmingham: 34). But 
because Nkrumah was in touch with the aspi rations and the revolu tionary zeal of the 
masses, the CPP was flocked with the common people enrolling in it to demand for his 
release from prison in order to lead them to political freedom. 
Clarke’s other statements, for example, that Danquah’s The Akan Doctrine of God and 
Obligation in Akan Society …were an intellectual preface to  Ghanaian independence and 
after…” and that Danquah “was considered th e country’s intellect was unfortunate on the 
eve of independence” (Clarke: 80) are mi sinformed. The record shows Danquah’s The 
Akan Doctrine of God  and Akan’s Laws and Customs  and Akim Constitution,  had no 
impact on the independence movement. The first two books discuss Akan cosmogony 
and modus operandi in the Akan society (McFarland and Owusu-Ansah: 34). As a multi-
ethnic society, these Akan phenomena and the Akim (Akyem) Constitution could not 
have served as a preamble to Ghana’s independence. Danquah and his Western-educated 
and elitist comrades as well as their pro-We stern political and economic ideas were the 
basis for the enmity between them and Nkrumah. The UGCC, led by Dr. J.B.Danquah, 
was a party of elitist professional lawyers, intellectuals, merchants, wealthy cocoa 
farmers and some conservative Chiefs 1 (K rafona, 1986:24). A manifestation of their 
elitism is represented by Danquah’s distaste and contempt for “thi s thing of masses,” 
whom he viewed as “only individuals” and dismissed their aspirations, as emotions 
(Wright, 1954:220). It needs to be pointed out that Danquah was a member of the then 
privileged Provincial Members of the Colonial Legislative Council in 1946, made up of 
two intellectuals and wealthy “Chiefs” (Reindorf, 1966:346). 
But according to Clarke, J.B. “Danquah was an African traditionalist” while Nkrumah 
“seemed to have forgotten these traditions,… some of his values and political ideology 
was European based” (Clarke: 82). In the first place, Danquah was a devoured Christian 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     21


--- PAGE 38 ---
and was not a traditionalist in terms of his po litical philosophy and life style. As Thomas 
Hodgkin indicated, the political ancestor of Danquah’s “UGCC are Lorke and Burke” of 
Europe (Bankole, 1963:66), The underlying political econom ic theory and political 
ideology UGCC was based on Adam Smith’s theories of laissez-faire free enterprise, the 
same European theories that were the bases of African colonization. Nkrumah’s political 
ideology, as the subsequent chapters will unfold, was rooted in African humanist values 
and an egalitarian way of life. 
Nkrumah’s belief in the African tradition was manifested in the libation he performed 
at the tomb of his real former teacher at Achimota College in Ghana, Dr. Aggrey, at 
Salisbury, North Carolina in 1943. As a consequence, the Dean of Theological Seminary 
at Lincoln University wrote a stern letter to Nkrumah expressing his utter surprise at his 
former student’s participation in a non-Christian rite (Timothy, 1963:33). Another 
example was the ritual ceremony after Nkru mah’s release from prison on February 2, 
1951; “a sheep was sacrificed to cleanse” Nkrumah’s “feet after the contamination of 
prison, at the Accra arena” (Birmingham, 1998:36). In fact, it was Nkrumah who 
introduced African drumming, dancing, and libation at public functions, affirming 
clothing, aesthetics, motifs and ceremonies into Ghana’s body politic. 
In my small town of Ettokrom, twelve miles away from Danquah’s hometown, the 
people including cocoa farmers, peasants, agricultural laborers and some of the 
traditional rulers in his constituency, saw him as a black man hidden in white mask.” In 
fact, my grandfather, the chief farmer in our village, admonished us little children in 1956 
for going to the Odikro’s palace to listen to  Danquah, whom he described as “a black-
white man, who boasts of his eloquence in the white man’s language and wears suits 
whenever he visits the area.” In fact , the Odikro’s Okyeame proudly introduced 
J.B.Danquah to us children, and two adults present, as a highly British-educated black 
man “who speaks brofo (English language) for the white man to nod his head.” This 
perhaps explains why he (Danquah) as th e leader of the Opposition did not win the 
national elections of 1954 a nd 1956 in his own Abuakwa constituency. But Nkrumah on 
the other hand, did not go to his Nzima c onstituency, about 300 miles away from Accra, 
but stood for elections in Accra New Town and won them all. 
In fact, Clarke’s commentary on Kwame Nkru mah is so strewn with fallacies and 
misinformation that he would accuse Nkrumah for attempting “to participate in the unity 
of African before he could achieve unity in Ghana” (Clarke: 82). Nkrumah inherited four 
territories loosely joined together as the Gold Coast in 1951. From this time on, Nkrumah 
strengthened his nationwide political party to defeat the forces of separatism and 
devolution, which were launched against the CPP’s nationalist agenda. It was therefore 
not surprising when Nkrumah successfully  became President “in a unified nation 
complete with political freedom” (Birmi ngham, 1990:37–38). Yet, Clarke ignores the 
fact that, it was Danquah’s parochial NLM and the ethnic-based Northern People’s Party 
(NPP) which, after loosing the election of 1956, “sent a resolution to the secretary for 
Colonies” in Britain “demanding separate independence for Asante and the Northern” 
(McFarland and Owusu-Ansah: Ixiii). What is  more, Danquah’s own wife, Mabel Dove 
Danquah worked with Nkrumah on the Evening News,  and remained a supporter of 
Kwame Nkrumah. 
Some background information regarding Danquah’s arguments against the Local 
Government Ordinance of 1951 as well as his advocacy for federalism would be useful in 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     22


--- PAGE 39 ---
the foregoing discourse. First, Danquah was a member of the Kyebi dynasty, the center of 
colonial oppression in the three Akyem st ates. His opposition to the local government 
ordinance thus served the interest of his br other, Nana Ofori Atta II, the Omanhene of 
Akyem Abuakwa. During the constitutional debate, Ofori Atta II himself argued for a 
military power in favor of his status as Omanhene (Paramount King) of Akyem Abuakwa 
as opposed to “a judicial origin of the Ak im state” (Simensen, 1975:26). His predecesor, 
Sir Ofori Atta I served in the Legisla tive Council from 1916 till his death in 1943, after 
he had been appointed to the Governor’s Executive Council in 1942. Simensen (Ibid: iii) 
points out that it was through Akyem Abua kwa that the British local government 
administration, Indirect Rule, was put to a special test. Both Ofori Atta 1 and 11 were the 
key collaborators “of the British and had a considerable influence on administration and 
legislation, not only in the field of ‘native affairs,’ but also in constitutional policy in 
general” (Ibid: iii). 
That Danquah’s arguments for a federalist form of government was unrealistic can be 
ascertained by the Akyem traditions. First, in contrast to the divisional authorities, there 
was no extensive land attached to the Paramount stool. But with the Indirect Rule, 
political power became the main source of wealth for the Ky ebi dynasty. Ofori Atta I 
introduced his own financial policy through tribunal income and various forms of 
political tribute in connection with installation of kings a nd queens, festivals and other 
forms. Second, there was no unity of the state and harmony between different 
components in the Akyem land. There was a “latent antagonism between Kibbi (the seat 
of the Omanhene) and the rest of the Akim Abuakwa state,” Simensen (Ibid: 29) notes.  
In 1879, a dispute over stream right between Osiem and Fankyereko led to bloodshed. 
In 1860, there were several violent clashes, including the one “between Kukurantumi and 
Asafo/Asiakwa, which the Omanhene failed to settle” (Ibid: 29). Third, there were 
frequent conflicts between the Kyebi dynasty and the commoners including some of the 
traditional kings of Akyem. A case in point, was the Asafo (Peoples Militia) of Akyem 
Kotoku’s violent revolt against the Omanhene, Sir Nana Ofori Atta I “leading to the fall 
of a large number of chiefs and on two occas ions came close to toppling the” Omanhene 
himself (Ibid: vb). During my interview with Osabarima Nana Adusei Peasah IV and his 
elders of Tafo in July 1998, I learnt of a civil war in the 1930s between the Kyebi dynasty 
and Tafo Awansa, the original seat of Omanhene in Akyem. The saying in Tafo is that 
“Abuakwa be too Akyem” (before the Abuakwa arrived from Adanse there was Akyem). 
Hence, Danquah could speak of rehabilitating th e image of Abuakwa to the exclusion of 
Akyem. Therefore, Danquah’s Akim Abuakwa Constitution only “expressed ideals of the 
ruling elite” of Kyebi (Ibid: 28). 
Fourth, Danquah as the leader of the Oppos ition was defeated in the elections of 1954 
and 1956 in the Akyem Abuakwa constituency by the CPP candidate, Aaron Ofori Atta 
of Tafo. Given the above, how were he and the dynasty of Kyebi going to turn Akyem 
Abuakwa into a federal state? Therefore the defeat of the Opposition in both local 
(Danquah in Akyem Abuakwa) and national elec tions was partly due to its collaboration 
with the British colonial government in the oppression and exploitation of the commoners 
and partly due to Nkrumah’s CPP nationalis t agenda. As indicated above, J.B.Danquah 
served on the Legislative Council during colonialism. 
This brings us to C.L.R.James’ “The Rise and Fall of Kwame Nkrumah.” Unfamiliar 
with the devastating impact of the Eurocentric education as well as the anti-African 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     23


--- PAGE 40 ---
curriculum on the attitudes of most Ghanaian intellectuals at the time and the political 
history of Ghana, James asserts that “the  struggle became extrem ely bitter between the 
educated middle classes whom his party denounced as stooges of British Government, 
and Nkrumah’s band derisively labeled veranda boys” (1996:574). First, he discounts the 
fundamental ideological and tactical differences between Nkrumah and the soc-called 
middle class during the anti-colonial struggle. The struggle was not between the middle 
class and Nkrumah; it was a bitter battle between the Conservative and Elitist UGCC-
NLM, and Nkrumah’s CPP, whom the latter branded as “hooligans,” “veranda boys,” 
“riff-raff” and “Communists” (Timothy: 67). 
Unfamiliar with the Ghanaian  society, James goes furthe r to say that “you cannot 
govern a backward country wit hout the cooperation or at leas t benevolent neutrality of a 
part of the middle” (James: 54). He adds, “The ablest, the most qualified and the 
intellectuals of finest character turned their backs on Nkrumah” (Ibid: 578). The real 
question is, how was Nkrumah to cooperate with the intellectuals who sought every 
means possible, with the blessings of the British colonial government, including violence, 
to make the CPP dysfunctional and the country ungovernable by his government? 
Second, the idea of a “benevolent neutrality” se gment of the “middle class’ as a social 
construct, is a misnomer in the country. 
As a matter of fact, Nkrumah offered to r econcile with the few educated class and 
elites, even though they constituted the core of his bitter opponents with respect to his 
politico-cultural thought and polices. For instan ce, Dr. K.A Busia, in 1951, turned down 
the invitation to become a member of Nkrumah’s cabinet (Timothy: 107). Those who 
accepted his reconciliation gesture included Si r Tsibu Darku, who had bitterly opposed 
and condemned Nkrumah for the Positiv e Action campaign and his CPP, became 
Chairman of Cocoa Marketing Board. Sir Quist, a former member of Accra Town 
Council on the National Democratic Party ticket, was appointed Speaker of the House 
whiles Nana Ayirebi Ackwah, Omanhene of Winneba and who had previously sided with 
the Colonial administration, was made Chairman of the National Educational Trust. 
Nkrumah also appointed Sir Charles Tachie Mensah, a one time member of the Executive 
Council in Governor Burns’s administra tion, and an opposition member of the 
Legislative Assembly after 1951, Chairman of the Civil service Commission. Two 
prominent Judgers Nkrumah appointed were Nii Armah Ollenu and K.A.Bossman, Vice-
President and General Secretar y respectively of the National Democratic Party, and who 
had stood in the Accra election of 1951 against the CPP candidates, Nkrumah and 
Thomas Mills, as well as UGCC candidates Obitsebi Lamptey and Ako Adjei (Bing, 
413–14). In fact, no elected government, to date, has appointed bitter opponents to 
positions of authority as Nkrumah did. 
Perhaps, had he brought himself to study the nature of the Eurocentric cultural outlook 
of the alleged “the ablest” intellectuals,” he would have rather berated their strong 
opposition to Nkrumah’s crusade on the rebi rth of African Pers onality, the underlying 
traditional African values of his socio-ec onomic, politico-cultural thoughts and policies, 
and African-centered education in post-independence Africa. 
James’s criticism of Nkrumah’s dismissal of Chief Justice Arku Korsah after his 
acquitting of Ako Adjei and Tawia Adamafio fo r their involvement in the attempt to kill 
President Nkrumah at Kulungugu on August 1, 1962, was again a manifestation of his 
(James’) lack of knowl-edge of the pre-i ndependence political alliance in Ghana. Arku 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     24


--- PAGE 41 ---
Korash was one of the two Africans appointed to the Governor’s Executive Council 
during colonialism. The other African appointed to the Executive Council was Sir Ofori 
Atta I of Akyem Abuakwa. Sir William Ofori Atta 1, a brother of Nkrumah’s bitter rival, 
Dr. J.B.Danquah, was the most powerful agent of colonialism through the Indirect Rule 
in the Gold Coast. One of the Supreme Court Judges on the case, Erick Akuffo-Addo 
(one of the Bix Six and a member of the Opposition) was the brother-in-law of William 
Ofori Atta, also the son of Sir William Ofor i Atta I. The acquittal of the two accused 
Ministers in Nkrumah government were not original members of the CPP. But Nkrumah 
brought them into the CPP government in his bid to include the “ablest intellectuals”. 
And as Kanu (1982:129) reveals, Adamafio, a lawyer and as the Minister of Information 
normally sat next to Nkrumah in the same vehicle; but, “by a strange coincidence… 
Adamafio had not accompanied Nkrumah in his car on this particular day.” 
What is startling was James’ statement that it took Nkrumah “six years to win 
independence by 1957. He coul d have gone on to independence in 1951. He decided to 
wait…but, today I am of the opinion that he should have gone ahead” (James: 574). 
Clearly, James writes from social milieu and geographic locations that make his 
perspective unreflective of the political history and geo-politics of the Gold Coast colony. 
First, pre-independence Ghana consisted of four fragmented regions. Aside from the 
Gold Coast colony, Asante was a “conquered” state, the Northern Territory, a 
protectorate, while the Trans-Volta was a United Nations Trusteeship Territory, all being 
administered as adjuncts of the British Colonial Government. It was after Nkrumah’s 
third election victory in 1956 that the four  segments became one nation on March 6, 
1957, mainly through the political organizati on and vision of Kwame Nkrumah. Second, 
the election of 1951 was contested on the ba sis of Coussey Constitution guaranteeing for 
a Legislative Assembly. The election was not  between the British colonial government 
and the CPP; rather it was contested by four internal political parties, namely the UGCC 
led by J.B. Danquah, the National Democratic Party led by Dr. Nanka Bruce, and Asante 
Kotoko, which stood for the independence of the traditional Kingdom of Asante 
(Timothy: 70). Third, the CPP formed on June 12, 49 as a mass movement comprising 
disillusioned, unemployed middle school leav ers, peasants, fish ermen, agricultural 
laborers, petty trades, mine and railroad work ers, some traditional rulers and a very few 
intelligentsia, was not a vanguard political organization. Nkrumah was imprisoned for his 
1950 Positive Action campaign and was only re leased after winning the 1951 election. 
Considering these factors, it was unrealistic, if not a [left-wing revolutionary infantile 
disorder of Trotskyite’s tradition] for James to suggest that Nkrumah should have gone 
for independence in 1951. The CPP victory in 1951 made Nkrumah Leader of 
Government Business, with the British G overnor holding key ministerial positions, 
namely, Foreign Affairs, Defense, Justice and Finance. 
Ronald Walters’ (1993:124–125) comments a bout James’ criticism on Nkrumah are 
worth citing here. He notes that “in a frank critique of the Nkrumah regime—among the 
many which have been written by various kinds of detractors—C.L.R.James, an admirer 
of Nkrumah and one of the great Pan-Africanists,” concludes that Nkrumah made some 
intractable errors. Walter’s caution is that “those who played various roles in support of 
the policies of Nkrumah’s government, then, were also destined to be judged guilty” 
(Ibid: 125). 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     25


--- PAGE 42 ---
Walters expounds that while “the quest for a functional Pan-Africanism cannot in 
itself be assailed…it carries an awesome res ponsibility.” Thus, “many of the roles played 
by African Americans in Ghana were significant.” They include “the initial role of 
George Padmore in the Pan-African Bureau, to that of DuBois and Hunton in initiating 
the Encyclopedia Africana  (and in giving Nkrumah general advice in other matters).” 
There were also Shirley DuBois, who served  as Ghana’s first Director of Television 
Program, Julian Mayfield’s role in admini stration and propaganda  and several other 
professional expertises in medicine, econom ic development and education. Even though 
these roles were “seldom traceable to the sh aping of the specific policies or political 
strategies…” they did provide crucial s upport for general administration of policy” 
Walters (Ibid: 125) elucidates. 
Walters (Ibid: 125) finds no credible “evidence of the struggle between Nkrumah and 
the African Americans over direction of the government.” With Ghana’s independent 
course of action, “the African Ameri can community, the Ghanaians and outside 
supports,” first “viewed Nkrumah’s Pan-African thrust toward the liberation of the 
continent as correct, since it was grounded in the history of the movement since 1900 and 
in the more recent nationalist movement for independence” (Ibid: 125). And being the 
“first Black African country in a wave of emerging states after the break-up of the 
colonial system,” the leaders of Ghana “w ere new to the development of managing the 
state. As such, African Americans could not have advised Nkrumah; while the political 
opponent of Nkrumah had only the political doctrines and policies of the Western powers 
“as their models. Under these circumstances, Walters concludes, “to suggest that 
C.L.R.James’ hint of inevitability of disaster was correct is a gross understatement” (Ibid: 
125).  
Kwame Ninsin’s discourse, “The Nkruma h Government and the Opposition on the 
Nation State: Unity vrs. Fragmentation,” identifies the political geography of Ghana as 
the most critical factor that unders cored strong opposition to Nkrumah’s CPP 
government. From the moment Nkrumah’s CPP formed the government in 1951, he 
explains, the Opposition persistently accused the CPP as anti-democratic for its stance on 
a unitary nation-state. The demands the Opposition put forth to accomplish its goal 
included “protection of chieftaincy as a viable indigenous institution for local 
government; diffusion of state power from th e centre to regional political organs; and 
control over cocoa revenue” (Ninsin 1991:220). And once chieftaincy became 
synonymous “with the defense of liberty,” the ensuing anti-CPP campaign was amplified 
and developed into the ideological basis of the struggle to achieve fragmentation of the 
state structure as a means to restrain a perceived “dictatorial regime” (Ibid: 221). 
Another condition the Opposition sought to realize its objectives was an alleged 
“historical and cultural evidence of nationhood as common history, language and culture” 
as represented by traditional communities. J. B. Danquah, the leader of the Opposition, 
constantly returned “to the greatness, glory and power of the Akim (Akyem) Abuakwa 
state” (Ibid: 222). In his letter addressed to Seth Appiah of the Akim Abuakwa Youth 
Association, he bloated about Akyem Abuakwa as “the largest State in the Colony” and 
thus “they must also be the greatest in the La nd.” He said, “I am determined to have the 
Abuakwa name rehabilitated and make Abuakwa lead the nation” (Ibid: 222). 
The Opposition’s association of federalism with chieftaincy in its demand can further 
be noted when Danquah “proclaimed that any attack on chieftaincy was also an attack on 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     26


--- PAGE 43 ---
the states” (Ibid: 224). In his letter to Sir Henry Coussey regarding the Local Government 
Ordinance of 1951, Danquah expressed his dete station saying “that…one direct result of 
the Enactment (the Local Government Ordinance) will be to obliterate Chieftaincy and 
tribal loyalties, and the Stat e as such will cease to be” (Ib id: 223). Besides, Danquah, in 
his bid for federalism passionately argued for the Gold Coast “colony to assert its 
‘residual political sovereignty in the chiefs and people’ to set up a constituent assembly” 
(Ibid: 226). For his part, Nene Azu Mate Kole asserted that the land question, as 
contained in the Local Government Ordinance, was inseparable from “the civil rights of 
our people.” But, as Ninsin indicates, the interests of the powerful “chiefs” and that of the 
Opposition were complementary, as the fo rmer demanded “for a second legislative 
chamber which would be reserved mainly for chiefs.” The aspiration of the non-chief 
elements of the Opposition as regards to a federal system of government lay in a 
“territorial political framework within which they would exercise for hegemony,” in 
terms of regional state power and economic gains (Ibid: 222). 
The 1951 constitution prepared by the Sir Phillipson Commission, on the other hand, 
had stipulated that the creation of regional administrative governments with 
“considerable autonomy and a wide range  of powers would be an unnecessary 
impairment of the unitary character of the Ghanaian” nation-state. Rejecting suggestions 
for a federal government, the Sir Phillips on Commission recommended regional councils 
as “essential outlaying parts” of the centr al government (Ibid: 227). Still by 1953, the 
Opposition viewed fragmentation of the stat e power as indispensable weapon against 
what they perceived as “the creeping dictatorship” of Nkrumah’s CPP (Ibid: 227). But the 
real anti-CPP’s stand of the Opposition can be understood in terms of its fear of imminent 
political demise which the CPP government  had come to represent (Ibid: 224). 
Redemption for them thus lay in the creation of regional centres of political power in a 
federal institutional framework as a bulwark for civil liberties. 
For the duration of the 1954 electioneering campaign, the Opposition’s agitation for a 
federal system of government erupted into a full-scale rebellion, of almost a civil war 
kind (Ibid: 226). Ninsin identifies two factors that accelerated the federalist explosion in 
1954. The first factor was the defeat of th e Opposition in the first general election of 
1954, both at the national and local levels . The Opposition at the time viewed popular 
democracy as “a perversion of the civilized and orderly government” (Ibid: 224). 
Essentially, they had negative attitude toward the great masses of the African people. Just 
like the colonial officials, the Opposition sought the support of the Chiefs against popular 
sentiments. As pointed out above, they viewed the masses as individuals and dismissing 
their aspirations in modern politics “as mere  emotion” (Ibid: 224). Hence, they emerged 
from the elections as a weak ethno-regional group. 
In its attempt to win the support of the co coa farmers, the Opposition misrepresented 
the Cocoa Duty and Development Ordinance of 1954 “as fixing for cocoa farmers a 
maximum price of 72 shillings per 60 Ibs of co coa,” when in fact, “the government had 
rather assured cocoa farmers a minimu m price of 72 shillings” (Ibid: 228). The 
Opposition desperately mobilized some coco a farmers in the Akyem Abuakwa area and 
Asante for what was, in the words of Ninsin, “crystallized as a grievance—an 
unsatisfactory producer, to promote their po litical and economic aspirations.” This is 
noticeable in the report of National Liberation Movement’s House Select Committee on a 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     27


--- PAGE 44 ---
federal system of government that “in a federation each unit would be able to formulate 
its own fiscal and economic policy (Ibid: 228). 
The CPP government saw revenue from the sale of cocoa as a common national 
property which ought to be centrally contro lled and utilized for common benefit. The 
Cocoa Board should be “reorganized in order to ensure effective government control and 
direction of its policies through a responsible minister” of state. It follows that “if cocoa 
revenue and land could be legitimately considered as private property rights then 
whenever there was the slightest sign of violation of their private enjoyment the grounds 
for ‘rebellion’ became incontrovertible” (Ib id: 226). During the debate on the Local 
Government Ordinance of 1951, the Oppositi on led by Danquah, also condemned the 
management of stool lands through the new local government organs, and characterized it 
“Confiscation of property-Communism naked and unashamed” (Ibid: 224–225). The 
agitation for a federal type of government and bicameral legislature underscoring the 
philosophical view-point of the Oppos ition becomes understandable. The same 
philosophy was to inform the events preceding “the formation of the National Liberation 
Movement (NLM),” Ninsin (Ibid: 226) explains. 
During the debate on the Motion for Cons titutional Reform, Nkrumah’s government 
categorically stated its total steadfastness to upholding and defending the territorial 
integrity of the country. It also declared its commitment to finding an amicable and 
democratic solution to the Trans-Volta question. Even though the CPP government gave 
assurance to “all the traditional territorial entities of its respect for their respective 
integrity,” the Opposition decided to pledge themselves to defend and safe-guard the 
traditional territorial entities “as basis of democratic representation of government” (Ibid: 
227). Hence, the Opposition persistently dema nded for federalism even after it had again 
been rejected by the electorate in the 1956 election. 
After the attainment of independence in 1957, the Nkrumah’s government 
immediately took measures through the “Avoidance of discrimination Act” to undercut 
the centrifugal tendencies which produced the NLM and the bloody strife of 1954 and 
1956. This eventually gave birth to the United Party, thereby laying the foundation for the 
development of a non-ethno-regional opposition. Yet, the Opposition’s ambition to wrest 
power from the CPP government between 1957 and 1960 was manifested in “the 
Togoland Disturbance, the Ga Shifimo Kpee and Awhiatey-Amponsah-Apoloo 
conspiracy of 1958,” Ninsin (Ibid: 229) points out. Prior to Ghana’s independence, the 
Opposition had given a strong warning to the British government of the dire consequence 
if Ghana should attain independence under the CPP administration. Judging from this 
statement, the 1966 coup can thus be underst ood as the culmination of the Opposition’s 
long struggle to topple the CPP government by any means possible. 
In his “Kwame Nkrumah’s Leadership Style: An Assessment from a Cultural 
Perspective,” Hagan posits that Nkrumah’s organizational and personal abilities to 
mobilize the mass of the people were based on “the use of organizational devices, ideas 
and methods sensitive to the culture of the people” (1991a: 182). These qualities 
distinguished him from the “conservative colour of” J.B.Danquah and other members of 
the UGCC. One of these virtues was his “cap acity to achieve results” that the people 
desired in their leaders. Another virtue Africans associate with  their leaders was 
Nkrumah’s perception of his leadership “both as sacred and profane” (Ibid: 184). 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     28


--- PAGE 45 ---
Nkrumah, Hagan (Ibid: 184) further postulate s, “became a leader by his adept use of 
the instrumentalities of mass communication in the cultures” of the people. He discerned 
that political education in a culture in which communica tion was “mainly face-to-face” 
had to be a “face-to-face,” phenomenon or communicating ideas through direct contact. 
He had to see and touch the people and the people had to see and touch 
him…he himself was a willing medium of the spirit of independence. He 
loved to meet the people, and he loved to draw the crowd. (Ibid: 185) 
Another African cultural heritage associ ated in Nkrumah’s leadership was his 
understanding of Ghanaians sensibilities toward  external symbols of collective and 
individual identification (Ibid: 187). The pe ople’s “intuitive traditional understanding of 
the meaning of colors and symbols” as used by the Asafo was employed by Nkrumah’s 
political party. For instance, the Convention People’s Party (CPP) chose as its totemic 
symbol the cultural aesthetic a ssociated with the red cockerel . His use of the color white 
and horsetail were not only proverbial, but they were also consistent with the authority of 
the traditional priests (Ibid: 189). 
Hagan posits that Nkrumah made himself into a symbol of the people’s physical, 
mental and spiritual force, by his conceal ment of myopia and use of contact lens. 
Traditionally, a leader such as king and queen should have no deformity (Ibid: 189). 
Mystique and charisma that enveloped Nkrumah, Hagan points out, had a peculiar 
cultural undertone. During the struggle, he rein forced the beliefs of  his spirituality by 
retreats in secluded areas (Ibid: 194). 
While his use of dramatic element and histrionics won the heart of the people, they 
gave the impression that “the road ahead coul d be full of adversity.” A manifestation of 
this was when he “once told a gathering of dancers that they were dancing their way to 
self-government” (Ibid: 190). The CPP deployed vans throughout the country painted 
with the party’s colors and symbols playing music, just as the gong-gong player goes 
about communicating the king and queen’s messages to the people. 
Nkrumah’s CPP gave “themselves an ethos and solidarity more or less like the Asafo 
or the clan complete with its songs and rituals and priest.” The party transformed the 
political culture of the Gold Coast into Mass Rally” (Ibid: 195). The rallies had people on 
their feet singing, dancing and joking. Besides, Nkrumah was able to mix characters of 
different social and cultura l background in which “each played for all and all for each” 
(Ibid: 193). 
The leadership style of Nkrumah as an international statesman, however, differed from 
the traditional ruler (Ibid: 198). Through his trip to Hanoi, he learnt the truth in the Akan 
proverb that “the wandering child does not w itness her mother’s funeral” (Ibid: 200). As 
indicated in chapter one, Nkrumah’s govern ment was overthrown by the military on 
February 24, 1966, while he was on his way to Vietnam. 
But for Nkrumah, the new political consciousness he inculcated in the people of 
Ghana was the consciousness of a distinctly African identity, unity and ideology. It meant 
the abrogation of Western democracy in favor of one-party system through legislation 
rather than through persuasion (Ibid: 201). The CPP College at Winneba, in Hagan’s 
view, lowered the party’s interest in mass education of the people, especially the rural 
population. Nkrumah became isolated speaking through the radio and television, thereby 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     29


--- PAGE 46 ---
confining his voice to the urban areas; “he ch anged from a leader to become a ruler” 
(Ibid: 207). 
Hagan’s identification of Nkrumah’s leadership style with those of the traditional 
Africa throws new light on how he won the support of the oppressed and under-
privileged people in the Gold Coast. However, some of his statements appear simplistic 
and inconclusive. How, for instance, could Nkrumah have persuaded the hostile 
Opposition parties to merge or abolish all pa rties in support of his argument for a one 
party system? Was it to be done through persuasion or legislation? The party’s college, 
Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute at Winneba, had as its objective the training of 
party cadets, whose role was to go round the country to educate the masses on 
government policies and organize them for social action. Besides, Nkrumah as head of 
state had a bigger and different role than his former role during the anti-colonial struggle. 
The problem was not his use of the electronic media to communicate to the people; it was 
rather his use of the English language as his medium of communication. The fact is, the 
political impasse in the country was a crash of  ideas, visions and po licies that could not 
be reconciled.  
Hagan’s other statement that Nkrumah saw the need to posit an ideology or a “myth of 
African consciousness” undermines the fulcrum of Nkrumah’s call for re-assessment and 
re-interpretation of African history and culture. Consciousness, whatever form it takes, is 
based on a group’s historical and cultural e xperience. Having been dehumanized as well 
as conditioned into believing that they (Africans) have no history, cultural or religion to 
be proud of by the European enslavers and colonizers, it was more than justified for 
Nkrumah to posit an African-centered ideology. Nkrumah’s political ideology was 
quintessentially Pan-African breaking those implanted during colonialism. 
Also, Hagan’s reference to the traditional African priests as “fetish” is anti-African; it 
has no place in any African language. The word , “fetish” is etymologically a Portuguese 
word (Hegel, 1965:94) for “doll” or “toy,” meaning an insignificant phenomenon. 
Therefore, his use of “fetish” is an imposition of European derived word to define an 
African phenomenon. In effect, the idea of “fetish priest” or “paganism” carries with it a 
hegemonic racist connotation that does not only insult the dignity of African ancestors 
(like Okomfo Anokye of Akwamu) and humanity, but it also rationalizes the European 
slave trade and colonialism. 
In “Kwame Nkrumah’s Cultural Policy,” Hagan sees Nkrumah’s speech, “The African 
Genius,” a clear manifestation of his cultural philosophy. It spells out, he elucidates, 
Nkrumah’s cultural objectives and the ramification of that philosophy for the stratagem 
“of study and of creative cultural activity n eeded to regenerate and develop African 
culture” (1991b: 22). Perhaps, his cultural thought could best be understood in his policy 
toward educational decolonization. And as Hagan postulates, Nkrumah saw the problem 
of the African mental dislocation as “largely the result of the educational system (Ibid: 4). 
Educational policy aside, Hagan finds in Nkrumah’s book, Africa Must Unite,  first 
published in 1963, an implicit cultural policy on African unity; and that the book only 
“explains his political philos ophy based on his convi ction of the need for freedom and 
unification of African” (Ibid: 3). 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     30


--- PAGE 47 ---
Though the cultural effects of the centuries of colonialism have been more 
enduring and not less damaging than the political and economic, Nkrumah 
gave intimation of this awareness in no clear terms. (Ibid: 4) 
Here, Hagan’s argument does not go into the cultural thrust of Nkrumah’s political 
philosophy. As Esebede (1994:5) points out, the Pan-African policy that underlined 
Nkrumah’s political agenda was itself a historical and cultural phenomenon. Nonetheless, 
Hagan further intimates that Nkrumah, in another chapter, makes assessment of the 
colonial origin of Africa’s cultural disorienta tion, as an indispensable foremost “step to 
the determination of policy objectives” (Ibid: 4). 
Hagan presents another puzzling statement w ith respect to the l ack of a clear policy 
for sustaining the cultural institutions. Nkrumah, he notes, created cultural institutions 
“for the discovery, interpretation, evalua tion, preservation and development of the 
African heritage,” but they “lacked a clear  cultural policy to sustain them” (Ibid: 7). 
Hagan again observes that Nkrumah had big vi sions and constructs, “often leaving it to 
others to work out the details. However,  Nkrumah, Hagan acknowledges, is the only 
political leader “who demonstrated his awareness of the cultural effects of colonialism 
and what the cultural problems demand by way of policy” (Ibid: 24). 
What is more, Nkrumah’s association of African personality with African genius, 
Hagan further indicates, embodies certain cultural attributes including communalistic 
social values, efficient institutional structures, and a humane attitude to all humans. It was 
on the basis of this that “Nkrumah proceeded  to explain his devel opment strategy with 
reference to culture” (Ibid: 22). Hence, Nk rumah “saw his educational policy as the 
centerpiece of his cultural policy and aim of  the development of African personality,” 
Hagan (Ibid: 5) asserts. 
According to Hagan, Nkrumah’s concept of African personality resulted from “his 
conviction that we are all Africans;” and that  this has always been there only waiting to 
be restored (1991:18). “If there is any reality  to African personality,” Hagan postulates, 
“it is the African genius” which Nkrumah saw as a step towards determining the strategy 
for the “cultural institutions to  use to restore the African glory and bring about African 
unity” (Ibid: 19)]. 
While a comprehensive cultural policy might not have been spelt out in his major 
policy statements, a systematic review of the government laws, clearly articulated policy 
guidelines for each of the cultu ral institutions. The Arts Council of Ghana, established in 
1958 by law, for instance, was made the cultural wing of the Ministry of Education with 
clear guidelines. The Institute of Arts a nd Culture, established in 1962, had detailed 
policy guidelines. The guiding principles for the Institute of African Studies, and by 
extension the School of Music and Drama, were contained in Nkrumah’s inaugural 
speech, “The African Genius.” By 1964, the government had expanded the thrust of the 
Institute of Arts and Culture with policy guidelines similar to the other Ministries. 
Moreover, a clear cultural policy could not have been the sole factor in combating the 
cultural effects of centuries of colonial indoctrination on the A frican personality. What 
the cultural policy lacked was a systematic educational decolonization colloquium for the 
leading scholars and artists responsible for th e implementation of the policies initiated by 
Nkrumah’s government. 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     31


--- PAGE 48 ---
When Ghana became a republic, Nkrumah prom ised a university that would reflect 
African traditions and culture, Robert July (1987:164) writes. In his African Voice, July 
(Ibid: 185) interprets the pl ace of culture in Nkrumah’s policies as furthering “his 
political aims.” He sees Nkrumah’s concep t of African personality as embodying the 
“desire for the liberation of Africa from th e cultural entanglement of the West” (Ibid: 
181). But it transcended political and econom ic freedom to achieve as well an 
independence from the ethical and aesthetic sta ndard of Europe, and to revive traditional 
African values in post-independence Africa. Likewise, as Nketia pointed out in our 
interview on December 26, 1996, Nkrumah’s idea of African personality was a liberating 
and creative concept, which he brought into focus as African alternatives to European 
cultural and aesthetic values, and institutions imposed on African people during 
colonialism. 
In July’s view, Nkrumah’s “devotion to a renascent African culture” was not new. 
What were new “were his favored elements  from Marxist socialism, missing in the 
pronouncements of earlier pan-Africanists.” Besides, he was determined to direct “all 
activities, cultural, or otherwise to the service of political  action” (Ibid: 184). In London, 
Nkrumah, July asserts, politicized the recreational activities of the Gold Coast African 
students’ union whose members often came t ogether on occasions like Christmas or 
Easter and organized activities like “songs a nd dances of the old country” Ibid: 184). 
Also, Nkrumah, he claims, “managed to have  himself elected secretary of” the student 
union, endowing it with politics that distressed those who were concerned primarily with 
the diversion of social intercourse” (Ibid: 185). The Gold Coast Students Union, like the 
West African Students Union (WASU), was a nationalist fraternity. The political 
character of the WASU, for in stance, is evident in its public condemnation of British 
colonial methods as unrealistic, prior to the arrival of Nkrumah in 1945. In its resolution 
on April 4, 1942, WASU (Including most Gold  Coast students) “demanded for British 
West Africa immediate internal self-government with a definite guarantee of complete 
independence within five years after the Second World (Imperial) War (Esedebe, 
1994:9). According to Armah (1965:7), the activities of WASU “ca rried into every 
movement for colonial freedom a new and militant radicalism which rejected the 
ideologies of the West as a solvent for African problems.” 
Nkrumah saw the need for education and entertainment, desiring that a network of 
theaters be established throughout the country for renascence of the arts in Africa. As a 
consequence, he became interested in Efua  Sutherland’s work at the Drama Studio, 
visiting there when work was underway (Jul y, 1987:75). And when he became the head 
of state, Nkrumah “continued to utilize cultural activities to further his political aims” 
(Ibid: 185). The fact is, Nkrumah set up a committee including Phillip Gbeho and 
Mawere Opoku to organize cultural activities, such as traditional music and dancing to 
mark Ghana’s Independence Day celebrations across the country. On the international 
level, Nkrumah, July claims, “dispatched performers abroad on repeated international 
tours as the peaceful arm of his global po litics and diplomacy” (Ibid: 185). But as Opoku 
told this author on January 4, 1997, the intern ational tours were part of cultural exchange 
programs between nations. Opoku further explained that Nkrumah saw the revival of the 
traditional dance forms as a visible manifestation of African personality. 
According to July (Ibid: 187), Nkrumah’s gove rnment funded the Institute of African 
Studies’ activities, yet he “never interfered in such internal affairs as program priorities or 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     32


--- PAGE 49 ---
staffing appointments,” and also “never insisted upon cu rriculum definition.” Regarding 
the objective of the School of Music and Drama, July says that the curricula were 
designed to train teachers for the national school  system as well as performers in musical 
ensembles and orchestra; and that the emphasis on the school’s performance and 
composition stressed African materials. 
Robert July’s statements can mislead readers who are not familiar with the life and 
work of Kwame Nkrumah. In the first place, Nkrumah’s attempts to place culture at the 
core of Ghana’s socio-economic transformation, was contrary to Marxism. While a 
student in the United States, Nkrumah was insp ired by the teachings of Marcus Garvey 
regarding an independent, strong and proud Afri ca. He also gained some experience in 
organizational work with several political parties and movements, which brought him 
into contact with African Am erican political activists. He had read several books by 
Marx, Lenin, Engels and others for revolutionary ideas, but “of all the literature that I 
studied,” he said,” the book that did more than any other to fire my enthusiasm was the 
“Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey” (Nkrumah, 1957:45). 
Therefore, his urging of the African students in London not to forget their duty toward 
African decolonization cannot be  seen as purely politicizing the recreational activities of 
their union. Also, the statement that Nkrumah managed to have himself elected secretary 
of the student union appears presumptuous, That fact is that, he had acquired 
considerable experience on the colonial question during his ten years in the United States 
of America. For instance, it was while a student  that he helped set up an African Studies 
center at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. It was also at this university that 
he began to organize the African Students Association of America and Canada and 
became its president. And it was also while a student in the same university that he 
drafted his first booklet, Towards Colonial Freedom . He had been on several public 
platforms and participated in conferences demanding unconditional and immediate 
political liberation of Africa from colonialism. Before his departure to Britain in 1945, he 
was invited by W.E.B Du. Bois to participate in the Council on African Affairs 
conference regarding the future of Africa. Nkrumah (Sherwood 1996:86) “was a member 
of the committee which drew up the confer ence’s four resolutions” on the colonial 
question for the United Nations. In 1943, Nkrumah was invited to an international 
conference on Africa in New York, following his involvement on the proposals for the 
“The Atlantic Charter and Africa from an African Standpoint” (Ibid: 87). 
It was due to Nkrumah’s depth of knowledge  on the colonial que stion, his political 
ideology and practical experiences in organizi ng, that Botsio returned to the Gold Coast 
with Nkrumah in 1947. He had become convinced that Nkrumah had the answer to 
ending colonialism on the continent and a united socialist Africa. 
In his next narcissistic, Eurocentric and racist statements, July makes the following 
claims: “it has been said that Nkrumah was not the most Cartesian of thinkers. He created 
no philosophical systems. He envisioned no Platonic society. Master politician, he was an 
indifferent administrator, and his thinking was intuitive rather than logical” (July, 
1987:165). Certainly, July makes these assumptions without an in-depth analysis of the 
holistic nature of Nkrumah’s policies in the context of colonial legacy. It would have 
been helpful if he had cited any philosophical  systems created by any European head of 
state, especially in the aftermath of a fore ign domination. In effect, these statements 
resonate the hegemonic ideas of the European colonialists, and that of Hegel who equated 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     33


--- PAGE 50 ---
the brains of African men and women with those of [European] children. Africans, they 
believed, were not endowed with intellectua l qualities; they only express emotions. In 
fact, there was no need for Nkrumah to be a “C artesian thinker” in order to salvage the 
people of Ghana from the ravages of colonialism. His seminal book, Consciencism, as 
well as “The African Genius” speak to the extraordinary African problems, to which no 
European philosophical system can offer any solution. It must also be added that 
Nkrumah aimed at creating an egalitarian society, which was in direct contrast to a 
platonic master-servant society.  
Robert July’s next assertion that music and drama graduates were prepared to be 
“performers in musical ensemble and orchestra…and drama troupes” (Ibid: 191), is rather 
misleading. It is also incorrect that the School, with exception of the Dance section, 
stressed African materials in its instructions. Based on my personal knowledge as a 
student of the period, most of the students in music and drama were teachers on study 
leave and were thus more eager in returning to the classroom. Those who were not 
teachers saw teaching as the only respectable pr ofession, that they were also zealous in 
entering after graduation. The national dance company, Ghana Dance Ensemble, was not 
born out of any collaborative efforts by the entire program of the School as July alludes 
to; it was born out of the program of the Dance section. Also, the association of the 
School and Efua Sutherland’s Drama Studio and Experimental Theater was not a 
programmatic relationship; aside from the initial preliminary courses for the members of 
the Experimental Theater at the Drama Studi o, the association remained technical and 
administrative relationship. 
Adinku (1994:1) posits that the desire to introduce traditional (arts) form into new 
creative development in Ghana was in fulfillment of the concept of the National Theater 
Movement. The concept was based on the “ notion that schooled-educated personalities, 
the symbol of change in the new artistic community envisaged for the country, should 
become aware of traditional aes thetic forms.” And that the use of the traditional models 
for new development, he posits, was “to meet the growing aspirations of the people.” 
This was to forestall the continuing reliance “on foreign artistic forms…which in the long 
run, would be detrimental to the progress of artistic-conscious Ghanaians” (Ibid: 1). 
Thus, the establishment of the Ghana Dance Ensemble, Adinku explains, was in 
fulfillment of the concept of the National Theater Movement. Quoting Prof. Mawere 
Opoku, the idea of the national dance comp any, “came from the first President, Dr. 
Kwame Nkrumah.” which was congruent with “his concept of the cultural emancipation 
of Ghana and Africa.” Nkrumah believed in bringing the traditional achievements to bear 
on the present, Adinku (Ibid: 6) explains. 
Kennedy (1973:56), who responded to Nkru mah’s call for a close relationship 
between the Institute of African Studies and Diasporan Africans notes that, “when 
Nkrumah spoke specifically about the people and the National Theater Movement, he 
was not only a thinker and a visionary leader, but also a human being interested in the 
culture and the arts of his people.” According to Hammond, the National Theater 
Movement, since its inception, aimed at bringing “into existence a theater that will derive 
its vitality and authenticity from roots firmly planted in the true traditions of the people” 
(1977:70). It was assumed, Agovi  (1990:3) posits, that “literary  theater had been fairly 
well established in the country and that the only thing it suffered from was a severe sense 
of alienation.” The most significant thing, therefore, was to create more and more 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     34


--- PAGE 51 ---
institutions and get them to function within defined ideals and goals. The aims and 
objectives, Agovi (Ibid: 3) postulates, “seemed beyond reproach, except that there were 
also dire assumptions which were not read ily apparent.” These assumptions did not 
reflect the facts on the grounds. The planners of the theater movement did not take the 
colonial legacy, in terms of theater, into account seriously. In other words, the approach 
did not sufficiently take into account the inherent complexity of colonial legacies. 
Nobody, Agovi again points out, quite fully understood the depth of antipathy toward 
African cultural activities created by the colonial mind-set. 
In his “Education in Ghana, 1951–1966,” Haizel (1991:68) posits that Nkrumah was 
not the type of person who waited for an ideal condition before acting on matters of 
education. Education, for him, was a right which had been denied to the majority of the 
children, especially in the northern part of the country. The first measure his government 
therefore took in 1951 was to assume full responsibility for educational policies and 
practices. Though challenged in and outside parliament, the government not only barred 
the Christian missions from future expansion in their primary schools, it also asked them 
to give up their existing ones. Accordingly, a private school “could be closed down by 
law if it was found to be potentially dangerous to the physical and well-beings of the 
pupils,” Haizel (Ibid: 61) notes. 
Between 1951 and 1961, there had been an enormous expansion of primary and 
secondary schools all over the country. Secondary school facilities were expanded for the 
older schools under the Ministry of Education, while the Ghana Education Trust, was 
“established to build Ghana Schools and Colleges.” Nkrumah commended the Trust in 
his speech to teachers on April 6, 1961 fo r, building more “secondary schools from 
thirty-nine in 1960 to fifty”  in 1961(Ibid: 68). Contradic ting Elliot Commission’s report 
that argued its case against a university in th e West African region, Hazel points to the 
three universities that had been  built in Ghana by 1961, with a fourth one proposed for 
agricultural science. 
With Ghana as an independent country, Nkrumah found education to be “the academic 
focus of national life, reflecting the social, economic, political and cultural aspirations of 
the people” (Ibid: 71). But the paradox was that Nkrumah, in 1959, came to find the 
University of Ghana the “breeding ground for unpatriotic and anti-government elements” 
(Ibid: 70). Thus, the government would no longer watch unconcerned while the 
university, supported by milli ons of pounds out of the sweat and toil of the common 
people,” continue to be the center of anti- government activities. Instead, “we want the 
University College to” relate its activities to the needs and the interest of the nation, and 
the well-being of the people (Ibid: 71). 
On scientific culture, Nkrumah contemplat ed the creation of a special scientific 
community where scientists of the Ghana A cademy of Sciences from different fields 
would leave and work, Haizel indicates. Nkrumah’s concern was not to explore the moon 
or Mars; his primary interest was “here on earth where so much needs to be done to make 
it a place fit for human efforts, endeavor, and happiness” (Ibid: 75). The philosophy of 
Nkrumah was that, it is only through the union of theory and practice that the lives of the 
people can gain “the highest material, cultural, moral and spiritual fulfillment in the 
service of his fellow man,” Haizel (Ibid: 77) cites. 
Another dimension in Nkrumah’s educational policy, Haizel elucidates, was the 
creation of Mass Literacy and Mass Education program in 1951; its purpose was not only 
Critical discourse on kwame Nkrumah’s life     35


--- PAGE 52 ---
to teach people how to read and write, but also how to live a productive life. But the irony 
Haizel finds is that, this same non-formal education which had done so much to improve 
the quality of life of people was used by the military junta which overthrew Nkrumah’s 
government in 1966, to eradicate the image of Nkrumah in the rural areas. At the same 
time, the military “government invited expe rts from UNESCO to advi se the Department 
on the eradication of illiteracy” in the country (Ibid: 80). 
During Nkrumah’s period, Haizel evinces, “the economists had discovered education,” 
and “education and economic growth had b ecame a credo in development planning” 
(Ibid: 83). Responding to Jones Quartey’s assertion that the rapid expansion of education 
became “one of the media of party ideological propaganda,” Haizel points out that: 
Dr. Kwame Nkrumah deserves to be judged also on his idea of the 
democratization of education put forward when he presented the Seven-
Year Development Plan to Parliament. But at least the Ghana Educational 
Trust schools stand as concrete evidence that Nkrumah was not only 
engaged in rhetoric. (Ibid: 86) 
While Hazel presents insights as to the thrust of Nkrumah’s democratization of 
education, he says very little about the c ontent and nature of the curriculum of the 
educational programs. Likewise, he does not re veal whether there was any attempt to re-
educate the teachers brought up by the missionary  institutions. As pointed out earlier, the 
Arts Council of Ghana founded in 1958 was made the cultural wing of the Ministry of 
Education. Yet throughout his discussion, Hazel makes no reference to culture and the 
National Theater Movement in Nkrumah’s educational objectives. 
While the above studies provide valuable insights into Nkrumah’s vision of African 
culture, as well as his government’s role in  setting the agenda for cultural emancipation 
of Africa, they offer very little or no t horough discourse on his politico-cultural thought 
and the restoration of African personality  through theater. My conclusion is that 
Nkrumah had an African-centered vision, philosophical ideas and policies, regarding the 
restoration of the African personality th rough theater as agent for socio-economic 
transformation of Ghana and Africa. Unfortunately, Nkrumah’s untimely overthrow by 
the military coup on February 24, 1966 that had the backing of the CIA, adversely 
affected his Pan-African project, as well as his politico-cultural ideas and policies in 
Ghana.  
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     36


--- PAGE 53 ---
Chapter Three  
Kwame Nkrumah’s Politico-Cultural Thought 
What man and animal have in common is th e sensory skills, sight, sound, smell, touch 
and taste. Yet between animal and man there is a difference of nature and essence, The 
former acts on instinct in order to preserve and maintain life in relations to nature, while 
the latter acts by rationalism in different stages at a given time and space to build 
civilization. Secondly, man is the only two-handed animal that laughs and weeps 
(Douglas, 229:1992). Accordingly, one of the manifestations that distinguish man from 
the other species, in my view, is thought process as well as development of cultural 
institutions. 
According to Cabral, (1980:139) when Dr. Goebbels, the brain behind Nazi 
propaganda, heard the word “culture,” he reached for his pistol. He  understood the value 
of culture as a critical factor of resistance to foreign domination. Thus, the desires to 
dominate other people as well as the resist ance to domination are both acts of culture. 
The latter proceeds from the knowledge of one’s cultural personality, history and 
aspirations to build a better society. Society is the “bearer and the creator of culture;” 
while culture on the other hand, is the result of a people’s history (Ibid: 143). 
Every thought is epistemic. It arises out of a people’s culture and in their attempt to 
define the universe, their environment, thei r society and themselves. The study of the 
cultural thought of any historical personality  thus requires the ability to discern and 
analyze his or her total worldview; it also requires an in-depth understanding of factors 
that impacted his or her total life. Such factors include the social milieu, social forces and 
his or her place in the society.  Therefore, every social bei ng has a culture, which results 
from one’s heritage or civilization. 
This chapter synthesizes those aspects of  Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought in his 
writings and major speeches that came to se rve as guiding principles for the politico-
cultural institutions and programs in Ghana. The scope of this synthesis includes the 
ontological aspects of culture, namely, his socio-political thought, institutional 
perspective, his concept of African pers onality, creative productions [theater] in the 
context of socio-economic liberation and r econstruction in post-independence African 
countries. 
It must, however, be pointed out that a comprehensive discourse on politico-culture 
does not appear in any of Nkrumah’s published works. He wrote on decolonization of 
Africa, neocolonialism, political economy, theo ry and praxis of African liberation, Pan-
Africanism, African socio-politi cal philosophy, social analys is and history of Africa. 
Conceivably, his book, Consciencism and speech, “The African Genius” inaugurating the 
Institute of African Studies at the University of Ghana at Legon in 1963, manifest his 
political and cultural thought. Nevertheless, it is  possible to see in his major works and 
speeches, vital aspects of his political and cultural perspectiv es that can be synthesized 
into a coherent thought process.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Definition of concepts, terms or constructs is contextual, and culture is no exception. 
Culture is understood as constituting the core of any group’s humanity; yet there is hardly 
any precise definition of the concept. The variance of its definition, in most cases, 
depends on the discipline of the scholar and the nature of his or her scholarship. The 
concern here, therefore, is not so much what culture is as to its ontological aspects. 
Culture, according to Gyekye, “refers to patterns of thought  and ways of acting and 
behaving that have been created, fostered, and nurtured by a people over a period of time 
and by which their lives are guided.” It results from their accumulated knowledge about 
their universe, their society, and themselves reflected in their beliefs, values, morals, law, 
and the techniques and habits they have acquired in their efforts to meet the challenges of 
their environment. It includes the “people’s religious beliefs, their methods of production 
and economics relations, their systems of values, manners, etiquette and fashions” 
(1994:2–3). 
Culture “‘at its most inclusive,” Abraham explains, refers to “public and private, of the 
life of a people.” Accordingly, culture comprises “the whole of knowledge, the arts, 
science, technology, religion, morality, ritu al, politics, literature, even etiquette and 
fashions, and such things as whether people clean their teeth three times a days or once” 
(Abraham, 1962:12–13). 
J.H.Nketia identifies four aspects of cultu re. One is the material aspect including 
implements, clothing, housing, artifacts, utensils etc. The second characteristic is the 
institutional aspect of culture whose development may be considered in terms of scope 
they give for social and politi cal action, and the extent to which they facilitate economic 
emancipation. Next is the philosophical aspect manifested in the realm of ideas, concepts, 
beliefs and values. Lastly, there is the creative aspect of culture including literature, 
visual and performing arts; this aspect can, in their own right, give scope to the 
development in other spheres (1965:5). 
But cultures, Ngugi wa Thiong’o notes, “do not always develop out of the workings-
out of contradictions within themselves or with the other features of a society. They also 
develop in an external environment of contact with other societies. This contact can be 
one of hostility, indifference, or mutual gi ve and take” (Ngugi, 1993:27). However, the 
ontology of culture is a transposition of the ideology of a given society at different 
epochs. And to a free and sovereign people actuated by the will to progress, there evolves 
a corresponding revolutionary culture as well as revolutionary ideology (Touré, 1973:70–
73). Thus, whatever the ideologi cal characteristics of its expression, culture is the critical 
element of a people’s history (Cabral: 142). 
There is a reciprocal connection between the cultural and socio-economic factors in 
the behavior of human society. At every mome nt of the life of a so ciety, culture is the 
result of the economic and political activities; it represents the dynamic expression of the 
type of social relations prevailing within that society. The nature of culture as an element 
of resistance to colonial domination lays in the fact that African culture was the vigorous 
manifestation, on the ideological level, of the material and historical reality of the 
colonized African people (Cabral: 141). 
The liberation struggle in Africa, Cabral further explicates, was preceded by an 
upsurge of cultural manifestation, which progr essively hardened to assert the cultural 
personality of the dominated people of Afri ca. Whatever the conditions of colonial 
oppression in Africa, it was always within the cultural factor that the people found the 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     38


--- PAGE 55 ---
germ of challenge, which led to the structuring and development of the national liberation 
movements. Accordingly, the national liberation movements were the organized 
expression of the people’s culture (Ibid: 143). The national liberation movement, Cabral 
(Ibid: 150) further explains “goes beyond the conquest of political independence.” The 
second most important task was for the movement “to put itself on the superior plane of 
the total liberation of pro ductive forces and the building of the people’s economic, social 
and cultural progress” (Ibid: 150). 
Touré (1976:73) also affirms Africa’s resistance to colonialism as an act of culture, in 
that it proceeded “from the knowledge of her own personality and of all the values there 
attached.” It expressed Africa’s will and determination to abolish centuries of European 
domination and unite for a better use of her developmental potential. Hence, the primary 
condition of culture is to abolish oppressive conditions and establish a better relation with 
nature, society, and the people. Touré (1976:97) advances that “the real and the total 
independence is the first condition for a r eal and total development of culture.” 
Accordingly, a selective analysis of the people’s cultural values must be done as a first 
step toward socio-economic transformation in post-independence Africa. 
Culture, Nkrumah asserts, is the core of political revolution; however, he views the 
attainment of national independence as the first measure toward the restitution of African 
humanity. His emphasis on the struggle for po litical independence as a first principle 
meant that, “without the first political revolution, we would never have been in a position 
to plan for the future,” Abdallah explained in our interview on January 5, 1997. In other 
words, political power is reci procally the inescapable prer equisite to economic, social, 
and cultural renaissance. 
What is discernable from the above is that culture as a product of a people’s history 
has an ideological dimension. Nkrumah’s po litico-cultural thought is historical, in terms 
of Africa’s unfavorable experience with Eur ope. To combat the legacy of European 
colonialism after the attainment of nationa l independence, in his view, required a new 
cultural and political thought. This meant a re surrection of Africa’ s past genius and 
cultural values to bear on the new Africa, in terms of socio-economic transformation. 
SOCIO-POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 
As Awoonor’s pointed out in our interview on January 8, 1997, Nkrumah’s cultural 
thought could only be comprehe nded within the framework of his political philosophy. 
This refers to a broad spectrum of ideas that came to constitute his political agenda. “One 
of the things so peculiar about Nkrumah was that, of the few African leaders,” Awoonor 
continued, “he was the one who constructed a whole theoretical system to support his 
political and economic agenda for a united A frica.” In 1960, he saw the need for the 
resurgence in the intrinsic values in African culture as part and parcel of the total 
liberation of Africa from the colonial and neocolonial economic exploitation of Africa. 
Thus, since culture is an organized expression of the people’s past experience, the 
leadership of the national liberation movement  in Africa must possess a clear idea of the 
value of culture as the ideological framework for the struggle. They must also have a 
profound knowledge of the culture of their people, whatever the level of economic 
development and social consciousness (Touré: 173). 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     39


--- PAGE 56 ---
It is Fanon who said that “each generation mu st out of relative obscurity discover its 
mission, fulfil it or betray it” (1996:253). For Nkrumah, it meant preferring “self 
government with danger to servitude in tr anquility (1973:10). He understood life not just 
as a product of history, but also one’s commitm ent to the historical traditions of African 
people. In doing so, he emerged as the epitome of the African anti-colonial struggles, in 
terms of human and material resources as well as ideological direction. In other words, 
Nkrumah was what Asante (1993:26) refers to as “keeper of the flames of the ancestral 
proactive response” to colonialism and neocolonialism in Africa. 
Nkrumah’s vision of African culture as the core segment of Africa’s political freedom 
and socio-economic transformation resulted from his understanding of history. He made 
manifest his historical conscience in his speeches and published works. The relevant ones 
for this discourse include: Toward Colonial Freedom,  the “The Motion of Destiny” 
speech delivered to the parliament in 1954, “The African Genius” and Consciencism, a 
book on political philosophy for the new Africa. Nkrumah’s Towards Colonial Freedom 
drafted while a student in the United States and completed in Britain, offers 
decolonization strategies as an act of culture. It gets to th e core of the primary objective 
of culture as explained above. It also expl ains his cultural thought process pertaining to 
the African situation during the second European world war. Nkrumah writes: 
In 1942…while I was a student in the United States of America, I was so 
revolted by the ruthless colonial e xploitation and politi cal oppression of 
the people of Africa, that I knew no peace. The matter exereised my mind 
to such a degree that I decided to put down my thoughts in writing and to 
dilate on the results of some of my research concerning the subject of 
colonialism and imperialism. (Nkrumah, 1962:xiii) 
In this booklet, Nkrumah analyses colonial policies, and the colonial mode of production 
and distribution of imports and exports. Through colonialism, the African was robbed of 
his land, by extortion and forced concession. Nkrumah critiques the exploitative nature of 
colonialism in Africa, such as its economic and political policies and praetices. He notes 
that “the policy underlying the economic situation in the colonies is that of monopoly 
control, forcing the farmer and peasant to  accept low fixed prices by eliminating open 
competition, and forcing the same colonial farmer and peasant consumer to buy at high 
fixed prices” (Ibid: 17). The philosophy of capitalism, Nkrumah further points out, forced 
the colonized African to labor under colonial governments “with uncomplaining 
satisfaction” (Ibid: 18). He writes: 
The imperialist powers need the raw materials and cheap labour of the 
colonies for their own capitalist industries. Through their system of 
monopolist control they eliminate native competition, and use the colonies 
as dumping grounds for their surplus mass-produced goods. In attempting 
to legitimize their presence they claim to be improving the welfare of the 
native population. (Ibid: 18) 
This form of economic exploitation, he found, was not compatible with the core values in 
African culture, specifically the egalitarian way of life or “the concern for all,” as Cabral 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     40


--- PAGE 57 ---
(1980:151) puts it. The highest value in African cultures, Nkrumah understood, is 
embedded in interdependence, interrelationship, and collective responsibility. 
As pointed out earlier, some of the major writings of Nkrumah focus on political 
philosophy, the dangers in neocolonialism a nd imperialism as a guide toward socio-
economic transformation in a united Africa. Yet underpinning his thoughts are the core 
values in traditional African societies. Th ey include African ethics, humanism, and 
communalistic ethos. 
During his student days in the United States, Nkrumah saw himself as one of those 
ordinary Africans, who were animated by  African national consciousness, and sought 
knowledge as an instrument of national emancipation and integrity (Ibid: 4). He observed 
in Western philosophy “opposition of interest,” or “social opposition between ‘inside and 
outside’ (as) dialectical in nature which can be used to explain the course of many 
societies, including Africa.” But in traditional Africa: 
This was reduced by making the visible world continuous with the 
invisible world. For them heaven was not outside the world, but inside it. 
African societies never accepted transcendentalism. (Nkrumah, 1970a:12) 
Nkrumah argues that philosophy is “one of the subtle instruments of ideology and social 
cohesion.” It provides a theoretical basis for the cohesion, and “performs this ideological 
function when it takes shapes as political philosophy or as ethics” (Ibid: 66). Thus, such a 
philosophy must take cognizance of the African situation as it was then and blend them 
into African philosophical thought pattern. W ithin that framework, Nkrumah, according 
to Cudjoe (1995:338), “sought to reconcile the traditional African humanist values, which 
he saw as a socialist manifestation with insights of Marxism.” 
Nkrumah’s socio-political thought, Philos ophical Consciencism, for the emerging 
African nation-states was based on African egalitarianism, ethics and humanism. It was 
also based on African “situation…at the re turn of political independence” (Nkrumah, 
1970a:68). He says: 
There are three broad features to be distinguished here. African society 
has one segment, which comprises our traditional way of life; it has a 
second segment which is filled by the presence of the Islamic tradition in 
Africa; it has a final segment which represents the infiltration of the Euro-
Christian tradition and culture of Western Europe into Africa, using 
colonialism and neo-colonialism as it’s primary vehicles. These different 
segments are animated by competing ideologies. But since society implies 
a certain dynamic unity, there need s to emerge an ideology, which 
genuinely catering for the needs of  all, will take the place of the 
competing ideologies, and so reflect the dynamic unity of society, and be 
the guide to society’s continual progress. (Ibid: 68) 
In effect, the working out of this contradiction in Nkrumah’s thinking is how they fit into 
the African personality. He evinces that traditional African human value includes “an 
attitude towards man which can only be described, in its total manifestation, as being 
socialistic. He explains: 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     41


--- PAGE 58 ---
This arises from the fact that man is  regarded in Africa as primarily a 
spiritual being, a being endowed originally with a certain inward dignity, 
integrity and value. It stands refreshingly opposed to the Christian idea of 
the original sin and degradation of man, (Ibid: 68) 
It should be emphasized that the theoretical basis of Nkrumah’s argument for socialism 
lies in the highest in African cultures, which is collective ethos. This is also manifested 
“on the social level, in terms of institu tions such as the clan, underlying the initial 
equality of all and the responsibility of many for one.” It was this cultural value as well as 
the communal ethos in traditional Africa which “was impossible for classes of a Marxian 
kind to arise” (Ibid: 69). In Marxist class society, there is a disproportion of economic 
and political power struggle between them. In such a society, the classes “are crushed, 
lacerated and ground down by the encumbrance of exploitation. One class sits upon the 
neck of another” (Ibid: 69). 
Nkrumah sees capitalism as a development by refinement from European feudalism, 
whereas feudalism is a development by refinement from slavery. And the development 
which capitalism marks over slavery and feudalism in Europe consisted as much in the 
methods by means of which labor is coerced as in the mode of production. Therefore, 
“capitalism is but the gentleman’s method of slavery,” he (Ibid: 72) explains. In contrast, 
the welfare of the people in the pre-colonial African soci ety was supreme. There was no 
sectional interest, which could be regarded  supreme, nor could the legislative and 
executive power aid the interest of a particular social strata (Ibid: 69). 
Nevertheless, colonialism, according to Nkrumah, came and negated all this. It created 
a cadre of Africans, who, by their European  education, became inf ected with European 
cultural values and “ideas, which they t acitly accepted as being valid for Africa. 
Nkrumah notes with serious concern the seduction of the “colonial students by Western 
philosophers” who gave them “a philosophi cal account of the universe that they 
surrendered their total personality to them  (Ibid: 3). Armed with such a fraudulent 
universalistic philosophy, the African students carried away with them an attitude at 
variance with the concrete reality of their people and their struggl es. In addition, the 
Africans were introduced to Greek and Roman history as the cradle history of Europe; 
they were to treat this Eur opean ancient history “together with the subsequent modern 
European history as the only worth-while portion” of world history. This kind of 
pedagogy, Nkrumah points out, “was anointed with a universalistic flavoring, which 
titillates the palate of certain A frican intellectuals agreeably that they become alienated 
from their own immediate reality” (Ibid: 5). 
Nkrumah’s argument is that because pos t-colonial Africa wa s no longer the old 
society of authentic African va lues, but rather a society en larged by Islamic and Euro-
Christian influences, a new harmony become s imperative. This harmony should be an 
ideology that solidifies “in a philosophical statement,” and at the same time uphold the 
original humanist principle of Africa. Nkrumah explains that: 
Such a philosophical statement I propose to name philosophical 
consciencism, for it will give the theoretical basis for an ideology whose 
aim shall be to contain the African experience of the Islamic and Euro-
Christian presence as well as the e xperience of the traditional African 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     42


--- PAGE 59 ---
society, and, by gestation employ them for the harmonious growth and 
development of that society. (Ibid: 70) 
What Nkrumah attempts to achieve with this ideology is to harmonize the three segments 
so that they fit into  the African personality submerged during colonialism. Secondly, he 
views the social-political practice of consciencism as thwarting “the emergence of classes 
as in Marxist conception of class structure” (Ibid: 98). 
But, in its 1964 editorial, the Legon Observer  notes that with Philosophical 
Consciencism, “Nkrumah revises Marxism to give it a particular reference to African 
needs and traditions.” This means re-interpreting the Marxist philosophy in the context of 
the new Africa, and enunciates a new social, political philosophy and ideology for a total 
decolonization and development of the mind. Nkrumah, however, explains in 
Consciencism that: 
The evaluation of one’s own social circumstances is part of the analysis of 
facts and events; and this kind of evaluation is as good as a starting point 
of inquiring into the relations between philosophy and society. Philosophy 
calls for an analysis of fact and even ts, and an attempt to see how they fit 
into human experience. (1970a:2)  
Here, Nkrumah establishes the relevance of his philosophical thought to the African 
reality. According to Hountondji (1983:210), the term Consciencism suggests that the 
new collective consciousness as advanced by Nkrumah “would be not only cognitive but 
also practical, consciousness in the most political sense of the term, as well as the 
definition of a new cultural identity.” 
As a student of philosophy, Nkrumah unders tood the nature of phenomena; he knew 
the primacy of matter, meaning it remains in a motionless state unless acted upon by an 
external force. Nkrumah finds his concept of materialism directly opposed to “Newton’s 
denial of the physical activity of matter…incapable of intellectual action, neither 
thinking, perceiving nor feeling” (1970a:81). Matter, he explains, is not inertia; rather it 
is capable of self-motion, both in the sense of change of relations, and in the sense of 
change of property (Ibid: 81). Though matter is capable of dialectical change, 
Philosophical Conciencism does not assert the sole  reality of matter. It rather asserts the 
ordinal reality of matter. 
For Nkrumah the minimum assertion of materialism is the absolute and independent of 
matter. Matter, however, is also a plenum of forces which are in antithesis to one another, 
and which is thus endowed with powers of self-motion (Ibid: 79). This is where we get an 
inkling of the influence of Marxist dialectical materialism on Nkrumah’s thought. As 
Politzer (1976:95) explains, for dialectics, “nothing is final, absolute, sacred. It reveals 
the “transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it 
except the uninterrupted process of becoming and of passing away (Ibid: 95). 
Nelson (1985:87) also makes a remarkable observation on Nkrumah’s paper on 
dialectics of materialism and sociology written while a student at the philosophy 
department at the University of Pennsylvania on the relationship between philosophy and 
sociology. Nkrumah, he cites, found “in that special area of philosophy as 
epistemology,…the origin of consciousness and the mind, the relationship of mind and 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     43


--- PAGE 60 ---
body, the nature of thought, language and logic and the influence of society labor on the 
individual and social thi nking.” The fundamental propos ition set forth by Marx’s 
epistemology, according to Nkrumah, are “t hat matter is primary, that the mind and 
consciousness are secondary and derivativ es, and that mental processes and 
consciousness itself are products of specially organized matter in the form of the brain 
and nervous system” (1970a:90). According to Nkrumah, “Marx and Engels regarded 
materialism as the true form of science, the final overthrow of idealism” (Ibid: 92). 
As a political philosophy for social policy,  Nkrumah’s assertion on the primacy of 
matter is a Marxist social supposition. This has some implications for social conditions of 
life. According to Marx, it is the anti-social  sources of crime, and not the individual, 
which must be removed. As a social being, each human being must be given social scope 
for the vital manifestation of his being. As cited in German Socialist Philosophy,  Marx 
theorizes as follows: 
If man is shaped by environment, his environment must be made human. 
If man is social by nature, he will develop his nature only in society, and 
the power of his nature must be measured not by the power of separate 
individual but by the power of society. (1997:102) 
Similarly, Nkrumah, while in prison for the Positive Action in 1950, concluded that 
criminality is not hereditary, but the upshot of social conditions; thus, the only way to 
change criminal acts is to change the social, as well as material conditions of life. 
Philosophical Consciencism asserts the interaction of mind and body. It has no room 
for parallelism on this issue; rather it retains the two categories as found in Marxist 
philosophy. In Marxist Social Thought, Freedman [ed.] cites Marx as follows: 
The real world is not a philosophical concoction but is rather the world of 
direct engagement, in which mind and body interact with human society 
and physical nature. (1968:xxxiii) 
Thus for Nkrumah, Marxist materialism holds that sociological theories that separate the 
mind from the brain, or which deny the primacy of the brain and nervous system are 
unscientific. 
Nkrumah writes that the cardinal ethical principle of philosophical consciencism is to 
treat each man as an end in himself and not  merely as a means. This principle is 
fundamental to all socialist and humanist conceptions of man, Nkrumah observes. From 
his standpoint, this principle of ethics found in the nature of man agrees with the 
traditional African idea of the absolute and independent existence of matter, and the idea 
of its power of self-motion. However, matter, he says, does not imply “dead weight, but 
alive with the forces in tension.” Thus to the African, everything exists as a complex of 
forces in tension (Nkrumah, 1970a:88). 
One clearly sees Marxist influence on Nk rumah’s social-political thought, as he 
acknowledges the primacy of matter over spirit. In human society, this refers to the 
material conditions of life as opposed to metaphysical interpretation. This materialist 
philosophy regards the environment and nature  of social relations in the mode of 
productions in every society as the factor that determines one’s conditions. Here, one 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     44


--- PAGE 61 ---
notes Nkrumah’s conceptualization of post-colonial Africa from a materialist conception 
of society. 
It must be pointed out Nkrumah’s statement that there is “in the African philosophy 
the absolute and independent of existence of matter” is inconsistent with Mibiti’s 
interpretation of traditional African worldvi ew. As Mbiti (1970:2) writes “there is no 
formal distinction between the sacred and secular, between the religious and non-
religious, between the spiritual and the material  areas of life.” In effect, there is “no line 
drawn between the spiritual and the physical (Ibid: 6). 
Nkrumah, Taylor (1987:48) indicates, disagreed with a Russian Africanist, Ivan 
Potekhin who challenged the claims by African political leaders “that African society is 
largely classless.” Potekhin’s argument was that “there is a widening gap between the 
African national bourgeoisie and the developing proletariat,” and that a class conscious 
was necessary for the transition to socialism. But Nkrumah, Taylor points out, 
Does not deny the existence of classe s in African; rather he denied the 
existence of Marxist-Leninist class struggle by insisting that Africa could 
avoid class antagonism. Nkrumah’s denial of class antagonism is 
attributable to his contention that classes have the tendency of dividing 
Africans. (Ibid: 48) 
Keto (1994:80) notes that “elements of Marxist theory that claim to predict future 
development in human affairs through a special insight into the ‘universal laws’ of social 
change, profoundly is incompatible with an Africa centered perspective.” Thus “when 
Marxist and neo-Marxist theoreticians claim ‘unqualified universalism’ or the conceptual 
derivations from their metatheory of history which are based largely on the study of the 
European experience, they are simply extending, under the guise of a ‘radical program’ 
and dimension, the application of a hege monic Europe centered perspective” (Ibid: 80–
81). But Marxist theory, Keto maintains, has “an analytical aspect that can interact with 
an Africa centered perspective of history” (Ibid: 80). For, Marxism, he writes: 
[Provides] a significant social critique of the class conflict and other 
economic and social factors associated with the social organization for 
production that accompanies the devel opment and maturation process of 
mercantile and industrial capitalism th at began in Europe, insights from 
such historical critiques of society ar e helpful for analyzing social change 
terrain as areas of the world occupied by Africans become affected by that 
process of industrialization and urbanization under capitalism. (Ibid: 81) 
Accordingly, the ultimate in tellectual response to the effects of capitalism on Africa 
emerging from colonialism will depend on how one analyses specific historical 
experiences and the high ideals in traditiona l African society “where acceptable trade-
offs can be made and how a society defines such acceptable social trade-offs” (Ibid: 82). 
As Welsh Asante (1993:16) points out in her Nzuri conceptualization, “African aesthetics 
as keeper of traditions will be  able to absorb influences, progress and cultures as long as 
it is located and its development, including influences and amalgamation, is on its terms.” 
The argument one can present is that when an “outside theory ” is modified to fit one’s 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     45


--- PAGE 62 ---
cultural confines, it ceases to be foreign. Si milarly, Nkrumah references Marxist thought 
to enrich Philosophical Consciencism. This is where he defers from Nyerere. 
Nyerere’s argument, on the surface, seems to authenticate Nkrumah’s position. “In our 
traditional African society,” he explains, “we were individuals within the community and 
the community took care of us. We neither needed nor wished to exploit our fellow men.” 
It was colonialism which “int roduced different and wrong headed attitude, such as the 
principle of private land ownership, which led to inequality, and the creation of a class, 
social parasites.” Therefore, in post indepe ndence Africa, this m eant a return to the 
traditional customs of land holding (1968:6–12). But while this, in Nyerere’s view, meant 
the creation of African socialism, Nkrumah argues for scientific socialism in the context 
of modern technology (1973a:439). 
From Nkrumah’s argument, it is the recognition of the restoration of Africa’s humanist 
and egalitarian principles of society, which calls for scientific socialism. This means 
remolding African society in th e socialist direction, and reevaluating it in such a manner 
that the humanism of traditional African lif e reasserts itself in a modern technical 
community” (Ibid: 439). Thus, “socialism in Africa,” he advances, “introduces a new 
social synthesis in which” contemporary technology is reconciled with African human 
values, in other to avoid the staggering social malefactions and deep schisms in the 
capitalist society. 
It is in this context that Gyekye’s disagreement with the premise of Nkrumah’s 
Philosophical Consciencism must be examined. According to Gyekye (1997:148), 
Nkrumah’s assertion that “there is a continuity of communalism with socialism is 
oversimplification” and “false.” In fact, Gy ekye’s quotation of Nkrumah is incongruent 
with the full tenet of Nkrumah’s Philosophical Consciencism. Notwithstanding elements 
of social hierarchy as well as private ownership of property, often by a family in 
precolonial Africa, Nkrumah explains: 
what social thought in Africa must r ecapture is not the structure of the 
traditional African society but its spirit, for the spirit of communalism is 
crystallized in its humanism and in its reconciliation of individual 
advancement with group. (Nkrumah, 1973a:441) 
This is a moral as well as ethical value—social justice, equality, fraternity, humanity and 
a healthy form of the public life—found in traditional African so ciety. Philosophical 
Consciencism is a search for rational methods of social and cultural development, and 
social order in the aftermath of enslavement by foreign capitalist countries. Thus, 
Nkrumah’s conceptual framework concerni ng communalistic ethos as the ancestor of 
scientific socialism is largely based on Africa’s historical and cultural experience with 
Europe. As Cudjoe (1995:34) e xplains, “the social-political  ancestor of socialism is 
African communalism in Africa, and one does not go that far to recognize that this 
historical unity was dislocated by colonialism and could be reconciled only through 
scientific socialism.” 
Nelson’s (1985:242) conclusions on dialectical conception of African history better 
clarify Nkrumah’s argument. First, the European exploitative society with its antagonistic 
class cleavages in slavery, feudalism and capitalism is alien to traditional African society. 
His second conclusion is that scientific “s ocialism and traditional African society could 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     46


--- PAGE 63 ---
be seen as having a common conceptual lineage, ” and not a continuity of the former with 
the latter, as Gyekye alleges. For, every revolutionary thought as a conscious movement 
cannot develop without drawing from the cultural values of the people, which contributed 
to their survival during oppression (Touré, 1976:102). 
Yet, in his Class Struggle in Africa,  written after his governme nt’s overthrow by the 
military on February 24, 1966, Nkrumah alters his previous supposition that class has the 
tendency of dividing Africans. At  the core of the military c oups and the outbreak of civil 
wars is the class struggle (Nkrumah, 1970b:9–10). The social category, class, he defines, 
“is the sum total of individuals bound together by certain interests” which “they try to 
preserve and protect” Class conflicts, he continues, result from the rise of private 
ownership of the means of pr oduction; thus the moment “capitalists start exploiting the 
workers, the capitalists become a bourgeois class,” whilst “the exploited workers become 
a working class” (Ibid: 17). 
Class struggle, Nkrumah maintains, is absent in every socialist state, since the 
government represents workers and peasan ts; whereas in the capitalist society the 
government represents the capitalist. Hence, a ruling class, Nkrumah adds, “is cohesive 
and conscious of itself as a class. It is conscious of its objective interests, position and the 
threat posed to its continual domination “by the rising tide of working class revolt” (Ibid: 
19). Freedom, to the capitalist class means “the absence of restraint, of laissezfaire, free 
enterprise,” and of “economic Darwinism;” in this case, the government sees its role as 
protecting the private property and private ownership of the means of production and 
distribution of goods and services. Furthermore, capitalists, Nkrumah explains, confine 
freedom to the political sphere without any relevance to economic issues. They equate 
capitalism with economic freedom. Secondly, “the bourgeois” conception of freedom is 
the bourgeois worship of ‘law and order’ regardless of who made the law” and in whose 
interest the law protects, Nkrumah (Ibid: 24) maintains. Therefore, inequality, from his 
stand point, can only cease by the obliteration of classes. 
In pre-colonial Africa, Nkrumah explains, “there were embryonic class cleavages, and 
did not surface until colonialism appeared on the continent. Duri ng the anti-colonial 
struggle, between eighty and ninety percent of the population consisted of peasants and 
agricultural laborers in Africa, while the industrial and urban workers represented five 
percent. Therefore, “conflicts between the African peoples and interests of 
neocolonialism, colonialism, imperialis m and settler regimes concealed all other 
contradictory forces.” This, to some degree explains why class or vanguard parties have 
been so long emerged in Africa” (Ibid: 19). 
But because different classes joined togeth er during the anti-colonial struggle, sharp 
class cleavages were blurred. In the 1960s, the drive for a nationalist front was deemed 
necessary in order to defeat the colonial oppression and exploitation and its local 
compradors. This, according to Nkrumah (Ibid : 10), prompted some African leaders to 
proclaim that the communal and egalitarian way of life in traditional Africa “made any 
notion of class struggle out of question.” As in Ghana, this fallacy became transparent at 
the time Nkrumah’s government began to make known its socialist program. 
In Africa, the bourgeoisie tends to emulate the standard of living of “the old colonial 
ruling class, which is not necessarily the way of iife of European bourgeoisie;” rather, it 
is “the way of life of a racial group in a colonial situation” (Ibid: 25). In this way, the 
African bourgeoisie perpetuates master-ser vant relationship in a post-independence 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     47


--- PAGE 64 ---
Africa. Their Eurocentric conditioning is identifiable by their habits, value system, dress, 
institutions and fraternal organizations. Associations such as professional chambers of 
commerce, stock exchanges, rotary clubs and masonic societies are identified with them; 
just as co-operative and trade unions are orga nizations associated with the peasants and 
working class. And these Western educated “white-color” personnel can best be 
classified as petty bourgeois,  “African bourgeoisie” or elite. In Ghana, this elite class 
found their interest threatened by Nkrumah’s socio-economic and cultural ideas, policies 
and the non-capitalist system path of development. 
It is true that African societies have not always been homogenous, but his previous 
statement that class structure began to de velop with clearly identifiable classes of 
proletariat and bourgeoisie is inconclusive. The special interest group at the era of 
colonialism in Ghana held no real political  and economic power; rather, it was through 
the Indirect Rule that a few paramount “chiefs” enjoyed absolute authority over their 
citizens. Majority of the population consisted of peasants and laborers, and only the small 
mining and railroad workers can be said to be proletariat as in capitalist countries. 
Therefore, the kind of class struggle that emerged in post-colonial Africa was not exactly 
between Marxian proletariat and bourgeoisie. 
Nkrumah finds the concept, African socialism, meaningless and irrelevant. It is a myth 
“used to deny the class struggle, and to obscure genuine socialist commitment by those 
African leaders who are compelled to proclaim socialist policies, but who are at the same 
time deeply committed to international capitalism” (Ibid: 26). Nkrumah writes: 
While there is no hard and fast dogma for socialist revolution, and specific 
circumstances at a definite historical period will determine the precise 
form it will take, there can be no compromise over socialist goals. The 
principles of scientific socialism are universal and abiding, and involve 
the genuine socialization of productive and distributive processes, Those 
who for political reasons pay lip service to socialism, while aiding and 
abetting imperialism and neocolonialis m, serve bourgeois class interests. 
Workers and peasants may be misled for a time, but as class 
consciousness develops the bogus soci alists are exposed, and genuine 
socialist revolution is made possible. (Ibid: 26) 
These statements dismiss the no tion that there is a form of socialism applicable to Africa 
that derived from purely communal and egalitarian aspects of traditional society. As 
pointed out earlier, Nkrumah drew from the spirit of traditional African egaliterialism and 
humanist values and not the communal structure to formulate his Philosophical 
Consciencism. With the revision of the first edition of Consciencism, Nkrumah’s political 
philosophy should be seen as a progre ssing political thought. And I agree with 
Hountondji when he counsels that “Consciencism must be read with an essentially critical 
eye, as evidence of a particular stage in the development of Nkrumah’s thought…and 
avoid treating it as the author’s last wo rd in philosophy” (Hountondji: 142), Writing in 
August 15, 1969, after his overthrown by the CIA orchestrated coup on February 24, 
1966, Nkrumah modified Consciencism, especially in Chapter Three and said: 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     48


--- PAGE 65 ---
Since the publication of the first edition of Consciencism in 1964, the 
African Revolution has decisively entered a new phase, the phase of 
armed struggle. In every part of our continent, African revolutionaries are 
either preparing for armed struggle, or are actively engaged in military 
operations against the forces of reaction and counter-revolution. The 
issues are clearer now than they have ever been, The succession of 
military coups, which have in recent years taken place in Africa, have 
exposed the closed link between the interests of neo-colonialism and the 
indigenous bourgeoisie. These coups have brought into sharp relief the 
nature and the extent of the class struggle in Africa. Foreign monopoly 
capitalists are in close association with local reactionaries, and have made 
use of officers among the armed forces in order to frustrate the purpose of 
the African Revolution. (1970a) 
Nkrumah’s political thought thus identifies ideo logy as an expressi on of “class interest 
and class consciousness” He finds “libera lism, individualism, elitism, and bourgeois 
democracy” as “examples of bourgeois ideology.” Socialism and communism on the 
other hand “are ideologies of the working class, and reflect its aspirations and politico-
economic institutions and organizations” (N krumah, 1970b:23). Therefore, every system 
of government “whether parliamentary multi-pa rty, one-party or ope n military dictator, 
reflects the interests of certain classes in” a given society. In other words, the state “is the 
expression of the dominant class over other classes” Nkrumah (Ibid: 17) elucidates. It 
follows that a one-party socialist system of government denotes classlessness; likewise, 
wherever there are sharp class cleavages in  a society with multi-parties, there is a 
government by single party. The Republican and Democratic Parties in the United States 
as well as the Conservative and Labor Parties in Britain, for instance, can both be 
classified as a single party, since they represent a single class, Nkrumah (Ibid: 18) further 
argues. 
Nkrumah’s thought about a one-party system of government should be understood in 
the context of his socialist ideas. His argument for the evolution of new forms of 
government quite different from the Western pattern but no less democratic in their 
protection of the individual and his inalienable rights, is also rooted in the traditional 
African political structure. He explains that, “because of Afri ca’s egalitarian society, the 
development of one-party democratic sy stem becomes natural and understandable 
(Nkrumah, 1973a:372).” And the multi-party syst em in Western countries is, in fact, a 
reflection of a social cleavage,  and a type of class system , which does exits in African 
societies. Thus, 
A one-party system of government is an effective and safe instrument 
only when it operates in a socialist society. In other words, it must be a 
political expression of the will of the masses working for the ultimate 
good and welfare of the people as whole. (Ibid: 372) 
The implication here is that a one-party system of government can only function for the 
good of all in the framework of a socialist state or state with a socialist program in post-
independence Africa. He saw it as a means of building a new post-colonial nation with 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     49


--- PAGE 66 ---
very little hindrance in the way of progress. But a one-party system of government in a 
neocolonial country, subject to external pressures and control, Nkrumah cautions, can 
quickly degenerates “into the most dange rous forms of tyranny, despotism and 
oppression” (Ibid: 372). It was against this b ackground that he conceived the construct, 
neo-colonialism, and ceaselessly campaigned agai nst it, in order to establish a one-party 
system of government for the evolving socialist Ghana. 
INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS OF NKRUMAH’S CULTURAL 
THOUGHT 
Post-independence African cu ltural thought and institutions  fall under what Diagne 
(1979:125) describes as cultural renaissance. Touré points out that colonial domination 
broke the normal process of development in the African societies, and plunged the whole 
continent into the same political, economic, so cial and cultural situation (1976:96). As a 
consequence, the cultural thought of African nationalist leaders, emerged primarily as a 
tool for re-conquering A frican people’s optimum cultural space. It was an attempt to 
bring culture up to date, and to integrate it into the new Africa. It was also a reaction 
against the European ethnocentric ideology and cultural imperialism, which had curbed 
the national cultures of the African continent. 
Karenga (1990:XI) opines that the key crisis and challenges in the African American 
communities is one of culture. Likewise, th e root of socio-economic problems in post-
independence Africa lies in the cultural disloca tion of the African. The task, as seen by 
some of the African leaders, th erefore, was to “rescue and reconstruct the best of ancient 
African culture and use it as a paradigm fo r a renewed modern African culture,” to 
borrow Karenga’s phrase. Thus, it is by taki ng this challenge that Africans can retake 
control of their destiny and daily lives, shape them in their own image and interest; it also 
meant stepping back on the stage of human history as a free, proud and productive 
people. This was thrust of Kwame Nkrumah’s cultural thought. 
As defined by Nketia, institutional aspect of culture gives scope for social and political 
action and facilitates socio-economic devel opment or heightens the organization of 
cultural activities. Comb ined with the philosophical asp ect of culture, institutions may 
stimulate and create intellectual environment for institutional developments. 
Ani (1994:1) views intellectual decolonization as a prerequisite for an effective 
“creation of successful decolonization and cultural reconstruction strategies. She explains 
that the success of Europe’s political impe rialism “can be accredited not so much to 
superior military might, as to the weapon of culture. The former ensures immediate 
control but requires continual physical force for the maintenance of power, while the 
latter succeeds in long-lasting dominance that enlists the cooperation of its victims” (Ibid: 
1). 
Nkrumah, in his writings and speeches, up lifted the spirit of his ancestors and 
advanced their culture of struggle. He embodied what Touré (1976:104) refers to as “all 
the aspiration of his people, aspiration to c onquer all the material and immaterial values, 
aspiration to permanent progre ss, aspiration to reach the valuable scale of mankind and 
who efficiently contributed to the continued progress of the people.” The core of the 
institutional aspect of Nkruma h’s cultural thought is manife sted in African classical 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     50


--- PAGE 67 ---
history. Thus, the claim to African historical achievement s cannot only rehabilitate the 
African people, but they can also draw insp irations from the genius of their ancestors 
towards a genuine political independence and socialist socio-economic development. 
In Consciencism, Nkrumah dismisses the history of Africa by Eurocentric scholars as 
encumbered with malicious myth , especially the denial of A fricans as historical people. 
Accordingly, while the “other continents had shaped the world history and determined its 
course, Africa had stood still, held down by inertia” (Nkrumah 1970a:62). The continent 
was only propelled into history by the European contact. And that Hegel’s infamous 
scholarship had “lent to the ahistorical hypothesis concerning Africa” (Ibid: 62). 
Thereafter, African culture and society we re presented as being rudimentary and 
primitive and that colonialism was a duty of Christianity and civilization (Ibid: 62). 
“Africa’s sophisticated culture,” Nkrumah points out, “was said to be simple and 
paralyzed by inertia, hence subjugated politically” (Ibid: 62–63). 
This distortion and omission of African personality and civilization propelled 
Nkrumah’s demand for an immediate and unconditional independence of Ghana and 
Africa from colonialism. Addressing the national assembly on July 10, 1953, Nkrumah 
justifies his demand for Ghana’s self-government in the light of African past glories. He 
reminded his audience as follows: 
Before the Christian era, and before England had assumed any 
importance, our ancestors had attained a great empire, which lasted until 
the eleventh century, when  it fell before the attacks of the Moors of the 
north. At its heights that empire stretched from Timbuktu to Bamako, 
and…the Atlantic. It is said that lawyers and scholars were much 
respected in that empire and that th e inhabitants of Ghana wore garments 
of wool, cotton, silk and velvet. There was trade in copper, and gold and 
textile fabric, and jewels and weapons  of gold and silver were carried. 
(1957:198) 
Nkrumah’s argument was that the achieveme nts by ancestors of Africa “give us 
confidence that we can create, out of the past , a glorious future.” “Just as the future 
moves from the past so the present has emerged from the past,” he further explains [Ibid: 
199]. The theorem of Nkrumah’s demand fo r unconditional independence of Ghana can 
be found in the words of Padmore; thus, “when the Gold Coast African demands self-
government today they are, in consequence, merely asserting their birthright which they 
never really surrendered to the British” (Ibid: 199). 
Because culture is the result of a people hi story, and because it is from history that 
people draw inspiration to build a happy future, Nkrumah viewed the African renaissance 
as necessitating the rewriting of African history. From his intellectual standpoint, the 
rewriting of African history should focus on the history of African society, and not as the 
story of European adventures. In other words, it should be treated as enjoying its own 
integrity, or a mirror of that society, so that  the European contact is  seen as interference 
in African historical and cultural mission. In this regard, African history “comes to guide 
and direct African action” (Nkrumah 1970a:63) in terms of intellectual and artistic 
products. 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     51


--- PAGE 68 ---
As Fanon (1996:238) said there is dignity, glory and solemnity to gain from African 
past. Arguing for the cogency of African past, he writes: 
The claim to a national culture, history in the past does rehabilitate that 
[African] nation and serve as a justification for the hope of a future 
national culture. In the sphere of psycho-effective equilibrium it is 
responsible for an important change in the native. Perhaps we have not 
sufficiently demonstrated that colonialism is not simply content to impose 
its rule upon the present and the future of a dominated country. 
Colonialism is not satisfied merely with holding a people in its grip and 
emptying the natives brains of all form and content. By a kind of 
perverted logic, it turns to the past of the oppressed, and distorts, 
disfigures, and destroys it. This work of devaluating pre-colonial history 
takes on a dialectical significance today. (Ibid: 238) 
Here, Fanon does not only recognize the rebirth of  Africa past as a worthy cause, but he 
also provides some insights into the nature of the estrangement of African culture and 
history during colonialism. For this reason, a successful African renaissance should 
proceed from a critical examina tion of the cultural estrange ment characteristic of the 
colonial period. The most significant was the aggressive psychological warfare the 
colonialists designed “to convince the native that colonialism came to lighten their 
darkness.” In this regard, colonial admini strators, who never cease calling the African 
“negro as a savage” also sought to push into the heads of the Africans that if the 
Europeans were to leave “t hey (Africans) would at once fall back into barbarism, 
degradation, and bestiality” (Ibid: 238). 
The European condemnation of Africa was continental in scope. In the eyes of the 
colonialist, “the ‘Negro’ was neither an Angolan nor a Nigerian; he simply spoke of the 
‘Negro.” Therefore, any A frican-centered program in an y academy should be straight 
away continental in its breath. Likewise, the African intellectual who desires to combat 
colonial misinformation and distortion of African phenomena ought to fight on the field 
of the whole continent. As would be discussed below, Nkrumah shared Fanon’s discourse 
on the role of the African intellectual in combating colonial legacy. Nkrumah’s vision of 
African culture is two-fold. One is the manifestation of African culture, which shows up 
as part of the African genius, identity and achievement in the past, Nketia indicated in our 
interview on December 31, 1996. The other is th e institutional aspect of African culture. 
Based on his background in the United States, Nkrumah had come to see African culture 
as the basis of African-centered education. He was disillusioned by the set up of the 
University of Ghana, which was very much like Oxford and Cambridge universities, or 
“very much like the colonial culture and he wanted to ch ange it.” But, the plan to 
establish “the Institute of African Studies  had so much opposition as he was trying to 
make it a university within a university and by approving twenty eight Fellows,” Nketia 
indicated. 
As indicated earlier, Nkrumah’s cultural thought can only be comprehended in the 
light of his Philosophical Consciencism. He made manifest his cultural thought with 
respect to institutional development in several speeches and writings, the most seminal in 
the views of Awoonor, Hagan, Nketia, Abdallah and Anyidoho was “The African 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     52


--- PAGE 69 ---
Genius.” This speech, marking the inaugural ceremony of the Institute of African Studies, 
on October 25, 1963, represents an affirmati on and restitution of African culture which 
colonialism sought to destroy. The title of the speech itself is a philosophical statement 
asserting that the future of Africa can only advance from the knowledge of its glorious 
past. It outlined a new aggressive and African-centered approach to intellectual and 
artistic pursuits in the new Africa. To this end, he raised philosophical questions as to the 
relevance of the Institute in terms of its specific contribution to the advancement of 
knowledge about the people and cultures of Africa through past history and the 
contemporary. Here, we discover for the first time Nkrumah’s statement on African-
centered perspective to the study of African phenomena in post-independence Africa. 
One essential function of this Institute must surely be to study the history, 
culture and institutions, languages and ar ts of Ghana and of Africa in new 
African centered ways—in entire freedom from the propositions and 
presuppositions of the colonial epoch,  and from the distortions of those 
professors and lecturers who continue to make European studies of Africa 
the basis of this new assessment. By the work of this institute, we must re-
assess and assess the glories and achievements of our African past and 
inspire our generation, and succeedi ng generations, with a vision of a 
better future. (1992:14) 
This passage reflects Nkrumah’s thought on the need to infuse the educational and artistic 
creation with an African-centered historical and cultural content. This, for Awoonor, 
meant that the struggle for independence was not purely the anti-imperialism, anti-
colonialist struggle and i ndependence from the British, ‘with everything following 
automatically.” It called for a conscious e ffort to reconstruct and energize the new 
African operating from his historical and cultural experiences. 
As Carter G.Woodson (1994:1) noted, the educated African Americans were “taught 
to admire the Hebrew, the Greek, the Latin and Teuton and despise the African.” The 
cause of this was rooted in the content of  the education they received from the Black 
“colleges and universities where the ‘Negro’ is thought of as the race or studied only as a 
problem or dismissed as of little consequence.” Diop has also explained that, “The West 
has modernized but it has maintained its closeness to its classical source. It is 
inconceivable to imagine modern Europe cut off from this long-live past,” (July: 139). If 
one looks “at the Western history, legal system, sociology, or philosophy,” July cites 
Diop, they are “all rooted firmly in Greco-Latin culture” (Ibid: 139). Therefore,” any 
African historian who evades the problem of Egypt is neither modest nor objective… He 
is ignorant, cowardly, and neurotic. To ignore Egypt is comparable to a Westerner 
writing a history of Europe without reference to Greco-Latin origins” (Ibid: 139). Diop in 
his Civilization or Barbarism takes the position that: 
We must underscore the abyss that separates us from those Africans who 
believe that it can be enough to flirt with Egyptian culture. For us, the 
return to Egypt in all domains is the necessary condition for reconciling 
African civilization with history, in order to be able to construct a body of 
modern human science, in order to renovate African culture… For a look 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     53


--- PAGE 70 ---
toward Egypt of antiquity is the best way to conceive and build our 
cultural future. In reconceived and renewed African culture, Egypt will 
play the same role that Greco-Latin antiquity plays in Western culture. 
(1991:3) 
Here, Diop sees the “historical factor as th e cultural cement that unifies the disparate 
elements of a people to make them into a whol e by the particular slant of the feeling of 
historical continuity lived by  the totality of the collectiv e people” (Ibid: 212). Thus, it is 
the historical conscience that allows a people to distinguish itself from others. Again, 
through the feeling of cohesion that it creates, historical conscience constitutes the safest 
and the most solid shield of cultural security. This means that the essential thing for a 
people is “to rediscover the thread that connects them to their most remote ancestral past” 
(Ibid: 212). 
Noticing Nkrumah’s cultural thought as including science culture, Abdallah argued 
that, the products of scientific culture and civilization are not the monopoly of any nation 
or group of people. It is a process in which, at one point or another, different nations and 
peoples have been custodians, and that science, “was initiated by the original thinking of 
our people, called ancient Egyptians,” Abdallah added. 
It is in this context that Robert July’s criticism on Nkrumah’s call for re-assessment 
and re-interpretation of the Africa’s glorious past is evaluated. July (1978:130) posits 
that, “by all odds the most genuinely revolutionary of Africa’s nationalist leaders, 
Nkrumah sought to create a new Ghana and a new Africa, in the process of destroying the 
old ways that the new were de signed to replace.” He adds th at the “chiefs were far too 
conservative for the dynamic Doctor Nkrumah; for them the world changed but slowly 
and the past had immediacy that made it sometimes indisquishable from present” (Ibid: 
130). These statements invite some responses. First, the idea of re-assessment and re-
interpretation of African past glories and achievements did not amount to “destroying the 
old ways.” It meant returning to the pre-col onial African cultural a nd historical achieve-
ments in order to inspire the new generation.  Second, it implied the rewriting of African 
history distorted and omitted from world history by Hegel and other European 
missionaries and scholars. 
In the first place, the so-called “chiefs” we re themselves divided between Nkrumah’s 
immediate and unconditional demand for independence and Danquah’s gradual approach 
to independence. For example, Nana Sir Tsibu Darku stood on the UGCC ticket in his 
own traditional area as the Paramount king, and was defeated by the CPP candidate 
Pobee, a locomotive engine driver, trade unionist (Bing: 142). On a lager scale, Nii 
Kwabena Bonne II, Mantse of Osu Alata, (a  Ga divisional king) organized a nationwide 
boycott of European textiles and merchandi ze in February 1948 in response to rising 
prices and threat of inflation. “Believing that the work, which I am doing, is one, which 
will help my country, I am prepared to die if only it will make the Gold Coast a better 
place,” the king declared (Nkrumah, 1973b:4). 
Another example that disputes the alleged conflict between Nkrumah and the 
traditional rulers is the case of Omanhene of  Esikado, Nana Dr. Kwabena Nketsia. In 
1948, he refused to allow the celebration of the British “Empire Day” at the public park 
in Sekondi, in protest against the imprisonment of Kwame Nkrumah. Through the “gong 
gong,” he announced that the ground where the Empire Day was usually celebrated 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     54


--- PAGE 71 ---
would not be available on May 24, 1948, He could not see the validity in going to salute a 
[British] flag under which th e people were nothing “but poor slaves.” The teachers and 
schoolchildren obeyed his orders, and there was no Empire Day celebration that year 
(Ibid: 9). 
In a speech titled, “Forward With the People,” cited in Political Awakening of Africa, 
Nkrumah expressed his thought on the need to adapt the traditional political institution to 
the new society inherited from colonialism (1951:112). Speaking on “African History 
Through African Eyes,” Nkrumah viewed democracy for Africa not as “a matter of 
techniques, but [as] a matter of socialist goals and aims,” which “we lost due to European 
education” (1962:26). His appointment of Adontenhene of Akyem Abuakwa, Nana Kena 
II as Ghana’s High Commissioner to India was a manifestation of his vision of the new 
role the traditional leaders could play in the new Africa. Nkrumah also appointed Nana 
Ayirebi Ackwah as the Chairm an of the National Education Trust, and his former foe 
Nana Sir Tsibu Darku to the position of Chairman of Cocoa Marketing Board. It must be 
recalled that Nkrumah himself was enstooled a king in his mother’s kingdom at Nkroful 
(Hagan, 1991b:9). The fact of the matter is  that, both the intelligentsia and those 
privileged traditional rulers found Nk rumah and his political “party as parvenus, and 
potential usurpers of power from the legitimate heirs to the British” (Arhin, 1991:31). 
In view of this, was Nkrumah’s statement on re-assessment re-interpretation of 
African civilization an “appeal to the past,”  in terms “of traditions and ancient culture, 
much of which was healthy and virile, and highly resistant to political fashions that now 
decreed its demise?” as alluded by July (1987:130). On the contrary, Nkrumah’s 
consciousness of the importance of historical factors in the liberation of Africa from the 
shackles of colonialism, was the most efficient cultural weapon with which the African 
people could arm themselves to rediscover their personality. Also, Nkrumah’s reference 
to Africa’s past did not amount  to destroying the traditional institutions, but rather to 
draw inspirations and lessons from the achievements of African ancestors to bear on post-
independence Africa. 
The call to African past served as a reminder of African history and personality that 
the Europeans sought to destroy. It was also meant to rescue, restore and reconstruct the 
core values in Africa’s classical culture to bear on the present. As Noire Diop wrote in his 
“Unite’ Cultural de I’Afrique,” it is “only a real knowledge of the past that can give one 
the sense of a historical continuity” (Ibid: 135). In effect, it meant that if the African was 
being born under the age of this political time,  Awoonor elucidated in our interview, he 
should be a new African who was not cowed down by the distortion of his history, but 
one who should raise his head up and assert himself.” As he  recalled “we as individual 
young people at that time, were all inkli ng around and writing so fast” to capture the 
experiences of the African from a new inte llectual framework. “We were like the foot 
soldiers of Nkrumah in the cultural field.” As a consequence, writers association, The 
Writers Workshop, the Drama Studio, Okyeame magazine and some others came into 
existence. 
In Nketia’s view, Nkrumah’s statement was meant to find a new way of interpreting 
African history. In other words, it was meant to recognize the fact that some studies had 
been made; there were a lot of scholars in th e African studies field,  but they were all 
mostly using the paradigms that they were accustomed to. “They might not have had any 
bad intention of twisting the historical fact; but those were the paradigms they knew.” 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     55


--- PAGE 72 ---
Among them were a few that were trying to find an African orientation, which fell in line 
with Nkrumah’s stand on combating the old colonial inheritance. As Nketia affirmed, 
African centered perspective is the only way to overcome colonial legacy. 
For Opoku, Nkrumah’s cultural thought meant refuting the “lies told about African 
past” by European scholars, and he wanted the post-independence African scholars to 
reassess those distortions. Thus, since “every nation has got something that needs to be 
discovered,” Nkrumah, Opoku recalled in our interview on January 6, 1997, insisted on 
unraveling “the untruths” that had been told about African past. As a consequence, “we, 
in the Institute, were more turning away from the Western documents to other 
documents, And that was how we came to organize the collection of Arabic manuscripts. 
It was part of the new orientation,” Nketia cl arified. For instance, the collection of oral 
traditions, Nketia disclosed, “was in the direction of getting new interpretation, which 
was African-centered.” 
In Nkrumah’s thinking, any uncritical pursuit of a Eurocentric educational program is 
inimical to a genuine political independen ce. His thought process was that just the 
opposite would occur, that by embracing Western culture, Africa would lose its 
intellectual and artistic freedom, He stressed that the mere achievement of national 
sovereignty could not ensure cultural inde pendence, unless it is rooted in African 
people’s historical and cultural experiences. By implication, the re-interpretation and the 
new assessment of the factors making up the African past, must note the following: 
That African studies, in the form in which they have developed in the 
universities and centres of learning in the West, have been largely 
influenced by the concept of the old style ‘colonial studies,’ and still to 
some extent remain under the shadow of colonial ideologies and 
mentalities. (1992:13) 
This statement by Nkrumah was meant to abr ogate “the study of African history as a 
minor and marginal theme within the framework of [the British] imperial history” (Ibid: 
13). Nkrumah further demonstrates his African-centered perspective when he admonishes 
the subordinated nature in which the study of African social and culture was done “to 
maintain the apparatus of colonial powers.” In this regard, he stressed the need to combat 
the “tendency to look to soci al anthropologists” in British institutions of higher learning 
“to provide the kind of knowledge that would help to support the particular brand of 
colonial policy known as Indirect Rule.” Indirect Rule here refers to the undue powers 
the British colonialists gave to the African kings to oppress their ow n people in contrast 
to the underpinning Seven Cardinal Virtues of Ma’at—Justice, Harmony, Balance, 
Righteousness, Reciprocity, Truth, and Order—of pre-colonial political institutions and 
structures in Africa. 
Nkrumah was mindful of the Western orientation of the professors and research 
Fellows when he called for an African-cente red interpretation and assessment of African 
experiences. The Western universities, where th ey had attained their academic laurels, 
had largely conditioned their intellectual outlook. For this reason, the new assessment and 
the ideological perspective of the foreign intellectuals also became the primary concern in 
Nkrumah’s vision for a new Africa. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     56


--- PAGE 73 ---
We appreciate, however, that their mental make-up has been largely 
influenced by their system of educa tion and the facts of their society and 
environment. For this reason, they must endeavour to adjust and 
reorientate their attit udes and thoughts to our African conditions and 
aspirations. They must not try simply to reproduce here their own diverse 
patterns of education and culture. Th ey must embrace and develop those 
aspirations and responsibilities, which are clearly essential for maintaining 
a progressive and dynamic African society. (Ibid: 14) 
For Nkrumah, an African university cannot serve the society unless it is rooted in the 
indigenous social structures and cultural institutions. Secondly, it would not be able to 
reach the people in the society without a firm  grasp of the philosophical principles that 
had guided African people thr oughout history. The irony, howev er, was that the Institute 
was part of a university, whose academic board was made of people, whose mental make-
up had largely been influenced by the system of education imported from Europe. These 
were people responsible for the approval and disapproval of the curriculum of all 
programs. Also, his concerns on the ideological orientation of the foreign intellectuals, in 
the light of his demand for an African-centere d perspective in scholar ship in an African 
university, were insufficient. The mere expre ssion of his concern could not simply alter 
their Eurocentric intellectual and cultural values. A critical examination and a complete 
reversal of the mission and cultural character of the entire university would have been 
appropriate. Otherwise, the Institute of African Studies, as a unit within the university 
system, alone could not combat the cultural character of the imported education. 
As Ashby (1964:11) observes, the universitie s of Ghana and Ibadan “were exported 
from Britain on the old assumption about social function.” In content, the curriculum of 
these institutions followed the English pa ttern through Cambridge, Oxford and the 
University of London [Ibid: 33], The thrust of such curriculum was noted in India where 
the British governor Macauly hoped “to create in India a class of persons Indian in blood 
and colour, but English in taste, in opinions, in moral and in intellect” (Ibid: 2). 
Giving his commencement speech at Fisk University in 1933, on “The Field and 
Function of the Negro College,” W.E.B.Du Bois (1973:92) maintained that the African 
American problem had to “be the center of  Negro university.” He evinced that the 
teaching of African American students in racist America, and their experiences should be 
at the core of their education. He explained further: 
upon these foundations, therefore, your university must start and build…. 
A university in Spain is not simply a university. It is a Spanish university. 
It is a university located in Spain. It uses the Spanish language. It starts 
with Spanish history and makes conditions in Spain the starting point of 
its teaching. Its education is for Spania rds, not for them as they may be or 
ought to be, but as they are with their present problems and disadvantages 
and opportunities. (Ibid: 93) 
Du Bois’s further argument also has some direct bearing on the situation to which 
Nkrumah addressed in his speech. Spanish uni versity, Du Bois poi nted out, “is founded 
and grounded in Spain, just as… French university is French.” But there were some 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     57


--- PAGE 74 ---
“Negro” scholars similar to those found at the University of Ghana at the time, who had 
difficulty in apprehending this very clear truth. In the view of such people, “French 
university,” for example, “is in a singular sense universal, and is based on a 
comprehension and inclusion of all mankind a nd their problems,” Du Bois added. On the 
contrary, “the problems of French people are its major problems and it becomes universal 
only so far as other peoples of the world comprehend and are at one with France in its 
mighty beautiful history” (Ibid: 93). 
It is in the same spirit that an African university in Africa must begin with African 
people’s experiences. President C.W.Eliot of Harvard understood this when he wrote 
that: 
A university…must grow from seed. It cannot be transported from 
England or Germany in full leaf and bearing… When the American 
University appears, it will not be a copy of foreign institutions,… but the 
slow and natural outgrowth of American social and political habits. 
(Ashby, 1973:3) 
This statement dismisses the notion of the so-called universalistic nature of a university. 
As the old adage goes, “charity begins at home.” 
Therefore, Nkrumah’s call for African-centered curricula and mission of the Institute 
of African Studies in Ghana, in a university founded on the principles of European 
cultural traditions, was inadequate. He made no mention of the need to develop a 
conscious and sustained evolution of a co rresponding African-centered paradigm for the 
entire university. Thus, simply urging the scholars, mostly products of Europeans 
universities, “to develop, amplify and apply these in relation to the actual possibilities 
that present themselves to you” (1992:18) underestimated the depth of colonial legacy. 
As Ashby notes, one of the symptoms of British cultural nationalism, was an invisible 
confidence of British education for export. 
Casely-Hayford foresaw this negative impact of colonialism on the African in his 
proposal for an African university. In his “Ethiopia Unbound,” Casely-Hayford 
emphasized that an African university must not be a “mere foreign imitation,” but should 
be African in orientation in order to train the African “to preserve his national identity 
and race instincts” (Anyidoho, 1992:5). In his vision, an A frican university should make 
it expedient for the revision of the distorte d and erroneous ideas about Africa and its 
people. What is striking was his vision of an African university as a center “of national 
conservancy and evolution,” and which “would preserve in the (African) students a sense 
of African nationalism” (Ashby: 13). Edward Blyden, though could not distinguish 
between modern Western civilization and Greco-Roman literature, maintained that an 
African university should be free from the grip of the “despotic Europeanizing influences 
which had warped and crushed the negro mind” (Ibid: 3). 
In Decolonizing the Mind: The Politics of  Language in African Literature,  Ngugi 
analyses at length the organic relationship between language and culture. “Language,” he 
explains ‘has a dual character, it is both a means of communication and a carrier of 
culture” (1986:13). Thus, “language as culture is the collective memory bank of a 
people’s experience in history” (Ibid: 14). For instance, “Hegel’s statement that there was 
nothing harmonious with humanity to be found in the African character,” Ngugi further 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     58


--- PAGE 75 ---
points out, “is representative of the racist im ages of Africans and Africa such a colonial 
child was bound to encounter in the literature of the colonial language” (Ibid: 18). As is 
commonly held, it was through the promotion of European languages by European 
missionary’s schools that the European trained African scholar developed special affinity 
to European classical history, philosophy, law and literature. 
The reversal of this trend in Nkrumah’s perspective meant the study of African 
languages and other relevant non-Afriean langua ges containing African classics. For the 
Institute of African Studies, this meant co-operating with other institutes and centers of 
African studies in other A frican states to produce what  Nkrumah described as “an 
extensive and diversified Library of African Classics.” He envisioned the library to house 
“editions, with translations and commentaries or works—whether in African, Asian or 
European languages—which are of special value for the student of African history, 
philosophy, literature and law” (1992:14). 
According to Nketia, Nkrumah’s interest in putting together what he described as 
African classics meant literary forms cultivated in African societies; they included 
materials emerging from those forms which are passed on from generations to 
generations, but which also served as models for creativity. And the simplest kind of 
materials one would think of were the folk tales and epics. It must be pointed out that 
Nkrumah also viewed the collection of oral traditions and documentation of African 
classics in Arabic and Hausa languages as positive steps toward the rebirth of African 
history (Ibid: 15). He found works undertaken by some of the staff in the Institute 
consistent with his concept of African studies. 
I also regard as important the work, which you are doing in the collection 
of stool histories and other forms of oral tradition—of poetry and African 
literature in all its forms—of which one admirable expression is Professor 
Nketia’s…. ‘Folks Songs of Ghana,’ and Kofi Antubam’s latest book on 
African culture… I must also mention here Ephram Amu whose work has 
created and established a Ghanaian  style of music and revived an 
appreciation for it. Our old friend, J.B.Danquah, has also produced studies 
of Akan culture and institutions. (Ibid: 15) 
According to Nketia, Nkrumah, in fact got some people together to think of collecting 
folktales, from which selections could be ma de, translated and published as models of 
African classical. It included the epics and anything that could be replicated by a 
succession of generations into publications. This was also a manifestation of the African 
genius. In other words, what the African genius was able to produce in the past should 
form the basis of the new Africa. We note that Nkrumah’s stand on African languages in 
the academy was not new. While working at the African Studies Center at the University 
of Pennsylvania as an instructor, he published “Native African Tongues,” a 
comprehensive listing by names and pronunciation of African languages with special 
emphasis on West Africa ( Philadelphia Evening Bulletin,  27th of June, 1943, Sec. 5. 
E25). 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     59


--- PAGE 76 ---
AFRICAN PERSONALITY 
Kwame Nkrumah’s conceptualization of African personality is intricately linked to his 
cultural thought. His conception, in many ways, differs from other proponents of African 
personality. Kambon defines it as “the system of psychological…and beha vior traits that 
are fundamental to African people.” Also, it is  “the African cultural reality manifesting 
itself in the basic psychological disposition and behavior of African people” (Kambon, 
1992:213). By “psychological tr aits” he means the “spir itual, cognitive emotional, 
biochemical constitution, whilst cultural rea lity refers to “collective psychogenetic” of 
African people. In order not to get into the polemics of his conception of African 
personality, it must be pointed out that this biogenetic and biochemical stance is inimical 
to that of Nkrumah. 
Writing on “The Concept of African Personality: Sociological Implications,” Tembo 
refers to African personality as “the ma nifestation of unique ness among Africans as 
reflected in their behavior, social norms, customs, values, beliefs, religious zeal, attitudes, 
explanations of the cosmos and the supernatural, social and political systems historically 
and in contemporary times” (1990:193). This  definition comes close to Nkrumah’s 
conception in terms of its cultural and political content. However, his citation of 
Kaunda’s discourse on psychology in support of what he refers to as “proAfrican school” 
rather affirms Plato’s equation of non-Greek aristocrats with emotions. According to 
Kaunda, “the Westerner has problem-solving mind, whilst the African has a situation-
experiencing mind” (Ibid: 193–194). In effect , Plato’s supposition views mind and body 
as polar opposites. It holds that “reason is a higher principle” while emotion is associated 
with lower capacity” (Ani, 1993:32). 
As cited in chapter one, the idea of African personality had, prior to Nkrumah, been 
used by “the caliber of O.Awolowo, Nnamdi Azikiwe and Jomo Kenyatta” (Diagne, 
1978:161). Historically, it was Edward Blyden who first used “the term of African 
personality,” and said “Africa is struggling for a separate personality” (Legum, 1962:20). 
But it was not until the November 1958 “All A frican Peoples Conference” in Accra that 
Nkrumah gave the concept, African personality, its prominence and political significance. 
Here, it must be pointed out that Diagne’s seeming equation of the concept of African 
personality with Fanon’s “idea of a “Nati onal Consciousness,” Nyerere’s “Ujama”, 
Touré’s “Africanity” and Mobutu’s “Authenticity” is questionable. For example, Touré’s 
and Mobutu’s concurrent use of the concept “authenticity” with “African personality,” as 
he implies, can be misleading. Mobutu, he quotes, defines authenticity as “the duty to 
think and to act independently” (Diagne, 1979:170). Toure’s conception of authenticity, 
he cites, is: 
That colonialism has produced a falsification in (inauthenticite’) and a 
depersonalization of the colonized people’s way of thinking. Therefore 
Authenticity means partly becoming reconciled with one’s heritage and 
one’s particular reality. As a step towards a renaissance, it implies 
destroying the colonial structures and replacing them with new structures 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     60


--- PAGE 77 ---
corresponding as closely as possible to the requirements of our 
development and our new needs. (Ibid: 170) 
By comparison, Mobutu’s idea of authenticity, and that of Touré are at variance. They 
belong to different philosophical and ideo logical schools as the post-independence 
African history has shown. The differences  in their political actions and economic 
practices are common knowledge to historians  as well as students of post-independent 
Africa. The most important thing is not the use of term; what is significant is the essence 
of a concept a person uses. Therefore, Diagne’s assertion that all the “African renaissance 
ideologies” (Mobutu’s Authenticity included) were “always to liberate the African and to 
restore his identity and creativity,” cannot be taken as an accurate representation of the 
core tents of African personality. 
African personality emerged as a socio-cultural construct arising from the cultural and 
historical experiences of African peoples unknown to any specific humankind. In other 
words, post-independence African historical as well as cultural consciousness owes its 
origin to the inhuman and ruinous nature of the European slave trade, colonialism and 
neo-colonialism. As Diop expl ains, cultural personality consis ts of historical, linguistic 
and psychological factors. It holds that, any discourse on post-independence African 
personality should not be limited to just psyc hological and/or social inquiry; it should be 
extended to cover historical and cultural (including linguistic) investigation (Diop, 
1991:211–215). 
Nkrumah’s African personality refers to “the cluster of African humanist principles 
which underline the traditional African society” (1970a: 79). His conceptualization is not 
just “the mind of ideas and attitude which are identical and equally important in all of the 
otherwise different African cultures” (Diagne: 162). It is the revival of “the cultural and 
spiritual unity of the African people,” and “our heritage, so that the African personality 
would become a strong driving force within the African revolution, and would at the 
same time become a factor to be reckoned with in the international community” 
(1973a:205). For Nkrumah: 
African personality is merely a term  expressing cultural and social bonds 
which unite Africans and people of African descent. It is a concept of the 
African nation, and is not associated with a particular state, language, 
religion, political system or colour of the skin. For those who project it, it 
expresses identification not only with African historical past, but with the 
struggle of the African people in the African Revolution to liberate and 
unify the continent and to built a just society. (Ibid: 205) 
Noting that African personality is the driving force within the African revolution, 
Nkrumah points to how the imperialist Europe and their intruding tourists forgot that “we 
are a historic people responsible for our unique forms of language, culture and society” 
(Ibid: 208). Thus, it was time African people were treated as agents and not as spectators 
in the international community. Nkrumah’s conceptualization of African personality is 
rooted in his conviction that “we are all African people” (Hagan, 1991b: 18). But, 
Nkrumah, he explains, “was convinced that it was a reality which had always been there, 
only waiting to be restored [Ibid: 18]. He saw the African personality in the context of his 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     61


--- PAGE 78 ---
strategy for determining the program of a key cultural institution as a model for other 
cultural institutions. 
One finds in Nkrumah’s identification of th e dialectical poles in the African cultural 
situation the bearings that should determine Africa’s quest for freedom and respectability. 
It holds that the re-assessment and re-asserti on of African past glories and achievements 
serve as a reminder and rediscovery of African personality, a potent agency for building a 
new Africa. In other words, African persona lity dwarfed during colonialism “can only be 
retrieved if we make a conscious effort to restore Africa’s ancient glory.” In addition, it is 
only in the environment of total independe nce from foreign control and independence 
that Africans would find real fulfillment of their wishes and aspirations, “and the African 
genius finds its best expression,” Nkrumah (1992:17) enucleates. 
Addressing the first Conference of Independent African States in Accra in April 1958, 
Nkrumah expressed his thought on the many years that Africa had had to speak through 
the voices of Europeans. Therefore, African personality in international affairs meant 
Africa making its own impact in the world through the voices of Africans themselves. It 
also meant the readiness and ability of all Africans to manage their own domestic and 
international affairs. In his book, I Speak of Freedom  Nkrumah made clear that it is 
through international peace and security that Africa would be able to assert its “own 
African personality and to de velop according to our ways of life, our own customs, 
traditions and culture” (1973b:128). 
Nkrumah’s identification of African personality with African genius, meant 
“something different from Negritude, something not static, but dynamic” [1992:16]. 
Negritude, he explains: 
consist in a mere literary affecti on and style which piles up word upon 
word and image upon image with o ccasional reference to Africa and 
things African. I do not mean a vague brotherhood based on a criterion of 
colour, or on the idea that Africans have no reasoning but only a 
sensitivity. By the African genius, I mean something positive, our socialist 
conception of society, the efficien cy and validity of our traditional 
statecraft, our highly developed code of morals, our hospitality and our 
purposeful energy. (1992:16) 
Like African personality, African genius is a composite of certain cultural characteristics. 
They include communalistic social values, efficient institutional structures, and a humane 
attitude to all humans. As pointed out earlier, it was from the attributes of African genius 
that “Nkrumah proceeded to explain his deve lopment strategy with reference to culture” 
(Hagan: 19). Because the mind is dynamic, he  continues, the culture of the African 
cannot be seen in inert archetypes; and the way to nurture the “African genius is to infuse 
the educational system with the right cultural content” (Ibid: 19). 
It is, therefore, inexact when July (1987:3) attempts to equate Nkrumah’s thought on 
bringing traditional culture to bear on the new Africa with “Negritude movement’s 
romantic appeal to African past.” Also, Essien-Udom’s attempt to lump all trends of 
Black Nationalism in the United States and Negritude together with African personality is 
misleading. Writing in Black Nationalism: A Study For an Identity in America,  he 
considers black nationalism and Nkrumah’s African personality as “the sense of cultural 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     62


--- PAGE 79 ---
incompleteness and subtle attraction to the center of white power.” According to him, 
“the idea of African Personality espoused by President Nkrumah of Ghana at the first 
Conference of Independent African States in 1958 as well as the cultural movement of 
Africans in French territories suffer from the same dilemma” (1989:62). Certainly, 
Essien-Udom’s observation amounts to what Touré (1976:196) describes as 
“depersonalization and alienation of the human values of the Black man.” 
Negritude, according to Touré (Ibid: 196), is a product of history,” born out of 
colonialism and imperialism. “The theoretical justification of imperialism,” he points 
outs, is a product of colonial and imperialist exploitation of African peoples. The 
theoretical justification of imperialism is thus “a denial of all human faculty to Africa, to 
the African, whose company is obviously degrading.” Thus, “giving proof of an odious 
racism, the white colonizers fostered among the colonizing nations a negrophobia.” 
Accordingly, Negritude “is a kind of denial of ourselves.” By Negritude, they gave the 
Europeans new weapons to destroy Africans and hold “us in contempt by going so far to 
assert that if reason is Hellenic, emotion is” to the African (Ibid: 198). But a 
revolutionary, as a conscious man, he expl ains, never fights on the enemy’s ground; he 
fights on his own ground. Touré further clarifies: 
It is a lack of revolutionary conscience therefore that led to the creation of 
the concept of negritude. With the inferiority complex in us and convinced 
that we had neither civilization nor culture, we came to believe that we 
could not climb the rungs of the cultural ladder, but by defining ourselves 
in relations to those who are alienating our personality. (Ibid: 198) 
The crusade on African personality or Black Nationalism at the turn of this century, 
Touré further explains, was as old as the capture and enslavement, and the colonization of 
African peoples. It was not driven by a se nse of cultural imperfection and perspicacious 
“attraction to the center of white power,” as  Essien-Udom claims. The voice of Africans 
in the century was a part of the African an cestral resistance to the denial of African 
humanity and what Asante (1990:14) refers to  as the treatment and placement of African 
people at the fringes of Europe. Therefor e Nkrumah’s speech, “African Personality” at 
the first “Conference of Independent African St ates” was a search for African agency. It 
is thus pointless to notice any dilemma in Nkrumah’s call for the newly independent 
African states to define African problems and solutions based on African historical and 
cultural experiences. 
African personality, in Nkrumah’s view, manifests itself in all compartments of life. 
Opoku recalled Nkrumah identifying a clear ma nifestation of his concept of African 
personality in African dance. Quoting Nk rumah, Opoku said: “you see the African 
personality clearly in his dance, music and everything.” This was based on a scene in a 
documentary film which Opoku and Nkrumah watched together, Opoku indicted. The 
wife of a drum maker had brought him some food, and as the woman was leaving, the 
man hit her buttocks and Nkrumah exclaimed: “that’s so African!” 
Nkrumah was convinced that through theater, Africans would be able to bring out 
things that were African, especially, the African Personality. Understanding it as 
embodying the intrinsic African values and system of thought, statecraft, and system of 
hospitality, Nkrumah envisioned African personality as capable of recovery, not only in 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     63


--- PAGE 80 ---
symbolic, nor in going back as it were, but bringing them to bear upon the new African 
situation. As Awoonor pointed out, Nkrumah “by Ghana’s independence was sharply 
aware of the fact that the disintegration of the African personality was a clear 
manifestation of some of the important outcome of colonialism or the consequences of 
colonial experience. He was sharply aware of the relationship between the psychology of 
the colonialism and the culture of the colonized that Frantz Fanon (1996:238) talks about. 
Recognizing the negative impact of the colonial psychology on the psyche of the 
colonized African, therefore, meant that part of the first task of his government was to 
embark on a process of reintegrating the African personality, Awoonor explained. 
It was for this reason that Nkrumah established the cultural institutions towards a 
psychological and intellectual emergence of a new African because of the trauma of the 
colonial experience or the disintegration of his personality during colonialism. This 
meant that scholars and artists had to contend themselves with undoing the distortions 
and negation of African history, religion, civilization, and worldview by the European 
historians, anthropologists and theologians. And part of the process was to be carried out 
by the Institute of African Studies, and by extension the School of Music and Drama as 
the nucleus of the National Theater Movement. 
CREATIVE ASPECTS OF NKUMAH’S CULTURAL THOUGHT 
Jegede posits that, “a people’s perception of what qualifies to be art, in form, content, 
import and usage, varies from one culture to  another” (1993:238). In the colonial days, 
dramatic activities formed part of the British Empire Day. “There were a lot of variety 
shows,” Opoku indicated, and “all the artistic performances had nothing to do with us; it 
was all about European culture.” The church was very anti African drumming and 
dancing. They “would say this is fetish, ancestral worship,” he pointed out in our 
interview. 
For Nkrumah, the rebirth of African cultu re meant the abrogation of the colonial 
legacy in respect of African  arts in the academy. He sa w African art forms as an 
inseparable component of the struggle against colonial legacy. Just as African socio-
economic, agricultural and industrial deve lopments were generally viewed from 
European exploitation, African music, dancing and sculpture were labeled primitive art. 
Nkrumah continues: 
They were studied in such a way as to reinforce the picture of African 
society as something grotesque, as a curious, mysterious human back-
water, which helped to retard social progress in Africa and to prolong 
colonial domination over its people. (1992:13) 
In this regard, the Institute of African Studies situated in Africa, Nkrumah stressed, “must 
pay particular attention to the arts of Africa, for the study of these can enhance our 
understanding of African institutions and valu es, and the cultural bonds that unite us” 
(Ibid: 17). 
Inaugurating the African Art Exhibition at  the British Council in Accra, March 1956, 
Nkrumah (1973b:61)] spoke of th e contributions and the place of African arts in global 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     64


--- PAGE 81 ---
communities. “African art, music and dancing,” he points out, “have played a significant 
part in the artistic revolution which has ta ken place all over the world in recent years.” 
The traditional dances in Ghana, for instance, have “gone into the making of High Life, 
Calypso and many others,” Nkrumah explaine d. He maintained that appreciation of 
African art should be “something more than a mere curiosity;” it should open the door to 
the understanding “and respect of the mind of the Africans” (Ibid: 61). 
Nkrumah underscored the importance of arts in human life when he said that, “without 
the desire to create, man would soon become stagnant and uninteresting” (Ibid: 61). 
Notwithstanding this, the African scholar, he cautioned, should not be content with the 
accumulation of knowledge about the arts; th eir researches must stimulate creative 
activity towards the development of purposef ul African-centered arts. Their creative 
work, he urged: 
must contribute to the development of the arts in Ghana and in the other 
parts of Africa, they must stimulat e the birth of a specifically African 
literature, which, exploring African themes and the depth of the African 
soul, will become an integral portion of a general world literature. It 
would be wrong to make this a mere appendage of world culture. 
(1992:17) 
Welsh Asante shares Nkrumah’s stress on th e need to develop African-centered arts 
speaking to the material and spiritual conditions of life in post-independence. In her “The 
Aesthetic Conceptualization of Nzuri,” she posits that “the cultural dynamics of a people 
create a specific aesthetic complexion” (1993: 2). For, an artist in  traditional “African 
society does not view society as an impartial observer in order to create, rather society 
actively gives vision and perspective from which to express one self” (Ibid: 2). 
Theater in the new Africa, from Nkrumah’s standpoint, should serve as an intellectual 
forum, artistic stimulus and driving force behind the cultural renaissance of Africa. 
Furthermore, he expressed that “a work of art is not the record of a bare matter of fact but 
the projection of the artist’s inspiration, his emotions, preferences and sense of value.” 
Consequently, the ideal of modern art is to express the traditional African values and not 
to imitate those of the Europeans. The contention is that art is a social documentation of 
the time that produced it. In other words, all arts are the product of time, place and space. 
Inaugurating his theater group, “Osagyefo Players” on January 24, 1965, he said: 
Art in all its forms is expressive of the social conditions and social values 
of a people. The artist and therefore his creation as well were products of 
his time, In a series of artistic creations is mirrored the history of a people. 
The Akan people had no written record of their history and yet history is 
preserved in songs, dances, folk tales, dramas, music, and sculpture. 
Whenever there has been a significant change in the social attitude of a 
people, it has been reflected, directly or indirectly, in the mirror of art. 
(Osagyefo Players program, 1965) 
In effect, Nkrumah’s position on the social relevance of arts in post-colonial Africa was 
not unknown in the traditional societies. This relationship [between theater and society] 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     65


--- PAGE 82 ---
has existed in traditional Africa since the beginning of human civilization on the 
continent (Botwe-Asamoah, 1991:1). They include: “The Triumphant of Horus” 
[Fairmount, 1974] in Kemet [classical Egypt], epics of Sundiata of Mali, Mwindo of 
Angola, Osidi of Igbo, the legend of Kofi Gyemprem of Akyem Tafo, Olodumare 
creation story. Popular theater on market days in the Savanna region in West Africa, story 
telling theater and festivals [masquerade included], were and still are “live-out art forms.” 
Therefore, the arts have always been “int egral to life and man’s well being” (Jegede, 
1993:238) or celebration of life. In the Sande society, for instance, singing facilitates the 
clitoridectomy ceremony, while dancing is a requirement for the entire ritual drama 
(Boone, 1986:65). Ceremonial dram a in palaces, for instance,  involved court musicians 
and dancers whose work “was part of a divine order,” Welsh Asante (1993:2) points out. 
They have expressed African people’s worldview, and their absence creates “an obvious 
but uncomfortable vacuum” (Jegede: 238). 
Nkrumah’s thought on the social function of the arts in the old African society negates 
Kant’s discourse on art for art’s sake. Defending Bowling’s position on “political 
inscription as an inseparable ingredient of ‘cultural context’ producing the artist, Douglas 
writes as follows:s 
The artist, in turn, affirms his own being and relationships in a contextual 
world through his art. To those w ho would snicker from their critic’s 
tower built upon the analytical doctrine of “form,” I hasten to say that 
commitment to form is also an ideology steeped in narrow bourgeois 
politics born of “quasi-Kantians” precep ts of value for its own sake. 
Kant’s concepts of beauty, which most formalists adopt [consciously or 
not] as their “grande posture” of art for art’s sake, were intended by Kant 
as an attempt to establish a termin al value disconnected from reward and 
motive. Those formalists who adopt it as their “grande posture” of art for 
art’s sake fail to realize that as a critical posture their formalism limits the 
investigation of the art project as a product of a society that encourages, 
guides and often demands its peculiar formation. (1993:159) 
Likewise, Nkrumah saw theater not only as a forum for intellectual discourse, but also as 
a medium for restoring African personality and history submerged during colonialism. In 
addition, his thought on the importance of the arts in the socio-economic transformation 
in Ghana was based on their ability to fost er unity and harmony among different ethnic 
groups. His view on the inability of colonia lism to destroy the ri ch African cultural 
heritage in art, music, dance, paintings and sculpture was rooted in the African artistic 
and aesthetic values. Thus, the African “culture and traditions have survived because they 
possess a special in-born power, a peculiar cultural image which we must now take upon 
ourselves to cultivate and develop,” Nkrumah urged (Osagyefo Players program: 1965). 
In “The African Genius,” Nkrumah enunciated the importance of the university 
linking itself to the larger soci ety, so that they could feed  upon each other. “And that is 
why, when Efua Sutherland was working on the Drama Studio,” Abdallah indicated, 
“Nkrumah said that it should be off campus into town, “so that there would be cross-
fertilization.” That meant feeding the results of the research into the community, and 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     66


--- PAGE 83 ---
getting feed back from the community into the university. “It is this kind of interchange 
that helps in the growth and development of culture,” Abdallah explained. 
For this reason, Nkrumah entreated the School of Music and Drama to provide the 
Institute of African Studies “with an outlet for creative work, and for the dissemination of 
knowledge of the arts through its academ ic endeavors and creative productions. 
Consequently: 
This institute, in associ ation with the School of Music and Drama, will 
link the University of Ghana closely with the National Theater Movement 
in Ghana. In this way the institute can serve the needs of the people by 
helping to develop new forms of dance and drama, of music and creative 
writing, that are at the same time closely related to our Ghanaian 
traditions and express the ideas and aspirations of our people at this 
critical stage in our history. This should lead to new strides in our cultural 
development. (1992:18) 
Clearly, Nkrumah envisioned the “School of Music and Drama” to be the vanguard of the 
National Theater Movement in Ghana. Accordingly, the School was implored to develop 
models of excellence out of the traditional society for the new so ciety. By traditional 
African society, he was urging the School to research into the origins and ideas that 
informed the African arts. For, Nkrumah “a co mparable study of musical systems or the 
study of instruments, drum language, or the oral traditions that link music with social 
events, may illuminate historical problems or provide data for the study of our ethical and 
philosophical ideas” (Ibid: 17). 
This statement summarizes the functions of the arts. First of all the arts are integrated 
into the social and cultural life; therefore, th ey are an essential part of culture reflecting 
“our institutions, mode of thinking which embody our philosophy,” Nketia explained. 
The arts can contribute to the search for African personality, in terms of the intellectual 
faculty that is transmitted from generation to generation. For, “tradition is history with its 
customs and rituals…” it changes and “serve s as both foundation and continuity of a 
society as progression occurs” (Welsh Asante, 1993:6). 
The idea of research into the arts in the traditional African society, therefore, raises the 
question of artistic and aesthetic standard of the people. Kariamu Welsh Asante (1993:6); 
Robert Thompson (1974); Ma ulana Karenga (1993:397) Leroy Morriseaa, Ntozake 
Shange (1979) and Larry Neal [1975) have disc ussed at length on the social relevance of 
African arts. Karenga, for instance, contends th at for African “art to be real and relevant, 
it has to have three basic characteristics, namely functional, collective and committing” 
(1993:397). 
Since “functionality is the normative in traditional African aesthetic (Welsh Asante, 
1993:2), Nkrumah envisioned the scholar-artists to see their creative work not only as a 
forum for the restoration of African personality, but also as inspiring the Africans to 
make new strides in socio-economic and cultural advancement of Africa. Hence, the 
National Theater Movement that emerged in Ghana from 1955, and reached its height in 
1960, was not to revive the African arts “for art’s sake;” the movement was viewed as 
integral to the social, economic and cultural revolution in Ghana and Africa. 
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     67


--- PAGE 84 ---
CONCLUSION 
Nkrumah’s socio-political philosophy is, in f act, culture bound, It is rooted in the pre-
colonial African ethics, human values, egalitarian way of life and communal mode of 
economic activities. It was formulated in res ponse to colonial exploitation, Eurocentric 
social thought and cultural hegemony that had dehumanize the African. His book, 
Consciencism, emphasizes the highest ideals underlyi ng the traditional African society, 
and argues for the restoration of the spirit of classical African cultural values to bear on 
the new Africa. His premise is that scientific socialism has characteristics common with 
the spirit of communalism in traditional Africa, just as capitalism is linked with European 
feudalism. Therefore, “socialism can be and is the defense of the principles of 
communalism in a modern setting” (1970a: 73). He acknowledged the contradiction 
between Euro-Christian and Islamic traditions, and the traditional African collective 
worldview. He said that Euro-Christian tradition and that of the Islam should be viewed 
only as an experience of the trad itional African society. Hence, Consciencism suggests 
methods by which they could be harmonized to fit into traditional African cultural values, 
and for that matter African egalitarianism. 
Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought was ma nifested during the struggle against 
colonialism. Because he understood the anti-co lonial struggle as an act of culture, he 
wore and popularized African clothes, such as kente, batakari, and danced with the 
people. Wherever he went to campaign for i ndependence, he waived the horse-tail to the 
people, employed African aesthetic through the use of colors and symbolic 
configurations, and encouraged for the first time the pouring of libation to African 
ancestors at political rallies (Hagan, 1991a:189). Th ese, in effect, attest to his vision of 
African culture towards the reconstruction of post-colonial Africa.  
Since the pre-colonial African personality was submerged during colonialism, 
Nkrumah saw its restoration as prerequisite for the socio-economic transformation in the 
new Africa. Also, he saw its revival as an important component of Pan-Africanism. 
African personality, he maintains, “finds its expression in a re-awakening consciousness 
among Africans and peoples of African descent of the bonds which unite us—our 
historical past, our culture, our common e xperience and our aspiration” (1973a:205). For 
Nkrumah, African personality is intrinsically socialistic; and that when socialism is true 
to its purpose, it seeks a connection with the egalitarian and humanist past of the people 
of Africa (1970a:78). 
The question was not so much the idea as to the method of combating the colonial 
legacies. One method was formal education, but that was seen as part of the long-term 
strategy. African-centered theater, he envisioned, has the most vivid, potent and 
immediate way of restoring the African  personality needed for socio-economic 
transformation in Ghana. An example of this medium was later to be seen in Kenya, 
where Ngugi wa Thiong’o, his colleague N gugi wa Mirii and the people in Kamiriithu 
founded the Kamiriithu Community and Educa tion and Cultural Center. Here, the people 
collectively created an African-centered theater, through which they developed social 
consciousness and discovered what Nkrumah would call their African personality 
(Ngugi, 1986:42–62). 
Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought should thus  be seen as holistic in nature and 
content. Though not clearly articulated, he understood culture as containing different 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     68


--- PAGE 85 ---
parts; “it was not only an integral, but it also was a vital or central part of the general 
project, socio-economic transformation, of moving a people forward with their history,” 
Anyidoho reflected on Nkrumah’s cultural thought. Since his first objective was in 
breaking down the colonial structures and ideology, Nkrumah realized that it was 
impossible to tackle that problem without the cultural factor, Anyidoho added. 
A manifestation of this awareness dawned on him during his education in the United 
States. For instance, speaking to schoolchildren in Douglas Junior High School in 
Philadelphia in 1943, Nkrumah spoke on A frica, education, economics, politics and 
development. As part of his speech, he sa ng two traditional African songs, all in an 
attempt to dispel the widespread negative image of Africa in Western popular culture, 
media and books (Sherwood, 1996:79). For hi m, issues in politics, economics, 
philosophy and arts could not be separated; they are all manifestations of culture. 
Nkrumah, in fact, understood the link be tween the manifestation of his politico-
cultural thought and his cultural policy, with the performing arts becoming a part of the 
academy. In this regard, he envisaged the School of Music and Drama not only as an 
artistic and intellectual training ground for artists, but also saw its graduates providing 
leadership for the National Theater Moveme nt towards the restoration of African 
personality. Thus, by rescui ng the African personality th rough critical knowledge of 
Africa’s glorious past and profound appreciation of African aesthetic and the arts, 
Africans would regain their dignity and agency in the context of socio-economic 
transformation. A manifestation of this awareness can be gl eaned from the speech 
inaugurating his theater group, “Osagyefo Players.” He said: “it is only when there is 
complete fusion between African culture (in this case the theater) and African politics 
that the African personality will find its highest expression” (unpublished document: 24th 
January 1965).  
Kwame Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought     69


--- PAGE 86 ---



--- PAGE 87 ---
Chapter Four  
The Political Policies of Kwame Nkrumah 
The vision that I see…in that vision I see a parapet, and 
upon that parapet I see the mother of African unity and 
independence. Her body besmeared with the blood of the 
benighted of the race. On the same parapet I see the heroes 
of the race both living and d ead, in unison, singing one 
national anthem. On the same parapet, I see cities in Africa 
springing up becoming the metropolises of art and learning 
and science and philosophy; and I hear, beyond that 
parapet, mortals resounding the rejoinder: “Seek ye first 
the political kingdom and liberty  and all other things will 
be added unto it.” (Timothy, 1963:130) 
This excerpt from a speech that Kwame Nkruma h delivered at the Centennial Pavilion in 
Monrovia in January 1953, recited both by Awoonor and retired Colonel Oteng during 
our interviews, underscores his political polic y and Pan-African project. In effect, the 
statement made Ghana the battleground and th e centerpiece of Nkrumah’s Pan-African 
project. Earlier, the founder of the National Congress of British West Africa, J.E.Casely-
Hayford, had espoused a similar Pan-African vision, but was unable to attain political 
independence mainly because of the weakness of the Congress as an elitist organization. 
Nkrumah theorizes that “practice without thought is blind” and “thought without 
practice is empty” (1970a:179). It follows that to every theory there should be a 
corresponding praxis to ascertain its potency. Otherwise, it would remain an untested 
hypothesis and/or assumption. Thus, it is by the interaction between thought and praxis 
that society goes through transformation. While a student in the US and England, 
Nkrumah took active part in and played l eadership roles in Pan-African political 
movements. In the US, for instance, he had contacts with the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, the Universal Negro Improvement Association, Urban 
League and the Council on African Affairs, from which he acquired the modus operandi 
of organization. 
The nation of Ghana was created in 1957 from the British Gold Coast colony, the 
British conquered state of Asante (incl uding the Brong Ahafo Region and Asante-
Akyem), the British Protectorate Northern Territories and the United Nations’ Trust 
Territory of Togo, under the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah. But long before he 
descended on the political scene in the Gold Cost, the social and political activism had 
been confined to protests, boycotts, constitu tional reforms and lobby ing by the various 
interest groups. With the exception of Wall ace Johnson, according to A.B.Holmes, other 
nationalists such as Dr. J.B.Danquah, Kobi na Sekyi and J.E.Casely-Hayford were 
unprepared to make sacrifices  toward the attainment of political independence. They


--- PAGE 88 ---
were too embedded in the system they sought to change. Holmes identifies three factors 
contributing to their failures. These were “the nature of the political system, the influence 
of the societal differentiation,” that is class attitude, “and the availability of grievances on 
which to build anti-colonial protest” (Holmes, 1975:13). Nkrumah not only addressed 
these three factors, but he also put Leni n’s maxim that “organization determines 
everything,” into practice. 
This chapter first discusses the human geogr aphy of Ghana and the early anti-colonial 
movements, as a prerequisite to understanding the dynamics of the country’s anti-colonial 
and post-colonial politics. Second, it proceeds with this data in mind to analyze the 
dynamics of Kwame Nkrumah’s anti-colonial policies. Political policies here refer to the 
definite course of actions devised by Kwame Nkrumah’s pre-independence and post-
independence governments to guide and dete rmine decisions affecting the desired 
objectives of Nkrumah, namely, a unitary government, socio-economic and cultural 
transformation, and the formation of a Continental Union Government of African. 
HUMAN GEOGRAPHY 
The aboriginal ethnic group in modern Ghana, the Guans, moved downward from its 
parent group Gonja in the North in about 1200 C.E., and reached the coastal areas in the 
later part of the thirteenth century (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah, 1995:xix–xx). They 
comprise the Anum-Bosso, Atwode, Awutu, Bole, Efutu, Krakye, Kyerepong, Larteh, 
Nkonya, Ntwumuru, Salaga and Senya Bere ku (Ibid: 290). Today, these sub-groups can 
be found in the Brong (Bono), Eastern, Central, Northern and Volta Regions. The Akans 
and other major ethnic groups came later, fought and/or settled among them.  
The Brong (Bono-Manso), the first Akan empire, was the founded by Asaman in 1298 
(Ibid: xix). The Brong and Nzema groups were, perhaps, the first cluster of Akans to have 
left ancient Ghana to settle at their present locales. Nk rumah belonged to the Nzema 
kingdom. The migration pattern of the later Akans (Akanni) seems to have taken its 
course via Wangara along the Black Volta River, after the final defeat of the ancient 
Ghana by Mali in 1235, to the present Takyiman area. There are about twenty two Akan 
kingdoms. They include Abora, Adanse, Agona, Ahafo, Akuapem, Akwamu, Akyem 
Abuakwa, Akyem Bosome, Akyem Kotoku, Aowin, Asante, Assin, Banda, Bawle, and 
Bono. The others are Chokosi, Denkyera, Evalue, Fante, Gomoa, Gyaman, Kwahu, 
Nzema, Sefwi, Twifu and Wassa (Ibid: 290). Sections of these Akan kingdoms can also 
be found in Ivory Coast and Togo. Adanse  and Akwamu were the most powerful 
kingdoms before Denkyira and Akyem (before the arrival Abuakwa from Adanse). 
According to history, the Fante (meaning the part that separated from the main body) 
were the first among the later Akan group to  migrate from the Takyiman area and settled 
at the present Central Region in the thirteen century, with Kwaman, and later on 
Mankesim as its capital. The remaining Akan groups are said to have migrated and 
settled around Lake Bosomtwe, in the present Adanse locale. The Akyem led by Okru 
Banin, a powerful king of Otapupuase, left  Fomana and Kwaman (Reindolf, 1996:61) to 
settle on the bank of River Birem at Bunso, and later moved to establish its kingdom at 
the present Tafo Awansa. Reindolf s accoiunt  indicates that Akyem was an equally 
powerful nation, on par with that of Denkyira. The Akwamu was in all probability a sister 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     72


--- PAGE 89 ---
group of the Akyem; the former establishe d its kingdom at the Akyem-Peak and became 
the most powerful Akan state between 1500 and 1600s (McFarland & Owusu Ansah: xx) 
in the entire eastern and coastal regions until “a party of refugees, called Abuakwa, from 
Adanse led by Ofori Panin settled north of the” Birem River (Addo-Fening, 1975:64). 
The Abuakwa, according to Tafo tradition as well as Reindolf’s account, begged “to 
migrate there, at which time they were a powerful kingdom” (Reindolf: 61). This is also 
confirmed by the Tafo maxim that “Abuakwa b e too Akyem” (Abuakwa came to meet 
Akyem). Henceforth, the Abuakwa people were to emerge a powerful military force in 
the eastern region, At the turn of the twentieth century, the Kyebi dynasty was to become 
the most powerful junior partner in the British colonial rule. Because of their role in the 
colonial domination, some of the divisions and towns, especially Tafo, Osiem and 
Kukurantumi in Danquah’s constituency, rallied behind Nkrumah’s anti-colonial stand.  
Around 1630, a faction of Adanse citizens, led by Oti Akenten, left the Adanse area of 
Lake Bosomtwe and settled about the trading town of Tafo (McFarland & Owusu Ansah: 
xxi). They later became known as Asante before the Asante-Denkyira war in 1700–1701. 
The etymology of the word, “Asante,” means Osa nti (Osa—war; nti—because of) came 
from “the King of Denkyira, Ntim Gyakari” when he “heard of the union of the five 
nations” (Busia, 1951:52). Later, Asante was to emerge the last aggressive and 
expansionist kingdom in Ghana’s history. After their defeat in the Yaa Asantewa war of 
1900, Asante was conquered a nd annexed under the British ad ministration on January 1, 
1902 (Awoonor, 1990:97). The popularity of Asante  in historical accounts was because 
they were the latest kingdom in the territory to which the British had to make concession. 
The Ga and Akwamu had earlier on fought and defeated some of the European settlers. 
The Dagomba, Mamprusi and Nanumba kingdoms in the north came into existence in 
1480 (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah: xx). The Mole-Dagbani-Gurense kingdoms in the 
northern regions comprise the Builsa or Kangy aka, Dagaba or Dagarti, Dagomba, Frafra, 
Gurense or Gurunsi, Kusasi, Lobi, Mamprusi, Mossi, Namnam, Nankani, Nanumba, 
Talensi and Wala kingdoms (Ibid: 291). The Gurma comprises Basare, Bimoba, 
Konkomba Kyamba Pilapila. The Grusi kingdoms also include Kasena, Mo, Nunuma, 
Sisala, Tampolense and Vagala. Sections of these kingdoms can be found in Burkina 
Fasso, Togo and Ivory Coast. On January 1, 1902, the northern part of the country was 
also commandeered by the British as its protectorate on the same day that Asante was 
annexed (Awoonor: 97). Until their annexation by  the British colonist, the kings in the 
Northern Territories did not play major role in the Indirect Rule. They became indifferent 
to the political agitation in th e colony. In contrast to th e colony, local politics involving 
the traditional rulers determined their political alliance. That was why Nkrumah chose 
one of the traditional rules, J.A.Briamah to join his first cabinet in 1951. And his 
defection from the CPP resulted in the formati on of the Northern Peoples Party (NPP) in 
1954. 
Fage pens that the Ewe-Ga-Adamgde groups migrated from the east in a number of 
waves, probably arriving earlier than the fift een century. The Ga mi grated from the east 
(Yorubaland) around 1300s (Fage, 1969:23), and had settled and built a kingdom under 
Ayi Kushi in the Accra plains by 1500s (M cFarland & Owusu-Ansah: xviii). The sister 
group of the Ga consists of Ada, Krobo, Prampram, and Shai. Mention must also be made 
of the later Ga settlers in Aneho, now a part of the Eweland (Reindolf, 1966:73).  
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     73


--- PAGE 90 ---
According to Adu Boahene, the Ewes escaped from the Kingdom of Nnotsie in Togo 
and arrived earlier than fourteen century (A du Boahene, 1966:63) to settle in segments 
between Keta basin and Ahamansu. Tradition ties them with the Oyo, Ketu in Benin. 
They major kingdoms include the Anlo, Tongu, Mina, Ho, Sovie, Vakpo, Hohoe, Krepi, 
Kpando and Aggotime. The other category of the Ewe speaking kingdoms include the 
Adele, Akpafu, Akposo, Avatime (from Ahanta in the Western Region), Bowli, Buem, 
Lipke, Logba, Lolobi, Ntrubu, Nyangbo and Santrofi. Between 1885 and 1914, the Ewes 
were divided between British and German colonial governments, Later, some of the Ewes 
and other ethnicities came under British rule dur ing the World War I, while those in the 
eastern Togoland, were placed under French co lonialism. In 1956, a United Nations held 
a plebiscite in the Trans-Volta under British ru le, and a majority voted to cast their lot 
with the new country of Ghana (McFarland & Owusu-Ansah: 82 and 290). Human 
geography shows that inhabitants in the Eweland are composed of Ewe and several non-
Ewes ethnicities (Botwe-Asamoah, 1977:16–18). 
As the ensuing discourse on political geogra phy divulges, different kingdoms in these 
territories, were to serve as centers of opposition to and allies of Nkrumah’s political 
policies. The two Akyem Abuakwa paramount kings, Nana Ofori Atta 1 and 11, as 
indicated above, were to become mistrust ed, collaborators and stooges of the British 
Colonial Administration (Addo-Fening: 61). Therefore, when Nana Ofori Atta II and his 
royal family, including Dr. J.B.Danquah, of  Kyebi became the strongest opponent to 
Nkrumah’s CPP in the Eastern Province of the Gold Coast, th e forces of Akyem 
Abuakwa, New Juaben, Kwahu, Krobo, and Akyem Kotoku rallied behind Kwame 
Nkrumah’s nationalist agenda. Of particular importance was the Adonten in Akyem 
Abuakwa, Dr. J.B.Danquah’s constituency , which became one of the Nkrumah’s 
strongholds in the region. 
In Asante, the Asantehene, Nana Agyemang Prempeh 11 and the Ashanti Confederacy 
Council were to form an ethno-regional political party against Nkrumah’s unitary form of 
government in the 1956 general election. While Nkrumah’s CPP was to enjoy a strong 
support among the Ga-Adamge groups, the Ewes in the Trust territory were also to form 
an ethnic-based political party in opposition to  Nkrumah’s CPP. Similarly, a parochial 
political party was to be built and based among the northern ethnic groups in opposition 
to Nkrumah’s CPP. 
Starting probably from the 1890s, segments of these ethnic groups, in search of trading 
and commercial ventures, as well as empl oyment opportunities in the mining centers, 
cocoa farming and cultivation, public servi ces in the urban centers, and agriculture 
research stations in towns, had migrated and settled permanently in different parts of the 
country. Thus, settling in regions other than those in which they were subjects by kinship, 
they developed little or no real allegiance to their “foreign” kingdoms. It was these 
“stranger settlers,” to borrow Busia’s e xpression (Busia: 128), that found Nkrumah’s 
nationalist ideas appealing, and, accordingly, became part of the bastion of the CPP. 
EARLY ANTI-COLONIAL MOVEMENTS 
The idea of Self-government in the Go ld Coast Colony within the British 
Commonwealth, dates back to the formation of the Fante Confederacy in 1868 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     74


--- PAGE 91 ---
(McFarland & Owusu Ansah: 82). The conclusion of the Anglo-Fante Bond of 1844, 
following the Tripartite Treaty of 1831, had resulted in the consolidation of British 
colonial power in the colony. It was this Bond and the subsequent Poll Tax of 1852, 
enacted to meet the colonial administrative expenditure of the territory, that awakened the 
Fantes regarding “the nature of the protection they were buying at the cost of their 
sovereignty” (Awoonor: 83). The next factor was the 1869 Anglo-Dutch exchange of 
theirs possessions between West and East Suwiruw River, (which divides the area 
between Cape Coast and Elmina), and the subsequent Dutch-Komenda war in 1871. In 
October 1871, the intelligentsia of Fante form ulated a comprehensive plan toward the 
improvement of the social life of the people, their defense and the attainment of political 
independence of Fante (Timothy: 152–153). 
Meanwhile, threats of invasion by the Asantes from the north reached the colony. This 
new threat united the Fantes to form the Fante Confederacy as manifested by the 
Mankesim Constitution. The Charter provided for “a powerful force for social 
administration, economic development a nd defence” (Ibid. 153). Unexpectedly, the 
constitution and the desire of the kings and people of Fante to become an independent 
state on the West Coast of Africa alarme d the British Governor, Charles Spencer 
Salomon, especially at a tim e when the European nations were “scrambling for Africa.” 
Mr. Salmon found the Fante Confederacy a treasonous conspiracy devised to subvert the 
British power. He thus took drastic measures  to abolish the Fant e Confederacy; three 
cabinet ministers of the Fante shadow government, Messrs. James Hutton Brew, James 
F.Amissah, George Blankson, including Re verend Joseph Hayford were arrested for 
conspiracy and jailed thereafter. Thereupon, the Fante Confederacy ceased to exist (Ibid: 
153). It, however, represented the first notew orthy political movement for a collective 
self-determination in the Gold Coast.  
The germ of resistance swelled in 1898 with the birth of the Aborigines Rights 
Protection Society (ARPS). Its founders included John Sey, its firs president, John 
Mensah Sarbah, J.B.Brown, Jacob Wilson and J.W.de Graft-Johnson. Its primary 
endeavor was to safeguard the interest of the aboriginal people in the Fante nation. The 
organization sought to maintain the sove reign rights of its citizenry and uphold 
constitutional government by kings. The so ciety was successful in abrogating the 
Colonial Government’s Land Bill by which the lands under the kings and the people were 
to be converted into “Crown Lands, under the sole protection of the Governor. But the 
establishment of the Provincial Councils of Chiefs in 1926 heralded the death knell of the 
society. The orderly development of a cons titutional government by the Fante kings was 
thus ruined (Awoonor: 91). 
The Provincial Council of Chiefs was ins tituted by the Colonial Government to 
facilitate its Indirect Rule in the colony, and to  deal directly with the Chiefs, rather than 
the indigenous democratic channel involvi ng the commoners. This Council undermined 
the ARPS and characterized it as an isolated band of anti-British agitators and demagogic 
rabble-rousers whom the British power treated with manifest worthlessness and 
contempt. Because the scope of both the Fante Confederacy and ARPS was limited to the 
grievances of the Fantes, they were not truly nationalist organizations in the colony. 
The next political movement to emerge after the Aborigines Rights Protections 
Society was the National Congress of Britis h West Africa (NCBWA), which presented a 
united front against British colonialism in We st Africa. Formed in May 1920 and led by 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     75


--- PAGE 92 ---
J.E.Casely-Hayford, the Congress demanded immediate constitutional reforms in the 
West African region. In this case, the Pa n-African political thrust of the Congress 
infuriated the new governor, Gordon Guggisberg. The Governor dispatched to London 
Nana Ofori Atta’s denunciation of the Congr ess as “a self-appointed congregation of 
educated African gentlemen” whose views did not represent the people and Chiefs of the 
Gold Coast (Awoonor: 125–126). Nana Ofor i Atta’s self-acclaimed principal 
spokesperson for the traditional African rule rs attests to the degree to which the 
indigenous political institution had been undermin ed by its insalubrious alliance with the 
British colonialism. The failure of Nana Ofor i Atta I and his brother Dr. J.B.Danquah to 
obliterate the position of the Congre ss in London in 1934 brought an unhealthy 
relationship between the kings and the intellig entsia. However, the popularity of Casely-
Hayford faded as he went back to support the 1925 constitution, against which he had led 
a fight. 
Succeeding the NCBWA 1930, was the Youth Conference, led J.B. Danquah. 
Probably because of his royal affinity toward  Nana Ofori Atta I, the Youth Conference 
was able to improve the apprehensive and discomfited relations between the kings and 
intelligentsia on one hand, and the Joint Pr ovincial Council of Chiefs and Aborigines 
Rights Protection Society on the other. This alliance was to constitute the core of the 
antagonistic forces against Nk rumah’s political philosophy, strategy and policies toward 
unitary government and Pan-Africanism. 
KWAME NKRUMAH’S NATIONALIST AGENDA WITHIN THE 
UGCC 
In his Toward Colonial Freedom,  Kwame Nkrumah dissects the ontological aspect of 
colonialism and the strategy to defeat it in Africa. Before his arrival in the Gold Coast, he 
had fought toward the attainment of freedom from the colonial yoke from the outside. 
Now, he must devise political policies and put his organizing skills acquired in the United 
State and Britain into practice. Policies and organizational experience acquired from the 
outside world, however, can be helpful, but do not provide blueprint regarding the 
attainment of political freedom and post-i ndependence reconstruction. The fundamental 
requisite for waging a struggle toward political freedom is based on ace leadership with a 
clear vision, knowledge of the strength and weaknesses of the enemy, knowledge of the 
society, the human factor in th e society, especially their belie f system, the level of social 
consciousness and their fighting spirit. The secondary prerequisite of the leadership 
include organizational, human relation and communication skills, determination, 
persistency, perseverance and willingness to  commit revolutionary suicide, as Che 
Guevara once stated. These are the kinds of  human qualities that distinguished Kwame 
Nkrumah from his predecessors and opponents. 
The first political action Nkrumah undert ook upon assuming the office of General 
Secretary of the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC) was a threefold strategy. The 
immediate measure that he devised was a strategy toward complete political freedom and 
absolute independence from the control of any foreign government. The second strategy 
involved the realization of democratic free dom from political tyranny. The third strategy 
focused on the process of social transformation. This includes freedom from poverty and 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     76


--- PAGE 93 ---
economic exploitation and the improvement of  social and economic conditions of the 
people (Timothy: 44). 
Knowing that organization determines everything, Nkrumah devised some effective 
strategies to make the UGCC reflective of a ll and sundry. This he did by changing the 
UGCC constitution to bring into its membership both the intelligentsia and the ordinary 
people from the Asante, Northern and Trans- Volta regions. As a man who acts according 
to plan, Nkrumah urged the UGCC to develop a policy with clear and defined objectives. 
His goal was to make the UGCC a vibrant political movement. He wrote a circular letter 
dated February 20, 1948 to the working co mmittee of the UGCC, proposing the setting 
up of a shadow cabinet for their considera tion. The purpose was to  enable the cabinet 
members study the duties of the many ministries in order to “forestall any unpreparedness 
on our part in the exigency of self-government being thrust upon us before the expected 
time” (Ibid: 46). The proposal also included a three-face organizational work. These 
proposals inspired the enthusiasm and determination of the members of the UGCC, to the 
extent of resolving to attain political power and placing it in the hands of the Africans 
(Ibid: 47). 
The initial goal of the UGCC wa s to attain self-government  in the “shortest possible 
time.” The British were comfortable with th is because they thought it meant that the 
UGCC would proceed peacefully step by step and would not  press for any immediate 
political change. But the position changed wh en Nkrumah began to call upon the people 
to demand “self-government now.” His strong political demand drew the youth societies 
in the country into the UGCC fold. 
Unlike his conservative colleagues in the UGCC who took politics to be a hobby, 
Nkrumah traveled across the country starting from Tarkwa, a mining district to other 
towns, villages and municipalities explaining the aims of the UGCC to the people, and 
helped them to open branch offices. In the No rthern Territories, he told a crowd that the 
people in the north and those in the colony, Asante and Trans-Volta were one, and urged 
them to ignore the territorial partitioning which had been imposed on Africans by foreign 
rulers (Ibid: 48). Whenever the old car given to him by the UGCC broke down, he 
walked on foot to reach his destination. W ithin six months he had succeeded in opening 
over five hundred chapters in the country (Forward Ever: 14). This travel allowed him to 
assess the level of unrest that lay beneath the surface. Sensing that Nkrumah’s demand 
for self-government and national unity would undermine their authority enjoyed under 
the colonial rule, some of the kings started to sabotage his work and began to dislike him 
(Timothy: 46). But the more they tried the greater the number which joined the UGCC 
because of his nationalist stand. 
Though Dr. J.B.Danquah assured the people at a mass rally in Accra that “Nkrumah 
will never fail you,” the question of UGCC newspaper that Nkrumah had urged and the 
June 1948 political upheavals in the country began to set him and the rest of UGCC 
Working Committee apart. Nkrumah had repeatedly explained to the Working 
Committee that national liberation in the fo rm of political action had never succeeded 
without a newspaper. To Nkrumah’s surprise, Ako Adjei presented a copy of the first 
issue of his (Ako Adjei) newspaper, The African National Times,  to the Working 
Committee at its meeting at Saltpond. As discussed in Chapter One, a divisional king in 
Accra called Nii Kwabena Bonne had calle d on the people to boycott foreign shops 
because of higher prices. The ex-servicemen’s peaceful march to the seat of the Colonial 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     77


--- PAGE 94 ---
Government to demand the fulfillment of the promises assured them before the “World 
War” II, had resulted in violence and looting in the country. 
The Watson Committee’s report on the political  unrest in the country in June 1948 
blamed Nkrumah largely for the turbulence. According to the report, the UGCC did not 
get down to business until Kwame Nkrumah arrived (Ibid: 49). This was also made 
manifest when some of the arrested leadi ng members of the UGCC, in connection with 
the June civil unrest, blamed Ako Adjei for recommending Kwame Nkrumah for the 
office of the General Secretary of the movement. 
The political upheaval together  with ideological, strategi c and tactical differences 
between the other UGCC members and Nkrumah anticipated the birth of CPP. By this 
time, Nkrumah had become an idol of the youth of the country, and they supported his 
stand in vilifying the UGCC members on th e Coussey Committee (Ibid: 54–55). At an 
open-air political meeting, Nkrumah condemn ed the five UGCC members appointed to 
the Coussey Committee set up to investigate the 1948 disturbances, saying that they 
would be less critical of the report. As fate would have it, the Working Committee took a 
drastic measure to remove Nkrumah from th e office of General Secretary of the UGCC 
and make him Treasurer, This decision was without any reference to the branches of the 
movement. Furthermore, the protest from various branches of the UGCC against the 
removal of Nkrumah had a contemptuous reception by the working Committee. 
The emerging popularity of Kwame Nkrumah at this stage can be attributed to, at 
least, three factors. First, his intensive speaking tour throughout the country expressing 
the wishes, aspirations and dreams of th e underprivileged had the populace seething for 
political freedom and nationalism. His unc ompromising demand fo r “self-government 
now,” amidst boycotts of non-African goods, slow-down work and the violence erupting 
from the ex-servicemen’s march, was a landmark in the country’s history. Second, his 
organizational genius had resulted in the setting up of strategies, tactics, detailed plan of 
action, levels of goals and objectives, includi ng the establishment of several chapters in 
the country and a yout h wing of the UGCC. Third, his oratory skills and charisma, his 
adept use of African motifs, symbols, aesthetics, person-to-person touching, and his sense 
of humor at public rallies appealed to the sensibilities of the people. All these were 
unknown in the country. 
The questions we may ask are as follows: were the UGCC old guys not naïve that by 
ignoring the protest of the youth against Nkrumah’s removal as the General Secretary 
they were, in fact, pushing them toward any plans that Nkrumah might be hatching? Did 
they not know that the Committee for Yout h Organization (CYO) that Nkrumah had 
formed could easily be turned into a major political party? Or were they not aware that 
the notoriety of the party at the time was primarily due to Nkrumah’s organizing skills 
and speaking tour? As suggested elsewhere,  Dr. J.B.Danquah would not have endorsed 
the recommendation by Dr. Ako Adjei, had he known of Nkrumah’s ideological 
persuasion. Danquah’s regret fo r writing to invite Nkrumah to  assume the office of the 
General Secretary of the UGCC was to have a psychological effect him, so much that he 
and his followers would resort to any means possible-including violence-to eliminate 
Nkrumah from the political scene in the country. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     78


--- PAGE 95 ---
THE CPP: NATIONALISM AND SELF-GOVERNMENT 
When the conflict between Nkrumah and the UGCC Working Committee became 
manifest, the youth organizations that had b ecome ardent supporters of Nkrumah went to 
work directing their activities at discrediting the leaders of the UGCC. The Accra Youth 
Study Group’s invitation of Nkrumah to speak at the King George Memorial Hall in 
Accra in December 1948 was to chart a new course of political action by the youth, under 
Nkrumah’s leadership. This was authenticated by the activities of the Ashanti Youth 
Association in Kumase, the Ga Youth Association in Accra, all of which came under the 
umbrella of the CYO, which rallied behind Nkrumah. 
The day of Kwame Nkrumah’s removal from the office of the General Secretary of the 
UGCC on March 6, 1949, coincided with the launching of the Accra Evening News  by 
Kwame Nkrumah to champion the cause of “full self-government, not in the shortest 
possible time, but now.” It had as its motto: “WE PREFER SELF GOVERNMENT 
WITH DANGER TO SERVITURE IN TRANQUILITY” (Nkrumah, 1973b:10). 
Working side by side with Nkrumah on the Evening News included such women as Akua 
Asabea Ayisi, (who later became a High C ourt Judge) and Mabel Dove Danquah (the 
wife of Dr. J.B.Danquah). 
As the friction between Nkrumah and the UGCC leaders intensified, and the latter’s 
resolute decision to demote the former to the position of Treasurer was affirmed, 
Nkrumah immediately launched the Convention People’s Party. Initially, he had agreed 
through an arbitration to allo w the CPP to become a junior  political party within the 
UGCC, just as the Indian National Congress Party was allowed to function within the 
Indian National Congress; contrariwise, the leaders of UGCC did not consider the idea 
(Timothy: 56). 
Attempts to discredit Nkrumah after his departure from the UGCC yielded negative 
results. For instance, at the UGCC meeting at  the Palladium in Accra Obetsebi Lamptey 
referred to Nkrumah and the core of the CPP as “strangers causing trouble in Accra.” 
This remark led to some confusion and uproar against Lamptey (Nkrumah 1957:105). 
Strangely, Danquah who was an Akyem and not a Ga was at this meeting. But, it 
demonstrated the kind of frustration and confusion that existed within the ranks of the 
UGCC. Nkrumah had all along been campaigning for national unity. The ethno-parochial 
thrust of the UGCC and the CPP nationalist platform would become the most critical, 
deciding factors in the outcomes of the pre-independence elections in the country. 
The six-point program of action of the Convention People’s Party was as follows: 
(i) To fight relentlessly to achieve and maintain independence for the people of Ghana 
(Gold Coast) and their chiefs. 
(ii) To serve as the vigorous conscious political vanguard for removing all forms of 
oppression and for the establishment of a democratic government. 
(iii) To secure and maintain the complete unity of the people of the colony, Ashanti, 
Northern Territories and the Trans-Volta/Togoland regions. 
(iv) To work with and in the interest of the Trade Union Movement, and other kindred 
organizations, in joint political or other action in harmony with the constitution and 
Standing Orders of the Party. 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     79


--- PAGE 96 ---
(v) To work for a speedy reconstruction of a better Ghana (Gold Coast) in which the 
people and their Chiefs shall have the right to live and govern themselves as free 
people. 
(vi) To promote the Political, Social and Economic emancipation of the people, more 
particularly of those who depend directly upon their own exertion by hand or by brain 
for the means of life. (Nkrumah, 1973b:58) 
That the CPP as a nationalist, as well as the first political party in the country with the 
objective of attaining political independence was marked by its multiethnic and class 
character. The membership consisted of seve ral categories with different ideological 
perspectives. Some were disillusioned middl e school leavers, petty traders (market 
women), farmers, farm laborers, trade unionists, victims of the Native Authorities 
obnoxious policies, divisional kings destooled by the more powerful kings in the Gold 
Coast Legislative Council and State Council a nd “stranger settlers” in regional capitals 
and employment centers. Perhaps, with a few exceptions, the members of the CPP did not 
have any notion of revolution at the national level outside the Gold Coast, and for that 
matter outside Africa. Also, they were indifferent to the scientific socialism, of which 
Nkrumah was very instrumental in declaring at the 1945 Pan-African Congress in 
Manchester in England, as the ideological framework for the anti-colonial struggle in 
Africa. Their militancy was essentially anti-colonial, anti-totalitarian, and anti-draconian 
policies of the state councils composed of powerful kings. This amorphous nature of the 
CPP membership, however, was to plague the party during Ghana’s post-independence 
socio-economic transformation and cultural revolution. Against this backdrop, how was 
the party able to overcome major obstacles  and succeed in achieving independence for 
Ghana and forging the community of African nations? 
POSITIVE ACTION AS AN ORGANIZED NON-VIOLENT 
REVOLUTION 
Nkrumah’s declaration of Positive Action on January 8, 1950, was influenced by 
Mohandas Gandhi’s non-violent revolution in India. It constituted the first major political 
action in the history of the country. It was to bring to an end British colonial rule not only 
in Ghana, but also in the rest of Africa. This campaign was to finally define the political 
landscape of the country, where the UGCC (composed of lawyers, merchants and British-
trained scholars), the powerful kings and British colonial government constituted one 
political camp, and Nkrumah and the CPP th e other. The non-compromising, non-violent 
Positive Action was also the second confrontation of this kind the British government had 
had to face after that of Gandhi in India years earlier, 
The Coussey Report precipitated the Positive Action. The apprehension in the CPP 
camp as to the content of the final report, and the subsequent indignation, with which the 
CPP greeted the shortcomings of the Coussey Report, was sufficient enough for Nkrumah 
to embark on political action. Hence, the formation of the Gold Coast People’s Assembly 
by Nkrumah to coalesce public opinion and to canalize it for effective action. The boycott 
of the public forum by the UGCC and Aborigines Protection Rights Society, in spite of 
representations from the Northern Territories, Asante, Trans-Volta and several 
organizations, was not without ground (Timothy: 85). The UGCC, for instance, was 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     80


--- PAGE 97 ---
confident that they could count on the Colonial Government’s support, just as the latter 
had done for Nana Ofori Atta and his Abua kwa State Council, Nana Agyeman Prempeh 
and the Ashanti Confederacy Council and other similar state councils composed of major 
kings. 
The displeasure and frustration of the UGCC against Nkrumah’s hatched Positive 
Action was manifested in its attempts to silence him and the CPP. The first attempt came 
from the Joint Provincial Council of Chiefs, whose efforts at sabotaging the public forum 
proved futile. Secondly, the deputation they se nt to the Ga State Council to summon and 
banish Nkrumah from Accra and suppress the CPP did not yield the results sought by the 
UGCC. Surprisingly, Dr. J.B.Danquah (a non-Ga) and other UGCC members, and non-
members like Nii Amaa Ollenu and W.M.Q.Halm , were also present at the Ga State 
Council meeting. The meeting ended with a request from the Ga council for Nkrumah to 
call a public meeting and explain what he meant by Positive Action. The Ga State 
Council later approved Nkrumah’s explanation (Ibid: 85). Rather than sabotaging the 
movement, the request instead provided Nkrumah the opportunity to further incense the 
people toward the Positive Action. 
Nkrumah identified two strategies to attain self government namely, armed revolution 
and violent overthrow of colonialism or by constitutional and legitimate methods. Britain, 
for example, prevented the two German attemp ts to enslave her, while India liquidated 
British imperialism by moral pressure. Nkrumah chose the latter. Hence, Positive Action 
for Nkrumah meant “the adoption of all legitimate and constitutional means by which we 
can cripple the forces of imperialism in this country” (Nkrumah, 1957:112). Its non-lethal 
weapons consist of legitimate political agitati on, newspapers and educational campaigns, 
“the constitutional application of strikes,  boycotts and non-co-operation based on the 
principles of absolute non-violence” as used  by Gandhi in India (Ibid: 112). Speaking to 
the crowd, he said: 
We want self-government so that we can govern ourselves in our own 
country. We have the natural legitimate and inalienable right to decide for 
ourselves the sort of government we want and we cannot be forced against 
our own will in accepting or perpetuating anything that will be detrimental 
to the true interest of the people in this country and their chiefs. (Timothy: 
91) 
That this statement underscores Nkrumah’s political policies will be made manifest in his 
one-party system of government  in 1964. Here, it provides the rationale for the Positive 
Action.  
In the early months of 1949, the Governor of the Gold Coast suddenly left for London. 
What followed his departure we re the arrival of more British troops and the landing of 
more war planes “at Accra airport day and ni ght.” The belief was “that arms were being 
distributed to the Europeans” (Nkrumah, 196:15). The editorial column of the Evening 
News reacted as follows: 
Bullets or no bullets, British troops or no British troops, there is nothing 
that can deter us from our determined march towards the goal of Self-
Government and Independence. (Ibid: 15) 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     81


--- PAGE 98 ---
Kwame Nkrumah’s proclamation of the Po sitive Action on January 8, 1950 with a 
general national strike commencing mid-night, finally prompted the Governor to declare 
a state of emergency and impose a curfew on January 11, 1950. With the instant outbreak 
of riots following the Positive Action, the Jo int Provincial Council of Chiefs of twelve 
members and the Ga Native Authority sent messages to the English king welcoming the 
measures taken by the colonial government to restore order. The Ashanti Confederacy 
Council also wrote to affirm its loyalty to the colonial government (Awoonor: 142). The 
Joint Provincial Council of Chiefs’ motion to deplore what it considered “grave disorders 
and acts of violence in certain parts of the country” brought by “some grasshopper 
leaders,” through the “weapon of Positive Ac tion,” was introduced by Sir Tsibu Darku 
and passed on January 20, 1950 (Timothy: 94–95). Supporting the motion were: Nana 
Kwame Gyebi Ababio, Nii Amaa Ollenu, Dr. J.B.Danquah, Mr. E.O. Asafu-Adjaye, 
Nene Azzu Mate Kole, DR. I.B.Asafu-Adja ye, G.B.E., Mr. B.D.Addai and Colonial 
Secretary. Dr. J.B.Danquah particularly c ondemned the Positive Action as an act of 
treachery (Awoonor 142). His instant joy over the arrest of Nkrumah and other CPP 
leaders ended with the following words, “p ataku (wolf) had been driven away” (Ibid: 
148). 
The arrest of the leaders of the CPP, in cluding Kojo Botsio, Kofi Baako, Dzenkle 
Dzewu and Komla Gbedemah on January 21, 1950 and Nkrumah on January 22, 1950, 
did not halt the people’s drive for self-government under Nkrumah’s leadership. When 
Nkrumah was sentenced to three years imprisonment for inciting people to “strike under 
the terms of the Positive Action, in an attempt to coerce the Government of the Gold 
Coast,” and “for publishing a so-called seditious article in the Cape Coast Mail,” the CPP 
supporters rallied daily in front of the James Fort singing the party’s anthem, “There is 
Victory for Us” (Forward Ever: 61). His imprisonment rather intensified the political 
work of the CPP, its supporters and community activists toward “self-government now.”  
Though the Positive Action did not succeed  in bringing down the colonial 
government, it shook its foundation, from which it never recovered. The myth as regards 
the omnipotent colonial government of “big white men,” its fears and weakness was 
confronted and exposed for the first time in West Africa by an organized African people. 
For one thing, the support the Joint Provincial Council of Chiefs and the Ashanti 
Confederacy Council regarding the measures taken the British Government in the wake 
of the Positive Action, marked the tradition of the divine African kings swearing their 
loyalty to the British government and any govern ment, so long as their personal interests 
were guaranteed by that government. Dr. J.B.Danquah’s actions and verbal attacks 
against Nkrumah, as well as the Positive Action, also marked the beginning of the 
former’s bitterness toward the latter; this  “bad blood” would culminate in Danquah’s 
linkage with assassination attempts on Nkrumah’s life in the 1960s, for which he 
(Danquah) was detained in prison on two sepa rate occasions. Dr. Danquah’s intention to 
have Nkrumah eliminated from the political scene, after the declaration of Positive 
Action, lies in his unapologetic statement th at Nkrumah will pay with his neck. Danquah 
would later become an ally of the CIA. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     82


--- PAGE 99 ---
FROM PRISON TO PRIME MINISTER 
While in prison, Nkrumah managed to keep in touch with the outside CPP leading 
members released from prison. He wrote on sheets of toilet paper outlining the party’s 
strategies on the next level of the struggle, which were smuggled out to the CPP 
headquarters by a friendly prison guard. His social philosophy that nobody was born a 
criminal resulted in the politi cal committees that were formed among his fellow inmates, 
including political education sessions. In the landslide victory of the election of February 
8, 1951, the CPP won thirty-four out of the thirty-eight elected seats thereby vindicating 
the thrust of the Positive Action and his stand on nationalism. It can be argued that 
Nkrumah’s victory was not only due to his articulation of the grievances of the 
disenfranchised and disillusioned mass of the people, but was also due to the nationalist 
thrust of the CPP political platform. These were the unique qualities that Dr. J.B.Danquah 
and the UGCC lacked. 
Nkrumah’s release from prison in 1951 to assume the office of Leader of Government 
Business was without precedence. He was con fronted with colossal contradictions and 
paradoxes inherent in the Coussey constitution.  In a press conference, Nkrumah warned 
the Governor that he considered the Coussey Commission’s constitution “bogus and 
fraudulent, and unacceptable as it does not fully meet the aspirations of the people of the 
Gold Coast.” Since “the ministers were without power, it simply makes us half slaves and 
half free,” Nkrumah (1961:23) protested. He would embark on a direct course of action 
aimed at changing what he called the “system of diarchy,” and vowed to continue to fight 
until full independence was attained (Nkrumah, 1957:147). 
That Nkrumah was ineffectual as Leader of Government Business was seen in the 
provision of the constitution, which empowered the Governor to appoint three ex-officio 
portfolios for Defence and External Affairs, Finance and Justice and Attorney General. In 
view of other independent candidate and territorial membership of the Assembly, 
Nkrumah appointed two non-CPP members to his cabinet. Among the three persons he 
invited to serve on his Executive Council, only two of them honored the invitation. These 
were E.O.Asafu-Adjaye, a lawyer and a re presentative of the Ashanti Confederacy 
Council, who became Minister of Local G overnment and Kabachewura J.A.Briamah a 
traditional ruler and a representative of th e Northern Territories, who later became 
Minister of Communication and Works (Ibid: 139). The third invitee, Dr. Kofi Abrefa 
Busia, turned down the offer (Timothy: 107). Dr. Busia had been defeated in election in 
Wenchi, where his brother was the traditional ruler (Bing, 142). 
Consistent with his African personality, therefore, he pursued an “Africanisation 
programme,” whereby the administration of ci vil service, the poli ce, the judiciary, 
defence and external affairs and internal security would come under African personnel, 
instead of the Governor and British na tionals (Nkrumah 1957:147). In order for 
Nkrumah’s to address the grievances that drove the common people to the CPP as well as 
its social, economic and educational progr ams, some constitutional reforms became 
imperative. Two of the immediate concerns included the exploitation and 
disenfranchisement of the common people through the Indirect Rule, and the control of 
cocoa industry. 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     83


--- PAGE 100 ---
Before the advent of the Indirect Rule, there was a strong democratic aspect in the 
constitution of several traditional governments in Africa. Among the Akans in Ghana, for 
instance, the ordinary citizens, often called the commoners or Asafo (people’s militia), 
were part of the decision making process. All able-bodied young men were members of 
the Asafo, and their consent was critical to the enstoolment (process of installing) and 
destoolment (removal from office by popular ac tion) of kings and queens; consequently, 
the contending candidates would have to cam paign vigorously in order to win their 
support. Furthermore, the Asafo, along with th e council of elders had the right to initiate 
the destoolments of kings (Simersen, 1975:37). Sometimes, the ordinary people emerged 
as the prime movers in destoolment actions.  
Between 1940 and 1944, there had been at least thirty five destoolments of individual 
kings in Akyem Abuakwa. These destoolments were caused by the increased tribunal 
exploitation on the basis of the Colonial government’s 1910 Ordinance, and the land sales 
without proper accountability of the profits . Again, between 1932 and 1933, another 
action by the Asafo was set off by the proposed Native Administrative Revenue measures 
given to the Akyem Abuakwa State Council, the power to impose levies on all people in 
the state. Under Ofori Attah I, corruption and extortion in the tribunals was the most 
direct form of exploitation the commoners had ever experienced. After the tribunals, fees 
and fines collected “were frequently excessive and divided on the spot among the tribunal 
members” (Ibid: 44). The corrupt practices underscoring the destoolment of all the main 
divisional kings by the Asafo, as well as the declaration of non-allegiance from two of the 
main wings of the state to Ofori Atta, should be understood in the context of the Indirect 
Rule. The non-allegiance to the Omanhene was also accompanied by some charges 
against him (Ibid: 40). Osabarima Nana Adusei Peasah IV of Tafo told this author of 
Tafo’s move to create an independent Tafo Awansa State, out of the towns and villages in 
Tafo’s jurisdiction, because of the abuses of power by the Omanhene at Kyebi. 
In 1918, “the Asafo of the Amantow-Miensa, the towns surrounding Kyebi, marched 
on the capital to demand an account from the Omanhene for some of his commercial 
activities. Conversely, the Asafo group wa s severely beaten by the colonial 
Government’s police; this was followed by punishment meted out to the leaders of the 
revolt, by the District Commissioner’s Court (Ibid: 39). The development of the local 
protest thus seemed to be correlated to the commercialization process and the extension 
of colonial rule (Ibid: 38). Revenue from cocoa export, levy on the World War II fund, 
voted by the Akyem Abuakwa State Council to finance the Akyem Abuakwa contingent 
of the British Volunteer Royal Force during the military occupation in East Africa, 
maladministration and undue mobilization of  communal labor were the prime factors 
causing the march on Kyebi (Ibid: 39). 
In the conquered Asante territory there we re in 1918 political disputes between the 
commoners and the traditional rulers at Ejisu, Juaben, Bompata and Obogo, including 
other divisions, over oaths fees being charge d by the traditional rulers and “elders at 
hearing of cases which came before them,”  Busia (1951:189) discloses. These political 
disputes as well as general dissent reached its climax in 1920, and involved the traditional 
rulers of Bekwai, Offinsu, Kumawu, Agogo, Agona, and Wenchi; the Offinsu and 
Kumawu kings were mobbed and wounded, leading to the distoolments of the Kumawu, 
Offinsu and Bekwai traditional rulers. The colonial government, however, punished the 
rebels in these mob cases. Under the Ashanti Confederacy Council, “both the chief and 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     84


--- PAGE 101 ---
his opponents, in constitutional dispute, bribes  were given to the chiefs, registrars, 
secretaries, Akyeame and others connected with the Council to enlist their support” (Ibid: 
189). In addition, some residents in Ku mase collected monies from litigants on 
constitutional disputes, which they promised to take to other kings or to the Asantehene. 
Some even became agents for influential traditional rulers, who collected the “presents” 
for the kings (Ibid: 190). It was these alien corrupt practices, associated with the Indirect 
Rule, more than anything else that underlined  the constitutional disputes and the Asante 
Youth Association support for the CPP. 
The next concern of the CPP was the issue of cocoa pricing, which was linked to the 
local politics discussed above. This increas ed awareness among the farmers played a 
significant role in the cocoa hold-up and boycotts of European goods in 1931 and 1937. 
By 1950, low cocoa pricing had resulted in the formation of farmers association. One of 
their reasons was also to wrest the monopoly of control of cocoa export trade from the 
European purchasing companies. The frustrated Asafo, mainly composed of farmers, now 
blamed the Colonial Government for higher commodity prices and the fallen cocoa 
prices, for blocking their participation in local politics, and for its backing of the 
traditional rulers through the Indirect Rule (Simensen: 42). 
In 1951, a Local Government Ordinance was passed allowing for people’s 
participation in their local affairs. The debate on the ordinance, however, turned out to be 
the first constitutional contest between Nkrumah’s political policy and the position of the 
combined forces of the UGCC and the traditional rulers. As indicated above, Dr. 
Danquah saw in the Enactment of the Local Government Ordinance, an obliteration of 
Chieftaincy and ethnic loyalties to the State Councils. On the flip side, a greater number 
of the CPP members and supporters were either victims of or dissatisfied with the abuses 
of power by some of the traditional rulers through the British Indirect Rule. 
Nkrumah’s government simultaneously addressed the concerns of the cocoa farmers 
by introducing a bill for state control of  the Cocoa Marketing Board, under the 1951 
Ordinance. This bill also became a bone of  contention between the UGCC and CPP. Led 
by Danquah, the Opposition felt that the Cocoa Marketing Board bill was in violation of 
the full enjoyment of private property. Nkrumah’s government on other hand argued that 
the transformation of the Cocoa of Marketing Board from a trustee to controller and 
manager of farmer’s wealth would promote the development of the whole nation. But as 
Ninsin explains, “the government’s conception of a unitary nation state directed by one 
central government affected its attitude toward cocoa revenue” (1991:225). Though not a 
socialist government, Nkrumah’s socialist orientation would dictate that cocoa revenue 
was a common national property, which had to be centrally controlled and utilized for the 
common good of all citizens in the country. As  a hub of the country’s economy, in terms 
of external earnings, the Cocoa Marketing Board bill was passed, allowing for the board 
to be reorganized toward effective gove rnment control and direction through a 
responsible minister of state. The local government policy was thus tied to the 
commoners’ desire to participate in local politics and cocoa revenue. 
From 1951 to the 1956 election, the commoners’ conflicts with the kings would 
intensify as the Akyem Abuakwa State Council, the Ashanti Confederacy Council and 
other native authority bodies would constitute the bastion of the opposition to Nkrumah’s 
CPP, because of the local government ordi nance and the centralization of the cocoa 
industry. But the majority of the commoners drawn into the CPP in 1949, would continue 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     85


--- PAGE 102 ---
to view the 1951 Local Government Ordina nce as a renewal of their traditional 
participation in local politic s through the local councils. This also explains why 
Nkrumah’s government claimed direct mandate from its common electorate and 
transferred the control of stool lands like those in Akyem Abuakwa entirely to the local 
council. 
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM AND THE ROAD TO 
INDEPENDENCE 
On March 5, 1952, the Governor addressed the Legislative Assembly and proclaimed the 
creation of the office of Prime Minister, subject to constitutional amendment. Though 
Nkrumah welcomed this office, he argued ag ainst the retention of the three ex-officio 
ministers, and stepped up the demand for fu ll independence. The creation of another 
constitution, often called Nkrumah’s Cons titution, was followed by his 1953 “The 
Motion of Destiny” speech, in which he asserted the right of Africans to rule themselves. 
Perhaps, the argument, “were not our ancesto rs ruling themselves before the white man 
came to these shores,” (Nkrumah, 1957:201) underscored the thrust of independent 
course of action advanced by Pan-Africanists before him. 
The transition period between 1951 and 1957 was very climacteric in terms of the 
mounting frustration that beset Nkrumah’s drive for full independence and unitary 
government. With the Governors’ veto power and the three ex-officio British nationals in 
charge of Defence and External Affairs, Finance and Justice, the British colonial 
government held firmly to its political and economic authority over the Nkrumah’s 
“internal” government. The 1954 election, under the Van Lare constitution, was intended 
to grant of political independe nce to Ghana, but the coloni al government yielded to the 
intrigues of the Ghana Congress Party (the successor of the UGCC). Hence, the political 
landscape in the entire country was fragmented into a conglomeration of ethno-regional 
and sectarian claims supported by some trad itional rulers, “intellectuals, and by the 
British colonial government” (Awoonor: 157). 
There were nine political parties contesting the election of 1954. Th ey included: CPP, 
Ghana Congress Party, Ghana Action Party, Northern People’s Party, Ghana Nationalist 
Party, Oman Party, Moslem Association Party, Togoland Congress and three other 
regional parties in the Trans-Volta Togoland. With the exception of at least one party, the 
rest were in one accord against Nkrumah a nd his CPP. Having lost  the 1951 election to 
the CPP and knowing that they had no hope for mass support, the ethno-regional, 
“national” assertion of each segment was to  break the mass hold of the CPP, and then 
become the next government. In view of the fact that Nkrumah’s government was under 
the control of the British colonial gove rnment, the Opposition embarked on a well-
concerted offensive characterizing Nkrumah “a dictator, a Fuehrer” (the title of Adolph 
Hitler) and the CPP leaders as “corrupt dictators” (Ibid: 160). 
Crisis and defection within the CPP camp became unhealthy phenomena in the history 
of the party. Awoonor points out that the crisis and defection gushed out when the party 
“sought to enforce obedience to party discipline to whip everybody into line” (Ibid: 158). 
In this case, the party leadership at times supported the less popular candidates for 
reasons which could only be on the personal whims and caprices of the local party bosses 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     86


--- PAGE 103 ---
and their patrons on the central committee in Accra” (Ibid: 159). But in the view of 
Nkrumah, the eighty-one members who “put themselves up to stand against official 
candidates,” were rebels. As party members, they knew “the rules of the game but they 
chose to put their own interest before those of the party,” Nkrumah (1957:209) explains. 
The result was that the less acceptable candidate s went into rebellion and defection into 
the Opposition camp. This was the case of J.A.Briamah, (the then Minister of 
Communication and Works in the CPP gove rnment) who became one of the founding 
members of the Northern People’s Party (Ibid: 209). 
As part of its political campaign, the C PP introduced African drumming and dancing, 
motifs, symbols, the pouring of libation alongside Christian and Moslem prayers at its 
political rallies. Some contemporary musical  groups and dance bands, like E.K.Nyame 
and E.T.Mensah and Tempost Band composed popular songs in praise of Nkrumah. The 
Evening News carried cartoons, women’s column, pidgin English column, poetry, daily 
sayings, slogans, as well as popular features which attracted general readership, including 
illiterates, semi-illiterates and school children.  Of importance was Nkrumah’s charisma 
and nationalist speeches regarding political freedom and unitary form of government. 
These were unknown in the annals of country. This strategy and tactics, as well as 
Nkrumah’s nationalist agenda led to another convincing victory for the CPP. 
The CPP won seventy-two seats with 55.04 % percent of the popular votes. The 
combined opposition parties, on the other hand, won thirty two seats with 44.6 % of the 
popular votes. The leader of the main O pposition party, Ghana Congress Party, Dr. 
J.B.Danquah, lost the general election in his own Akyem Abuakwa constituency to Aaron 
Ofori Atta. Dr. K.A Busia won with a majority of eleven votes in Wenchi West. The CPP 
won in all the regions, with the exception of the north, where the NPP won eighteen seats 
(Awoonor: 160). This election was to lead Ghana into independence. 
FEDERALISM VERSUS UNITARY GOVERNMENT: THE 
BATTLE FOR POLITICAL POWER 
In August 1954, Nkrumah considered it necessary to arrest the frequent frustrations in the 
cocoa price paid to the farmers. The govern ment’s bill on Cocoa Duty and Development 
Plan was passed with the backing of the oppos ition parties in the parliament. Provisions 
in the bill guaranteed the payment of a fixed cocoa price for four years, irrespective of 
how low the world cocoa price might fall during that same period. The objective was that 
“the fund accrued to the government would be used on expanding the economy of the 
country as a whole with special emphasis on agriculture” (Nkrumah, 1957:216–17). 
The Opposition leaders immediately went into  the offensive, after they had supported 
the bill in the parliament. The National Liberation Movement was instantly formed, 
providing another chance for the opposition pa rties to punctuate the attainment of 
independence, under the CPP government that year. Its main argument was that the 
money which the cocoa farmers were “pouring into Government’s coffers was being used 
in developing the coastal region or Colony.” Therefore, the Asante “cocoa farmers would 
be better off if they would manage their own affairs” (Ibid: 216–217). 
According to their argument, the CPP government had used the resources of the Cocoa 
Marketing Board to give low interest loans to poor farmers, This policy thus deprived the 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     87


--- PAGE 104 ---
wealthy farmers including many of the traditional rulers in the Asante province who had 
for long run a lucrative “business by lending (money) to the poorer farmers” (Bing: 158). 
The poorer farmers and those looking for the government development that would open 
up more land for farms backed the CPP, Consequently, 
The wealthy farmers lined up with the chiefs and to give the ‘Committee 
for Higher Cocoa Prices’ a more ethical look, it was transformed into the 
‘National Liberation Movement.’ The chiefs would not allow this new 
organization to be called a ‘Party.’ Party politics were contrary to the 
tenets of traditional rule and as a price for their support they insisted it 
should embrace feudalism and also t hus propose the redivision of the 
country into its old provinces which had existed as almost separate entities 
in the heyday of the (sic) Indirect Rule. (Ibid: 158–59) 
The anticipated independence in 1956, as promised by the constitution, was thus 
bludgeoned with the birth of the National Liberation Movement (NLM) in the Asante 
Region. Amid the firing of muskets and the singing of Asante war songs, Bafour Osei 
Akoto, the chief Okyeame of Asantehene, ritually slaughtered a sheep to signify the birth 
of the NLM, of which he became the chai rman (Ibid: 158). On September 19, 1954, the 
great oath of Asante was sworn to stamp out what they considered dictatorship and 
communistic practices of the CPP government. Consequently, some leading members of 
the CPP, like R.R.Amposah, Joe Appiah and Victor Owusu, defected and joined the 
ethnic-based NLM. 
Among the ex-CPP members joining the NLM were the so-called Communists, 
Kurankyi Taylor and J.C.De Graft Jonhson, who allegedly left the CPP becuase of 
Nkrumah’s anti-communist stand. But between July 12 and 17, 1956, the NLM and its 
allies called upon their supporters to rej ect what they called the “Communist 
(Convention) People Party” (Austin: 332). Th e Asantehene, Nana Agyeman Prempeh II, 
also declared his support for the NLM the day after its launching (Awoonor: 162). The 
backing of Asantehene and the swearing of the Asante oath, Awoonor explains, 
“signified the seriousness of the sectarian perspective of the Movement which seemed to 
be created only for the ‘sons and daughters’ of the Asante nation” (Ibid: 162). 
Heneeforth, the “chiefs and elders would arrive and take their seats on the platform, to be 
followed by a succession of local speakers who” proclaimed their readiness to die for the 
Golden Stool while making demands for a higher cocoa price “(Austin, 1964:333). 
Clearly, what the educated elite in the NLM, including the rich cocoa farmers in the 
Asante province in the NLM feared, was not communism “but the rough and ready 
democracy of the United States which they saw about to be thrust down their throats by 
the British administration,” Bing (1968:158) points out. The only option they saw “was to 
resurrect chiefly powers as a support for thei r” political party by purchasing “the support 
of the chiefs” in the Asante province (Ibid: 158). Three weeks after the launching of the 
NLM, “the chiefs in council declared their full support for the movement, again swearing 
the Great Oath, pledging £20,000 drawn from th e Asantehene Palace Fund to support it” 
(Awoonor: 162). Strangely enough,  but not surprising, “the  NLM received support from 
the Cadbury and Fry, the British Cocoa-buying company,” who probably stood to lose by 
the cocoa bill, and “offered loans to farmers who supported the NLM (Austin: 343). 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     88


--- PAGE 105 ---
The irony was that, during the second imperialists’ war (WW II), the Asante 
traditional rulers made financial contributions toward the three British warplanes. In 
addition, “the Chief of Adanse alone,” as Busia points out, “gave £1,000.00 toward the 
third aeroplane that Ashanti contributed as its gifts for the prosecution of the war” (Busia: 
110). If there was nothing wrong for the “Chiefs” and people of Asante to demonstrated 
their loyalty to the British Government by  generous contributions to the (second 
imperialists) War Fund (sic), what would have been wrong with the CPP government 
using some of the cocoa farmers’ money to develop the coastal region, especially the 
Tema Harbor? 
Judging from the political policies and judicial  practices of the Ashanti Confederacy 
Council, set up to facilitate the British Coloni al exploitation of Africans, its inciting 
sentiments in order to contest national election appears suspicious and a ploy. History 
shows that until the Confederacy Council was birthed, there was a lack of political, 
administrative, economic and judicial cohesion among the divisional states in the Asante 
union. Busia notes that aside from “the bonds of clanship and the possession of common 
social and political institutions , language and religion, the As hanti Union was, as far as 
can be ascertained, a loose confederation” (Ib id: 87). He further notes that “the strength 
of the Ashanti union was largely dependent on the fact that it was a group organized for 
wars” (Ibid: 191–192). There was little trade or  economic bond between the states (Ibid: 
89). In 1875, the state of Juaben revolted and fought to safeguard its independence. 
During the reign of Asantehene, Nana Mensa Bonsu, Kumawu, Mampong, Nsuta, 
Bekwai, Kokofu and Mansa-Nkwanta took similar steps to break away from the Kumase 
division. Furthermore, the st ates of Kumawu and Mampong,  claimed that according to 
their traditions “they did not surrender the spoils they took in the war to the Asantehene” 
(Ibid: 87). For instance, the kings of Bekwai and Abodom signed formal treaties with the 
British Government in 1895, “without the permission of the Asantehene” (Ibid: 88–89). 
When the Native Court Ordinance of 1935 established a parallel legal body within the 
Native Authorities, the commoners and some of the less powerful kings in Asante began 
to complain about the fraud in this court system. The abuses by the Ashanti Confederacy 
Council as discussed above also caused some of the divisions to secede from the union. 
Noteworthy was the 1945 decision of the Bekwaihene to break away from the 
Confederacy Council. According to Busia, it was commonly understood that other kings 
also held meetings with Bekwaihene, and agreed to secede too (Ibid: 190). Six months 
following the Bekwaihene’s decision, trouble broke out in the divisions of four kings 
generally suspected to have attended the cove rt meetings with the Bekwaihene; two of 
them were subsequently deposed. One of th e accomplice, the Kuntan asihene, and also a 
member of the Confederacy Council was depos ed after he had been found guilty by the 
Kumase Divisional Council of se lf-absorption in the Bekwai secession, Busia elucidates 
(Ibid: 191). The Asante union did not contain any customary administrative machinery. It 
was the Confederacy Council, created under the Indirect Rule that took the place of the 
union with legislative and judicial powers. As a foreign institution , it was not integrated 
into the community, but rather legislated directly by the colonial government to the 
commoners (Ibid: 194). The following are some of the common sentiments expressed by 
the commoners against the decrees by the Ashanti Confederacy Council: 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     89


--- PAGE 106 ---
Whenever the chiefs comes back from Kumasi they brings us laws to 
obey. Most of these are in their own interests… We must not hold funeral 
celebrations. We must not plant cocoa. We must pay a levy. When we ask 
why? They say ‘they Council say so,’ or ‘Asantehene ruled it.’ Today, we 
have too many masters, the District Commissioners, the Chief, the 
Asantehene, and they all make laws for us. When you serve too many 
masters, your head tears off (wo ti te). (Ibid: 193–194) 
These sentiments thus demonstrate the lack of commoners’ participation in their own 
local politics and the dictatorial policies of the Ashanti Confederacy Council. They also 
attest to the peoples’ resentment toward the Ashanti Confederacy Council. 
Were the rumors circulating that Nkrumah had demanded the sacred Asante Golden 
Stool, therefore, a ploy to incense the Asante people to go to war with Nkrumah and CPP 
(Awoonor: 162)? Was the governments’ cocoa policy of 1954 the real grievance 
triggering the naissance of the NLM? Or was the birth of this movement a pretext to 
advance the political agenda of the old anti-Nkrumah opponents? Otherwise, why the 
drawing into its tepees the chief farmers in the Asante region, the CPP rebels, the Ga 
Shifimo Kpe, led By Obitsebi Lamptey, and the Togoland Congress, also led by 
S.G.Antor? 
In December 20, 1955 issues of its newspa per, “Librator,” the NLM accused the CPP 
supporters in Asante as “those who belong to no family or clan, those who are strangers, 
not properly trained to appreciate the value of the true and noble Akan” (Ibid: 163). 
Meanwhile, some of the Brong kings like Takyimanhene and Dormanhene formed the 
Brong-Kyempem to free Brong from Asante domination (Ibid: 164). The irony is that, the 
leader of the N.L.M., Dr. Busia, was a Brong from Wenchi, and not an Asante. 
With the mounting support among some of the Asante kings, the NLM “plunged into a 
vigorous political agitation,” saying, “forget about the cocoa price question conveniently 
and adopted open violence as its instrument of  organization” (Adamafio: 9). Made up of 
the ethno-regional and parochial political parties and their conservative traditional rulers, 
the NLM quickly embarked on a vicious campaign to halt the independence, while 
demanding a federalist system of government. Adamafio further describes the situation in 
Kumase as follows: 
Acts of extreme vandalism were perpetuated in Ashanti but particularly in 
Kumasi, where members of the CPP were chased and ambushed down 
like animals in broad daylight. Party adherents fled to Accra and other 
Southern towns and their houses were e ither dynamited, burned, or turned 
into places of public convenience. Th e NLM organized what they called 
‘Action Troopers. These were armed gangs who raided CPP strongholds 
and killed indiscriminately or destroyed property at will. Law and order 
had virtually broken down in Kumasi. (Ibid: 10) 
These violent attacks seem to demonstrate the intolerant attitude of the Opposition toward 
Nkrumah and the CPP since the 1951 election. The government policy was either on their 
term or they would resort to violence to achieve what they could not attain through the 
ballot box. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     90


--- PAGE 107 ---
The British Colonial Government, with th e ultimate power to maintain peace and 
order in the country, simply stood neutral while the CPP members were being terrorized 
and murdered in the country. A CPP activist, Kofi Banda was shot dead at a rally at Ejisu. 
The Ejisuhene was tried and acquitted. Krobo Edus ie’s sister was shot in her yard, as she 
was preparing food for her children. It was around this time that Nkrumah’s house was 
bombed in Accra. The CPP ministers and activis ts were threatened with death if they 
dared went to Kumase. As Bing notes, “t he Asantehene Confederacy Council was 
employed to” arbitrarily destool all Chiefs who “supported the CPP” (Bing: 159). They 
include Juasohene, Bekyemhene, Juabenhene, Nifahene of Kumase, and Bamuhene also 
of Kumase (Nkrumah, 1957:219). Meanwhile, a CPP activist, Twumasi Ankrah was tried 
and executed in the colonial court for stabbing to death his personal friend Baffoe, an ex-
CPP member. Baffoe and a gang of the NLM “Action Troopers” had chased him to a 
room, where he stabbed the former with a knife in self-defense (Adamafio: 10–11). 
A similar incidence, well known to this author, occurred in Akyem Abuakwa 
involving one Sowa, a CPP activist of Ak yem Tafo, and NLM Action Troopers. Sowa 
was sentenced to death in the colonial court in Koforidua, for allegedly killing an NLM 
Action Trouper, Kwasi Ampofo from Kyebi. In this case, Sowa went to the house of a 
known NLM member by an invitation, whereupon about six NLM Action Troopers, 
including Kwasi Ampofo, suddenly came out of a back room and physically assaulted 
him. During the scuffling, Ampofo was stabbed and later died at Koforidua central 
hospital. 
The violent assault on the CPP in Kumase caused the closure of its regional office. 
After fourteen month the party decided to reopen it on one Saturday. But, on the day of 
its re-opening ceremony, the NLM struck that morning. According to Adamafio, (the 
NLM) jeep drove past the crowd that had assembled to witness the re-opening ceremony, 
and fired shots into the crowd and wounded several persons, killing a pregnant woman 
(sic.). The newly formed CPP Troopers “chased the terrorists and gave them a good dose 
of their own medicine,” Adamafio (Ibid: 11) writes. Since then, the CPP Troopers met 
the NLM Action Troopers equally and cont ained the “bombast of its conduct and 
possibly outclassed them in the skill of str eet warfare. When the CPP supporters decided 
to speak the “language” of NLM Action Troupers, Nkrumah “stepped in with a warning 
to Party members to stop the fighting” (Ibid: 11). 
Now, the CPP government had to deal with the complex issue of federalism, and the 
malicious rumors and the violence associat ed with it. The parliamentary Select 
Committee set up to examine the question of a federal form of government was boycotted 
by Dr. Busia and Modesto Apaloo, the l eading opposition members in the Assembly; 
they insisted on the summoning of a Constituent Assembly to deal with the matter, even 
though the Select Committee had rejected the federalist idea. The Opposition also 
boycotted Sir Frederick Bourne, a constitutional expert sent down by the British 
government to resolve the impasse betw een the government and Opposition. The 
Opposition and its allies also rejected the regional assemblies cont ained in Bourne’s 
report. 
In the light of the violent opposition in th e Asante province to the CPP government, 
the colonial government concluded that i ndependence could not be granted. Nkrumah 
sought to avert another election, especially coming after its victory of the 1954 general 
election, by summoning an all-parties conference at Achimota. The NLM and NPP 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     91


--- PAGE 108 ---
refused to attend. The NLM and Asantema n laid down certain conditions under which 
they would attend, namely the repeal of the Ashanti State Councils Amendment 
Ordinance which allowed aggrieved chiefs to bypass the Asanteman Council to the 
central government for redress. This cond ition vindicates the govern ment Ordinance to 
obviate the abuses of powers by the Ashanti Confederacy Council and Asanteman 
Council. It also seems to affirm Awoonor’s statement, cited above, that the traditional 
rulers would swear their loyalty to any government, for as long as their interest was 
guaranteed by that government. 
In order to resolve the constitutional impasse, another general election would be held 
for the people to decide whether they wanted a unitary government or a federal form of 
government. The government issued its constitu tional proposal in the April White Paper, 
which the Opposition boycotted its proceedings. The Opposition issued its own proposals 
on Second Chambers and Council of State. One of its provisions was a House of Chiefs 
in each Region serving as Second Chambe rs. The government found the Opposition’s 
proposals inconsistent with the government  proposal, which had already been accepted 
by the three Territorial Councils. Conceivably, the reason why Nkrumah and the CPP 
yielded 
To Britain’s insistence on yet another election was the case of British 
Guiana where the internal independence of the country under Dr. Cheddi 
Jagan was cancelled by Britain in October 1953 with the excuse that the 
communists were poised to seize power. Britain sent in police to the 
territory for four years. (Awoonor: 166) 
The 1956 election was held, and again the CPP won 71 seats in the 99 contested 
constituencies. The NLM and its allies won 33 seats in their respective region. The CPP 
won 11 seats in the North and eight seats in the Volta constituencies of 13. In Asante, the 
NLM and Muslim Association Party (MAP) won 13 seats with 8 seats going to the CPP. 
It must be pointed out that the CPP obtained 43 percent of the total votes cast in the 
Asante region. In the colony, the CPP w on all the 44 seats. The CPP as the only 
nationalist political party was, once again, proven by its nation-wide triumph. Once 
again, Aaron Ofori Atta, later called Kofi Asante Ofori Atta, of Tafo defeated the “doyen 
of the Gold Coast politics,” Dr. J.B.Danquah. 
After the election, the NLM produced a nother theory. Its argument was that no 
constitution would be acceptable unless it was “f avored by a majority of the people of 
every region into which the Gold Coast as at the present.” Hitherto, Dr. Busia, leader of 
the NLM, had written to inform the Governor that: 
In accordance with constitutional pr actice in the United Kingdom, the 
National Liberation Movement and its allies will expect Your Excellency 
to call upon Doctor K.A.Busia, their Parliamentary Leader, to form a 
Government should they win more than 52 seats at the election. 
(Nkrumah, 1957:272) 
In other words, Dr. Busia and his party took the view that whichever party won the 
majority seats in Assembly would be entitled to introduce the particular constitution of its 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     92


--- PAGE 109 ---
choice. Yet, he would denounce the voice of the electorate and resort to terrorist and 
undemocratic methods to overthrow the democratically elected government of Kwame 
Nkrumah. 
Back in August 1955, the NLM warned the Br itish government of grisly aftereffects if 
the country should attain independence under th e CPP; thus, “as far as we can see (this 
would lead to a road that) makes for the count ry (one) of riot, rebe llion, revolution; the 
road long ago taken by those unhappy countries where one can change only the Head of 
State or the people who govern by armed insurrection after underground conspiracy and 
sabotage.” The Opposition’s boycott of the c onstitutional debate tabled by Nkrumah on 
August 3, 1956, must, therefore, be understood in the context of its intent to overthrow 
the CPP government by any means possible. 
Dr. Busia would travel to London to make hi s plea to the British Government to deny 
granting independence to Ghana since, in his view, the country was not ready for 
parliamentary democracy. In his words: 
We still need you in the Gold Coast… Your experiment there is not 
complete. Sometimes I wonder why you seem such in a hurry to wash 
your hands off us. (Nkrumah, 1957:279) 
Such was the undemocratic tactics employed by Dr. Busia to undermine the voice of the 
people in the country. Earlier, Dr. Busia had told Richard Wright in an interview that he 
was British, “a Westerner…and was educated in the West” (Wright, 1954, 228). He also 
told the London Times that “Oxford has made me what I am today. I have had eleven 
years contact with it and now consider it my second home. Most of my friends are here” 
(Fitch & Oppenheimer (1966:62). His loyalty to the English Crown and culture did not 
yield any positive result; his desperate plea was thus denied. 
The British Colonial Government accepte d the CPP government’s request for 
independence, and subsequently agreed to  grant the Gold Coast its independence on 
March 6, 1957. For the national flag, the government chose red for the blood of the 
martyrs, gold for wealth and green for th e land and the black star in the center 
representing the freedom of Africans on the continent and in the Diaspora. Nkrumah’s 
African nationalist policies finally won independence for the new nation Ghana. 
CONCLUSION 
Colonialism was an evil system of economic exploitation. It emerged after the first phase 
of the holocaust of the European slave trade, and took from the Africans their right to 
self-determination and their cultural personality . Sooner, the Africans in the Gold Coast 
colony began to demand their freedom. But the Fante Confederacy, Aborigine Rights 
Protection Society and the Nati onal Congress of British West failed to achieve colonial 
freedom because of their limited scope, in sufficient grievances, lack of political 
organization with clear objectives, strategy and tactics, and mass participation. These 
were necessary for the last two movements to combat both the colonial government and 
the Provincial Councils of Chiefs. Dr. J.B.Danquah’s Youth Conference compromised its 
The political policies of kwame nkrumah     93


--- PAGE 110 ---
nationalist stand, when it sought an allian ce with the dreadful Provincial Councils of 
Chiefs. 
Until the arrival of Kwame Nkrumah, the UGCC was a loose movement without any 
national grievances and strategy, nationalis t stance, mass participation, and strong 
agitation for an immediate political independence. It had as its strategy gradual transition 
to political freedom through the benevolence of the British government. But all that 
changed when Kwame Nkrumah arrived to a ssume the position of General Secretary of 
the UGCC. But, judging from his rich background, the impasse between him and other 
members of the UGCC was expected. Therefore,  when he formed the CPP, he made a 
strong and relentless demand for political “I ndependence Now.” His Positive Action and 
his fourteen-month imprisonment, and the CPP victory in the election of 1951 was 
primarily due to his organizational skills, nationalist stance and Pan-African vision. 
Because of his popularity, large followers and the victory of the CPP in the 1951 
election, some of the repulsive powerful kings, noted for their corrupt and undemocratic 
practices through the draconian Indirect Rule, hated Nkrumah. This was also true with 
the Danquah-Busia party who as “men of substance, the English-educated haute 
bourgeoisie—detested Nkrumah for having usurped their na tural right” to succeed the 
British colonial government (M ahoney: 159). Hence, the O pposition used terrorist and 
undemocratic methods in an attempt to achieve their parochial and/or ethnocentric 
objectives. Austin notes that, “as the coco a farmers in the colony listened to the 
propaganda coming out of the Ashanti Capitals  and saw the preparation being made for 
the extension of the ‘NLM into the colony, they saw the NLM not as farmers’ friend but 
as the spearhead of a new Ashanti invasion of the south” (Austin: 344)). As indicated 
elsewhere, my grandfather was the Chief Coco a Farmer and Chairman of the CPP in the 
small town of Ettokrom. The birth of the NLM as the “Hour of Liberation” was a myth. 
Ninsin authenticated this when he states that the aim of  the NLM “was not to liberate the 
country but themselves (the  Opposition) as a group from i mminent political extinction” 
(Ninsin: 231). It is in this context that we can understand Dr. Busia’s trip to London in a 
desperate attempt to halt the granting of political independence to Ghana under 
Nkrumah’s leadership. Nkrumah’s strong nationalist policies underscoring the victory 
CPP victories were thus clear to the Br itish government. Yet, Dr. Busia failed to 
recognize the fact that the victory of the CPP in the 1956, across the country, truly 
represented the desire of the people in Ghana to become one nation. 
The question is, was the Opposition prepared  to accept the democratically elected 
government of Nkrumah, in post-independen ce Ghana? Ghana’s atta inment of political 
independence came as a result of bitter st ruggle between Nkrumah’s CPP on one hand, 
and the combined forces of the colonial government and the Opposition on the other. In 
view of the terrorist and undemocratic character  of the Opposition, the first major task of 
Nkrumah’s government was the consolidation of power and the preservation of peace and 
order.  
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     94


--- PAGE 111 ---



--- PAGE 112 ---
Chapter Five  
Post-Independence Political Policies 
Decolonization policies are the means of attaining political independence. Post-
independence political policies are contingent on several factors. They include a clearly 
defined social philosophy and vision that accentuated the anti- colonial struggle, in the 
context of the material reality of the society, cultural and intellectual values acquired 
during colonialism, and the mental make-up of the people, Next are institutional changes 
in civil and public service administration, and a peaceful environment in which to embark 
on cultural, social, economic and industrial transformation of the country. 
NATIONAL SECURITY AND CONSOLIDATION OF 
INDEPENDENCE 
Consolidation of national unity, peace and order not only meant the creation of a 
congenial atmosphere for the new Ghana’s social, economic and cultural transformation, 
but they also meant the creation of the requisite venue for Nkrumah’s Pan-African 
project. Having compromised on the federal issues with the provision of regional 
councils, the CPP government found itself ha ving to combat secessionist threats, 
rebellion and violence, A statement by the opposition leader, Dr. Busia, foreshadowed 
these developments. He had warned the Br itish government that a CPP victory in the 
1956 election would be disastrous for the nation, and that the NLM was prepared to seek 
any means possible, including terrorism and undemocratic means, to eliminate the evil 
CPP (Awoonor: 168). In March 1953, Dr. Busia debased “the CPP of being made up of 
agitators and revolutionaries, aided by a frantic band of propagandists who used 
imperialists as scapegoats to inflict the demagogy of the uneducated upon the country” 
(Ibid: 156). 
Against this anti-democratic stance, was it surprising to see the relentless, 
systematically terrorist methods applied by the Opposition that  culminated in the coup of 
February 24, 1966 that overthrew Nkrumah’s government? Should not the government at 
that time have considered Busi a’s statement as a threat to national security, worthy of 
arrest by the law enforcement agency? Gh ana was to witness the outcomes of this 
avowed violent statement by Dr. Busia, ofte n referred to as the champion of democracy 
in Africa. As indicated in Chapter One, the Opposition’s declared its vow to rid the 
country of the “Veranda Boys” or the “homeless tramps and jackals” took the form of 
several bomb explosion, assassination attemp ts on the lives of Nkrumah and the CPP 
followers. Earlier, Dr. J.B.Danquah had also issued similar threatening statements on 
various occasions. 
During the electioneering campaign in 1956, the NLM supporters in the central 
Akyem Abuakwa constituency quoted the Omanhe ne Nana Ofori Atta II as saying that


--- PAGE 113 ---
there would be no peace in the country if the CPP should win the election. In fact, fears 
were constantly put into the people (this author, then a child, also head it) that the CPP 
strongholds in Akyem Abuakwa would be destroyed by the “oprem” (cannons) in front of 
the Omanhene’s palace. In our village, th e NLM supporters vowed publicly that all 
“strangers settlers” would be chased out of Akyem leaving their cocoa farms behind, 
should the NLM emerged victorious; in add ition, they vowed that the CPP supporters 
would be made to plant their plantains inside their houses. We the children from 
Ettokrom, who had to walk from Ettokrom to attend primary school at Osiem at the time, 
would run to hide in the bush, anytime we heard the approaching NLM Peugeot caravans, 
especially their resounding horns. 
Kofi Awoonor’s analysis of the events at the time is worth citing here. After the CPP 
won the election, the NLM kept up some degree of agitation in which secession was 
invoked as the last result “to what it consid ered to be a constitutional impasse.” He 
continues: 
The political unrest persisted in th e opposition enclaves of parts of 
Asante, the Volta area, and Accra where the sectarian movements for 
secession, Ewe unificationist and Ga s ectarian claims against “strangers” 
received more ominous and threatening support. (Ibid.188) 
This situation posed a very grave threat to the political stability in the newly independent 
country, a serious factor sadl y ignored by critics of Nkruma h policies. On the eve of 
Ghana’s independence, the Opposition enclave in the Volta region, the Ewe Unification 
Movement, actually went into the bush to prepare for an armed insurrection. 
Accordingly, “groups were set up armed with homemade shotguns” and “formed 
themselves into a ragged guerilla army prepared to go into battle for their cause” 
(Mahoney: 160). In the face of this, the “Queen’s governor-general in the Gold Coast was 
obliged to send troops” to the region to put down the “Ewe revolt against the new 
government” (Ibid: 160). Later, the leaders of the movement, S.G. Antor and Kojo Ayeke 
were arrested and jailed for masterminding the rebellion. The CPP government’s attempt 
to contain the unrest that erupted in Kumase, was prompted by the deportation orders, 
debated in the parliament, against Alhaji Amadu Baba and Alhaji Osman Lalam. These 
two non-Ghanaian Moslems “were accused of financing the NLM and its thugs” 
(Awoonor: 190). 
Three months after the Ewe rebellion, Nai Wulomo (Ga Chief Priest) launched another 
anti-Nkrumah movement, the Ga-Shifimo Kpee, in Accra, with an opening prayer. As 
Awoonor indicates, “a sheep was slaughtered and oaths were sworn against all 
‘strangers,’ including Nkrumah who was accu sed of encumbering a Ga Constituency 
seat. From then on the organization’s youth wing, “Tokyo Joes,” thronged themselves at 
vantage points in Accra, the seat of the government, hooting and jeering at Nkrumah and 
the CPP leaders. Strangely enough, J.B.Danquah, who had lost his bid in the election in 
Akyem Abuakwa Central, and S.G.Antor were present for the inauguration of what 
Awoonor characterizes “revanchist organization.” In order to buttress the Ga-Shifimo 
Kpee, taxi drivers and truck drivers went on strike in July 1956. This led to armed 
conflicts between the CPP youth, led by Oko Kolomashe, a fisherman of Bukom, “and 
the Tokyo Joes, who had the support of Ga leaders” (Austin: 372). 
Post-independence political policies     97


--- PAGE 114 ---
It was in response to these undemocratic and terrorist methods against national 
security interest that compelled the C PP government to seek the necessary legal 
measures, and rightly so, to consolidate the unitary system of government for which the 
people voted. Ninsin legitimizes the Nkruma h government’s emergency measures as a 
choice to the realization of a strong national unity free from both ethnocentrism and the 
“danger of fragmentation,” or national fragmentation and rivalry. With the voters’ 
mandate, the CPP government “committed its en ergies to “forging national unity and 
making the nation strong” (Ninsin: 232). Nkrumah had urged th at “in the highest reaches 
of national life, there should be no reference to Fantis, Asantes, Ewes, Gas, Dagombas, 
‘Strangers’ and so forth;” in contrast, “we should call ourselves Ghanaians-the brothers 
and sisters, members of the same community-the state of Ghana” (Nkrumah, 1961:168). 
Continuing, he implored Ghanaians to purge from their own minds the ethnic chauvinism 
and prejudice of one group against the other. Otherwise, 
We shall not be able to cultivate the wider spirit of brotherhood which our 
objective of Pan-Africanism calls for. We are all Africans and Peoples of 
African descent, and we shall not allow the imperialist plotters and 
intrigues to separate us from each ot her for their own advantage. (Ibid: 
168) 
Here, Nkrumah not only understood the Oppositions’ continual undemocratic, 
conspiracies and terrorist methods as a threat to Ghana’s internal security, but he also 
viewed them in the broader context of his Pan-African project. 
Accordingly, the government issued a White Paper in 1959 registering its 
unadulterated vow “to the very existence of the state of Ghana by (not) allowing to go 
unchecked plots and conspiracies which might result in the destruction of the state itself” 
(Ninsin: 232). The government took two measures: (i) “the elimination of sectarian or 
sectional tendencies which militate against the unity and security of the Ghanaian state; 
and (ii) the elimination of the structural basis of the tendency toward national 
fragmentation” (Ibid: 232). This resulted in the “Avoidance of Discrimination Act” of 
1957 which forbade “racial, tribal, regional as well as religious and political organization 
and propaganda.” Through this legal measure: 
The government was thus, in one stroke, able to undercut the centrifugal 
tendencies which produced the NLM and the bloody strife of 1954–56. It, 
above all, produced the United Party and thereby laid the structural basis 
for the development of Opposition and other political parties which would 
become national in character, and whose activities would thenceforth 
reinforce the unity of the nation-state of Ghana. (Ibid: 232–233). 
In effect, this was the first major post-independence democratic policy by the CPP 
government. The other alternative would have been an outright proscription and the 
closure of the offices of the ethno-regional and parochial political parties. 
The first duty of any government is to govern, Nkrumah points out; hence, the 
preservation of internal security becomes paramount (Nkrumah, 1961:113). The 
consolidation of national unity and security was thus strengthened by the parliament’s 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     98


--- PAGE 115 ---
“enactment of the Nationality and Citizenship  Act, 1957, (Act 1) and the Preventive 
Detention Act, 1958 (Act 17) (PDA).” The first one provided for the legal framework for 
the deportation of aliens found to be “engaged in activities inimical to the unity, security 
and stability of the Ghanaian  state” (Ninsin: 233). The de portation act only renewed the 
powers previously possessed and exercised by the Colonial Government. The second one, 
PDA, “made it possible for the government to imprison, without trial, some Ghanaians 
whose activities” were found to be prejudicial  to the state secur ity and stability (Ibid: 
233). These were the laws of the land by which the people, irrespective of one’s social 
status, profession, political affiliation or et hnic background had to live. On the contrary, 
the Opposition flaunted these laws and c ontinued its vow to overthrow the CPP 
government by any means possible; the first of this behavior was the Awhiatey-
Amponsha-Apaloo conspiracy of 1958 (Ninsin: 229). 
The question is, was it not Busia who warned the British government that “the NLM 
was prepared to meet it as such and to take all steps in and out of the Legislative 
Assembly to mitigate the evil (CPP)? (Awoonor: 168). Also did Danquah not speak at the 
Balewashi coup plot? Did he not say that Nkrumah would pay with his neck for going 
against the law by declaring the Positive Ac tion in 1950? Did he not join the voice of 
Nana Ofori Atta II, who threatened to bomb the voters in Akyem Abuakwa, that there 
would be no peace in the country, if they (t he voters) should vote for the CPP? Was not 
Dr. Danquah on the CIA payroll at the time he went to the US Embassy to demand some 
explanation as to “why the funds his fam ily had been receiving during his imprisonment 
had been cut after his release?” (Mahoney: 184). This caused His Excellency Mr. 
Mahoney, the new US Ambassador to Ghana to summon “the CIA chief of station to ask 
why he had not been advised of the agency’s association with Danquah. Dissatisfied with 
the explanation, Mahoney flew to Washingt on two days later and personally informed 
Kennedy about the matter” (Mahoney: 184–5). 
The next perplexing intrigue is Komla Gbedema’s seeming complacency in the 1961 
Takoradi workers strike, while Nkrumah was on state visits to the USSR and China. His 
contacts with the Central Intelligent Agency (CIA), and his plots to oust Nkrumah and 
seize power are contained in Mahoney’s (the son of the US Ambassador in Ghana at the 
time) account. The author evinces that Gbedemah, while serving on the three-man 
presidential commission ruling the country, during the Takoradi workers strike of 
September 1961, “saw his chance to seize power. Gbedemah had no problem in obtaining 
CIA backing for his conspiracy, but he want ed an official assurance of American 
support.” What is more, Gbedemah “approached Ambassador Russell on September 6, 
(1961) and told him of his plans,” and asked for US support. And “Washington gave an 
unequivocal yes” (Ibid: 172), 
It must be recalled that when Nkrumah accepte d the Soviet offer to train some of the 
Ghanaian military cadets, the US Secretary of State Dean Rusk predicted to President 
“Kennedy that if Nkrumah went through with  his plans, Ghana’s British-trained officer 
corps might depose him” (Ibid: 171). In late August, Mahoney indicates, there was a 
conspiracy among the senior Ghanaian military officers, but the plot collapsed because of 
the death of the chief conspi rator Brigadier General Joseph E.Michel in an “airplane 
crash in Ghana on September 1961” (Mahoney: 171). Was Gbedemah also in involved in 
this conspiracy because of his anti-Soviet stand? 
Post-independence political policies     99


--- PAGE 116 ---
While preparations were underway for Pr esidents Nkrumah and Kennedy’s meeting 
on the Volta Dam project, Gbedemah urged th e US president to e xpress with “great 
directiveness and force” his concern regardi ng Ghana’s ties with the communist block. 
The Cold War politics regarding the Volta brought negotiations of the project to a 
stalemate. But while monitoring cable traffi c from Ghana, the Under Secretary of State 
George Ball urged President Kennedy to stay  on the Volta Dam project, because “there 
was a chance that Nkrumah might be overthrown in the next couple of weeks and a 
‘really solid government’ would be installed.” The State Department desired “to see if 
Gbedemah gets anywhere.” Mahoney give s further evidence of Gbedema’s heavy 
dependence on the CIA to oust and replace Nkrumah (Ibid: 173). 
Gbedemah, however, proved to have little aptitude for intrigue. He 
seemed to want the Americans to do the work for him and spend as much 
time plotting with the CIA station in Accra as he did with other Ghanaian 
conspirators. Also assisting Gbedemah was the local agent of a New York 
diamond merchant, Leon Tempelsman and son. The son, Maurice 
Tempelsman, was a friend and political  supporter of Adlai Stevenson and 
had a liking for mixing conspiracy in his African trade. A few days after 
Nkrumah dismissed him from the cabin et, Gbedemah sent a letter to 
Governor Williams detailing those i nvolved in the plot  and requesting 
money. (Ibid: 173) 
This account clearly also gives an inkling to the collaboration between Gbedemah and 
some of the leading members of the Oppositi on party, especially since he went into 
political alliance with the Opposition leader Dr. Busia with th e backing of the CIA (Ibid: 
183). 
The apropos of the preceding conspiracies  and terrorist met hods employed by 
Nkrumah’s enemies should be taken into consideration in any discourse on Nkrumah’s 
political policies. Such studies should also  take into account the hundreds of innocent 
children and adults who were maimed and k illed by the Opposition’s terrorist’s attacks. 
Otherwise, one would be suggesting that the lives of the more than three hundred 
innocent victims of the bombs are worth less than those persons imprisoned for violating 
the laws of the land. There is no doubt of some excesses that might have occurred in the 
enforcement of the law. However, could the Opposition’s undemocratic and terrorist 
methods to achieve what they could not achieve through the ballot box, be excused?  
On May 5, 1962, Nkrumah released many of the persons detained in prison under the 
Preventive Detention Act, in connection with the two bomb explosions in Accra on 
November 4, 1961. In addition, Nkrumah granted amnesty to political exiles. On June 20, 
1962, another batch of the detainees, includi ng Dr. J.B.Danquah was also released. For 
instance, Kojo Ayeke who was jailed in connection with the 1957 Ewe Unification 
Movement’s armed insurrection, was rel eased after appealing his case in court 
(MacFarland & Owusu-Ansah: 43). Less than one and a half months after Nkrumah’s 
hope for sereneness in the country, the Kulungugu bomb explosion occurred on August 1, 
1962, this time leading to the arrest and imprisonment of some key CPP members, 
namely Tawia Adamafio, Ako Adjei and Azzu Crabb. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     100


--- PAGE 117 ---
The question is, if those who made the attack on Nkrumah at Kulungugu on August 1, 
1961 “were Northerners based at Lome” as Tawia Adamafio suggests (Adamafio: 131), 
why then did the Warrant Officer Edward Tetteh, a Ga, charged with supplying the 
grenade, commit suicide? Before joining th e CPP, Adamafio was a fierce Ga-Shifimo 
Kpee (Awonoor: 200). Also, while a leading member of Dr. Busia’s Ghana Congress 
Party, Adamafio, in 1953, “offered conflagatory challenge to the CPP comparing 
Nkrumah to Adolf Hitler leading a band of illiterates against Congress which was led by 
intellectual giants” and which would salvage the country from “a one party evil, the evil 
of dictatorship” (Ibid: 156). The reader can j udge as to whether or not Adamafio was an 
innocent victim of the alleged Nkrumah’s dictatorship. 
In her letter to President Kennedy, Barbara Ward explained Nkrumah’s predicament 
over the Western press attacks on PDA as “incipient Dictatorship” and “destruction of 
due process.” She pointed out that “Ghana has real security problems and has done much 
better than many other newly-independent inexperienced governments. Thus it cannot 
fail to sense a core of hostility and cold s uperiority in Western reactions” (Mahoney: 
160). Therefore, the view held by some cr itics that Nkrumah changed from a leader to 
become a ruler, amounts to shifting the burden of terrorism in the country from its 
perpetrators to the victims (Kwame Nkru mah included) of their acts of terrorism. 
Secondly, to overlook these heedless, systematic violence and terrorism perpetuated 
against the members of the Young Pioneers (children) Movement and Nkrumah himself 
by the lawless Opposition in Ghana betw een 1955 and 1966, and characterize him as 
“Nkrumah: The Leninist Czar” as Ali Mazrui does (Agyeman, 1992:20) is simply 
anomalous and inept.  
REPUBLICAN GOVERNMENT 
Considering the fact that the CPP gove rnment accepted the 1957 constitution as a 
compromise, the government used its majority in the Assembly to amend it in 1959, and 
to modify the executive powers vested in the Regional Assemblies. The constitutional 
compromise that the CPP accepted in 1957, as  Ninsin (1991:233) explains, was “to avert 
any further situation that might be us ed by the Opposition,” possibly the British 
government included, “to delay the attainment  of independence.” He further elucidates 
that the constitutional “amendment served to remove once and for all the regional base of 
the Opposition” (Ibid: 233). 
Independence corresponds to the control of the state apparatus by indigenous 
manpower. Yet until July 1, 1961, the three main instruments of the government of 
Ghana, namely, the military, police and civil service were in the hands of British 
expatriates. Lesser in ranks were a stratum of Ghanaian professional that had been deeply 
conditioned by the British mode of life, because of their Eurocentric education. 
The 1957 constitution thus contra dicted Ghana’s own historical experiences, and the 
true meaning of independence. Ghana after independence desired to pursue its own 
course of action, yet the commanding officer of its national army was an expatriate. 
When Nkrumah hinted on the idea of making the Ghana a republic, Her Majesty’ 
government in Britain was very displeased about it (Mahoney: 160). To this end, the 
Republican constitution was designed to free Ghana, once and for all, from the thumb of 
Post-independence political policies     101


--- PAGE 118 ---
the Queen’s governor-general. It also guara nteed the Chieftaincy institution and the 
preservation of the Houses of Chiefs. The constitution was based on the idea of “one 
man, one vote and African unity, namely  the political union of Africa” (Nkrumah, 
1973b:206). Nkrumah became Ghana’s first President on July 1, 1960, after winning the 
contested plebiscite held in April 1960. 
Nkrumah as President also  became the head of government and the Commander-in-
Chief of the armed forces, in  accordance with the constitution.  In contrast to the US 
constitution, the President was assisted in the administrati on of the country by cabinet 
chosen from members of the Parliament. U nder the 1957 constitution, he could sponsor 
the All-African People Conference in December 1958, and attend it in his capacity as the 
Chairman of the CPP. With his Presiden tial executive powers, Nkrumah was able to 
advance the African liberation struggle, African Unity and Africa’s interest in the 
international community. That Nkrumah as Prime Minster had limited authority in the 
affairs of the country was authenticated when Awoonor said in an interview with this 
author that Nkrumah could not even enter the University College of Ghana until he 
became President. Therefore,  the constitution was not desi gned to assert for the CPP 
ultimate and ambiguous control of power nor as  a prelude to the one party system, as 
alleged by some critics. 
ONE PARTY SYSTEM 
The One-Party system of government that Nkrumah introduced is probably the most 
controversial political policy ever pursued. The contention that it is consistent with the 
traditional political system has been criticized in terms of the Western notion of 
democracy. Democracy has had several definitions, including (i) “a government of the 
people, by the people and for the people,” (ii) “government with the consent of the 
governed,” and (iii) “a form of regime that derives popular sovereignty in which ordinary 
citizens are endowed with the right and ability to govern themselves” (Osabu-Kle, 
2002:1). These concepts do not define the char acteristics or give operational definition of 
democracy. Despite the prevailing partisan political contest in the West, that democratic 
model should be viewed as a system by “the organized few that rule the majority 
comprising the unorganized” (Ibid: 2). No matter how we interpret it, the model has a 
dictatorship component. Therefore, what c onstitutes “the real, philosophical, ideal or 
essential meaning of democracy” as Osabu-Kle explains, is that “the actual practice of 
democracy may be said to be in the eye of the beholder” (Ibid: 1). 
In the pre-colonial African political system, there was no sectional interest and no 
permanent opposing, political groups. T hough there was no mass popular electoral 
process, decisions were reached by cons ensus, involving the co mmoners. Colonialism 
destroyed this “democratic” system through the British Indirect Rule. Like the old 
communal mode of socio-economic produc tion in each community, the corresponding 
post-independence scientific socialism, Nkru mah asserts, should also be a one-party 
political system. In his supposition, “A multi-pa rty system introduced into Africa results 
in the perpetuation of feudalism, tribalism,  and regionalism, and in inordinate power 
struggle and rivalry” (Nkrumah, 1973a:372). 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     102


--- PAGE 119 ---
During the anti-colonial struggle, he emphasized the need for Africans to develop their 
own political and economic systems, according to their traditions, customs and way of 
life. It must be stressed that his policy on the one-party system is limited to a socialist 
state. So, for any critic to characterize Nkrumah’s introduction of the one-party system in 
the country as draconian is to suggest that there is only one universal system of 
government for all social systems, irrespective of differences in cultural systems. Aside 
from the fact that the multi-party system vari es from country to country, wherever it is 
practiced, the capitalist economic system as well as neocolo-nial exploitation of the less 
developed countries, through the WTO and globa lization, remains essentially the same. 
The question is, does the multiparty electoral process ensure actual democratic practice as 
we witnessed in the 2000 presidential election in the US? Perhaps, the one questionable 
policy by the Nkrumah government was the re placement of the National flag, the symbol 
of national unity, with that of the CPP. By so doing, it indirectly eliminated the state, 
thereby defeating the purpose of the one-party  system. If anything at all, the CPP flag 
should have rather been eliminated. 
However, democracy must be measured by the quality of life of the majority of the 
citizenry as opposed to a privileged few, at a particular epoch in a given society. In 
Ghana, the main difference between the NLM and CPP we re both political philosophy 
and ideology. In the view of the NLM, privatization of property such as cocoa and land 
was the basis for improving the standard of living of the people in the society. Based on 
Nkrumah’s political philosophy and ideology, on the other hand, land and cocoa, and for 
that matter, all natural resources, as social products and must be used for the good of the 
whole society. Ninsin summarizes the CPP position as follows: 
The measure which the government in stituted to control land and cocoa 
revenue were aimed at ensuring the une ncumbered realization of this goal 
(of the CPP). In this connection the massive investment in the 
development of social services, like education, health, and housing, which 
were made at the time are lasting monuments to the foresight and courage 
of that regime and its leader, Kwame Nkrumah. (Ninsin: 232) 
The question is how did Nkrumah manage to overcome the unusual circumstances 
discussed above and still achieve major succe sses in that relative short time in the 
country’s history? 
For the sake of some left-wing critics of Nkrumah policies, especially Trotskyites like 
C.R.L James, and R.Flicther and M.Oppenheimer, I feel compelled to cite Trotsky’s 
commentary on the Soviet Union in 1932. 
The processes of great changes must be measured by scales, which are 
commensurate with them. I do not know  if the Socialist society will 
resemble the biblical Paradise. I doubt it. But in the Soviet Union there is 
no Socialism as yet. The situation that prevails there is one of transition, 
full of contradictions, burdened with the heavy inheritance of the past and 
in addition is under the hostile pressure of the capitalistic states. (1932:15) 
Post-independence political policies     103


--- PAGE 120 ---
If the Soviet Union, with all of its advanced Marxists and the proletariat class, and Red 
Army was confronted with unimaginable contradictions, haunted by the legacy of the 
Czarist society as well as burdened with the rancorous persecutions by the capitalists in 
1932, what could we expect from a post-colonial Ghana? While the change from a 
monarchy to a socialist template in Russia, was abrupt, there was no intervening period 
by a Foreign Monarch, nor di d 400 years of European slave trading precede this political 
transformation. During colonialism for example, Africans were conditioned into 
identifying their destiny with their oppressors. Therefore, Czarist Russia was not, in any 
conceivable way, comparable to the multitude of Ghana’s negative cultural and historical 
experience with Europe and the magnitude of  colonial legacy, immediately after the 
attainment of political independence. Why Hegel’s discourse on dialectics is a natural 
law of revolution, Karl Marx’s dialectical and historical materialism is not applicable to 
Ghana and, for that matter, to any post-European slave trade and/or post-independence 
African country. 
PAN-AFRICAN POLICY 
Kwame Nkrumah’s Pan-African statement on the eve of Ghana’s independence that 
Ghana’s independence was meaningless unless it was linked with the total liberation of 
the entire African continent was to bring to fruition the ideals of Pan-Africanism, which 
began in Chicago 1893. It was also to fulf ill the visions of both Marcus Garvey and 
W.E.B.Du Bois. Based on Nkrumah’s Pan-African statements during the national 
revolutionary stage, Ghana’s independence was to serve as the catalyst for the ultimate 
economic freedom, African emancipation, African union government and universal 
African liberation. Therefore, the independe nce of Ghana meant a rededication to the 
struggle to emancipate other African countries. Otherwise, the failure to extend Ghana’s 
independence beyond its borders “would have tragic consequences for other African 
territories striving toward  independence” (Nkrumah, 1972b:105). Nkrumah approached 
the decolonization of Africa at five levels. First, he brought African heads of states and 
political activists together at  conferences in Ghana in 1958. Second, he set up military 
training camps for the freedom fighters in Ghana. Third, he sent arms and ammunitions to 
other liberation camps in Africa. Fourth, Nkrumah provided material, financial and 
human resources to the African liberation movements and governments. Fifth, he made 
Ghana a haven for leaders of the freedom fighters and victims of colonial oppression, 
even outside the African continent. 
AFRICAN UNION GOVERMENT 
Before Ghana attained its political independence, there were only seven independent 
African countries, These were Egypt, Ethiopia, Libya, Liberia, Morocco and Sudan. 
Other African territories were either under col onial rule or the European settler regimes. 
In accord with the resolutions concluded at the Pan-African Congress in Manchester in 
1945, Nkrumah signaled the European powers that an independent Ghana was not going 
to tolerate the continual domination of Africa and its people. Hence, he shaped his 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     104


--- PAGE 121 ---
African policy primarily toward the total liberation of the remaining territories under 
colonial and settler regimes, and to unify Africa politically. This, he viewed, was a 
prerequisite for economic, industrial and cultural development of Ghana in particular and 
Africa as whole. Critical to his African policy was world peace, positive neutrality (in the 
face of the Cold War) and non-alignment. 
It must be recalled that, before Danquah invited Nkrumah to assume the general 
secretaryship of the newly formed UGCC, the latter was the secretary of the London-
based West African National Secretariat. And it was on the advice of the WANS that 
Nkrumah accepted the invitation (Esebede, 1994: 152). Nkrumah made manifest his plan 
for Pan-African unity on the African soil when he addressed the students at the Fourah 
Bay College, while he was on his way to the Gold coast in 1947. 
Nkrumah’s policy of a unitary government in Ghana was inextricably linked with his 
crusade for an African Union Government. As far as back in 1948, following his 
“inevitable removal as secretary of the UGCC,” Agyeman (1992:38) points out, 
“Nkrumah set off on a visit to the Ivory Coast and Guinea in a continuing effort to 
commit other African leaders to the vision of  a free and united Africa.” Hence, the birth 
of CPP in 1949 came to give expression to Nkrumah’s Pan-African mission. For instance, 
following his 1953 “The Motion of Destiny”  speech, Nkrumah organized a Pan-West 
African conference in Kumase in December 1953, of which Nnamdi Azikiwe and Aminu 
Kano of Nigeria attended. The conference called for the establishment of “a strong and 
truly federal [West African] state capable of protecting itself from outside invasion, and 
able to preserve its internal security” (Davidson, 1973:164). Nkrumah’s plan to hold a 
“conference of delegates from organizati ons all over Africa in August 1955” was, 
however, called off primarily because of th e birth of the NLM and the subsequent 
political crisis in the country (Austin, 1964:284). 
With Ghana’s independence, Nkrumah gave a practical expression to the Pan-African 
liberation and unity of Africa by inviting, for the first time in African history, the heads 
of state of the seven independent African states for a summit meeting in April 1958, in 
Accra. At the conclusion of the summit meeting, the leaders agreed to support those 
African countries still under colonial rule  and settler regimes to achieve their 
independence. They also expressed their de termination to pursue a foreign policy based 
on non-alignment, positive neutrality and, the urgent need for economic development. 
Inspired by the example of th e thirteen colonies that came together to form the United 
States of America, Nkrumah held a series of meeting with Sekou Touré of Guinea and 
formed a Ghana-Guinea Union on November 23, 1958. Serving as the nucleus of a union 
of West African States, Sekou Touré announced on May 1, 1959 that the union was open 
to all African nations (Esebede: 169–170). 
The Ghana-Guinea-Mali Union later replaced  the Ghana-Guinea Union, formed on 
April 29 1961 to serve as a future United States of Africa. Its charter declared its 
membership open to every African country or  federation of African states that accepted 
its goals. Specifically, its goals sought “to st rengthen and develop tie s of friendship and 
fraternal cooperation between the member states politically, diplomatically, economically 
and culturally, and to pool their resources in order to consolidate their independence and 
safeguard their territorial integrity” (Ibid: 171). Other aspects of its aspirations spoke of 
working jointly to achieve the total liquidation of imperialism, colonialism and 
neocolonialism in Africa, in order to form African Unity; and “to harmonize the domestic 
Post-independence political policies     105


--- PAGE 122 ---
and foreign policy of its Members, so that their activities may prove more effective and 
contribute more worthily to safeguarding the peace of the world” (Ibid: 171). 
Earlier, William Tubman of Liberia, alarmed by the word, “Union” had invited 
Nkrumah and Touré to a conference at Sannniquelle on July 19, 1959, where the name 
Ghana-Guinea Union was dropped and replaced by Associated States of Africa. The 
conference adopted the name, Community of Independent African States, with 
“Independence and Unity” as its motto. But as associated states, its goals fell short of 
Nkrumah’s vision of a political union of Africa. The difference was that the Ghana-
Guinea-Mali Union stood for a radical decolonization and speedy unification of Africa, 
while President Tubman preferred a cauti onary and gradual approach (Ibid: 171–72). 
These differences in objectives signaled the divisions of what would later become the 
Monrovia and Casablanca blocks. 
This early polarization of the Pan-Afri can project precipita ted the All-African 
Peoples’ Conference in Tunis from January 25 to 30, 1960. It was at this conference that 
the establishment of an organization to organize all the necessary assistance and 
solidarity of all the independent African countries was set up. They also agreed on the 
sending of African volunteers to fight in the Algerian war of independence from France. 
Furthermore, the conference adopted a policy at furthering closer economic and cultural 
cooperation (Ibid: 173). Nkrumah’s proposals for the establishment of an African 
common market, an African bank and a technical research institute were approved; but, 
his proposal on the political union of Africa was rejected. 
The differences between the Monrovia and Casablanca blocks brought a division in 
the Pan-African project at the Addis Abab a conference in June 1960. The conservative 
Monrovia block, which favored a gradual approach, was led by Tubman of Liberia, while 
the radical pro-African political union group, the Casablanca block, was led by Nkrumah 
(Ibid: 174). Judging from the positions of the tw o blocks, the Pan-A frican project could 
not escape from the Cold War politics. United States Senator J.Dodd of Connecticut, in 
December 1962, began a campaign with a sp ecial focus on Ghana as a “center for 
subversive communism in Africa.” As “vice chairman of the Senate Internal Security 
Committee,” the Senator “reiterated the charge, saying Ghana is the first Soviet Satellite 
in Africa” (Walters, 1993:114). Earlier, the US government had regarded Nkrumah’s 
support of Lumumba of Congo as tantamount to being pro-Soviet” (Mahoney: 163). For 
instance, when Nkrumah wrote and distributed copies of his book, Neocolonialism: The 
Last Stage of Imperialism,  to the African leaders in 1965, the US State Department 
sharply criticized and protes ted the chapter which exposes “the activities of the Peace 
Corps, the US Information Services, the US  Agency for International Development and 
to the World Bank” in Africa (Nkrumah, 1973a:310). 
The mounting criticisms of Nkrumah as scheming to become the ruler of Africa or as 
being pro-Soviet could not deter him from his repeated call for a Union of African States. 
It follows that a loose amalgamation of African nations would only create loopholes for 
the former colonial powers and imperialists to manipulate the African nations to their 
advantage. It would also lead to situations  in which “the resentment which overthrew 
colonialism will be used against us.” Nkrumah further explains his theory of political 
economy when he points out that: 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     106


--- PAGE 123 ---
Political freedom is essential in order to win economic freedom, but 
political union is meaningless unless it is of a nature which enables the 
country, which has obtained it to maintain its economic freedom. 
(Esebede: 176) 
This statement clearly elucidates what he c onsidered to be the indissoluble relationship 
between economic and political freedom. In other words, political freedom is the 
forerunner to Africa’s total social, economic and cultural freedom. It was with this in 
mind that he accepted the compromised constitu tional reforms towards the attainment of 
political independence. 
Esebede notes that, nearing the final conclusion of the Charter of Organization of 
African Unity (OAU), Nkrumah ignored “Selassie’s coun-sel of caution and gradualism” 
and used the occasion to drive home his argum ent for the total liberation and immediate 
political unification of Africa. The questi on is, how was the OAU going to meet its 
commitment to the total liberation of Africa without form al political machinery? Or how 
was the OAU going to defend Africa without a unified foreign policy and military 
command? Answers to these questions are embodied in Nkrumah’s proposed five 
commissions to serve as modalities for an  African union government: a Commission to 
frame a constitution for a Union government; a Commission to draw up details for a 
Common Foreign Policy and Diplomacy; a Commission to produce plans for Common 
System of Defence and a Commission to make proposals for a Common African 
Citizenship. A Commission to work out a continental plan for a common economic and 
industrial program for Africa, included (i) a Common Market, (ii) an African Currency, 
(iii) an African Monetary Zone, (iv) an African Central Bank, and (v) a Continental 
Communication system. (Nkrumah, 1973a:246–47). Sensing that there would be 
insufficient support for the critical components of his proposals, Nkrumah drew attention 
to the fruitlessness of a compromised OAU ch arter that would result in making it an 
amorphous organization. 
What are we looking for in Africa? Are we looking for Charters, 
conceived in the light of the United Nations example? A type of United 
Nations Organization whose decisions are framed on the basis of 
resolutions that in our experience have sometimes been ignored by 
member States? Where groupings are formed and pressures develop in 
accordance with the intere st of the groups concerned? Or is it intended 
that Africa should be turned into a loose organization of states on the 
model of the Organization of American States, in which the weaker states 
within it can be at the mercy of the stronger or more powerful ones 
politically or economically and all at the mercy of some powerful outside 
nation or group of nations. Is this the kind of association we want for 
ourselves in the United Africa we all speak of with feeling and emotion? 
(Ibid. 244–45) 
Certainly, the OAU was destined to become a loose association. The inevitable dissention 
among the member states can also be attributed to the behavior of most of the French 
speaking countries in the West Africa sub-region, who attained their independence within 
Post-independence political policies     107


--- PAGE 124 ---
the French Community; with the exception of Guinea and Mali, the rest appeared to favor 
the Organization of American States model. 
The favorable vote on the charter of the OAU fell short of Nkrumah’s vision of a 
political union government. It al so fell short of Marcus Garvey’s vision of a powerful 
Black nation with a strong army, pursuing independent of course of action. It also fell 
short of the objectives of Pan-Africanism, for which Dr. Du Bois pursued from 1893 to 
1963. The charter of the OAU became what Nkru mah characterizes “a Charter of intent, 
rather than a Charter of Positive Action (Ibid: 247). 
So, what looked like a reasonable proposal toward real African unity was met with 
opposition from the other member states. The issue of African High Command and 
African union government were rejected outright. For this reason, Nkrumah pointed to 
three choices available to Africa: “first, to unite and save our continent; secondly, to 
disunite and disintegrate; or thirdly to ‘sell out’ to foreign powers” (Esebede: 176). 
This awareness, perhaps, drove Nkrumah to denounce those he viewed as bent on 
blocking the path to African political union as imperialist protagonist and puppet leaders. 
For Nkrumah, political union meant a common foreign and defense policy, common 
currency, one citizenship, intercommunication system, as well as rapid social, economic 
and industrial development. Africa is endowed with incredible natural resources, yet the 
post-independence African nations were still dependent on the former colonial powers for 
simple goods. With an African Common Mark et of three hundred million producers and 
consumers, Africa could be in control of productivity and purchasing power on par with 
any of those trading and currency blocks which now rule the commerce of the world. Yet, 
most member States of the OAU did not see it that way. 
Nevertheless, Nkrumah was not prepared to accept defeat. In the subsequent OAU 
meetings in Cairo in 1964 and Accra in October, 1965, Nkrumah reiterated his call for a 
continental African High Command. This  time, he proposed setting up an OAU 
Executive Council to act as the executive arm of  the Assembly of Heads of States and 
Governments. The boycott of the Accra su mmit meeting by five French speaking 
countries in the West Africa sub-region, however, caused the voting for the Executive 
Council to fall short of two votes. Unhappy about the rejection of his proposed Executive 
Council and African High Command, Nkrumah went further to reiterate his earlier 
warning that either the OAU move forward to development through an effective African 
Union or step backward into stagnation, instability and confusion, whereby Africa would 
become easy prey for foreign intervention, and insurrection, He asked: 
Who is there to oppose or frustrate us, if we only have the courage to form 
an All-African Union Government. Can the industrialized nations do 
without our copper, our iron ore, our bauxite, our coffee, cocoa, cotton, 
groundnuts, palm oil or will they be running after us, as we have been 
running to them for trade on equitable terms? (Nkrumah, 1973. 307) 
Again, his Pan-African vision, in terms of self-determination and independent course of 
action by Africans, fell on dead ears. 
Was Nkrumah’s struggle for an African political union government premature? Or 
was Nkrumah ahead of this time? Was the repugnance of the majority of the member 
states toward a union government and African High Command due to any imperial 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     108


--- PAGE 125 ---
design that Nkrumah might have had in mind? If so, how was Nkrumah going to achieve 
this alleged imperial design in order to become the head of the African union 
government? Was the choice of the head of the union government going to be decided by 
the Executive Council of the OAU as proposed by Nkrumah or by a general continental 
election? What benefits did African people derive from the gradual approach to a 
political African union government , as espoused by some of the leaders? Or was the 
aversion of those African leaders toward an African union government and African High 
Command due to their Eurocentric conditioning that had submerged their African 
personalities? Therefore were not the anti-Nk rumah proposals due as much to the Cold 
War politics and their lack of confidence in the ability of Africans to determine Africa’s 
destiny? Answers to these questions, plausibly, explains Nkrumah’s crusade on the 
recovery of African personality through an African-centered education and the theater. 
THE AFRICAN LEBERATION STRUGGLE 
If the summoning of the independent African Heads of States to the Summit meeting in 
Ghana in April 1958 by Nkrumah marked the turning point in African history, then 
Nkrumah’s sponsoring of the historic All-African Peoples Conference in Accra in 
December 1958, marked the highest and the final point in both non-violent and armed 
struggles toward the total liberation of all African territories. It was the greatest coming 
together of thirtysix liberation movement s and other Pan-Africans from England, USA 
and the Caribbean on African soil. 
This historic meeting was originally urged by Dr. Du Bois through George Padmore to 
be the sixth Pan-African Congress. For strategic reasons, Nkrumah changed it to All-
African People’s Conference. Some of the notable participants were Nelson Mandela, 
Robert Mugabe, Patrice Lumumba, Julius Nyerere, Tom Mboya and Frantz Fanon 
(Krofana: 31), Amilcar Cabral, Joshua Nkomo and Holden Roberto (Mahoney: 163). 
Also in attendance were Horace M.Bond, a former President of Lincoln University, 
Marguerite Cartwright, an African American journalist, and Shirley Graham Du Bois. 
W.E.B Du Bois could not attend because of a restriction placed on his external travels by 
the US State Department (Esebede: 167).  
In his speech read by his wife, Du Bois explained that “if Africa unites, it will be 
because each part, each nation, each tribe give s up a part of the heritage for the good of 
the whole” (Ibid: 168). The agreement at the conference was that freedom fighters should 
be provided with resources like material , military and medical supplies (Ibid: 168). 
Nkrumah called for the set up of volunteer armed forces to help in the freedom struggle, 
saying that “we will not tolerate interfe rence from any country, and I mean any” 
(Nkrumah, 1973:348). 
This meeting enabled Nkrumah to reinforce his personal relations with the 
nationalists. Ghana had became the “Mecca” of fr eedom fighters, who “began to look to 
Nkrumah for guidance and financial support to foment rebellion in their home countries.” 
Patrice Lumumba was one of those delegates who returned to Congo with a 
determination to press for immediate independence in the Belgian Congo” (Mahoney: 
163). When Congo became independent, Nkruma h sent doctors, engineers and civil 
servants to help the new country (Krafona: 38). 
Post-independence political policies     109


--- PAGE 126 ---
Nkrumah’s first Pan-African positive action was the £10 million interest-free loan he 
gave to Guinea to stabilize its economy and provide administrative and technical 
assistance. It should be recalled that Gu inea, under Sekou Toure, voted ‘No’ against 
General de Gaulle’s referendum of September 28, 1958 on upholding the constitution of 
the French Community. As a retaliation ag ainst Guinea’s negativ e vote, the French 
government withdrew its civil servants and equipment and everything France owned 
from Guinea (Esebede: 169). 
To further the course of the African liberation, Nkrumah created three new institutions 
in Ghana, namely, the African  Secretariat, the Bureau of  African affairs and the All-
Trade Union Congress. “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, bequeathed by the British, was 
viewed with disfavor because  it was suspected to be a s econdary colonial interest” 
(Krafona: 30). According to Adamafio, Nkru mah regarded himself African first, and 
therefore disliked the idea of treating affairs pertaining to African nations as foreign 
affairs. Nkrumah was “Africa’s African and he spoke, ate, smoked, drank, and sang 
Africa” (Adamafio: 96–97). 
The African Affairs Secretariat was responsible for organizing conferences of 
independent African states and nationalist movements, while the Bureau of African 
Affairs served as a channel through which pr opaganda and material aid were provided to 
the freedom fighters. The All-African Trade Union Congress, on the other hand, was set 
up to organize a Pan-African Federation Union as ‘the Vanguard of the Struggle for 
political freedom, independen ce and unity’ of the African  continent (Krofana: 31–32). 
These three entities became the vehicles for pursuing Ghana’s African policy. 
But, Nkrumah’s African policy suffered a terrible defeat in the Congo crisis, after the 
Moise Tshombe-led secession in the Katanga province in Congo in July 1960, leading to 
the murder of Lumumba. This failure was partly due to Nkrumah’s misperception of the 
situation and his overwhelming confidence in the British-born Ghanaian officer, General 
Alexander, who became Commander of the Gh anaian and UN Troops. At the request of 
Lumumba, Ghana sent two battalions to help avert a civil war and Nkrumah immediately 
placed Ghana’s resources at the disposal of  Lumumba. With the exception of Guinea, 
Congo received no support from any other independent African country. 
The Ghanaian troops initially restored or der by disarming th e mutinous Congolese 
troops. By the time the Congo crisis resurfaced at a higher level, Lumumba had 
developed a very deep suspicion of General Alexander but Nkrumah would not withdraw 
him, because of an unimpeachable confidence Nkrumah had in the general. Little did he 
know that General Alexander “grew increasingly hostile to Lumumba whom” the Belgian 
and US “feared might become another anti-colonialist militant (like Nkrumah) in the 
heart of Afriea” (Ibid: 40). Lumumba now accused “Ghana of treachery when the UN 
Commander using Ghanaian troops,” denied him (Lumumba) “permission to broadcast 
on his own government radio at a time of serious escalation of tension in the Congo” 
(Ibid: 40). The Ghanaian Ambassador and the general had been sending conflicting 
messages to Ghana, and the upshot was the arrest and murder of Patrice Lumumba by the 
Chief of Staff of the Congolese Army, Colonel Joseph Mobutu on February 13, 1961 
(Ibid: 39–44). 
Lumumba’s murder constituted a major, but a temporary set back to Nkrumah’s 
African Pan-African policy, es pecially coming after the c onclusion of a secret Ghana-
Congo, (including military pact) accord between the two leaders on August 8, 1960. The 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     110


--- PAGE 127 ---
immediate dismissal of General Alexander was inconsequential; it came too late to 
uphold the Ghana-Congo accord. Nkrumah’s su mmoning of “the new US ambassador, 
Francis H.Russell, with a chiding letter, “stinging, aid mémoier to President Kennedy” 
perhaps, marked a turning point in Ghana’ s attitude towards the US. So was his second 
letter to President Kennedy flatly accusing him “of bad faith” (Mahoney: 165). The root 
of the impasse, in the wake of the Cold War, also lies in his confidence in the UN and the 
British-born officer commanding the Ghanaian  and UN troops. In the aftermath of 
Lumumba’s murder, Krafona notes:  
Mutual suspicions gave way to fundamental conflicts of interest. In the 
Western view, if the Congo were to become independent then, perhaps, a 
moderate leader who would pander to their interests was preferable. But 
the Ghanaians wanted a radical like Lumumba who would readily 
embrace their Pan-African crusade. Such a fundamental clash of interests, 
coupled with the fact Ghana was at this time beginning to tighten the 
screw on private enterprise in favour of ‘socialism,’ made rupture in 
Ghanaian-Western relations inevitabl e. A search for a new friendship 
began with the Eastern block, in particular the Soviet Union. (Krafona: 
41–42) 
This conflict of interest heightened the already mounting campaign, and assassination and 
coups attempts to rid Africa of Nkrumah. The drama of the Cold War politics would be 
played out in the upshot of the Angolan independence in the seventies, where the 
Western forces rallied behind Jonas Sa vimbi in opposition to the OAU support for 
Aogostinho Neto. 
This major set-back notwithstanding, Nkrumah set up camps for freedom fighters to 
give them proper training in guerrilla activity and organization. All freedom fighters 
knew Ghana as their sanctuary. In the case of the Algerian revolution, Nkrumah saw 
armed struggle as the only solution. Nkruma h brought together liberation and political 
movements from French, Spanish, British and Portuguese colonial territories including 
the settler areas, and held discussions with them. He would formulate strategies for the 
African revolutions, discussing these with colleagues and officials, and “worked like a 
wounded tiger” (Adamafio: 103). Adamafio adds: 
We received great supplies of arms, which we kept at Elmina Castle. 
Kwame and I (Adamafio) went with Madjitey, the Commissioner of 
Police, to inspect them. Driving back to Accra in Kwame’s car, we talked 
and planned for Africa and shook cha llenging fists in the face of all 
oppressors of our continent. Kwame was so elated that he behaved like a 
boy who had just received a present of  a toy gun at Christmas! I was glad 
too, for this was a positive manifestation of our will to act and a concrete 
demonstration of Ghana’s leadership role in the African Revolution. (Ibid: 
104) 
Post-independence political policies     111


--- PAGE 128 ---
Nkrumah, who had earlier embraced Gandhi ’s non-violent positive action, had now 
become a convert to the belief that armed struggle was the only means of defeating 
colonialism and settler regimes in Africa. 
According to Retired Colonel David Gbon Zanleringu, Commander of the President 
Own Guard Regiment (POGR) between 1962 and February 24, 1966, Nkrumah’s 
government gave substantial support to the liberation movements. One such logistic 
support was the setting up of military camps in  two locations in Ghana, namely, “Half 
Assini in the Nzema area, and Obenemase in  the Asante Akyem” area for training the 
freedom fighters. Some of the freedom fighters were recruited by the liberation 
movements from Belgian Congo (now Congo Democratic Republic), Angola, Rhodesia 
(now Zambia and Zimbabwe), Nyasaland (now  Malawi)” and Belgian Congo and sent to 
the camps in Ghana. Secondly, the CPP gove rnment provided arms and ammunitions for 
the fighters. One Lieutenant Kabu-Davies of the POGR had the task “to escort the arms 
and other equipment to various destinations ,” Retired Colonel Zanleringu, said in 
response to my questionnaire on June 15, 2003. Some of the beneficiaries of the military 
supplies were Dr. Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia and Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe. Colonel 
Zanleringu, “believed that financial support was also provided to the fighters.” Some of 
the arms and military equipment were also secretly sent to some of the freedom fighters’ 
bases, especially in Sudan, of which Retired Colonel Kwasi Oteng, then a Second 
Lieutenant of the POGR, had some knowledge. In our interview on May 15, 2003, 
Retired Colonel Oteng revealed that he spent some weeks with the soldiers under him at 
Half Assini, guarding arms and ammunitions deposited there for the training of the 
freedom fighters. 
As the Commander of the POGR, Retired Colonel Zanleringo indicated the trust and 
confidence that Nkrumah had in him (and General C.M. Barwah who was murdered in 
his residence by Colonel Kotoka when he refused to support the coup that overthrew 
Nkrumah government). He handled some aspects of the training and the distribution of 
arms and ammunitions to the camps. Though he was not directly involved in the affairs of 
the African High Command that the Casablanca block had established in Accra, he was 
charged to provide accommodation for the staff. 
Nkrumah’s support for the cause of African unity went beyond his campaign for 
political union, conferences, and support of the armed struggle. When Ian Smith of 
Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) announced his Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 
November 1965, Ghana severed diplomatic relations with Britain on December 16, 1965. 
Additionally, the government introduced a Bill in the National Assembly under the 
certificate of urgency to “give the Government general powers to make laws necessary 
for mobilization” of Ghana’s Armed Forces (Nkrumah, 1973a:361). I recalled discussing 
with a friend in Koforidua about joining the volunteer force called by the government at 
the time. 
During the Algerian war of independence, Ghana provided logistical support to the 
National Liberation of Algeria. Sooner after the All-African People’s Conference, Franz 
Fanon of the Front for National Liberation of Algeria, collaborated with Nkrumah to 
work in Ghana (McFarland & Owusy Ansah: Ivi). In a 1972 discussion of Ghana’s’ role 
in the Algeria revolution, with J.E.Jantuah (now, Kwame Opoku Sanaa Jantuah), Ghana’s 
ambassador to France at the time, indicated th at his official residence in Paris became a 
safe haven for the Algerian citizens, who we re being chased down to be slaughtered in 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     112


--- PAGE 129 ---
France. He said Nkrumah authorized the issuance of Ghanaian passports to those 
Algerians in his residence and on the Ghan a embassy compound. In addition, Nkrumah 
sent a special plane for their evacuation from Paris to Ghana. By 1977, this author knew 
some Southern African nationals who held Ghanaian passports, which were issued during 
Nkrumah’s Ghana. Retired Colonel Oteng also knew about South African students with 
whom they interacted on their arrival in Ghana. 
Ghana’s foreign policy was based on Dignity , Peace, Friendship, and Non-alignment. 
This policy was conceived in the context of  the atomic arms race and the Cold War. 
However, Ghana’s policy of non-alignment did not imply indifference to the issues in the 
world, nor did it mean isolationism. It also did not mean anti-Western or anti-anti Eastern 
blocks. As an African proverb goes: “When the bull and elephant fight the grass is 
trampled down,” Nkrumah (1973b:143) cites. Thus, between war and peace, Ghana stood 
for peaceful solutions of disputes. The non- aligned movement was predicated upon this 
philosophy, which was initiated by Kwame Nkrumah after his visits to Egypt and India in 
1958. Through these visits, “he laid the foundation of a non-aligned ‘third force’ in 
international affairs” (Mahoney: 163). 
Nkrumah also sought other avenues of support for African liberation and self-
determination. In 1960, Ghana managed to ge t the United Nations General Assembly to 
approve Resolution 1514 (XU), or the Declaration on the granting of Independence to 
Non-Self-Governing Territories and peoples. Ghana’s vigorous voice in the UN, its 
active involvement in the UN conferences a nd advocacy for World Peace, disarmament, 
and specially Nkrumah’s doctrine of “World Without Bomb,” led to its being elected into 
the UN Security Council in January 1962 for two years. The recognition of Ghana’s 
prominent position in world affairs was also manifested in the making of a Ghanaian 
diplomat, Alex Quasin Sackey, the President of the UN General Assembly (Krafona: 32). 
Addressing the UN General Assembly on August 10, 1961, Nkrumah focused his 
attention on world peace, disarmament, the illegal settler regimes in Africa and the war in 
Vietnam; in addition, he expressed his government’s support for the admission of the 
People Republic of China to the UN (Nkrumah, 1973b:277). 
Nkrumah saw his active role in interna tional affairs as regards world peace, 
disarmament, fraternal relations with all democratic nations, non-alignment and Ghana’s 
policy of positive neutralism in the context of  Cold War, as fundamental to ensuring 
peaceful environment for Ghana’s freedom, social, economic and industrial development. 
Secondly, any military alliance with any atom ic power, in the view of Nkrumah, was a 
threat to the security of Africa and world peace. It was for this reason that he accepted Ho 
Chi Mihn’s invitation to go and mediate the conflict in Vietnam (Forward Ever: 53). 
Prior to this invitation, Nkrumah had been very instrumental in the formation of the Afro-
Asia Solidarity Committee. The irony was that the CIA orchestrated military coup 
overthrew his government while he was on his way to restore peace in Vietnam. 
The military coup of 1966 constituted a major set back not only to Ghana’s social, 
economic, industrial and cultural revolution as contained in the Seven-Year Development 
Plan, but it also halted the entire Pan-African project. Inseparable from Nkrumah’s Pan-
Africanism was the place of the African’s in Diaspora who began and advanced the Pan-
African movement form 1893 to 1945. The liberation movements and Black Power 
movement in the US and elsewhere, Nkrumah elucidates, can only find consummation in 
Post-independence political policies     113


--- PAGE 130 ---
the political unification of Africa, the home of black people throughout the world 
(Nkrumah, 1973a:427). 
For this reason, Nkrumah made a conscious effort to invite some leading Diasporan 
African political, social and cultural activists to Ghana’s Independence Day celebration. 
They included Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Congressman Adam Clayton Powell, Dr. 
Ralph Bunche, Asa Philip Randolph, Norman Manly of Jamaica, Mrs. Louis Armstrong 
and many others. Dr. Du Bois could not attend because of the confiscation of his passport 
by the anti-communist State Department of John Foster Dulles. During Ghana’s 
Republican celebration, Thurgood Marshall of the NACCP, Professor Leo Hansberry and 
others honored Nkrumah’s invitation (Walters: 97–98). Addressing a gathering of 7,500 
African Americans in Harlem, New York in July, 1958, he explained that “Africans and 
African Americans were held together by ‘bonds of blood and kinship;” He ended his 
speech by appealing to those with expertis e to go and help build Ghana. Among those 
who went to Ghana between 1958 and 1966 included Professor St. Claire Drake, Maya 
Angelou, Julian Mayfield, Professor Martin Kilson, Drs. Robert and Sara Lee, Dr. Du 
Bois and Shirley Graham Du Bois, George Padmore, CLR James, Bankole Timothy, John 
Henry Clarke, Alice Windom, Sylvia Boone, Tom Feelings and Robert Freeman, former 
President of the United Mutual Insurance Company. Most of them lived in Ghana till the 
US backed military forces overthrew Nk rumah’s government. It is common knowledge 
that until Dr. Du Bois’ death in 1963, Nkru mah spent countless hours with him seeking 
advice on a number of issues, including the political union of Africa (Marais, 1972:103).  
Visits to Ghana by Africans in the Diaspora became common phenomena. Other 
notable ones like, Richard Wright, Mohammed Ali and Malcolm X were some of the 
Africans in the Diaspora who held special meetings with Nkrumah. Malcolm X, for 
instance, returned to the US in 1965 and urged African Americas to go Ghana and 
partake in the Pan-African struggle on the continent. Nkrumah repeatedly stated that until 
Africa was united under one socialist government, every black person everywhere lacked 
a national home. The Black Power movement, Nkrumah notes, “operates throughout the 
African Continent, in North and South Amer ica, the Caribbean, wherever Africans and 
people of African descent live. It was linked with the Pan-African struggle for unity on 
the African continent, and with all those w ho strove to establish a socialist society” 
(Nkrumah, 1973a:426). Therefore statements by  some critics that Nkrumah shifted the 
spirit of Pan-Africanism to a geographical entity are simplistic and misleading. 
Kojo Botsio told me in January 1997 that Nkrumah’s campaign for a continental union 
government was also intended to make it possible for the Africans in the Diaspora to 
become African citizens. On the question of  dual citizenship for the Africans in the 
Diaspora, he said Nkrumah started the pro cess, but the military take-over stopped it. 
Nkrumah’s government dissemination of information in Ghana about the Civil Rights 
and later the Black Power Movements in the US made the American government more 
unpopular in Ghana. And the “left” leanings of some of the Pan-African activists 
supporting Nkrumah course did not sit well by the US government. 
In the light of hostilities, both internal and external, how did Nkrumah manage to 
embark on unprecedented massive social, economic, industrial and cultural developments 
in the country? At the time of Ghana’s independence, “Nkrumah had left $500 million of 
reserves, accumulated during the colonial pe riod, in long-term, low-interest British 
securities,” on the advice of the British, but “this great source of productive investment 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     114


--- PAGE 131 ---
was unavailable in 1959” (Ma honey: 161). Thus, political i ndependence did not mean 
economic independence. 
Between 1951 and 1955, Nkrumah’s administration raised the national income from 
£20 million to £65 million per annum, while expenditure rose from £14 million to £52 
million. The country redeemed its external debts, whilst the country’s “assets from all 
sources” amounted to nearly £100 milli on by 1955 (Nkrumah, 1973b:45). The CPP 
government’s development concentrated on education, Africanization of civil and public 
personnel, construction of hospitals, hea lth and sanitation, road and railways 
constructions. The Adomi Bridge, Tema Harbor and the present campus of the University 
of Ghana were part of this development plan.  
Nkrumah’s economic policies were, in large measures, shaped by the planned and 
developmental economic ideas of John Keynes, often called “mixed economy.” Keynes’ 
criticism of laissez-faire economic theory was that an unregulated market system—
private ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange of goods and 
services—“was likely to be chronically uns table and incapable of assuring the full 
realization of productive resour ces” (William Barber, 1967:237–250). His General 
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money  thus advanced the need for active 
government intervention in the economy through savings and investment towards 
planning and development, as well as full employment (Ibid: 250). 
In July 1957, the government established the Bank of Ghana to play a very important 
and decisive role in the national life, in terms of “the economic and financial self-
government and independence” (Nkrum ah, 1973b:111). The Second Five-Year 
Development Plan, code-named “Building A Welfare State,” was launched on July 1, 
1959. The major components of the plan were industrial development, communication, 
power and water (Volta Dam Project) health and sanitation, tourist industry, arts and 
culture and employment. In the plan, Nkrumah saw education as “one of the main, if not 
the main pillar” (Ibid: 121). Though the development was based on mixed economy, the 
government was apprehensive about the emergence of strong free-market economy to 
impede Nkrumah’s long term socialist objectives. This explains why the industrial sector 
of Ghana’s “economy was mainly a joint venture between” foreign investors and the 
government. By so doing, “the government retained control of the economy and to ensure 
that foreign investment “fitted in with Ghana’s development” plan (Krafona: 34). Loan 
agreements for the country’s development pl an were concluded on Ghana’s own fiscal 
policy. Hence, “Nkrumah rejected outright the loan agreement” on the Volta project “that 
Gbedemah had concluded with World Bank;” Nkrumah charged that “it was improper for 
the bank to dictate Ghana’s fiscal policy” (Mahoney: 169). 
On March 11, 1964, the Five Year Developm ent Plan was replaced by a Seven Year 
Development Plan. The goal was to “develop Ghana economically, socially, culturally, 
educationally, spiritually and technologically” (Nkrumah, 1973:185). Code-named, 
“Work and Happiness,” the aim, under the plan, was to transform Ghana into a socialist 
country, in which the government would accep t full responsibility in promoting the well-
being of the masses. Yet still, the economy remained a mixed one, in which the public 
and co-operative sector operated along with the private sector (Ibid: 191). And the 
development plan made room for all investors, including foreign investors, the central 
and local governments, and individual Ghanaians. The State retained control of certain 
Post-independence political policies     115


--- PAGE 132 ---
strategic sectors of the economy, such as  public utilities, raw materials and heavy 
industry. 
The total expenditure of the Seven-Year Development Plan was over a billion [British] 
pounds sterling, with a total government investment of four hundred and seventy-six 
million pounds. As a state in transition to socialism, the state enterprises were made to set 
up yearly financial and production targets, so that they would work towards definite 
objectives and goals. To achieve the goals of the plan, a National Economic Planning 
Commission was set up under the chairmanship of J.H.Mensah, then a Marxist oriented 
Economist. 
In January 1966, the Volta Dam project, criti cal to Nkrumah’s development plan was 
completed sooner than expected. At a special ceremony on January 23, 1966, Kwame 
Nkrumah switched lights to signify the flow of electricity from the Volta dam. He had 
achieved one of his dreams, which were once criticized as impossible and “prestigious 
projects” by his foes. The el ectricity generated from the dam was to set the stage for 
Ghana’s industrial development. Unfortunately for the people of Ghana and Africa, the 
US government succeeded in timing the comp letion of the Volta project before its 
sponsored military agents went into ac tion to overthrow Nkrumah’s government on 
February 24, 1966. One of the arduous pr oblems ignored by critics of Nkrumah 
government, specifically as it relates to th e coup, is the fact that Nkrumah faced 
“tremendous difficulties entailed in the effort  to bend the colonial bureaucratic and 
military institutions to the service of Pan-Africanism (Agyeman, 1992:40). 
CONCLUSION 
The unanswered question by most critics of post-independence Africa is, what would 
Ghana and Africa be in the twentieth century without Kwame Nkrumah’s nationalist and 
Pan-African crusade? Nkrumah’s policy in  Ghana was Africa’s policy, and Africa’s 
policy was Ghana’s policy; they were two sides of the same coin. The fulcrum of his 
return to the Gold Coast colony in 1947 was to advance the course of African liberation 
and unity through the decolonization of the Gold Coast colony. The CPP that he formed 
fulfilled his Pan-African objectives. His pr ofound statement that Ghana’s independence 
was an indispensable part of the African liberation was not without a cause. 
But, this newly independent Ghana was threatened by armed rebellion, hostility and 
destabilizing campaign by the Opposition. Dr. Bu sia’s unabashed warning he gave to the 
British government, that the Opposition would resort to any conceivable methods, outside 
the law, to oust from power, a government formed by Nkrumah, foreshadowed the 
incidence of orchestrated violence after Gh ana’s independence. But, in the thick of 
secessionist intrigues and acts of terrorism, Nkrumah’s government was able to unite the 
country through its multifaceted policies and pr ograms. They include d education, youth 
and women movements, local and interna tional sporting events, nationalist songs, 
Independence Day Celebrations, the th eater arts and cultural centers. The 
accomplishment of his political policies in terms of one party system of government, with 
a socialist orientation, remaines to be judged between his rapid socio-economic and 
cultural transformation of Ghana and those of the multi-party system currently being 
pursued in Ghana and elsewhere in Africa. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     116


--- PAGE 133 ---
The achievement of Nkrumah’s government at the economic, industrial, agricultural, 
educational and cultural levels, through the de velopment plans, remained unparalleled in 
Ghana. Successive governments after his government have been unable to achieve a 
fraction of what he did for Ghana. These governments, especially Jerry Rawling and 
Kufour’s governments have willfully surre ndered not only the destiny of Ghana to 
financial institutions, but they have agreeab ly paved the way for foreign investors to 
recapture the natural resources of Ghana. 
Nkrumah’s pioneering role in the liberation of Africa from colonial rule and settler 
regimes, and his call for a political union of Africa is indisputable. These were 
quintessential Pan-African objectives of Nkrumah, as well as those of the Pan-African 
movement initiated by Sylvester Williams of Trinidad and later championed by Dr. Du 
Bois. Besides carrying through the resolutions concluded at the Pan-African Congress in 
Manchester in 1945, Nkrumah was also determined to realize the Pan-African vision of 
Marcus Garvey, specifically a strong Black Nation with a strong Black Army, Black-
owned business (including Black Star lines). At the same time, the capitalist countries in 
the West became alarmed by his Pan-African policies, since the stableness of Western 
economies depends on Africa’s fragmentation, “a principle, which underlay the 
nineteenth century ‘Scramble for Africa” (Kra fona: 37). Also, in spite of his policy of 
positive neutrality and non-alignment with resp ect to the Cold War politics, he became 
the target of Western criticism. 
At the 1963 summit conference in Addis Ababa, Nkrumah’s opponents strongly 
rejected everything that he proposed, especially an African High Command and a 
Continental Union government. But the birth and existence of the OAU owes its name to 
Kwame Nkrumah and the people of Ghana.  Nkrumah’s prediction at the OAU summit 
meeting in Cairo in 1964 that African governments were going to be removed from office 
one after the other, by the neocolonialist and imperialist powers, should they fail to unite 
under one a continental government has come to pass. The succession of military coups 
after those of Nigeria and Ghana in Janua ry and February 1966 respectively vindicated 
Nkrumah’s proposals for a continental union government. Secondly, the unknown 
carnage of the civil wars in the history of Africa, beginning with that of Nigeria between 
in 1968 to 2004, also proved correct Nkrumah’s proposal for an African High Command. 
The heartrending phenomenon is that nearly a ll the victims of the civil wars (still going 
on) are the poor, women and children. 
Though Nkrumah did not succeed in achieving the political unification of Africa, he 
laid the foundation for future Africa leaders to pursue it. Also, the liberation struggle he 
sparked in 1958 continued unabated after the untimely overthrow of his government by 
the CIA orchestrated coup. This military coup halted all that Nkrumah wished for Ghana, 
Africa and the Africans in Diaspora, especia lly his crusade on the recovery of African 
personality as an agent for Africa’s soci o-economic transformation, through African-
centered education and theater.  
Post-independence political policies     117


--- PAGE 134 ---
Chapter Six  
Nkrumah’s Cultural Policies: The State and 
the Arts 
The post-independence cultural renascence that  Nkrumah, and some Ghanaian cultural 
activists advanced, constituted a declaration of independence from what Freire 
[1972:185] calls the “culture of invasion” into the continent during colonialism. It also 
necessitated both intellectual decolonization policies and the creation of cultural 
institutions. What remains uninvestigated, therefore, is the effectiveness of the cultural 
policies of Nkrumah and the cultural institutions he established to combat colonial legacy 
in Ghana. The question is, how did Nkrumah’s cultural thought, analyzed in Chapter 
Three, inform his cultural policies and cultural institutions? Did the policies take into 
consideration the legacies of colonial structures, institutions, and especially the consumed 
European culture that had shaped the personality of the African? Was Nkrumah’s cultural 
thought and vision shared  by those who served on the cultural committees as well as 
those responsible for the implementation of the said policies? 
This chapter assesses the nature of Nkrumah’s cultural policies and their impact on the 
establishment of cultural institutions in Ghana. They include the National Theater 
Movement concept, the Arts Council of Ghana and the Institute of Arts and Culture in the 
society. The chapter also discusses the cultural thrusts of these institutions, and the extent 
to which the planning committees took into acc ount the nature of colonial legacies in 
Ghana. 
Cultural policies, in this chapter, refer to the definite course of actions charted by 
Nkrumah’s government to guide and determine decisions affecting projected cultural 
institutions and movement with desired objectives. The desired aims of these institutions 
and movement refer to Nkrumah’s location of  African culture at the core of Ghana’s 
post-independence socio-economic development.  
There are two levels of Nkrumah’s cultural policies, namely, non-statutory and 
statutory. The non-statutory cultural policies consisted of  practical activities that 
Nkrumah introduced into the body politics of Ghana during a nd after the decolonization 
process. The second level comprised the public policies formulated by the various 
committees he set up and the cultural institutions that emerged out of the 
recommendations by the former. It should, however, be pointed out that Nkrumah’s non-
statutory cultural policies were not unpreceden ted in the country, Nevertheless, it was 
when he came into the political scene, this author maintains, that we witnessed 
resurgence in African culture at the mass level. 
The quest for cultural liberation in Ghana predated Nkrumah’s cultural policies. They 
comprise the actions of individuals and organizations. Most of the actions were 
manifested in creative works, essays, articles and life styles. But while their actions were 
not far-reaching, in terms of rejecting all as pects of European cultu ral nationalism, they


--- PAGE 135 ---
were radical measures at the time. Some of the notables are Kobina Sekyi, Casely-
Hayford, The African Academy, Ephraim Amu, Joseph Boakye Danquah, and Oku 
Ampofo. 
Casely-Hayford’s pro-African traditions, especially through his book, Ethiopia 
Unbound, were widely acknowledged in the West African region. He was perhaps the 
first African in the Gold Coast to recognize language as the carrier of culture. As cited in 
Chapter Three, he proposed an African university in which an African language would 
serve as the medium of instruction. Casely-Hayford was the first president of the National 
Congress of British West African. 
By 1915, Kobina Sekyi had become an ardent advocate for the return to pre-coloniai 
Af rican political institutions, traditions and customs. His view was that the “conscious 
imitation of European manners and European society” were “social analogy of that 
physical monstrosity” (1974:viii). His play, The Blinkards,  written and performed in 
Fante in Cape Coast in 1915, satirizes a kind of social pandemic that had characterized 
the personality of the Africans in the area. The satirized characters included those 
Western semi-educated and educated, who ha d come to repudiate African traditions in 
favor of the English way of life. As a practical manifestation of his pro-African traditions, 
Sekyi wore togas [very long knickers] and sandals to meetings and [European] lower 
court of law irritating some of the magistrates (Ibid: X). He was the last president of the 
Aborigines Rights Protection Society. 
J.B.Danquah, the political opponent of Nkruma h, wrote on Akan traditions, especially 
the Akan Doctrine of God . He made demands “for the importance of African institutions 
and conventions” in the development of modern state (July, 1987:58). He wrote two 
plays in Twi and one in English, “The Third Woman” (Graham-White, 1970:285). The 
two Twi plays Danquah wrote were “Nyankosem” based on a Ghanaian folklore and 
“Osei Tutu,” the founder of the Asante kingdom (Agovi, 1990:15). 
Perhaps the most outstanding cultural crusad er of the time was Ephraim Amu. After 
his return from Britain in the 1920s, he became impatient with what he saw as 
inappropriate European cultura l accretion. Henceforth, he was to devote the rest of his 
life to the renascence of African traditions, customs and language. His first action was the 
collection and study of the language and aesth etic of traditional African music. Out of 
this effort, he created an African choral music in Ghana that has since become a legacy in 
the country. Though it was to replace European hymns in church service, the motifs and 
themes in his innovated music reflect African nationalism and folklore. After its debut in 
the Presbyterian Church, some of the past ors [mostly Africans] considered the music 
“uncouth sounds and inappropriate to Christian worship.” But, as he told July (Ibid: 86) 
in an interview, “I felt encouraged by the resistance they gave me.” 
While teaching at the Akropong Teacher Traini ng College, he wore the kente cloth to 
preach one Sunday. Immediately after the serv ice, the ministers c onfronted and ordered 
him to discontinue the practice; but since Amu would not yield to their demands, he lost 
his teaching position at the college. Amu us ed calabash for drinking and preferred 
speaking both Ewe and Twi to the English language. Based on my knowledge, he spoke 
these languages to those students [even during our African choral classes] who 
understood them. One day, he unconsciously as ked a Ugandan student a question in Twi. 
During my student days, Amu wore ky enkyen [an authentic fabric material made from 
the bark of kyenkyen tree] and a pair of sandals. 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     119


--- PAGE 136 ---
His legacy of traditional musi c also includes the use of at enteben [six-tone bamboo 
flute] and odurugya [five-tone bamboo flute], which was introduced in the academy. He 
wrote all his songs in both Twi and Ewe languages. The popular one in Ghana is Yen Ara 
Asaase Ni (This is our land) has become Ghana’s unofficial second national anthem. 
The African Academy was a cultural orga nization, which aimed at re-asserting 
African intellectual agency. Lead by  Bankole Awoonor-Williams, they challenged 
Europe’s claims of racial superiority over others. In addition, the group intended to 
assemble African arts, to encourage research in tropical diseases, and European diseases 
in Europe by African doctors and to aid in the publication of the works of African 
scholars, poets, composers and inventors (Sherwood, 1996:15). 
Another Ghanaian cultural nationalist, whose immeasurable legacy is in visual art and 
pharmacopoeia, is Oku Ampofo. He combined his medical practice with visual arts 
(sculpturing). On his return to the Gold Coast in 1940, he organized the Gold Coast Arts 
Society, popularly called The Akwapim Six, and held the “New African Arts” exhibitions 
in 1944, 1946 and 1948. The kente cloth hanging at the United Nations as Ghana’s gift, 
was the work of his weavers, led by E.Asare (July, 1987:55). 
Ampofo’s medical work also turned into studying and prescribing the traditional 
African medicine for his patients. He set up the Institute for Research in Herbal Medicine 
in his hometown, Akwapim Mampong. Today, the Tetteh Quashie Memorial Hospital at 
Mampong is the only known modern hospital in Ghana where herbal medicine is 
prescribed for patients. 
These individual declarations of independence from European culture, especially in 
the arts, anticipated political action. As Em erson and Kilson (1965:7) point out, the full 
flowering of the African cu ltural awakening did not take place until the end of the 
European World War Two; “even the decades between the wars were little more than a 
preparation behind the scenes for what was about to come.” It was after the entrance of 
Nkrumah to Ghana’s political scene in 1947 that the proposition was put forward that 
colonialism was evil and must be overthrown now. Not only did he use African art forms, 
orature, aesthetics, motifs and symbols, during and after the campaign for national 
independence, but he also initiated policies and created cultural movements and 
institutions in Ghana. 
NKRUMAH’S NON-STATURORY CUTLTURAL PRACTICES 
First, Nkrumah’s skillful use of the creative culture and what Yankah (1985:87) identifies 
as folk wisdom during and following the decolonization process was a major cultural 
policy at the personal level. His use of wh ite handkerchief, horsetail and walking stick, 
for instance, was in keeping with the secular and religious roles of the traditional kings 
and queens. As pointed out earlier in Hagan’s discourse on Nkrumah’s leadership style, 
these practices were consistent with the authority of the traditional African priests 
(1991:189) like Okomfo Anokye of Akwamu, Okomfo Asare of Akyem Tafo, Krakyi 
Denteh of Ketekrakyi and Nana Oparebea of Larteh. 
Another manifestation of Nkrumah’s adept use of the traditions in post-independence 
African national politics was his “Dawn Broadcast.” It is traditional for Akan kings and 
queens to make very important pronouncements at dawn. Conscious of this sacred 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     120


--- PAGE 137 ---
tradition, Nkrumah began broadcasting to the nation on important issues at dawn (Marais: 
105 and Jones, 1976:106). 
Kwesi Yankah (1985:87), in his “The Making and Breaking of Kwame Nkrumah: The 
Role of Oral Poetry,” discusses the place of orature in Nkrumah’s speeches, both in 
public and electronic media. “There was always,” he writes, “a prelude of a well-
articulated” and “inspiring appellation performances” to Nkrumah’s speeches “often 
ending with the words: Kwame kasa, kasa, kasa (Kwame speak, speak, speak). The place 
of appellation performance in Nkrumah’s speeches was also consistent with those of the 
traditional kings, queens and royalty in the Akan society. The appointment of Okyeame 
Boafo Akuffo as a state poet by Nkrumah wa s similar “to the traditional bard in apae 
performance” in front of the king and queen; and that his “performances were often a 
poetic capsule of Nkrumah’s speeches that was about to follow” (Ibid: 88). 
It must be mentioned that Nkrumah’s reverence toward African traditions was anterior 
to his cultural policies in Ghana. For instance, during a memorial service for Okunini 
(Dr.) Kwagyir Aggrey in Salisbury, North Carolina in 1943, Nkrumah “took charge of 
the African ritual. 
He said sacred prayers in the Fanti language and then poured libation to 
the Gods three times, each libation be ing preceded by a prayer. He cut a 
piece of sod from the grave, which was to be sent to Aggrey’s memorial 
home for burial. (Sherwood: 97) 
What was interesting is that Nkrumah had attained a degree from Lincoln University’s 
Theological Seminary with a licentiate to preach. Hence, the dean of the Seminary, 
George Johnson condemned Nkrumah for c onducting an “Animistic Service without 
Christian significance and contra dictory to Christian teaching.  To pray to heathen gods 
and to pour [libation] to them is directly forbidden in the Holy Scriptures.” In his reply, 
Nkrumah stated that “the burden of my life is  to live in such a wa y that I may become a 
living symbol of all that is best in both Christianity and the beliefs of my people. I am a 
Christian and will ever remain so, but ne ver a blind Christian,” Nkrumah (Ibid: 97–98) 
expressed in 1943. 
National unity was one of Nkrumah’s determined policies whereby the people would 
think of themselves as Ghanaians first, Fa nti, Ewe, Asante, Frafra, Dagbani, and Gas 
second (Marais, 1972, 18). Like  his predecessor Casely-Hayfo rd, Nkrumah also pursued 
a course of “a racial affinity to the rest of  the African people,” which he saw as “definite 
values and must be placed be fore anything else,” Marais  quotes Nkrumah in her book, 
Kwame Nkrumah As I Knew Him (Ibid: 17). 
Another manifestation of Nkrumah’s cultural policy was the prominent position 
occupied by women in the country. The e quality of women and men was seen in his 
educational policy as well as in political ac tivities. He found support for his policies in 
the views of his early mentor Aggrey, who once said that:  
No race or people can rise half-slave, half-free. The surest way to keep a 
people down is to educate the men and neglect the women. If you educate 
a man, you educate an individual; but if you educate a woman, you 
educate a family.” (Smith, 1930:139) 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     121


--- PAGE 138 ---
In Handbook of Revolutionary Warfare,  Nkrumah also maintains that “the degree of a 
country’s revolutionary awareness may be measured by the political maturity of its 
women” (1969:91). 
Takyiwaa Manu (1991:129) affirms this when she writes that Nkrumah enabled 
women, without necessarily being of royal birth, to occupy public offices. “This reflected 
a conscious desire to project women onto th e political scene as well as a recognition of 
their roles in the anti-colonial struggle.” Furthermore, “the results of the educational, 
economic and social measure pursued,” she points out, “led to high enrollment figures for 
women in basic education” (Ibid: 129). Nkrumah was the man, Marais writes: 
who gave African womanhood real meaning, a new dignity, for the first 
time in their history, it was typical with him, the literary lioness, the 
politicians eager to spread their female wings. In fact, Kwame Nkrumah 
created a new dimension for the African womanhood. There were female 
members of the parliament and a judge. (1972:88) 
It must be stressed that these appointments, and elevation of women in Ghana by 
Nkrumah, were unknown during colonialism. The Legislative Council set up by the 
colonial government had no women representation. Also, we do not find the role of 
women in the early nationalist movements in the Gold Coat. Nkrumah’s newspaper, 
Evening News,  for instance, had a women column on the front page in which Akua 
Asabea Ayisi, who later became a Judge, wrot e on women issues. In fact, Asabea Ayisi 
and Mabel Dove Danquah, Manu points out, “wor ked side by side with Nkrumah on the 
Evening News (Ibid: 113). 
It is common knowledge that women were more influential in the Convention 
People’s Party (C.P.P.) than their male counterparts. As Nelson (1985:26) indicates, the 
social forces significant to Nkrumah’s victory in the election “of 1951 were the workers, 
the market women and the stratum of youth with elementary school education. And 
throughout the entire decolonization process, it was expressed that “one market woman in 
Accra was worth any dozen Achimota gr aduates” (Ibid: 25). To mark Ghana’s 
Independence Day celebrations, the Department of Social Welfare and Community 
Development, in collaboration with the Independence Day Committee, organized Miss 
Ghana contests. Using the African aesthetics as  the criteria, the winner of the contest in 
1957, Miss Amekoafia, was plump (Maayan, 1990:23). The follow-up, Mrs. Addo, was 
thirty-eight years old. In 1958, Mrs. Agyei, who was four-month pregnant, won the 1958 
contest (Yankah, 1990/91 19); she had “a pose with Kwame Nkrumah” (Maayan, 
1990:24). As Mawere Opoku indicated in our interview, Nkrumah approved all the 
activities. 
Consistent with his ideas on the resurrection of African arts. Nkrumah urged 
drumming and dancing at the Accra Sports Stadium and other public parks or facilities in 
the country and art exhibitions to mark Ghana’s Independence Day celebrations. In 1965, 
Nkrumah inaugurated his theater group, “Osagyefo Players,” and made it a part of his 
presidency. It was formed at his request  through Genoveva Marais to other people, 
Awoonor recalled. This, according to the Awoonor , was in line with th e practices in the 
traditional palaces. The opening ceremony began with libation. The group produced plays 
like Lorraine Hansberry’s classic play, “A Ra isin in the Sun” and “Our Town,” also 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     122


--- PAGE 139 ---
written by another African American woman, Thornton Miller and “Arms and the Man.” 
The group performed “Our Town” for the participants of the Organization of African 
Unity Summit in Ghana in 1965. The members included Kweku Bartels, Stephen Bekoe 
Mfodwo, Betty Bossman, A.E.Vanderpuye, Sandy Arkhurst, Anne Fredua-Mensah, 
George Andoh Wilson (the Director), Kofi Awoonor (Executive Chairman), Geneveva 
Marais (Secretary), David Longdon, Berylle Karikari (Treasurer), Charles Patternsen, 
[Research Reader] and Geormb ee Adali-Mortty (Coordinator), Dr. Leticia Obeng, Lily 
Nketia and Dr. Robert Lee, The Advisers were Prof. William Abraham, Joe de Graft and 
Efua Sutherland (Osagyefo Players Opening Ceremony Program, February 1965). 
According to Arkhurst, Nkrumah would occasionally show up during “Osagyefo 
Players” rehearsals at the Flagstaff House, give his comments and encourage us. 
One day, he stopped us. He realized that there was too much tension in us. 
He then took us through some relaxation exercises on the floor He showed 
us how to sink every muscle into the floor, and go blank [in the mind] 
without thinking about anything. From that moment, we learned how to 
relax. (Arkhurst, Interview: 1/14/97) 
During rehearsals at the Drama Studio in Accra, Nkrumah would sometimes show up in 
casual clothes, Arkhurst disclosed in our interview. In the opening nights, he was there 
with his friends, Botsio and Awoonor recalle d. “And if there was a dignitary passing 
through town, he would invite him” to see the performance by his group,” they added. 
Based on Awoonor’s experience, Nkrumah took a personal interest in artists involved in 
theater work. Awoonor recalled a note Nkru mah sent him through Marais Genoveva, 
when he was on admission at Achimota hospital, saying, “I wish you well.” 
Nkrumah’s idea about the presidential theater group, the “Osagyefo Players,” was a 
part of the national theater movement. Awoonor summed up his vision when he 
explained that: 
The “Osagyefo Players” idea was virt ually the icing of the cake in his 
realization of this grand vision, which was going to touch the grass root, 
the young right to the top; so that his own presidency became the ultimate 
expression of the personality and the ch aracter of the state. Because the 
state is a sacred entity, it is not an epitome of one religious entity. 
Therefore, if Nkrumah symbolized it at the time, he brought his vision to 
bear on it. This was also a manife station of the character, the inner 
essence, and a high level of attainment. 
Nkrumah’s attitude towards African arts, An yidoho pointed out, was “a direct challenge 
calling upon the scholars and artists on the ground to move in a certain direction.” 
Consequently, “they had free access to Nk rumah personally; this was a time when 
security was becoming tight around the president. It was that easy for them as individuals 
and as groups to walk to the president any time more often than he sent for them.” 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     123


--- PAGE 140 ---
STATUTORY CULTURAL POLICIES 
Touré (1976:89) postulates that culture, while being unique and universal, takes the forms 
of intellectual and artistic expressions, adapted to the standard of historical development 
of every society. In post colonial Afri ca, it meant the conscious development of 
intellectual and creative institutions towards the resurrection and reconstruction of 
African culture and personality. In Nkrumah’s Ghana, the restoration of African 
humanity began with the democratization of education, beginning from the elementary 
school system. As cited in Chapter Two, Nkrumah’s educational policy was the hub of 
his cultural policy; and its objective was the restoration of African personality (Hagan, 
1991a:5). Yet Nkrumah saw a national theater movement in its diverse forms as the 
potent activity for the rebirth of the subdued African personality. As disclosed below, the 
Ministry of Education instrumented the idea of a national theater movement.  
Theater, as reenactment of life experiences, has always been an essential phenomenon 
in traditional African societies. At best, it is an integral part of social, economic, political 
and religious activities of the people. It welcomes a new baby into the world, initiates 
youth into adulthood, and facilitates weddi ng ceremonies, burials and funeral rites. 
Festivals for instance, are occasions for co mmunity solidarity and celebration of people’s 
life experiences. They contain re-enactments of dramatic, historical or mythological 
events. The re-enactments consist of prayers and libation pouring, music making, 
dancing, chanting, and visual display. It is a “place where man searched out the meaning 
of his existence and location of his being in the comic infinity” (July: 59). 
In many respects, African theater is a co mposite art form, comprising several genres, 
such as music, dance, verbal art, visual ar ts and miming. In some instances, one of these 
genres serves as the dominant mode of expression, as is the case of masquerade. These 
forms of African theater do not fit the European concept or definition of theater with its 
heavy emphasis on written text and prosceniu m or what Hatless (1964:25) calls “fourth 
wall,” a psychological barrier separating the performers from audience. Whether by 
directing technique or Brechtian dramaturgy, proscenium (theater) leads to a detachment 
of audience from the ethos in the world of  the characters. And the National Theater 
Movement of Ghana was to embrace these two forms. 
The idea of a National Theater Movement in Ghana beginning from 1955 therefore 
raises critical questions in terms of conception. It also had some deeper implications for 
its nature, purpose and the traditional genres in a nation comprising several ethnic groups. 
Was its mode of expression to be found in the traditional society or a combination of 
what is effectual in the Western tradition and that of Africa? What purpose was the 
National Theater Movement to serve? These were some of the critical questions that 
needed answers by the committees that Nkrumah appointed to formulate policies to 
undergird the National Theater Movement. Otherwise, the movement would find itself in 
a web of contractions. 
In his Afrocentricity, Asante (1988:31) posits that “any ideology for liberation must 
find its existence in ourselves…it cannot be im posed by those other than ourselves;” and 
that “it must be derived from our particular and cultural experiences.” In other words, any 
theory and praxis for liberation cannot come from the oppressor other than the people 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     124


--- PAGE 141 ---
themselves. Similarly, the development of the National Theater Movement in Ghana 
should not just reclaim the artistic forms in the traditional African societies, but also 
should reclaim the core values of traditional African aesthetics and axiology. In addition, 
it should take into account the particular hi storical and cultural experiences namely 
colonialism and its legacies. As we shall discover below, the committee that Nkrumah set 
up to formulate policies for the National Theater Movement in Ghana ignored the 
insidious nature of colonialism and its legacies, in terms of conception, aesthetics and 
forms. 
THE ARTS COUNCIL OF GHANA 
The first major contradiction in Nkrumah’s cultural policy occurred when the Ministry of 
Education, in 1954, contacted the British Council to set up a body to look into the 
possibility of creating a national theater movement (NAG/RG3/7246). Subsequently, the 
proposal of Brian Jones of the British C ouncil recommended the establishment of a 
committee for promoting and developing appreciation of the arts, preserving and 
fostering the traditional arts and culture of  the Gold Coast (NAG/ RG3/7/:58). Early in 
1955, the Ministry of Educa tion appointed a ten-man comm ittee charging them with the 
responsibility of examining the best way to develop a national theater movement. In its 
report published in March, 1955, the committee stated that “the people of the country (the 
Gold Coast) were too engrossed in other things to realize the threat to their traditional 
culture.” In its opinion, “the main respons ibility for reviving thei r dying culture” though 
“lay with the people themselves,” the government should take the initiative. 
The committee’s recommendation favored a national (physical) theater that should be 
constructed to promote the arts. Another recommendation was about the establishment of 
an “Arts Council of the Gold Coast” whose duty was “to organize the arts and encourage 
their promotion” (NAG/RG 3/7/33). Subsequently, the Arts Council of the Gold Coast 
was set up in June 1955 as a statutory body to operate from public funds on the lines of 
the Arts Council of Britain. An Interim co mmittee of thirteen members was appointed 
with Mr. Gbeho as its Chairman. Informa tion as to its activities between 1955 and 1957 
was unavailable at the time of the research. Th e plausible explanation to the impasse can, 
perhaps, be inferred from the political unrest between Nkrumah’s political party, 
Convention People’s Party, and the Asante  based National Liberation Movement and 
other parochial parties at the time. 
Earlier, the Asanteman Council had, thr ough the initiative of Dr. Yaw Kyeremateng, 
established the Asante Cultural Center in 1951. What precipitated this action was that the 
culture of the people “was suffering from fore ign adulteration and possible annihilation” 
(Okyerema, 1995:5). It was toward the preserva tion and a concrete manifestation of their 
culture that the center was built to house a mu seum, plastic arts, crafts and facilities for 
the performing arts. In 1954, “the Kumasi Municipal Council undertook the su-pervision 
of the project” (NAG/RG3/7/33). In 1964, when Nkrumah recognized “that the aims and 
the activities of the Centre were national in character, he declared it the Ghana National 
Cultural Center (Okyerema: 5). 
At the national level, Nkrumah’s cultural policy did not surface until Casely-Hayford 
raised the issue during parliamentary debates on August 20, 1958. “What is the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     125


--- PAGE 142 ---
government cultural policy,” he questioned the Minister of Education, “to assure the 
preservation and demonstration of the character and traditions of the people of Ghana”? 
The Minister’s response was rather vague when  he said that the government had always 
been interested “in the preservation and demonstration of the character and traditions of 
the people of Ghana (Hagan, 1991:5). He, however, cited the establishment of the Ghana 
Museum and Monuments Board and the opening of Ghana’s National Museum as 
evidence of this interest. He also expressed the government’s plan for the establishment 
and creation of a National Theater, National Art Gallery and National Theater Movement. 
The debate resulted in the passing of the Arts Council of Ghana Law, Act 43 on 
December 23, 1958, which took effect in April 1959 (NAG/Rg3/7/2:55). 
The Arts Council was made up of ten members with Nana Kwabena Nketsia as its 
Chairman and Dr. Seth Cudjoe as the Deputy Chairman. Other members were: Mr. Philip 
Gbeho, Professor. J.H.Nketia, Mr. Eugene Koranteng, Mr. Kofi Antubam, Mrs. Efua 
Sutherland, Mr. J.C.de Graft, Miss E.J.A.Ev ans, E.N.O Cofie and Mr. W.P.Carpenter as 
the Executive Secretary (NAG/RG3/7/14:17). Nk rumah became the president of the Arts 
Council. “A small number of distinguished” c itizens were invited “to become Patrons of 
the Council.” They Included Dr. J.B.Danquah, Sir Arku Korsah, the Chief Justice, Sir 
C.W.Techie-Mensah and all the six Regional Presidents of House of Chiefs 
(NAG/RG3/7/34:7). 
At the macro level, Nkrumah’s government charged the Council to study the report of 
the ten-man committee, and to formulate a nd carry out a systematic policy for the 
National Theater Movement. Within this frame-work, the Interim Committee of the 
Council came out with a policy “to preserve, im prove and foster the traditional arts and 
culture of Ghana.” In this regard, the Council was to awaken public interest by 
stimulating and inspiring the love and appreciation of the arts and “culture of Ghana in 
particular and of Africa and other parts of the world” (NAG/RG3/7/33:55). Again, the 
committee emphasized its basic aim as follows: 
To examine practical ways and mean s to encourage a national theatre 
movement which at once reflects the traditional heritage of this country 
and yet develops it into a living for ce firmly rooted in and acclaimed by 
the modern Ghana of today, It aimed at stimulating an indigenous national 
theater movement aware of trends in  dramatic expression elsewhere but 
firmly rooted in the past and drawing its strength and support from the 
people of Ghana whom it seeks to entert ain, to stimulate and to inspire. 
(Ibid: 55–56) 
The first task of the Interim committee was organizing the drumming and dancing that 
marked the anniversary of Ghana’s independence in 1958. At the time of independence 
Gbeho took his drumming and dancing group to perform at the Castle, the seat of the 
government, while Sutherland also took the Anansegoro (Storytelling group) from Atwia. 
Mawere Opoku, Philip Gbeho and Betty Hayford constituted the organizers for 
traditional dance and music performances from th e regions at the Accra Sports Stadium. 
Palm branches were erected to serve as open theater. They had to arrange for their 
boarding, lodging and their well being according, accordi ng to each region. On one 
occasion, seven Asafo (militia companies) represented Cape Coast, created a big problem 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     126


--- PAGE 143 ---
for the organizers, in terms of logistics, Opoku recalled. It was these artistic performances 
that formed the basis of the objective of the Interim Committee in respect of the National 
Theater Movement, which Nkrumah approved. The philosophical perspective, which 
Nkrumah introduced, was the promotion of African personality through theater, Nketia 
explicated. 
The National Theater Movement as concei ved by Nkrumah gave birth to several 
performing arts groups across the country emphasizing new productions of traditional 
materials wherever they existed, under the auspices of the Arts Council of Ghana. It was 
“a fast stimulating new consciousness in theater based on our own traditional theater or 
its resources and concepts.” It was called the movement because it was not based “on the 
idea to be carried out by isolated individuals, but by the idea shared by individuals, who 
would act on it, and create what one might call the movement,” Nketia explained. It 
became a movement because it suddenly inspir ed and brought people with certain talents 
in the arts experimenting and working toge ther. New drama and dance groups sprang up; 
the arts were also looking for new avenues, as  associations were formed. “People talked 
about the arts more than they did before,” Nketia summed up in our interview on 
December 31, 1996. 
In addition to the national office, the Arts Council established eight regional 
committees throughout the country “in an effort to emphasize the underlying unity of the 
nation, and the equal importance of the contributions which can be made by her people in 
every region.” The national staff consiste d of: Mr. W.P.Carpenter as the Executive 
Secretary, Mr. F.Morisseau Leroy [a Haitian], the Organizer for Drama and Literature, 
Mr. G.E Akrofi, Organizer for Music and Dancing, Mr. J.O.Ansah, Organizer for Arts 
and Craft and Mr. E.A Hanson as the Drama Officer. The Regional Secretaries were: Mr. 
J.M.Averreyireh, Northern Region at Tamale, Mr. A.M.Bamford, Upper Region at 
Bolgatanga, Mr. L Ewusi-Emmim, Brong Ahafo Region at Sunyani and Mr. Osei 
Agyeman, Ashanti Region at Kumase. Others were Mr. S G.Damalie, Volta Region at 
Ho, Mr. Issac D.Riverson, Western Region at Takoradi, Mr. W.Bessa-Simon, Central 
Region at Cape Coast and Mr. A.O.Bartimeus, Eastern Region at Koforidua 
(NAG/RG3/7/33:66). 
The Council also established Advisory Panels for Music, Drama and Literature, Arts 
and Crafts and Cultural Research. Besides the members of the Arts Council, the Advisory 
Panels included some prominent people in the country. They included: Dr. J.B.Danquah, 
a politician and private attorney, Dr. Laing of the University College, Mr. Tibu of 
Achimota College, Dr. F.K.Fiawo of Zion College, Dr. Kwapong of the University 
College, Dr. Oku Ampofo of Mampong, Akwapim. Others were Mr. Kofi Antubam of 
Achimota College. Mr. Saka Acquaye of Development Commission, Mr. J. Ghartey of 
Ghana Broadcasting System, Miss Pearl Tay of Achimota College, Dr. R.E.Lee, a dentist, 
Mr. Cobblah., Mr. John Botsio of Accra, Mr. Osie Bonsu of Asantehene’s office, Mr. 
Kwadwo Bambir of Achimota College, Mr. Amon Kotei of Government Printing Press, 
Mr. Buama of Bureau of Ghana Languages, Mr. J.C.Okyere of Winneba Training 
College and Mr. J.S.Kaleem of Burreau of Ghana Languages (NAG/RG3/7/243). These 
advisory groups were to advise the Arts  Council on matters affecting the categories 
indicated above. 
In line with the National Theater Movement, the policy of the Arts Council at the 
regional level was, “to encourage and support artistic and cultural activities and 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     127


--- PAGE 144 ---
associations which are already in” exis tence, “rather than creating similar 
activities…provided that the Council was satisfi ed as to their objectives, quality and the 
integrity of those concerned with them.”  But where there wa s the need for the 
“establishment of an organization or for the promotion of an activity or project in the 
field of arts and crafts,” then the Arts C ouncil would take necessary measures to satisfy 
the need. In addition to leading such organizations to become self-supporting and 
independent, the Council offered them “in association” with the Arts Council of Ghana” 
status. This status conferred on organizations meant official recognition by the Council, 
providing them with grant-aid. Besides, the Council offered grants, bursaries and 
scholarships to promising individual artists, craftsmen and craftswomen, creative writers, 
musicians and dancers towards further studies (NAG/RG3/7/243). Additionally, it offered 
“assistance, through association with itself, to art and cultural societies whose aims were 
in line with its own.” These were The Ghana Society of Ar tists, The Ghana Society of 
Architects, The Ghana Society of Writers, The Ghana Music Society, Agromma Players, 
Asante Cultural Center, Akwapim Six, Societ y of Artists, Ghana Experimental Theater 
and Gbeho Research Group (Ibid: 56). 
In October 1959, the Arts Council held a press conference in Accra, informing the 
people of its “practical policy to provide f acilities for the general public to participate 
actively in the performing arts by joining any of the following classes. These were 
“traditional drumming and dancing, traditional dances designed to enable dancers to learn 
variety of dances, choral music, pure drama, puppet theater, fine arts and orchestral music 
rehearsals.” These classes were free. Sim ilar classes were organized in the regions 
(NAG/RG3/733:19). 
Each regional office of the Arts Council worked with leading artists and community 
leaders to establish theater movement comm ittees at the regional and district levels. 
Similar committees were set up in the mi ddle and secondary schools. The committees 
promoted drama, choral singing, traditional percussion and dancing, and Gooje 
[chordophone] performances. The Arts Council held annual competitions for these 
performing arts group to keep the National Theater Movement alive. Arts and Craft 
societies were also formed and held several exhibitions. The Regional Secretaries 
compiled calendars of festivals in their respective regions, with copies to the national 
office, as instructed. This led to the revival of some festivals banned during colonialism. 
The Secretaries worked dilig ently to promote several performing arts groups in the 
country (NAG/RG3/7/243). 
The National Theater Movement began to bear fruit between 1960 and 1963. This 
period saw the emergence of several voluntary dance, music and drama groups across the 
country, some “with associati on” status with the Arts Council and its successor, the 
Institute of Arts and Culture. They were found in secondary school s, teacher training 
colleges, mass education circles, nursing schools, Young Women/Men Christian 
associations (NAG/RG3/7/33). Some people in the cities, urban centers, towns and 
villages also formed performing arts groups . Public establishm ents like the Ghana 
Farmers Council, Workers Brigade and The Ghana Young Pioneers Movement had 
performing arts programs. 
The government’s cultural policy was coordina ted in the regions in accord with the 
National Theater Movement. This was mani fested in the Council’s activities involving 
artistic groups during the transitional period in  1961 before it changed into Institute of 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     128


--- PAGE 145 ---
Arts and Culture. It was also the period that the National Theater Movement was 
maturing in the regions with the emergence of several performing arts’ groups in each 
region of Ghana.  
The notable performing arts groups in Accra were: Obadzeng founded by Saka 
Acquaye, the Paradise Theatre Promotions, The Osu Youngsters Club, The African 
Theater Group, The Theater Club Group, The Unity Choir Group, The Good Samaritan 
Society and The Ghana Farmers Drama Gr oup. There were also the Ga Adangme 
Cultural Society, Ayitee’s Drumming and Dancing Club, Worker Brigade Concert Party, 
Workers Brigade Nungua Camp Orchestra, the Renaissance African Club and the Ghana 
Experimental Theater under Efua Sutherland (NAG/RG3/7/60). The Experimental 
Theater Players introduced Anansegoro [Spide r Plays] into Ghana’ s theater traditions 
outside its traditional environment. They included “Anansesem,” “Wohyee Me Bo” and 
“Mirididi Me Nyansa Ho” [unpublished Experimental Theater Players document]. In the 
case of The Osu Youngsters Club, for instance, E.A.Hanson directed their winning play, 
“The Rich Man and Death” in Ga on October 31, 1961. 
In the Asante Region, there were groups like Westminster Choir, which won the third 
position in the National Festival of Music and Drama in Kumase on July 4, 1961, 
Kumase Dramatic Choir, Kumase Theater Club, Asawasi Methodist Choir and many 
others. Kumase was also the center of the annual National Festival of Arts organized by 
the Ghana National Cultural Cent er. The events covered the e xhibition of fine arts, craft 
works, cabarets, and competitions in the performing arts and lectures on African history. 
In November 1961, the Asawasi Methodist Choir produced the play, “Onnyibi N’asem 
Nyame Na Odzi” by A.K.Mensah. The play  was written and performed in Fante under 
the auspices of the Arts Council. In March 1961, the National Cultural Center in Kumase 
organized an exhibition of Textile Prints. In December 1961, the Kumase Brewery, in 
collaboration with the Arts Council, initiated and sponsored the first national High-Life 
dance competition in Kumase. 
The Western Region was the home of the Sekondi Minstrel Choir. On January 1962, 
Bonsu Kyeretwie founded the Ghana Generic Cultural and Historical Society in Sekondi. 
It had membership from different parts of the country. The Central region had performing 
arts groups like The Africana Dramatic Society of Cape Coast, Elmina Vocal Band which 
won the second position in drama in Twi dur ing the National Festival of Music and 
Drama in Kumase on July 4, 1961. As indicated earlier, some festivals were revived 
during this period. One example was the Abangyi festival of Ogua State. According to 
the Arts Council Secretary’s monthly report, some of the festivals were abandoned as a 
result of “Western civilization and the great force of Christianity” (NAG/RG3/7/243:29). 
Though Abangyi could not be a bolished because of its politi cal and military character, a 
committee was set up to plan for its celebration on a grand scale in September 1961. The 
committee was also urged “to coordinate and resuscitate such festivals as Eguadoto, 
Ahobaa, Bakatue and others (Ibid: 29). Ba sed on my personal knowledge, Nkrumah, the 
Ministers and District Commissioners at the time attended such festivals throughout the 
country; this has become a legacy in Ghana. It should also be pointed out that Nkrumah 
was a member of an Asafo company in his school days at Achimota College (Sherwood: 
80). 
The Upper Region organized sixty drawing and painting exhibitions of Sumani Omoru 
depicting scenes in Ghana. Besides organizing several dance groups like the rest of the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     129


--- PAGE 146 ---
regions, the regional office organized drama co mpetitions at the elementary school level. 
The Zuarungu Middle School came in first with its play, “The Refund,” followed by 
Tongo Primary School with the play, “Mosore the Founder of Tongo.” The third position 
was taken by the Girls Middle School with its play, “Monte Christo,” while the Zuarungu 
Primary School came fourth with a play, “Bula Bugre” (NAG/RG3/7/243:61). 
The Eastern Region had performing arts group like the Koforidua Drama Club, Abetifi 
Mass Education Female Group, [Akyem] New Tafo Young Women Christian 
Association Group, The Konkonsa Group at Mamfe, La Youngster Choir, and the 
Obawale Indigenous Music Lover Group. During the National Festival of Music and 
Drama in Kumase on July 4, 1961, the Mass Education Female Group of Abetifi won the 
first position in Twi drama competition. In Effiduase, a drumming school was established 
with fifteen students by February 1962. The Arts Council’s regional office organized an 
International Arts Festival at Koforidua in October 1961 (NAG/RG3/7/246). 
The performing arts group in the Volta Region included E.P.Church Dramatic Society, 
Catholic Dramatic society, JA SICO Dramatic Society of Jasikan, Peki-Dzake Big Choir, 
Vakpo Gboxome Star Band and several others. The Catholic Action produced the play 
Agbezuge written in Ewe by S. J.Ob iani in October 1961 (NAG/RG3/7/243:37). 
Drumming and dancing groups dominated the artistic activities in the region during 1961 
and 1962, especially in the Anlo sub-region to the south. A Kente Weaver Association 
formed and held an exhibition. The Worawora International Social Club of Ghana, 
founded by J.K.Dodoo on November 20, 1961, sought an affiliation with the Arts 
Council of Ghana. 
In the Northern Region, there were the Tamale Drama Club, The Northern Singers, 
Bagabaga Drama Club and several drummi ng and dancing and Gooje groups. Between 
May 18 and 32, 1962, a Gooje dance competiti on was organized in an old lorry park 
[public transport]. On August 31, 1962, the regional office organized Kente Weaving and 
Leather exhibition, Traditional Best Dressed Gentleman and lady competitions; 
additionally a Hair-Do competition was organized on December 30, 1963. It is interesting 
to note that, the Regional Secretary’s reports of August 1962 contained the formation of 
The Northern Brushers Society [comprising pa inters, sculptors and pottery makers]. By 
February 1962, Pot Makers Association had also been formed at the village of Jakarayili, 
On December 9, 1961, Bambaya and Ewe re sidents dancing groups  toured Ouagadougu 
in the then Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso) as part of an exchange program 
(NAG/RG3/7/246:118). 
The performing arts group that emerged in the Brong Ahafo Region included the 
Sunyani Amateur Dramatic Society, Kwatire Dramatic Group Arts and Drama Club, and 
some drumming and dancing groups. During Nkrumah’s visit to the region between 26th 
and 28th in March 1962, the Arts Council’s Regional Secretary introduced three 
members of the Arts and Drama Club to him.  One of the members of the club presented 
“a miniature plane that works on dry cells batteries having the propel working.” Nkrumah 
was so much impressed with the miniat ure aeroplane that he asked the Regional 
Secretary to bring the exhibitor to his office in Accra; additionally, he referred him to the 
Department of Social Welfare and Community Development so that he could learn to 
read and write in both Twi and English (NAG/RG3/7/246:63). 
Between July 1 and 4, 1961, the Ghana Broadcasting System in association with the 
Arts Council of Ghana organized the first Festival of Music and Drama at Prempeh Hall 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     130


--- PAGE 147 ---
in Kumase with plays in Twi and English. The competitors in Twi Drama category were 
the winners from Asante Region, Central Region and Eastern Region. They included 
Westminster Choir for Asante Region, Elmina Vocal Band for Central Region, and the 
Eastern Region’s Mass Education Female Group, which won the first prize; the second 
position went to the Elmina Vocal Band, and the Westminster choir came in third. 
The final competition in Drama in English  took place at Achimota College Hall on 
Thursday on July 6, 1961. The Jasikan Dramatic Society from the Volta Region came in 
first, the Holy Child Secondary School of  Cape Coast took second position, and third 
position went to Mfantsipim Secondary School of Cape Coast. Others were the Wesley 
Girls High School and the Met hodist Girls Middle School of Cape Coast. The committee 
for the festival gave an award to the Method Girls Middle School for being the only 
middle school competitor in the national event. 
July 5, 1961 was set aside for the national competition in Choral Music at Achimota 
College. Sekondi Minstrel Choir, representing the Western Region, came in first, and the 
Evangelical Presbyterian Training College Choir of Amedzofe, representing the Volta 
Region, won the second position. The third position was shared between Damas Male 
Voice Choir of Accra and Wesley College Choir representing the Asante Region. Other 
competitors were Alexander Choir of Ca pe Coast and Komenda Teacher Training 
College for the Central Region, Presbyterian Singing Band of Larteh for the Eastern 
Region, Evangelical Presbyterian Middle School of Wudome, Evangelical Church Choir 
of Amedzofe for the Volta Region, and Ewe Melody Singers for Accra area. According 
to the Central Regional Secretary’s monthly report, the choirs in the Choral category 
“sang beautiful traditional songs, and in some  cases were of a high standard.” Every 
competition was broadcast live “and was hear d by many thousands in their homes” 
(NAG/RG3/7246:16). 
On July 8, 1961, the regional winners of the Traditional Music for Dancing and 
Entertainment competed for the finals at the Accra Sports Stadium. The competitors 
included Gogoyila Group of Tumu representing Upper Region, Baamaya of Tamale 
representing the Northern Region, Fiapre Odie Group from the Brong Ahafo, Agromma 
from Kumase for the Asante Region and Adenkum Group of Sekondi representing the 
Western Region. The rest were Turom Akonka Adenkum Group of Elmina for the 
Central Region, Manya Krobo Group and Odumasi-Krobo representing the Eastern 
Region, Ho Aflao Residents Union Atsiagbekor Group for Volta the Region and Aflao 
Atsiagbekor Group of Osu, for the Accra district. Ho Aflao Residents Union Group won 
the first position, Baamaya Group came in second and Agromma Group from Kumase 
took the third position. 
The finals in the Brass Band division took place at the A ccra Sports Stadium on July 
8, 1961. The final competitors comprised the Nweremo Brass Band from the Brong 
Ahafo Region, Nyameani Brass Band from the Asante Region, Symphony Brass Band of 
Prestea for the Western Region, Agona Duakwa Brass Band representing the Central 
Region, Akyem Akroso Brass Band for the Eastern Region and Worawora Brass Band 
for the Volta Region. The Prestea Symphony came in first; Agona Duakwa Brass Band 
took second position, while Akyem Akroso Brass Band won third position. 
In the Category of Guitar Band Music,  we had Onyina Guitar Band of Kumase 
representing the Asante Region, J.T. of Half Assini for the Western Region, Essuekyir 
guitar Band for the Central Region, K.O’s Band of [Akyem] New Tafo for the Eastern 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     131


--- PAGE 148 ---
Region, J.P’s Guitar Band of Totoman-Buem for the Volta Region, and Dangbe Rhytm 
Band for Accra area. The winners were Onyina  guitar Band in first place, K.O’s of New 
Tafo, second, and Damgbe Rhythm Band cam e in third. The ev ent took place at the 
Ghana Broadcasting House in Accra on July 8, 1961.  
The last category in the National fe stival of Music and Drama was the Dance Band 
competition. This event occurred at the Gh ana Broadcasting House on July 8, 1961. The 
finalists were the Revellers Dance Band of Kumase representing the Asante Region, 
Broadway Dance Band of Sekondi for the Western Region, Cape Coast Sunset Band for 
the Central Region, Casino Dance Band of Koforidua representing the Eastern Region 
and Joe Kelley’s Dance Band for the Accra area. The Broadway Dance Band won the 
first position; Revellers Dance Band came in s econd, while the third position went to Joe 
Kelley’s Dance Band. 
There was also a collaboration between the Institute of Arts and Culture and some 
performing arts group. They included Kakaiku Concert Party, Agyekum String Band, 
Bob Cole and Bob Johnson and the Workers Brigade Drama Troupe. In August 15, 1962, 
the Institute sponsored the Workers Brigade Concert Part y production of “Awo Nye Wo 
Yam,” a musical comedy at the Arts Center. Felix Morissea-Leroy, Bob Johnson and Bob 
Cole directed the play (NAG/RG3/7246). 
The Workers Brigade followed a Concert Party tradition in Ghana initiated by Ishmael 
Johnson [Bob Johnson] in the 1920s. The Two Bobs  involving J.B.Ansah, Charles 
B.Hutton and Johnson started a popular theat er movement that became a model for 
several concert party groups in the country. The songs and dance forms in the 
performances of Teacher Yalley at Sekondi  Optimism Club, the antics of Charlie 
Champion and the “Empire Day concerts mostly in songs like Mini the Moocher and the 
crowning of Cotton Queen,” inspired the group. They kept the melodies of the songs, and 
composed new words to correspond to the dramatic purposes of their play-lets and comic 
acts born out of the social domestic scenes (Sutherland, 1970:8). Anansesem performed 
in speech and songs mode with isochronal re -enactment of scenes, female impersonation 
and cantata (Christian music and dance forms) also informed the mode of production of 
the Two Bobs (Ibid: 12). 
By 1943, the theater of the Two Bobs had an enthusiastic patronage in the country. In 
1935, Johnson toured Nigeria with a new group, Axim Trio, inspired by the Two Bobs. 
Others to follow in this tradition were Sam and His Party, Kaikiaku Concert Party, 
E.K.Nyame and the Akan Trio, Otu Larteh, Appiah Agyekum, Jaguah Jokers, Kwa 
Mensah, Bob Cole and His Trio and many others. 
In 1961, the Arts Council, through the efforts of Efua Sutherland, established the 
Ghana Drama Studio. The cost of construction was £G7,500. The Ghana Government 
gave £G3,000, while Rockefeller Foundati on provided £G2,000; the remaining £G2,500 
came from the Ministry of Education’s votes through an appeal by the Arts Council 
(NAG/RG3/7/33). The Ghana Drama Studio had three objectives. The first objective of 
the Drama Studio was “to create, stimulat e and discipline the new Ghana theatre 
movement, and to provide opportunities for training artists through participation in 
dramatic productions and other related ac tivities.” The second aim was to provide 
opportunities and a venue for the meeting of  theatre artistes: writers, musicians, 
producers, actors, choreographers, designers ” and others. Finally, it hoped to “provide 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     132


--- PAGE 149 ---
talent, material and ideals for the programmes of the national theatre, when that 
institution is established” (unpublished Ghana Drama Studio document). 
The Studio was opened on October 21, 1961 with the play Odasani, an adaptation of 
Everyman, by Efua Sutherland and performed by the Studio Players. The opening 
ceremony was presided over by Nkrumah. He said, among other things that, the Studio 
can provide the forum for bringing into life the power of literature and arts of Africa. 
With this example “plans can be made for theatres to be established throughout the 
country where the ordinary people can go and be assured of happy entertainment, where 
they can relax from their work and forget their troubles.” He said that the arts could 
become one of the strongest bonds between Africans transcending the artificial barriers 
erected between them by the colonialists. Thus, henceforth, Africa must look inward into 
the African continent for its developments. 
Nkrumah, however, regretted the failure of the Arts Council in making any impact on 
the Ghanaian society. He uttered the following words: 
The Arts council which I helped to form with such high hopes has not, I 
regret to say, come up to my expectation. It may have had its difficulty 
but the truth remains that it has failed to make sufficient impact on Ghana 
society. It has failed to give people any vision of the rich store of art and 
music which we possess. I hope that the Ghana Drama Studio even if it 
remains independent will operate within the framework of the Ghana Arts 
Council. (NAG/RG3/7/60) 
Perhaps, Nkrumah’s disappointment stemmed from the fact that the Arts Council’s 
creative productions were not consistent with  his vision on the renewal of African past 
civilization and African personality thr ough theater. Aside from this, the Council’s 
performing arts activities were silent on the renewal and/or recreation of Anansegoro 
[Storytelling theater], ritual drama like dipo (Ga-Adagme puberty), ab ofoo (hunters) and 
Asafo (people’s militia) dramatic performances and others in the new social context. I 
was part of the organizers of the annual Eastern Regional festival of the arts of the Ghana 
Young Pioneers Movement, which encouraged re -enactments of some of the traditional 
theater forms. 
As expected, the Drama Studio became the venue for theatrical presentations by 
several groups. From January 11 to 13, 1962, the Theater Club presented a Pan-African 
play “Doguicini” by Morisseau-Leroy at the Drama, Studio. This was followed by Efua 
Sutherland’s Anansegoro (Ananse plays,) “Wohyee Me Bo” (You Made Me a Promised) 
on October 27, and 28, 1961. Next in the series of theatrical performances was James Ene 
Henshaw’s “This is Our Chance” from February 1 to February 24, 1962; Joe de Graft’s 
“Son’s and Daughters” from March 1 to March 24, 1962 and “Foriwa” by Efua 
Sutherland from March 29 to March 31, April 6, 7, 13, 14, 19 and 20, 1962. The Institute 
of Art and Culture sponsored the Africana Dramatic Society of Cape Coast in its 
production of “Kofi Ba Bon,” an adaptation of Moliere’s “That Scoundrel Scapin” at the 
Ghana Drama Studio [the Ghana Drama Studio program document]. In 1964, the Studio 
became University of Ghana Drama Studio. 
Hagan (1991b:7) critiques the Arts Council of  Ghana’s law as falling short of making 
reference to “entering into cultural exchange s with other African States” towards the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     133


--- PAGE 150 ---
unity of Africa. He also finds it disappointing as the Council’s law failed to make 
reference to the concept of African personality as a guiding principle for the cultural 
institution. But the problem of the law was not just the lack of clarity of policy in the 
early years of independence as Hagan (Ibid: 7] suggests. It was also not the result of the 
enigma in respect of “the divisiveness of the tribal cultures and the reactionary leadership 
of the chiefs to whom the people owed traditional allegiance;” nor was it rooted in 
“Nkrumah’s reaction to chieftancy, tribalism and abrofosem” (Ibid: 7). The main problem 
was rather the undeclared conception of cu lture, the National Theater Movement and 
their place in national life. 
In fact, the initial request from the Minist ry of Education to the British Council to 
assist in setting up a committee on a national theater movement demonstrated a lack of 
knowledge of the critical role of theater in  transforming African personality. Second, it 
attests to some initial wea kness in Nkrumah’s government, in terms of underestimating 
the insidious nature of colonialism, and th e power of the British Council as the center of 
British cultural nationalism on Ghana’s soil. Th ird, this initial contact with the British 
Council compromised Nkruinah’s, “The Motion of Destiny” on July 10, 1953. He 
argued: 
Were not our ancestors ruling themse lves before the white man came to 
these our shores?…. To assert that certain people are capable of ruling 
themselves while others are not yet ready…smacks to me of imperialism 
than of reason. Biologists of repute maintain that there is no such thing as 
a superior race. Men and women are as much products of their 
environment—as of instincts and physical heredity. We are determined to 
change our environment, and we shall advance in like manner. (1957:102) 
Next, the policies of the Arts Council of the Gold Coast and that of Ghana were silent on 
the social relevance of the National Th eater Movement in the society. The 
recommendation of the ten-member committee in 1955 that an Arts Council “be set up to 
organize the arts and encourage their appreci ation” (NAG/RG3/7/246:55) is an antithesis 
to the place of the arts in the lives of the people in traditional African society. In fact, the 
idea of “art appreciation” is an axiological posture associated with Western aesthetics—
art for art’s sake.” As J.C.de Graft proposed in his memorandum to the Arts Council, “the 
Council must actively encourage artists to return to their Ghanaian ‘roots’ for artistic 
material and inspiration, and itself accept such  orientation as necessary for the success of 
its work (NAG/RG3/7/33:50). What is unclear was the kind of research method used by 
the ten-member committee to conclude that the people “were too engrossed in other 
things to realize the threat to their traditional culture.” The body never explained what 
they meant by “traditional culture.” Also, the policy of the Arts Council of Ghana of 
1958 “to foster, improve and preserve the tr aditional arts and culture of Ghana” was 
insufficient. Because there was no explication as to the role of the ar ts or the culture of 
the peo ple in the context of the government’s socio-economic transformation strategy, 
the policy suggests inertia like the collection of African visual arts in Euro-American 
museums. But culture like its creative products is dynamic; theater for instance “is a 
reflection of the time, space, place and social strata of those who produce it and those for 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     134


--- PAGE 151 ---
whom it is presented” (Molette and Molette, 1986:1). The creative productions must 
speak to the wishes and aspirations of the people and inspire them to greater heights. 
Finally, the Arts Council did not engage th e Ministry of Educa tion to place African 
arts in the curriculum of the school system in the country as suggested by its member, 
J.C.de Graft. His criticism was that the Arts  Council’s work was not involved in shaping 
and “reshaping, of a whole nation’s attitudes towards the arts;” de Graft believed that the 
Arts Council could achieve a lasting result by directing “a very serious attention to the 
new generation in school.” This , he hoped could have led to  a review of educational 
policy with regards to education in Afri can arts (NAG/RG3/7/33:50). Otherwise, the 
participation of the schools was considered extra-curricula activities.  
INSTITUTE OF ARTS AND CULTURE 
Early in 1962, Nkrumah proposed that the Arts Council of Ghana be turned into an 
Institute of Arts and Culture with Nana Kwabena Nketsia as its Director 
(NAC/RG3/7/246:46). On March 1, 1962, the Institute was established to widen the 
scope of the work of the Arts Council “and give it more effective direction.” The Institute 
was generally charged with the responsibility to  coordinate the activities of the statutory 
bodies and other institutions “dealing with the preservation, promotion and dissemination 
of the arts and culture of Ghana.” Initially, the statutory bodies were to function under 
their own Acts of incorporation. They included the Arts Council of Ghana, The Ghana 
National Museum, The Ghana Library Board, The Ghana National Archives and National 
Cultural Center at Kumase. On May 8, 1962, however, the Government placed The 
Ghana Library Board, The Ghana Museum and Monuments Board and The Ghana 
National Archives under the Ministry of Education (Ibid: 46). 
On June 26, 1962, Nkrumah’s government published Instrument number 22 for the 
formal incorporation of the Institute into a statutory board, absorbing the Arts Council of 
Ghana duties and repealing its act of 1958. On October 1, 1962, the Institute of Arts and 
Culture was lawfully incorporated. The direction, supervision and management of the 
National Cultural Center at Kumase were assigned to the Institute. The duties outlined by 
the Instrument of Incorporation were: first, “to promote and disseminate throughout 
Ghana appreciation and knowledge of all forms of  arts and culture and, in particular to 
preserve, foster and develop the traditional arts and culture of Ghana.” Second, “to act as 
a clearing house for all cultural agreements between Ghana, and other countries.” Third, 
“to build up a central archive of sound and photographic material concerned with arts and 
culture of Ghana and Africa as a whole, as well as a collection of reference works and 
journals.” Fourth, “to encourage, assist or promote research into the arts and culture and 
of Africa as a whole by establishing fellowships under which such work can be 
undertaken.” Fifth, “to initiate cultural pr ogrammes when necessary for implementation 
by appropriate bodies under the Institute” (Ibid: 46). 
The Institute’s activities in the area of the arts included categories of Art and Craft, 
Drama and Literature, Traditional Drumming and Dancing, Choral Singing, Music and 
Puppetry. Here, we must take note of the distinction between “traditional” drumming and 
dancing, and music. There is no mentioning of “traditional” drama, oral tradition or 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     135


--- PAGE 152 ---
“traditional” choral singing like the Akan nnwomkro, in the Institute’s conception of art 
forms.  
The Institute organized exhibition of art and craft works of various artists, and 
sponsored and presented productions of seve ral amateur drama groups. They organized 
free classes in traditional dances, drumming, acting, playwriting and artwork for the 
public in the country. Its drumming instructors were constantly engaged in teaching other 
groups, especially members of dance bands who desired to include traditional African 
percussion in their repertoire. For instance, during the Republic Day Celebration of 1963, 
the Institute organized a traditional drumming and dancing program at the Accra Sports 
Stadium, which brought dancers from Ivory Coas t. Besides, the Ins titute built a special 
studio in Accra for puppetry which, attracted workers and school children. Elder 
Dempster Ghana Independence Trust donated Puppet Theater Caravan for regional tours 
(Ibid: 47). 
The most distressing thing that occurred was the Institute’s establishment of the New 
Ghana Orchestra for the cultivation of [European] classical music. To this end, the 
government provided grant money to employ an additional music teacher from Israel and 
purchase Western musical instruments for the Orchestra. In June 1963, the Orchestra 
gave a concert of works by Haydn, Mozar t, Beethoven and some African compositions 
arranged by Philip Gbeho, the composer of Ghana’s National Anthem. This raises some 
questions as to audience, aesthetic, soci al relevancy and the meaning of national 
independence. Thus, if, in fact, the people’s culture was dying as a result of colonialism, 
how was the Orchestra’s classical music going to preserve, foster and develop the African 
arts and culture? Was there a choice between  assembling African musical instruments 
and those of the Western world to form an orchestra? Or was it an opportunity to become 
“modernized,” according to European standard s? Was this not an affirmation of the 
attitudes of Europeans in general who believed “that Africans are becoming Westernized, 
convinced that they must accept modern civ ilization or perish” as Jahn (1970:11) writes? 
The audience for this kind of musical ensemble could only exclude a vast majority of the 
people in the country; aesthetically speaking, they simply would not enjoy it even if 
invited. 
By 1960, the government had set up a Nati onal Theater Advisory Committee for the 
construction of a National Theater to accomm odate the rapid proliferation of music, 
dance and drama performances in the country. The main function of the National Theater 
was to encourage the development of dramatic and dance companies, and provide the 
opportunity for choreographers, musicians, writers, producers, designers, actors and 
dancers to develop their talents. It was also to work with experimental theater groups in 
the country, assist in training, and serve as the focal point to dramatic and dancing 
activities in all parts of the country. Lastly, the National Theater was to arrange tours of 
the national companies to other parts of the country and other parts of the world to 
portray the African personality (NAG/RG3/7/33:79). 
The project involved the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Works and Housing, 
Ministry of Construction and Communication, The Arts Council of Ghana and its 
successor the Institute of Arts and Culture, Engineers from the Development of Public 
Construction, Development Secretariat,  Town Planning Development and Lands 
Secretariat. Norman and Dawbarn Architects and Nickson and Borgs were consulted for 
the construction of the project. The original scheme provided for two theaters sharing 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     136


--- PAGE 153 ---
common facilities for work shops and other things. The firs t one was to be an open-air 
amphitheater with a seating capacity of five thousand (5,0000). This was to be designed 
along the traditional mode of presenting perfo rming arts. The indoor one was to be a 
conventional Western and air-cond itioned type of theater with a seating capacity of five 
hundred (500). Several sites were proposed for the two theaters. These were the current 
road from Nima to Accra central, North Ridge Hospital, George Padmore and Liberia 
Roads, and Barnes and Liberia roads, east of  the then Ghana Farm ers Hall. The Castle 
Road was also to be the site for an International Cultural Center desired by Nkrumah and 
a new headquarters for the Arts Council. 
Another important part of Nkrumah’s cultural policy was the role of Africans in the 
Diaspora in the intellectual and artistic rebirt h of Africa. In his inaugural speech at the 
Institute of African Studies, Nkrumah stated that, while the research fellows’ task should 
include the study of the experiences of the Africans in the Diaspora, they should also 
“seek to maintain close relations with their scholars so that there may be cross 
fertilization between” them (1992:14). The In stitute played host to a number of Pan-
African scholars, who came in and worked. “I t became the base, for any African scholar 
who was talking about Africa at the intellectual and artistic levels,” Awoonor recalled. 
Those scholars who were in Ghana included Sinclair Drake, a sociologist, Naval 
Dawes of Jamaica, a novelist and a poet, and Liver Pool who went to the Law Faculty. 
Others were, McNeil Stewert, a poet from Trinidad whose poems were published daily in 
the Ghanaian Times in a column called, “The Poets Corner,” and Moriseau LeRoy from 
Haiti, who became one of the directors in the National Theater Movement. W.E.B.Du 
Bois was invited by Nkrumah to embark on an Encyclopedia Africana project (Marable, 
1986:208–208). He was very instrumental in Nkrumah’s cultural policy development that 
culminated in the establishm ent of the cultural institutions, recalled Awoonor. As stated 
above, Nkrumah spent many hours discussing African unity with W.E.B. DuBois.” 
Scott Kennedy, a dramatist from the United States, joined the Institute later to direct 
the Drama section of the School of Music a nd Drama, because of Nkrumah’s inaugural 
speech. Earlier, Nkrumah had personally contact ed Paul Robeson in the US to become 
the head of the newly established School of Music and Drama at the University of Ghana 
at Legon (Sherwood, 1996:85). The promotion of Jazz concerts in Ghana was one of the 
policies of the Arts Council. In November 1958, the Arts Council arranged for the visit of 
Louis Satchmo into the country and to perform  in Accra, Kumase, and Takoradi. George 
Tapps Dance Company and the Golden Gate Quartette of Philadelphia visited Ghana in 
1961 and 1962 respectively. According to Sherwood (Ibid: 33), Nkrumah, while a student 
in the US, sometimes traveled with “the  Glee Club when they went to sing Negro 
spirituals at Clubs and other venues.” During such trips, Nkrumah would tell “stories of 
Africa, especially about life in Ghana…and often spoke of his dreams for a free Africa or 
a free united states of Africa” (Ibid: 34). 
Nkrumah’s policy regarding the National Theater Movement was not limited to Stage 
Theater. It also encompassed movie, radio and television theaters. He saw these as critical 
components of cultural institutions, severi ng as instruments of transmitting African 
cultural values “and asserting the personality of the African,” Awoonor explained. Hence, 
his opening speech of the Ghana Tele vision Station in  1965 discouraged 
commercialization of its transmitting services. From its inception the Ghana television 
embarked on presenting some of the fruits of the Theater Movement for the wider 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     137


--- PAGE 154 ---
audience. In the summer of 1965, the repertoire of the Dance Section of the School of 
Music and Drama, (which I watched at the Koforidua Cummunity Center) was 
showcased on the television. As part of the cultural rebirth, Awoonor also hosted an 
evening variety show called “Seven Forty Five Special.” He interviewed musicians, both 
African and the diasporan Africans, and play ed “a bit of their music;” additionally, he 
interviewed poets who had produced new poe ms.” He “recalled interviewing Malcolm X 
when he was in Ghana early 1965. 
Ansah (1991:95) points out that, Nkrumah understood the critical role the media could 
play in educating the “people, enlightening them on their national responsibilities and the 
need for development,” especially “its potential as a tool for national unity.” Hence, in 
1963, Nkrumah proposed a Pan-African News Agency to correct the distorted image of 
Africa” being “projected in foreign media” (Ibid: 99). External affairs services broadcast 
in French, Portuguese, Arabic, Swahili, Hausa were designed to count er vile and vicious 
propaganda “cast on the ability of the Africans to manage their own affairs” (Ibid: 92). 
The radio station also introduced programs “in various local languages.” They 
included Twi, Fante, Ewe, GA, Hausa and Nzema, Awoonor indicated. The reason was 
that Nkrumah “was very interested in r eaching the people across the borders; and once 
there was a broadcast “in Nzema, for inst ance, all speakers of the Nzema related 
languages in Ivory Coast were being reached by Ghana’s Pan-African surge.” This was 
also true with a broadcast in Hausa, which is not a Ghanaian language, but spoken by 
“the people of northern Nigeria, or all the northern segments all the way to Niger.” 
Awoonor explained, 
In Awoonor’s view, Nkrumah’s vision for building these cultural institutions in Ghana 
was totally unfocused, because it was a visi on of Africa. “Ghana was only a microcosm 
of that African structure he was envisioning. He did not only articulate his vision of 
Ghana, but in the same breath, he spoke of the unity of Africans on the continent and 
those in the Diaspora as envisioned by Ga rvey, Awoonor and Botsio recalled. Awoonor 
recalled a script called Across the Parapet,  a quotation from one of Kwame Nkrumah’s 
Pan-African vision, which the Ghana Films Corporation, headed by Awoonor, produced. 
The quotation, as cited in Chapter Four, was chosen “in the context of the total 
framework of Africa’s rebirth.” The Ghana Film Corporation was an essential arm of the 
entire Pan-African cultural project, and so we re the National Theater Movement and the 
Ghana Young Pioneers Movement. But “the intellectual store house,” Awoonor further 
pointed out, “was going to be the Institute of African Studies. This was where the real 
think tank was to be located. 
CONCLUSION 
Nkrumah’s cultural policies at the non-statutory level were effective in the decolonization 
process. The introduction of State Okyeame, officially called “linguist,” and the pouring 
of libation (now under attack by Christia n fundamentalists inside and outside the 
parliament house) at state functions alongside foreign religions was a reminder of the 
importance of African cultural practices in post-independence Africa. The wearing of 
Batakari and Kente as national costumes symbolized a break with colonialism. The use of 
symbols and motifs to identify political parties, traditional drumming and dancing during 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     138


--- PAGE 155 ---
political rallies reminded the people to cherish their African art forms and their aesthetic 
values. These marks of Nkrumah’s Convention Peoples Party reconnected the people to 
their past, as well as restored their pride in things African.  
Nkrumah’s cultural policies attempted to r ecapture and reconstruct the values in 
traditional African society in wh ich the state was all-inclusiv e, in the context of socio-
economic transformation of Ghana. They were bold steps of the time, in view of colonial 
indoctrination of the people to associate things African with a so-called devil. The 
creation of the Arts Council of Ghana, th e Institute of Arts and Culture, and the 
subsequent establishment of the Institute of  African Studies and its  School of Music and 
Drama resulted from Nkrumah’s personal vision. In fact, they were great achievements of 
the time, since there were no models anyw here in Africa. The judging of traditional 
music and dance, during the Festival of Music and Drama in 1961, on their aesthetic and 
artistic values, regardless of their ethnic origins, was also a mark of nationalism. 
Nevertheless, the objectives of the two cultural institutions with respect to fostering 
the art forms, failed to spell out their place in socio-economic development in Ghana. The 
concept and the objective of th e National Theater Movement were never clearly defined. 
The aesthetic principles to undergird the movement were never clarified, thereby leading 
to several substitution performing arts producti ons (Welsh Asante: 7) that embraced any 
standard of judgement. 
Also, the objective of the cultural institutions to enable the people appreciates their 
arts and culture perhaps resulted from the policy makers’ positivist research method. It is 
common knowledge in Ghana that an Anlo-Ewe, regardless of his or her level of 
education and or social status, would grab a piece of cloth, get into the dancing arena and 
perform agbadza [music-dance form]. Therefore, the people did not need to be told to 
appreciate their arts and culture that had b een central to their humanity. Another failure 
was its inability to view the art forms as instruments for fostering national unity and 
restoring the African personality, which Nkrumah advanced with passion. 
As pointed out earlier, one of the shortcom ings of the Arts Council and its successor 
the Institute of Arts and Culture was its indifference towards the formal educational 
system. There was no plan to formulate pe rforming arts curriculum to permeate the 
educational system, in order to ensure continuity in the National Theater Movement 
project. The creation of cultura l institutions “without taking e ffective steps to integrate 
then into educational system from primary school to the university level, was one of the 
fundamental mistakes of the New National Theater Movement,” Agovi (1990:17) 
intimates. This impasse was to affect the School of Music and Drama, in terms of its 
inability to recruit promising students directly from the high schools.  
Nkrumah’s cultural policies     139


--- PAGE 156 ---
Chapter Seven  
Nkrumah’s Cultural Policy: The National 
Theater Movement and the Academy 
Speaking about African personality , Dr. Edward Wilmot Blyden urged that “the African 
must advance by methods of his own.” Specifically, the African must possess the 
capacity to carve his own culture quite distinct from the European.” Thus, “we must show 
that we are able to go alone, to carve our own way,” and not be satisfied when the 
“Europeans influence our polity, make our laws, rule in our tribunals and impregnate our 
social atmosphere” (Legum, 1962:20). Blyden made this observation in his presidential 
address at the opening of the Liberia College in 1881 (Ibid: 20). At the time of Africa’s 
national independence, the agency of African people that Blyden advanced had been 
arrested by colonial legacy. Jahn (1961:11) attests to this when he notes that: 
Europe is alleged to provide the model, Africa to copy it; Europe to be 
spiritually the giving, Africa the receiving partner. Since Europe is held to 
be the teacher and Africa the pupil, Europe is to decide. 
These statements explain the racist ideas held by Europeans in general, and some 
Eurocentric African intellectuals, towards institutional development in post-independence 
Africa. According to this community, Africans have no choice but to follow European 
models. As pointed out in the previous chapters, Africa, they perceive, has no cultural, 
economic and political traditions of its own worthy of serious attention, “and certainly no 
history of glory in” the creative art (Roscoe, 1977:1). In this case, Africa must either 
accept “civilized” European art forms or crumbled.  
According to Touré (1976:85), the particular culture of a people is the constant and 
living achievement of the abstract concepts of  culture. It results from concrete answers a 
society devises to solve concrete problems. Culture encompasses the mental tools and 
practices that, express the essential, the particular and the vitality of the people. It also 
expresses the standard of intellectual, technological and creative arts created by the 
people to enrich their lives. Bu t at every moment of the exis tence of the people, culture 
undergoes the law of change and development.  On the contrary, the kind of intellectual 
tools institutionalized in Africa during colonialism were not devised by the Africans to 
address any concrete African problems. Rather , they were transplanted on the continent 
to promote hegemonic European cultural nationalism. 
As Davidson (1974:25) notes, the Europeans were contemptuous of Africans. They 
“insisted on their own superiority and thought that Africans had no history and 
civilization of their own.” That explains why the Colonial Office in London referred to 
Phelps-Stokes’ team as an advisory Co mmittee on “Native Education in the Tropical 
Dependencies” (Agovi, 1990:5). Its report of 1925 led to some expansion in primary and


--- PAGE 157 ---
secondary school education in Ghana. T hough the Colonial Government sought to 
participate and control the educational facilities, the schools remained in the hands of the 
missionary churches. Alongside this, the c hurches had an active unwritten policy of 
theater movement as part of their proselytization in the country. They established a 
tradition of religious plays, and between 1931 and 1932, there was a proliferation of 
dramatic cantata in Accra, Nsawam, Cape Coast and Sekondi. The popular plays included 
“The Rolling Season,” “Nativity,” “Esther the Beautiful” and “Bethlehem.” The schools 
also produced secular plays, such as “Macb eth,” “The Armada,” and “Britannica Court.” 
The last play was designed to show the lands forming the British Empire and their 
allegiance to the British Crow n. The Methodist Church in Britain, for instance, 
established a West African Literature Society Committee in London to supervise the 
publication and distribution of “relevant” literature and drama for West African colonies 
(Ibid: 7). 
Similarly, there was overwhelming dominance and stature of the missionaries in the 
development of what Agovi calls “literary” theater in Nigeria. There were those who 
attempted to create a secular base for the Ni gerian “modern” theater outside the church. 
There were also those who did everything to return the theater to the church. But in 
Senegal, the William-Ponty College’s attempt in 1933 to reform the colonial education in 
Dakar, through ethnographic research, led to a theater development. The students 
involved were required to write plays based on African folklore and history in French, 
which were performed at festivals mark ing the end of the academic year. The 
composition and performances of the plays, in the words of Traore (1972:33) in his 
discourse on Black African Theater, were incor porated, if not into the actual syllabus of 
William Ponty, at least into its organized activities. Eventually, the College became a 
center of theater education for the student s in the West African French-Speaking 
colonies. The experiment led to “a gradual nurturing of a tradition of ‘modern’ theater 
that reconciled Africa to Europe” (Agovi, 1990:5). At the time, it was not easy for the 
students to foster a true African-centered theater in terms of themes and modes of 
productions. The idea of one of the exponent s of this tradition, Keita Fodeba, was 
“simply to reconstruct certain characteristic moments of authentic African life, drawing 
of the ancestral past, now on the Africa of today,” Traore (1972:37) cites. 
This chapter focuses on Nkrumah’s cultural policy with respect to the National 
Theater Movement in the academy. This refers  to the major structural change in the 
University of Ghana leading to the establishment of the Institute of African Studies and 
its School of Music and Drama at the university. We must always bear in mind that 
Nkrumah’s educational policy at the University of Ghana was crucial to his cultural 
policy, in terms of African-centered orientation towards intellectual and artistic pursuits. 
THE NATURE OF COLONIAL EDUCATION AND AFRICAN 
CULTURE 
In 1927, Governor Guggisburg founded the Achimota College. Interest in the 
development of an African curriculum at the time caused the Colle ge to set precedence 
for the study of African languages and culture . This was accomplished by the efforts of 
Diedrich Westernman, through whom Mawere Opoku and several others turned into the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     141


--- PAGE 158 ---
study of arts. He created a common script for Twi and Fante. This included the 
“collection of folktales and oral historical traditions…native music and dancing” (Ashby: 
35). Behind this commendable efforts was a deliberate attempt, 
to ‘produce a type of student, who is Western in his intellectual attitude 
towards life, with respect for science and capacity for systematic thought, 
but who remains African in sympathy and desirous in preserving and 
developing what is deserving of respect in tribal life, customs, rule and 
law. (Ibid: 36) 
Besides, the statement demonstrates Westernman’s condescending and patronizing 
attitude towards African culture. The irony, however, was that the few educated Africans 
embraced his idea about education in tropical  Africa. This “Lawyer-Merchant class of 
Africans,” as Agovi (1990:5) characterizes them, vehemently opposed the idea of African 
studies in the academy. 
As Agovi (Ibid: 5) quotes S.K.B.Asante, “these aspiring entrepreneurial groups had set 
immutable standards and patterns for the re st of the population and in general had 
spearheaded the drive for modernity.” Their goal was to imitate the European and the 
desire to live up to what they  considered “civilized standard s.” As a consequence, they 
and their forebears, Agovi cites Robert Gardiner, were in the habit of wearing: 
Heavy woolen suits, tail coats and hi gh collars and were as correctly 
dressed as Englishmen would be in England…their madams spotted 
Victorian wardrobes complete with corsets and plumed hats. They 
organized clubs and local European style cultural societies such as lodges 
and magic lantern shows—programmes similar to those of parish 
gathering in England. There are accounts of Ladies’ Clubs which imposed 
fines on those their members who spoke local languages or wore native 
dress in public. (Ibid: 5–6) 
It was these types of Africans that Kobina Sekyi satirized in his play, “The Blinkards.” 
This group “controlled a vociferous press and their brand of nationalism.” Agovi 
observes, “only aspired toward a sharing of power” with the chiefs in the Legislative 
Council to oppose any pretensions toward Africanization of the educational curriculum 
(Ibid: 6). They held dearly to the idea of educational parity, believing resolutely that 
European type of education was worthwhile in order to achieve parity with the colonial 
elite (Graham, 1971:182). Any “special cour ses for Africans or Africanization of 
education,” in their view, constituted “an attempt to keep them in a subordinate 
intellectual and social position of inferiority” (Foster, 1965:167). 
It is startling to note that both the kings and educated elite, including the author of 
Ethiopia Unbound Casely-Hayford, Foster points out , “were united in their opposition to 
the Africanization of the curriculum” (Ibid: 167). In fact, Casely-Hayford’s words attest 
to his attachment to the British Empire. He said: 
Now one more word as to what happens to be the feeling not only of this 
country, but of all British West Africa, a nd that it is that we feel that our 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     142


--- PAGE 159 ---
loyalty and cooperation with His Majesty’s Government is no mere matter 
of sentiments; for we feel and reali ze that our interest as a people are 
identical with those of the Empire, a nd we mean, as in the past, in the 
present, and in the future, to stand by the Empire through thick and thin in 
every circumstance.” (Emerson and Kilson, 1967:10) 
In Nana Ofori Atta’s view, any restriction of studies to the African scene would be 
unwise (Foster: 167). What these views demonstrate is that the consumption of European 
culture, in all its manifestations, was to explain the differences between the African-
centered character of Nkrumah’s cultural policy and that of elite and/or the European-
trained African scholars in the country. 
Therefore, at the time of political independence, there was the urgent need to 
incorporate African culture, or if not, to A fricanize the content of education, into the 
entire educational system. Th e incorporation of African culture was to include the 
traditional political systems with their checks and balances; “its passionate identification 
with the soil through religion,  customary law, the cultivation of crops and care of 
animals; its philosophical and codes of beha viour; its languages; its folklore and music 
and dance” (Ashby: 59). He cites examples of the clamor for the study of Afriean 
humanities, such as African languages and litera ture in Nigeria. By 1955, for example, 
the Lagos Daily Times,  “was advocating a faculty of Nigerian Languages at Ibadan” 
University (Ibid: 60). 
Similarly, Nkrumah saw Ghana’s “cultural problem as largely the outcome of colonial 
educational system” (Hagan 1991a:4). When  he became the Leader of Government 
Business in 1951, he was eager to combat the Eurocentric education of what Ashby 
describes as “disrupting the stability of African society by alienating Africans from the 
core of their culture” (Ibid: 59). Dr. Busia, the Prime Minister of the second republic of 
Ghana, testified to the anti-African nature of British education, when he said: 
At the end of my first year at secondary school [Mfantsipim, Cape Coast], 
I went home to Wenchi for the Christmas vacation. I had not been home 
for four years, and on that visit, I b ecame painfully aware of my isolation. 
I understood our community far less than the boys of my own age who 
had never been to school. Over the years, as I went through college and 
university, I felt increasingly that the education I received taught me more 
and more about Europe and less than my own society. (Rodney, 
1982:246) 
What this testimony shows is that an A frican could graduate from an African academy 
and still be ignorant of his culture, especia lly his African envir onment, history and 
civilization. 
To combat the Eurocentric nature of the educational system in Ghana, the government 
first took over from the missionaries the full responsibility of Ghana’s educational policy 
and practice (Haizel, 1991:59). The government  created an Accelerated Development 
Plan for Education to carry out its policies. It stated that: 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     143


--- PAGE 160 ---
In future no new primary school ope ned by a denominational religious 
body or by a person or group of pers ons will be eligible for assistance 
from public funds unless prior approval of the local authority concerned 
under powers delegated by the central government has been obtained. 
(Ibid: 60) 
As a consequence, the missionary schools were not only barred from expanding their 
elementary schools, but they were also expected to give up the existing ones. This, Haizel 
discloses, was a “deliberate move to take over primary schools where church influence 
had been strong’“ (Ibid: 61). However, the schools continued to bear the names of the 
missionary churches. As noted above, there was no mention of changes in the content of 
the course taught to the African students. The government policy was simply an 
administrative change, in terms of material, financial and human resources. 
The class periods set aside for civics in the schools, including the study of African 
history and traditions, was insufficient to combat centuries of British cultural nationalism 
in Ghana. Perhaps Nkrumah’s educational policy, which Botsio was very instrumental in 
developing, was the mass education and the a dult education designed to enable everyone 
to become literate. As Botsio established in  our interview on January 1, 1997, those who 
had already passed the school going age had non-formal adult education designed for 
them. “We encouraged them to do higher studies,” he recalled. 
In 1960, the government established the Ghana Education Trust for the expansion of 
secondary schools and teacher training colleges in the count ry. In all, the government 
built forty boarding and l odging secondary schools, in cluding accommodation for the 
faculty, in each zone in the country. Hitherto, there were very few such schools in the 
country. In the Seven-Year Development Pl an, secondary schools were going to be free 
and compulsory for all children living in Ghana (Haizel, 1991:68). As indicated earlier, 
Nkrumah in 1961, commended the work of the Trust that he established to build Ghana 
Schools and Colleges (Ibid: 68). 
The expansion of the schools and colleges appeared linear. First, by 1961, there was 
no indication as to the principles for th e Ghana Education Trust to Africanize the 
curriculum of the school system. Second, there was no manifestation of replacing the 
colonial course books with African-centered ones. Third, the government paid no 
attention to the cultural loca tion of the teachers, who were  products of the missionary 
training colleges. It is here that one noti ces the paradoxes and contradictions between 
thought and praxis.  
Based on my experiences as an elementary school student at the time, we were taught 
that certain European tourists, came to discover rivers, lakes and mountains in Africa. 
Christopher Columbus was referred to as th e person who discovered America. By 1959, 
elementary school children were being taught that Africa was the “dark continent.” One 
of the most popular and mesmerizing reading books in Twi we read in the elementary 
school was entitled, Tete Romanfo Akokodrufo (Brave Men of Ancient Rome). We read it 
aloud in the mornings with praises to what we thought was the most outstanding show of 
bravery in the world. 
The little history we were taught about the European slave trade was romanticized. We 
were made to think that the capture of A fricans in Africa and thei r enslavement in the 
Americas were a phenomenon that happened to some people quite remote from us. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     144


--- PAGE 161 ---
Interestingly enough, the British were credite d for freeing the “slaves” and settling them 
in Sierra Leone, with a capital called Freetown. 
Our West African geography lessons consiste d of Gold Coast, Nigeria, Gambia, and 
Sierra Leone, and I grew up thinking there were no other countries in West Africa, 
besides these four. Yet we could draw the ma p of Europe and indicate all the countries 
with their cities, rivers, and mountain ranges without reference to any atlas. By 1959, part 
of the geography lessons—in the hot afternoons—on the seasons of the year consisted of 
spring, summer, autumn and winter, and the topography of Europe. In the schools we 
sang songs in the afternoon like “In The Mi dst Blitz Winter” and “London is burning”. 
The irony was that it was not until 1978 in New Haven, Connecticut, that I first 
experienced a “blizzard.” 
English was, and still is, the medium of instruction in all secondary schools and 
elementary schools. It must be recalled that Nkrumah’s predece ssors like, Casely-
Hayford, Mensah Sarbah and Kwegyr Aggrey, strongly advocated for the use of African 
language as the medium of instruction in African schools and colleges (Smith, 1930:44). 
Sarbah and Casely-Hayford came to discern the “peril denationalization [of the] African 
by means of Western methods of education and, urged that the young” Africans should 
be trained in African languages “and be turned out men.” Otherwise, they would become 
“effete, mongrel product of foreign systems” (Ibid: 44). For his part, Aggrey insisted that 
an African language should be used from the beginning (Ibid: 139). 
These early African nationalists questioned why the African Christian converts should 
not sing their African songs and play their “native airs in church.” “Why in the name of 
reason and common sense, should he not bear his own name and wear his native 
garments?” they asked. In addition, they protested vehemently “against the ignoring of 
African institutions and the attempt to deal with the people as if they had no past” (Ibid: 
43). Sarbah and Casely-Hayford, for instance, reminded the missionaries that they should 
study the religious system of Africa before trying to improve it or introducing a new one 
(Ibid: 44). As discussed in Chapter One, edu cation and Christianity worked hand in hand 
during colonialism. Yet, after the attainment of national independence, Christian prayers 
continued to be said at morning and afte rnoon assemblies in the schools that I attended 
and in which I taught. Wednesday mornings wa s set aside for devotional services in all 
the public schools. 
Perhaps the most Afrocentric policy of Nkrumah’s government was its edict in 1962, 
“that a pass in English is no longer necessary  for a [high] School Certificate” (Ashby, 
1964:92). Prior to this, a failure in English c onstituted a failure in the final examination 
conducted by the (British) West African Ex amination Council, regardless of outstanding 
grades a student received in all other subject s. But the Ghanaian in tellectual cried foul 
and accused Nkrumah of lowering Ghana’s educational standard. 
According to Botsio, Nkrumah thought of convincing other leaders in the West 
African sub-region to adopt Hausa as a regional language. The rationale was “that 
whatever we did we would be able to express ourselves in our own languages,” Botsio 
recalled. However, “Nkrumah never finally decided what should be done about it,” he 
indicated. The idea was not farfetched if the Ghanaian intellectual was willing to study 
the example of the veterans of the so-called World War Two. They (including my uncle) 
returned from Burma after about two years singing and speaking Hausa thoroughly. 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy in the area of language resulted in the establishment of the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     145


--- PAGE 162 ---
School of Ghanaian Languages at Ajumako to  train teachers, th e Ghana Bureau of 
Languages and the Institute of Foreign Langua ges, including Hausa, Swahili and Arabic, 
outside the university. As the ensuing discourse shows, the Ghanaian intellectual strongly 
opposed Nkrumah’s attempt to Africanize the University’s curriculum via the Institute of 
African Studies. This paradox of  being enamored of Europ ean cultural traditions, while 
ignoring their own African traditions was to  affect the National Theater Movement, 
especially the Music and Drama Sections of the School of Music and Drama at the 
University of Ghana. 
THE UNVERSITY OF GHANA 
Touré (1976:75) posits that it is through e ducation that every generation consumes 
culture. It can take the form of human c ontacts in the society, cultural expressions 
through schooling, or both. Therefore, since Nkrumah’s government had been unable to 
Africanize the curricula of the schools and colleges after independence in 1957, it should 
not have been surprising to him when, in 1959, the University of College of Gold Coast 
became the “breeding ground for unpatriotic a nd anti-government elements (Ashby: 79; 
Haizel: 70). 
The anti-Nkrumah sentiments in the university community can, however, be 
understood if we look at the views expressed by its first principal. In his inaugural speech 
in 1949, Dr. David Mowbray Balme did not see why a university in Africa should be 
different from others elsewhere. He said: 
The issue has been bedeviled by our careless use of the phrase ‘European 
civilization.’ It may be justified that the things which are studied at 
universities…are themselves the instruments of civilization. It happens to 
have started in Greece…and it spread first through Europe. But it is high 
time we stopped calling it European as though there were some other form 
which to distinguish it… I was astonished when I came here to find 
myself called European. I had never t hought of myself as one before, and 
I don’t now.” (Ashby, 1964:37) 
It is clear from his speech that there were some Africans who did not accept the view of a 
universal civilization. It is also clear that the appointment of Balme, (an Englishman and 
a former Cambridge Classics Don) as the principal of a new university situated on the 
African soil did not meet the approval of some of the African nationalists. In fact, there 
are contradictions in his statements. First, he dismissed the idea of “European 
civilization,” yet he alleged that civilization “happens to have started in Greece” and then 
“spread first through Europe.” Second, Ba lme admitted that within one universal 
civilization there are different national cultures, yet he doubted whether universities were 
concerned with national cultures or whet her cultures could be kept alive through 
education. “After all, folk dancing is dy ing out in England and hand-looms have been 
replaced by machinery,” he said. “I don’t th ink we need weep when national traditions 
go…it is only a matter of pride in superficial things” he (Ibid: 37) concluded. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     146


--- PAGE 163 ---
In fact, had Balme read the works of anci ent European scholars such as Herodotus, 
Diadorus and Strabo without prejudice, including the accounts of Julius Caesar and those 
of Portuguese travelers to Africa, he would have known that Africa was advanced when 
Europe was “Dark.” According to Poe (1997:6), “Europe’s most dangerous predators 
were not the animals, but men.” He further points out that “Tacitus, Strabo, Polybios and 
Julius Caesar have left us a vivid picture of Europe feral inhabitants, a picture that leaves 
little doubt as to why most Greeks and Romans  steered clear of the northern forests” 
(Ibid: 6). According to these accounts, “canniba lism appears to have been widespread in 
Darkest Europe.” For instance, “the Issedones of Eastern Europe devoured their own 
fathers when they died” (Ibid: 14). For the Celts, he continues, “count it an honorable 
thing, when their fathers die, to devour them, and openly have intercourse with their 
mothers and sisters” (Ibid: 14). By the twelfth century, “kings of one Irish clan still 
celebrated their coronation by engaging in ritual sexual intercourse with a horse” (Ibid: 
6). The Gauls of France on their part, “were great enthusiasts of human sacrifice.” By 
1439 C.E., “the city of France was besieged by wolf packs that emerged from the forest 
en mass and devouring innocent wayfarers” (Ibid: 6). Conversely, the second Western 
Sudanic Empire, Mali, had declined in 1400 C.E. (Karenga, 1993:94). Also when the 
Portuguese led by Vasco Da Gama  arrived in East Africa, th ey found civilization, cities, 
urban comfort, lavish wealth, commerce and navigation on high seas unknown in Europe 
at the time (Davidson, 1974:163). 
Indeed, Balme either demonstrated his ignorance, or refused to acknowledge the fact 
that the so-called Greek civilization was transported from Africa to Greece by those 
natives of Greece who studied in Egyp t (Herodotus 1964:18; James 1954:1–150; Diop, 
1974:1–235; Diop 1991:231–309; DuBois, 1947:98–147). James (1954:3) in his seminal 
work, The Stolen Legacy, affirms this when he writes that the “Greek philosophers were 
not the authors of Greek philosophy, but the Egyptian Priests and Hierophants.” The 
“Ethics,” which the Greeks were forced to study, was borrowed from the Egyptian 
“Summun Bonum,” or the “greatest good.” This is also true of the command, “Know 
Thyself,” which Socrates copied from the an terior of the Egyptian temples (Ibid: 3). 
Secondly, not only have the ancient European scholars such as Herodotus, Aristotle, 
Lucian, Apllodorus, Strabo and Diodorus, attested to this fact, but they also described the 
Egyptians as “black skin and kinky hair,” documented in General History of African; 
Ancient and Modern, (UNESCO 1990:21–22). Herodotus, in his Histories II, pointed out 
that “almost all the names of the gods  came into Greece from Egypt” (Herodotus 
1964:139). 
But as a hegemonic and Eurocentric scholar in European Classics, Balme did not 
hesitate to establish departments of classics  and philosophy dedicated  to the teaching of 
European philosophy and classics (July: 161). Ensconced in his “intellectual cocoon,” to 
borrow the words of Asante (1998:40), he made it impossible for his audience to 
conceive of another universe. In effect, the ethnocentric ideas and policies of Balme were 
to determine the mission and character of the University of Ghana. They were also to 
inform the intellectual outlook of the teaching staff and stude nts of the university. It was 
therefore not by accident that Nkruma h’s policies on university education and 
Africanization of its curriculum after 1960 were to be met with fierce resistance. 
According to Awoonor, Nkrumah as Prime Minister could not visit the university 
unless a formal invitation had been extended to him by the university administration. But 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     147


--- PAGE 164 ---
in 1959, the C.P.P. students broke the univers ity “barrier” by inviting Nkrumah to the 
university campus. “The imperialist refused to allow him in, so in my last year, we had a 
‘conspiracy’ and brought him to the University of Ghana campus in connection with the 
inauguration of the National Association of Socialist Students,” Awoonor disclosed, 
In 1959, Nkrumah’s office issued directives to the university college requiring 
changes in the deluxe passages to Britain, but the faculty and staff interpreted it as an 
infringement of academic freedom (Ashby: 60). “While I fully subscribe to the principle 
of academic freedom,” Nkrumah stated, “a uni versity must relate its activities to the 
needs of the society in which it exists” (Ibid: 58). This and other statements by Nkrumah 
were met with resistance. Among the oppositi on, Ashby observes, were some African 
intellectuals. He notes: 
Some of the European trained Afri can intellectuals, especially those 
educated in Europe resisted changes in curriculum or in pattern of course 
because they confuse such changes with a lowering of standards. They are 
accordingly suspicious of any dive rgence from the British pattern. Some 
of them are particularly allergic to proposals for incorporating African 
studies into the curriculum. (Ibid: 61) 
The need to replace the administrators and facu lty, especially those expatriates with their 
Eurocentric scholarship and the notion of acad emic freedom, with those sympathetic to 
the objectives of the Nkrumah’ s political agenda is manifested in the above speech. As 
Ashby (Ibid: 58) points out, “one manifestation of African nationalism,” was the need to 
bring to bear upon the universities a pressure for relevance to the short-term needs of 
African society. This meant that any experiential curriculu m had to aim at diminishing 
the menacing gap between the intellectual environment and the African society. 
Furthermore, Nkrumah’s cultural policy exp ected an African unive rsity in Ghana to 
engage in intellectual decolonization. The desired objective was to produce graduates 
who could function in post-independence African society. 
The University College, however, mobilized its defense, while the government, on the 
other hand, came to regard the university as the focus of dissent and a threat to the 
stability of the new nation. Politicians in Nkrumah’s fold criticized the expatriate 
academic staff as doing “no work which was of the slightest use to Ghana, and worst of 
all to pervert the flower of her youth, f illing their minds with pernicious non-African 
rubbish” (Ibid: 86). 
Speaking on the tenth anniversary of the founding of the Convention Peoples’ Party, 
Nkrumah expressed his dissatisfaction about wh at he saw as lack of productivity of the 
University of Ghana and the Kumase College of Technology. He explained as follows: 
It cost as much more to produce a graduate at Legon than in many other 
universities abroad. We have provided with unparalleled lavishness all the 
facilities necessary. It is common opi nion that our students are ‘feather-
bredded.’ And what is the result? With few exceptions, the University 
College is a breeding ground for unpatriotic and anti-Government 
elements. But the students are not to be blamed. The staff bears a heavy 
responsibility for the anti-Government atmosphere which prevails. We do 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     148


--- PAGE 165 ---
not intend to sit idly by and see th ese institutions which are supported by 
millions of pounds produced out of the sweat and toil of the common 
people continue to be centres of an ti-government activities. We want the 
University College to cease being an alien institution and to take on the 
character of a Ghanaian university, lo yally serving the interest of the 
nation and the well-being of our people. If reforms do not come from 
within, we intend to impose them fro m outside, and no resort to academic 
freedom [for academic freedom does not mean irresponsibility] is going to 
restrain us from seeing that our University is healthily devoted to 
Ghanaian interest. (Nkrumah, 1973b:167) 
Nkrumah’s speech, specifically his intention to intervene and reform the university, 
“provoked a storm of protest not only within the college but from all over the world,” 
Ashby (1964:87) notes. These were people who shared Balme’s universal view of 
education, irrespective of Africa’s time and place in history. These acolytes of Balme 
equated the study of European classics, philosophy, Euro-Christian religion, history, 
languages and literature at the University Co llege of Gold Coast with universal human 
sciences. For the African students, this amounted to seeking higher knowledge for its 
own sake. On the other hand, those who supported Nkrumah’s declared intention to 
reform the university not only viewed the acquisition of advanced knowledge as a means 
of improving the life chances of African people in a post-independence Africa, but also 
found the university as the cancer of the colonial legacy, which needed to be changed. A 
brief history of the University College will, perhaps, explains the choice that Nkrumah 
had to make.  
In 1911, Casely-Hayford took up Dr. Africanus Horton’s proposals for a West African 
University, and rather campaigned for a university for the Gold Coast. Nine years later, 
the National Congress British West Africa, le d by Casely-Hayford, petitioned the British 
Government “to found a British West African University on such lines as would preserve 
in the students a sense of African nationa lity” (Bing, 348–349). This request yielded no 
positive response until 1945, when the Colonial Government finally embraced the idea of 
a university for the Gold Coast. This change of attitude was based on two separate reports 
submitted to the Colonial Government by Asquith and Elliot Commissions. Contained in 
the reports, the mission of the university was to train a new platonic Africa elite. In doing 
so, the two commissions “set their faces agai nst creating anything except copies of the 
British “red brick universities of pre-war days” (Ibid: 350). As Ashby noted, the founders 
of universities in the British colonies in “Africa worked in the belief that the social 
function of a university in Africa was to cr eate and sustain an intellectual elite” (Ibid: 
351). The social function of a university as defined by the two Commissions was not 
without precedence in England. Bing writes: 
The medieval clerical tradition had endowed the original English 
Universities, Oxford and Cambridge , with a form of academic self-
Government, later to be adopted by  the new English universities of the 
nineteenth century. Medieval universities had been ecclesiastical agencies, 
and their ‘self-government’ had followed simply from the autonomy of 
the clergy. Academic freedom in the nineteenth century at Oxford and 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     149


--- PAGE 166 ---
Cambridge had essentially been the right of College ruling bodies to 
impose their collective decisions as to  whom they would admit and what 
they would teach. (Ibid: 351) 
From Nkrumah’s point of view, this social ch aracter of the University College of Gold 
Coast, founded in 1948 as an extension of London University, clearly compromised the 
fulcrum of Ghana’s independence. By 1960, “the university and their graduates were 
isolated from the life of the common people in a way which had had no parallel in 
England since the middle Ages” (Ibid: 361). The contradiction also was that, after 
independence, in proportion to its per capita  national income Ghana, Bing (Ibid: 364) 
explicates, was spending ten times as much as Spain and the government was excluded 
from any say as to how its university s hould be run. Yet Nkrumah’s government’s 
attempt to uncouple the university from its ecclesiastic tradition of medieval Europe, after 
the departure of Dr. Balme in 1957, was decried as interference of academic freedom.  
What reforms the government intended “to impose from the outside” depended on the 
extent to which they combatted the European  medieval social char acter of this public 
university, its anti-African mission and the preponderance of European faculty. With its 
status as an appendage of the University of London the University College of Gold Coast 
was managed in terms of its syllabus, ex aminations, and quality of teaching and 
administration. Independence, Nkrumah unde rstood, meant self-determination and the 
University College of Ghana was no exception; it had to sever its relationship with the 
University of London. 
Those who characterized Nkrumah’s actions  as interference in academic freedom 
failed to acknowledge that a free university education in post-independence Ghana was 
the people’s investment, in terms of its returns in research and manpower development to 
improve their life chances. By 1959 there were hardly any daughters and sons of the 
masses, whose sweat and toil generated the financial resources for the faculty’s salaries 
and the students’ education, among the university student body. Therefore, the 
government’s action to get rid of the persons  found to be undesirable at the University 
College of Ghana was to ensure positive returns for the investors. The real obstacles were 
rather from those outsiders who considered Nkrumah’s action as interference in academic 
freedom. What, for instance, would the Br itish government have done if an African 
professor like Sheikh Anta Diop were to serve as the president of its leading publicly 
supported university, with a hegemonic African-centered curriculum, Wollof as the 
medium of instruction and ethnocentric African-centered intellectuals as the dominant 
faculty? This is a question, which we must pose to those who liken any attempt to 
Africanize an African university on African soil to interference in Academic freedom. 
Shortly before the University  of Gold Coast became inde pendent from the University 
of London, a letter dated late May 1961 from Nkrumah’s office stated that “all 
appointments of members of the academic sta ff will automatically be terminated.” And 
that those desiring re-appointments had to do so  by June 10, 1961. In another letter dated 
May 27, 1961, Nkrumah’s government indicated that persons would be appointed 
without re-applying, but that it might “be necessary to terminate certain appointments and 
to revise the conditions of service of others” (Ibid: 87). 
To unbound the university from foreign control, Nkrumah appointed an International 
Commission in 1960, chaired by Kojo Botsio, the Minister of Agriculture, with Daniel 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     150


--- PAGE 167 ---
Chapman as the Vice-Chairman. The purpos e of the Commission was to advise the 
government on the future development of the University College of Gold Coast. One of 
the Commission’s terms of reference was about the conversion of the Kumase College of 
Technology into a University of Scien ce and Technology (Ashby: 89 and July: 169–70). 
This body included “three scholars from England, two from United States of America, 
one from the USSR and one African from Si erra Leone (Ashby: 89). Nana Kwabena 
Nketsia and Thomas Hodgkin served as joint Secretaries of the Commission. 
In May 1961, the commission submitted its repor t, which was enacted into law by the 
Parliament on July 1, 1961 (July: 170). The statute stipulated two main principles 
regarding the relationship between the State and the University. On one level, the 
government urged the university to create curricula that “respond to the immediate and 
future needs of the community ;” the second level gave the universities the “autonomy in 
their organization, teaching and research” (Ashby: 89). The most significant aspect of the 
new policy was that teaching should be base d upon those areas “which are of special 
relevance to the needs and aspirations of Gh anaians, including the furtherance of African 
unity” (Ibid: 90). 
In addition to these guidelines, the law created a new structure of government 
consisting of a Chancellor, the head of state, Vice-Chancellor, to be appointed by the 
president of the republic, and the University Council, as the governing body. The law 
also established a National Council for Higher Education and Research under the 
Ministry of Education “which would plan, coordinate and finance education and research 
throughout the country” (Ibid: 90). Nkrumah immediately appointed Nana Dr. Kwabena 
Nketsia who had served as a member of the International Commission Secretariat, as the 
Interim Vice-Chancellor. 
Nkrumah’s appointment of Na na Nketsia’s successor, Conor Cruise O’Brien, was 
against the advice of Thomas Hodgkin (July: 173), who preferred an African. But 
Nkrumah, according to July, “greatly admire d O’Brien’s actions in Katanga affairs and 
clearly regarded him as a person of unimpeach able academic credentials who would also 
understand Nkrumah’s own objectives in higher education” (Ibid: 173). According to 
McFarland & Owusu-Ansah, O’Brien was an “admirer of Nkrumah’s socialism and anti-
imperialism” (1985:135). 
The question that arises, is how far did the new law lead to the intellectual 
decolonization that Nkrumah envisioned? How was the appointment of O’Brien 
reflective of national independence and the African unity agenda? How did this structural 
severance from the British tradition ensure an African-centered curriculum, in terms of 
the intellectual location of the British-trained Ghanaian professors? What purpose was 
served by retaining the Departments of Classics and English, and the so-called of 
Department of Modern Languages: French, Russian, and Spanish? Why did the new 
policy not lead to the creation of departments of African languages such as Hausa, 
Wollof, Zulu, Ga-Adamgbe, Yoruba and Ki swahili? Why did the governing body retain 
medieval British traditions, such as the administration of residential halls, “Trinity,” 
“Michaelmas” and “Lent” for the terms, the wearing of gowns to meet one’s residential 
tutor and to attend high dinne r on Sundays preceded by Christian grace (prayers), the 
attachment of Euro-Christian churches to every hall of residence, and maintenance of 
students’ rooms by university staff? The answer to these questions can be found in the 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     151


--- PAGE 168 ---
following words of Macaulay: “a class of pe rson” African “in blood, and color, but 
English in taste, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect” (Ashby: 2). 
Was it then surprising when in 1964, the invincibility of British cultural nationalism 
and its attendant anti-Nkrumah’s cultural po licy within the university became apparent? 
The anti-Nkrumah’s cultural policy in the campus that invited responses from the 
newspaper, the Ghanaian Times  and a demonstration on the campus by the public 
evidenced the weakness of the government’s stature of July 1, 1961. In its editorial, the 
Ghanaian Times  charged that the universities “hav e become the fountain heads of 
reaction and fertile grounds for imperialist and neo-colonialist s ubversion and counter-
revolution” (Ibid: 93). The editorial and probably Nkrumah’s own public 
pronouncements generated a demonstration on the campus by people from the outside, 
including the market women. According to Abdallah, Nkrumah expressed his 
exasperation with the university “when he was talking to the market women in Accra.” 
The women went with “brooms to sweep the people out of what they referred to as the 
backward institution,” Abdallah added. Consequently, “six faculty members were 
deported for indulging in subversive activities” (Ibid: 93). 
In Nketia’s view, Nkrumah’s emphasis on the importance of relating academic 
research to the African culture should not have led to a conflict between the government 
and university. What he understood Nkrumah as  saying was that “the University of 
Ghana should not be an ivory tower organizati on,” so that “the gowns [could] move to 
the town.” In the United States, for instance, “what they do in the university reflects the 
culture and the achievement of the society; and what Nkrumah expected of us was to do 
the same,” Nketia explained. 
It was against this background that the creati on of the Institute of African Studies and 
its performing arts unit, the School of Music and Drama at the University of Ghana must 
be viewed. As Nketia explained, the establishment of the Institute of African Studies 
resulted from the recommendations of the International Commission that Nkrumah set 
up. Whether or not the commission devised some guidelines for the Institute could not be 
ascertained. 
THE INSTITUTE OF AFRICAN STUDIES 
It must be recalled that Blyden’s discour se on African personality preceded that of 
Nkrumah. Blyden took note of the effect of  colonial traditions obliterating those of 
Africans as though they had “no poetry and philosophy.” Thus: 
The songs that live in our ears and are often on our lips are the songs 
which we heard sung by those who shouted while we groaned and 
lamented. They sang of their history, which was the history of our 
degradation. They recited their triumphs, which was the history of our 
humiliation. To our great misfortune, we learned their prejudices and their 
passion, and thought we had their aspi rations and their power. Now if we 
are to make an independent nation—a strong nation—we must listen to 
the songs of our unsophisticated brethren as they sing of their history, as 
they tell of their traditions of the wonderful and mysterious events of their 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     152


--- PAGE 169 ---
tribal national life, of the achievements of what we call their superstitions; 
we must lend a ready ear to the deities of the Kroomen who pull our 
boats, of Pesseh and Golah men, who till our farms; we must read the 
compositions, rude as we may think of them, of the Mandingoes and the 
Vegs. (Legum, 1962:21) 
Here, Blyden recognized the irreconcilable differences between the historical and cultural 
experiences of the Europeans and those of African people. Second, it meant that the 
aspirations of African people were diametrically opposed to those who had once enslaved 
and colonized them. The third implication was that it would be counterproductive to try 
to restore African personality in post-indepe ndence Africa, through the worldview of the 
African oppressors. Therefore, the process of restoring the African agency that 
underscored Nkrumah’s cultural thought was to be found in Afriea’s own creative 
culture. As Anyidoho indicated in our interview, Nkrumah’s cultural policies aimed at 
“searching for African personality through African drama, dance and music.” 
Nkrumah’s speech, “The African Genius,” in many ways resonates some of Blyden’s 
concerns, The core canons of his cultural thought, as discussed in Chapter Three, 
provided the guiding principles towards the intellectual and artistic pursuits of the School 
of Music and Drama. The relevant ones are restated here as a framework for the criticism 
that follows. First, Nkrumah called for a re-interpretation and a new assessment of 
African past and the abrogation of Eurocentric paradigms towards to the study of African 
phenomena. Second, he proposed the development of an Africa-centered paradigm in the 
intellectual and artistic pursuits of the Ins titute of African Studies and the School of 
Music and Drama. It meant that the School’s creative endeavors should be free from the 
propositions and presuppositions of the Western world, in the context of the National 
Theater Movement. In this regard, Nkrumah urged the faculty to invalidate the distortions 
of those Eurocentric scholars who made European studies the basis of the new 
assessment. 
Third, Nkrumah urged the Institute of Afri can Studies and the School to fertilize the 
universities and the nation with their work. Their intellectual and creative work should 
seek to benefit the welfare of the people, in order to solve Africa’s economic, cultural, 
technological and scientific problems. Fourth, he saw the School of Music and Drama 
linking the University of Ghan a closely with the National Th eater Movement in Ghana. 
The School, he stressed, should develop new fo rms of dance, drama, music and creative 
writing out of the African traditions, which, at the same time, express the wishes and 
aspirations of the people. Accordingly, the School should concern itself with diffusing 
their creative work “in a more popular form among a wider public” (1992:18). Fifth, 
Nkrumah emphasized the importance of the st udy of achievements in classical Africa; 
and said it was “our duty to give them thei r place in our studies here” (Ibid: 20). Finally, 
Nkrumah called to attention the study of African arts in order to uncover the African 
traditional institutions and values that unite the people. Such a study, he pointed out, 
could illuminate Africa’s historical problems, as well as provide the data for the study of 
Africa’ ethical and philosophical ideas. 
The Institute of African Studies was set up in 1962 with Thomas Hodgkin as its first 
director. As indicated above, he served in the Secretariat of the International Commission 
that Nkrumah set up to look at the university and propose how it could become a self-
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     153


--- PAGE 170 ---
governing independe nt university. Because of his unt arnished background in African 
politics, Hodgkin was appointed the director  on an interim basis to carry out the 
recommendations of the Commission. In Nketia’s view, it was also politically “wise and 
important to have Thomas Hodgkin as the first director because the university was 
opposed to a larger Institute of African Studi es.” Prior to that, the university itself had 
indicated some interest in setting up an o ffice for African studies , which was just an 
administrative structure that  would coordinate the academic work being done in the 
departments, Nketia further explained. Ho wever, the university’s concept of African 
studies was different from that  of Nkrumah. His idea, accord ing to Nketia, was a greater 
kind of institute, and the report of the Commission leaned towards it.  
In effect, the establishment of the Institute of African St udies in the academy was part 
of Nkrumah’s fight for total independence of Ghana. It was an organic component of his 
educational policy, and Nkrumah envisaged African studies to be “the catalyst for change 
in the university,” Nketia further brought to light. As indicated above, Nkrumah, while a 
graduate student in the United States, was very instrumental in the creation of the African 
Studies Center at the University of Pennsyl vania, It was at the same time that he 
completed the work on “Native African Tongues,” a complete listing of names and 
pronunciation of African languages. 
Nkrumah’s desire was to make the Institute of African Studies an independent 
institution or “a university within the univers ity;” hence, his support for the immediate 
appointment of twenty-eight research fellows. Nkrumah “made it semi-autonomous with 
its own subvention and had the freedom to its own structure. Instead of departments, the 
Institute created sections for social studies, linguistics, performing arts, religion, history, 
literature; and that was how the Institute t ook off,” Nketia summed up, in our interview 
on December 26, 1996. 
In his “The African Genius” speech, Nkru mah defined the Institute of African 
Studies’s mission as recaptu ring and invigorati ng Africa’s classical traditions in 
philosophy, history, religion and the arts to bear on post-independence Africa. Casely-
Hayford before him had articulated a similar mission of an African university on African 
soil. He said: 
I would find in such university a Chair for history; and the kind of history 
that I would teach would be  universal history with particular reference to 
the part Ethiopia [i.e. Africa] has play ed in the affairs of the world. I 
would stress upon the fact that while Ramsses II was dedicating temples 
to God of gods and secondly to his own glory, the God of the Hebrews 
had not yet appeared unto Moses in the burning bush; that Africa was the 
cradle of the world systems and philosophies, and the nursing mother of 
its religions. In short, that Africa has nothing to be ashamed of its place 
among the nations of the earth. (Anyidoho, 1992:5–6) 
Asante echoes Casely-Hayford’s vision when he writes that the foundations of all 
speculation in religion, art, science, ethics , moral customs, and aesthetics are derived 
from systems of knowledge found in classical Egypt. It is this African foundation, rather 
than the Greeks, which made a lasting impact on the Western world (Asante, 1990:47), 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     154


--- PAGE 171 ---
Therefore, “classical references are nece ssary as baseline frames for discussing the 
development of African cultural phenomena” (Ibid: 12).  
Writing in The Black African Theater and its Social Functions, Traoré (1972:17) states 
that there are myths of the gods and “all the elements necessary for the birth of African 
theater, in much the same way that the Greek theater was born out of the cult of 
Dionysus, and European theater from the Christian mysteries.” Thus, “if we consider that 
theater finds its materials mainly from the folklore,” namely “an aggregate of myths, 
legends, tradition, stories, then we can say that a specific African theater has existed since 
the beginning of African civilization” (Ibid: 7). 
Kennedy (1973:54) also finds that theater “flourished with all of its ritual regalia and 
dramatic elements in classical Ghana; the splendor and pride of the empire was evident 
through its music, drama and ceremonial spectacles in the empire.” He further notes that 
classical Malian empire was also noted for its ceremonial splendor and spectacle in ritual 
drama and theater (Ibid: 2). Citing Robert Corney’s accounts by French travelers, 
missionaries and colonialists, Beik summarizes  forms of African theater in the savanna 
region of West Africa as dance including, representational ceremonies, pantomime, 
praise singing, “epics by griots, games, storytelling puppetry, “buffoons,” and Mandingo 
theatre in Mali. The Mandingo theater in Mali, she adds, embodied “stories enacted by 
male actors and musical accompaniment by an orchestra and a choir of women” (1987:9). 
Based on Labouret and Mousa Travele’s cita tion of Ibn Batoutah ’s account, we find a 
great deal of evidence showing “Mandingo civilization which shone brightly in days gone 
by;” and that “one s hould not be surprised to see unique  social institutions and artistic 
achievements worthy of study in the area which witnessed its glory” (Traore, 1972:7). 
The artistic achievements in Mali, the account goes on, find their main expression in 
an abundant orature comprising my ths, legends, folktales, short pieces in prose or verse, 
rhymed or free, and finally satires. Batoutah’s exposé further states: 
There is no mere puppet show or exhi bition of conjurer magicians and 
animal’s charmers, as is found in certain parts of Africa, but of real with a 
perfect sense of plot and unity, aiming through its actors, to develop a 
given theme. On these grounds it can be affirmed that a Malian theatre 
really exists. (Ibid: 7) 
As further evidence of theater tradition in pr e-colonial Africa, Traoré cites Delafosse’s 
story as follows: 
Once more we were studying a work dedicated to the dramatic adventures 
of the Fulbe Hore, Samba Guiladio Diégui, Equibea when [sic] the 
administrator, expressed some doubts as to the existence of anything 
pertaining to theatre art among Black Africans. The interpreter, Mousa 
Travele, who was present during the conversation, affirmed that this art 
was indeed practiced in Mali, and in support of this, he showed the 
administrator the scenario of a come dy which he had seen performed in 
his country. On 2 November 1915, he sent me a copy of the scenario. 
(Ibid: 8) 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     155


--- PAGE 172 ---
In addition, traces of theater in manuscrip ts including the “quadicas” verses written in 
Fulbe, Hausa, Songhai, in Arabic script and metre” found “in Futa Toro, and the Futa 
Jallon in Massina and in Nigeria, preceded colonialism (Ibid: 12). Puppet theater of a 
high degree of originality was popular among the Somonos in Niger, Senegal and the 
Akan type in Awa in Southern Nigeria (Ibid: 16–17). 
Above all is the classical Egyptian drama and theater, from which the Greek’s got 
their theater in honor of Dionysius. Herodotus’ Histories affirms that Western theater 
resulted from Greece’s contact with Egypt. Writing on “Ritual Mode,” Zaria Ife cites 
Badge’s description of Osirian drama in the following words: 
The Mysteries of Osiris and Isis were  a series of Miracle Plays in which 
all the events of life, death, mummification, resurrection, and 
enthronement of Osiris as king of the Order World and God of the dead 
were produced mimically. At Abydos all these mysteries were directed by 
a chief priest who was, of course a learned man, and he was assisted by a 
number of priests of various lower grades. In some of the acts the public 
were allowed to take part, and thus the performance of the Osiris cycle of 
the Mysteries tended to the edification of all classes. (1993:41) 
It is this centrality of the supernaturals in drama and theat er in Greece that affirms its 
Egyptian ancestry. Herodotus, in his Book II, for instance, states that “the Egyptian first 
brought into use the names of the twelve gods, which the Greeks took over from them, 
and were the first to assign alters and im ages and temples to the gods, and to carve 
figures in stone” (1954:103). He also points out that “the names of nearly all the Gods 
[Heracles included] came to Greece from Egypt” (Ibid: 122). In  the city of Meroe in 
Ethiopia, for instance, “the inhabitants worship Zeus and Dionysus alone of the gods” 
(Ibid: 113). Furthermore, it was Melamphus, the son of Amytheon, who “introduced the 
name Dionysus into Greece,” together with fe stival, the phallic procession and sacrifice 
in his honor (Ibid: 122). 
Like religion and philosophy, the models and history of African drama and theater had 
existed in classical Africa and in pre-coloni al African societies. And Nkrumah’s speech 
“The African Genius” gave a clear direction as to research in to the African past in order 
to develop Africa’s own models in drama and theater. His “vision was his ability to see 
things in a new light all the time,” Nketia concluded. 
THE NKETIA FACTOR 
Professor J.H.Kwabena Nketia became the direct or of the Institute of African Studies in 
October 1965. Graduating from Oxford Univer sity, he was the first person to be 
appointed by the university in 1952 as a Research Fellow in African Studies at the 
Department of Sociology. At the time, Pr ofessor K.A.Busia had proposed setting up a 
unit for African studies with special focus on archeology, history and sociology, but it 
was to no avail. In the midst of frustration, he asked for a research fellowship of which 
the university approved. It was out of these efforts by Busia that Nketia’s appointment as 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     156


--- PAGE 173 ---
a Research Fellow was made possible. His status  was the same as the rest of the teaching 
faculty. 
The scope of Nketia’s research covered the wider field in African studies with special 
reference to African music, dance and their related arts. He accomplished his research by 
tape recordings. His research culminated in the publication of his first book, Funeral 
Dirges of the Akan People,  published in 1955. This was followed by Drumming in Akan 
Gommunities, African Music in Ghana  and Folk Songs of Ghana . These publications 
preceded the establishment of the Institute of African Studies. 
Performing the role of deputy director, Nketia was consulted and kept abreast of every 
development, including copies of all letters that Hodgkin sent to Nkrumah. Because of 
Nketia’s scholarship, Hodgkin suggested that he creates a sec tion in the institute for the 
arts. This gave rise to the idea of creating a music program and its related arts in the 
institute, as well as the national dance company, as originally conceived by Nkrumah. It 
was also at the urging of Nana Kwabena Nketsia that Professor Nketia wrote to Nkrumah 
about their plans to set up a school of music and drama, which Nkrumah approved 
without hesitation. It was within this framework that the School of Music and Drama was 
established. Nketia assumed full admini strative and academic responsibilities of the 
School until he became the Director of the Ins titute in 1965. He remained the director of 
the School, the Ghana Dance Ensemble and the Institute of African Studies. 
THE OPOKU FACTOR 
Professor Mawere Opoku was a trained ar tist and an art teacher. Prior to the 
establishment of the dance program, Opoku was frequently brought from the Kumase 
Institute of Technology to do extension work  in drama and dance at the Institute. He 
hailed from the Mawere family in the Asante Kingdom; in this family, expertise in dance 
is extremely important. He grew up in an area where knowledge of the court was part of 
the training. That is why the Ghana Dance Ensemble was fed on traditional materials, 
Nketia explained. Opoku and Nketia used to  observe Spanish dance and other dances 
when they were students in England. The “idea was not to take those dances and 
substitute them for our traditional dances. It was to see how other people express 
themselves in their own dance forms, including the use of space,” Nketia recalled. 
Therefore, Opoku, Nketia continued, had long had the mission of restoring the African 
dances. He began this at the Asanteman Cultural Center in Kumase, where civil servants 
and teachers went after work to l earn Akan dances like Adowa and F ontonfrom. They 
mastered these dances so that they could pe rform them at funerals. In fact, an Arts 
Council’s document shows that the Asanteman Cultural Center had proposed establishing 
a school in the African arts (NAG/RG3/7/246). 
As indicated above, Opoku was part of the team responsible for the traditional African 
dance and music performances in connection with Ghana’s Independence Day 
anniversaries. It was due to the success of the annual Independence Day performances 
that “Nkrumah had the idea of having a national dance company,” Opoku told me. The 
problem that arose was whether or not the membership should reflect one ethnic or the 
national character. Mr. Philip Gbeho and Dr. Seth Cudjoe wanted the traditional 
performers to constitute each company. Bu t Opoku and Nketia opposed the idea; they 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     157


--- PAGE 174 ---
opted for young men and wome n from different ethnic groups  who had the aptitude for 
dancing so that they could be trained at the University of Ghana. Mawere Opoku, for 
instance, strongly opposed the idea of temporary ethnic dance companies, to “dismiss 
them and then bring in another group to perform for a while, as was the case of the 
Guinea Ballet,” he recalled. 
Opoku’s pioneering leadership in the national dance company also manifested itself in 
the location of the company. He convinced Nkrumah to situate the training and the 
administration of the company in an academic environment. “In order to have that, it has 
to be attached to a university or a place of  higher learning,” he e xplained to Nkrumah. 
“Why?” Nkrumah asked. “Kwame, it is very simple. In the traditional African 
educational system, dance is a must for the highly educated person; he must be a good 
dancer. In songs and movements, the social etiquette, that is where you see these things,” 
Opoku further explained in our interview on January 6, 1997. “You’re right,” he quoted 
Nkrumah. According to Opoku, Nkrumah wanted the company to be situated in Kumase, 
because of its centrality to the country. On ce more, Opoku’s idea prevailed after raising 
logistical concerns such as state events, where the dance company would be needed to 
perform. 
The idea of an academic program in dance, Nketia disclosed, came after Nkrumah had 
requested the company to travel to Malawi in connection with its independence. With 
Opoku’s background, it was possible to start a certificate course for some of the 
promising members of the dance company. In October 1964, Nketia and Opoku 
developed a curriculum for dance as a valid  academic discipline for the academic board. 
A Certificate in Dance preceded  a three-year diploma, with  special minor thesis in 
African music and dance. The first successf ul candidates for the Certificate course 
included Ampofo Duodu, William Adinku, He len Mensah, Lily Acquah-Harrison, 
Godfrey Odokwei Sackeyfio a nd Victor Klotey. In  October, 1965, they proceeded to 
pursue the Diploma Course in Dance (Adinku, 1994:7–8). 
Mawere Opoku’s approach to the selection of dances from different ethnicities was “to 
unify the country” through the “dance forms, thereby underscoring Nkrumah’s drive for a 
unified nation and a unitary government. Besides his background in Asante dances, he 
was introduced to other traditional dances at Achimota College, “where ethnic dances 
were encouraged, and Nkrumah was also a student there at the time,” Opoku disclosed. 
This was one of the reasons why the dance section of the School of Music and Drama 
was also fed on traditional dance forms. 
THE SUTHERLAND FACTOR 
Early in nineteen fifties, Efua Sutherland visited and spoke to Nketia and Busia at the 
Department of Sociology, as well as to J.B.Danquah and Michael Dei-Anang about the 
promotion of African writings and theater. She found an outlet in the New Year’s School 
where she read her poems. It was at this time that Molson of the Ministry of Information 
published her collection of poems, which eventually led to the birth of the Ghana Society 
of Writers. It was also while she joined the research team at the Institute of African 
Studies that she helped found the Okyeame in 1963 as a literary magazine, Nketia 
explicated. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     158


--- PAGE 175 ---
Efua Sutherland “came from a different background and had some knowledge about 
theater in the western form, yet she had a mission to produce African drama,” Nketia 
indicated. Like the Afrocentric scholars—Barbara and Carlton Molette—Sutherland saw 
the need to develop concepts that best suit African worldview, and avoid the confusion as 
to what is realism, traged y, dark comedy, melodrama, dance-drama, surrealism and 
naturalism. She deftly enunciated the confusions that are created by imposing these 
Eurocentric concepts upon African dramatic expressions, describing them as clash of 
concepts which results from “…an insistence on using foreign terminology to describe 
African dramatic experiences. She explicated: 
Each African language has precise and indigenous terms for its dramatic 
concepts and conventions. Outside of a small sprinkling of people, the 
words drama, theatre, stage, audi ence etc. are foreign words and 
incompatible in Africa. (Molette, 1986:73) 
These statements were precisely what Nkrumah meant when he urged the Institute to 
carry out its intellectual and artistic work in African-centered ways. This also explains 
why Sutherland objected to the Eurocentric  content of children’s books. Hence, she 
decided to develop a body of dramatic litera ture for both children and the general public 
(July: 74–75). She had founded the Ghana Experimental Theater in 1958 alongside the 
Ghana Society of Writers. Also, she was very  instrumental in the construction of the 
Ghana Drama Studio with the help of the government and started producing African 
drama. While serving as Senior Research Associate at the Institute of African Studies she 
helped create the Atwia Kodzidan (Theater) in the Central Region for its residents. 
As part of the creation of the School of Music and Drama, Sutherland engaged herself 
in research on African drama. Her main intere st was in applied research, Nketia pointed 
out. Materials resulting from her research had to be translated into creative productions. 
Secondly, she had some notions “about how drama courses should be taught, but she was 
more interested in the production aspect,” Nketia clarified. 
Additionally, she requested people in Greater  Accra to bring their children to the 
Institute where she taught them songs. It was with these children that she made the song 
“Opete Opete” popular, Nketia recalled. 
Efua Sutherland, Anyidoho told me, experimented with what she called the “text 
production.” This was a production put together at the University of Ghana, which was 
then taken outside the campus to Aburi to be tested on the local people for its 
effectiveness. Because it was done in Twi, “the audience identified with” it “as coming 
from their own traditions;” they represented all the cross sections “of the community, 
including those with Western education as well as those with traditional education in the 
arts. The audience served as the jury,” Anyidoho further explained. 
In the training of actors in the school, Suth erland (195:2) found that they were “faced 
with a serious frustration of their talents when they performed in English.” To this end, 
she saw the need to “build up their capacity to turn that language into a more natural 
vehicle.” But noting that the use of Akan language had led to the widespread popularity 
and patronage of the Concert Party in the country, Sutherland declared in her The Second 
Phase: A Review of the National Theater Movement,  that “the time is Ripe …for a bold 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     159


--- PAGE 176 ---
launching of new programmes in Theatre in Akan or another major Ghanaian language” 
(Ibid: 14). 
Sutherland was one of the original members of the Arts Council of Gold Coast. She is 
popularly acclaimed the mother of the Nationa l Theater Movement of Ghana. In 1965, 
she wrote The Second Phase, a critical review of the Nati onal Theater Movement for the 
benefit of the performing arts institutions, and other establishments like the Ghana Film 
Corporation, Ghana Broadcasting and Television, and the Ministry of Education. 
THE DE GRAFT FACTOR 
Jeo de Graft was head of the English department at Mfantsipim Secondary School from 
1955 to 1960. During this period, he developed a drama course and directed the school’s 
Drama Laboratory (Agovi, 1992:134). As indicated in Chapter Six, he was one of the 
original members of the Arts Council of Go ld Coast. In 1960, he  took another teaching 
position in the English department at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology in Kumase. It was around this time that Efua Sutherland arranged for him to 
travel to Accra to direct plays at the Ghana Drama Studio; he was appointed to the 
Institute of African Studies a year later. With his background, “we started thinking about 
how we could make drama a formal course.”  Eventually, the Certificate course was 
developed at the Drama Studio, and was eventu ally made “an official university course,” 
Nketia explained. 
But while Nketia and Sutherland were search ing for an African drama, de Graft “was 
more interested in play analysis and inte rpretation,” Nketia said. It became a dominant 
thing for him, which was based on Western a pparatus,” Nketia added. Because he “was 
not a traditional person,” his “concept of African plays,” Nketia indicated, “was having a 
modern set-up.” He disliked “all those traditional things in his plays.” This was 
manifested in his first play, “Sons and Daughters,” to which Nketia referred to as a 
“drawing room play.” The play is “set up like a drawing room,” with a “living 
room…contemporary furniture, radiogram with a built-in record player, radio and sound 
system.” In this case, “the players come to the stage with a tennis racket,” as though they 
are in England. The entire “scenes and acti ons take place in the living room like in 
Western plays; whereas in African life many things happen outdoors,” Nketia pointed 
out. His second play, “Through a Film Darkly’“ followed the same drawing room pattern, 
Nketia indicated. Unfortunately, this draw ing room has become a legacy. The drama 
section of the School of Performing Arts, and the Ghana Broadcasting television theater 
have followed the model, Nketia regretted. 
Agovi (Ibid: 135) affirms this when he writes that de Graft’s “fondness for 
Shakespeare” became “a significant factor in his career.” Accordingly, he was “unmoved 
in his love for Shakespeare’s plays, since he was still active in producing and acting in 
plays of the English classics, and School Certificate plays.” This, Agovi further points 
out, “prevented him from a total allegiance to  the African theater;” hence, he was not 
affected by the strong nationalist aspiration of the National Theater Movement. 
Though de Graft, in late 1960s, started developing sympathy for the aspirations of 
cultural nationalism, “he did so with caution and circumspection,” (Ibid: 135). But, while 
his work appeared to uphold “the aspirations of the National Theater Movement,” Agovi 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     160


--- PAGE 177 ---
(Ibid: 138) notes, his “personal convictions a nd ideas were completely at odds with the 
ideology of the movement.” Cited by Agovi, de Graft explained his philosophy of life as 
follows: 
Modern dramatists are fundamentally individuals with a fierce pride in 
their individual effort, their unique ideas, their artistic integrity, and their 
achievement…. One must be able to come to terms with human life from 
one’s own distinctive perception of it. To me, the important thing is not 
coming in solidly on the side of any particular movement. (Ibid: 136 and 
138) 
Certainly, this view is antithesis to the African collective consciousness and egalitarian 
mode of life that underscored the thrust of Nkrumah’s cultural policy, specifically the 
role of the School of Music and Drama in the National Theater Movement. 
THE SCHOOL OF MUSIC AND DRAMA 
There were two issues in the conception of the School of Music and Drama. First, 
Nkrumah wanted to recognize the pioneering work of Dr. Ephriam Amu, “long before the 
Institute of African Studies came into being.” He called Amu and said: “I would like you 
to form a committee to plan fo r an Academy of African Musi c,” Nketia recalled. Nketia 
was a member of the committee that was se t up. The committee met several times and 
sent its reports to the Flagstaff House. Had the proposal met with the vision of Nkrumah, 
he would have set up the first Academy of African Music. But Amu’s ideas were too 
narrow for Nkrumah. According to Nketia , Amu’s idea was to situate “the academy 
somewhere in the Akuapem ar ea” instead of Accra, Nketia  remembered. At the time, 
Amu was teaching at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology.  
The other issue concerns the initiatives by the Arts Council of Ghana. On November 
27, 1961, the Executive Secretary of Arts Council, Mr. Carpenter, invited Nketia, Efua 
Sutherland and Kofi Antubam to meet with Nana Kobina Nketsia to discuss the 
possibilities of co-operation “between the Arts Council…and proposals for the 
establishment of a National Orchestr a and an academy of Music and Drama” 
(NAG/RG3/7/33:1b). In addition, Mr. Carpenter, in a memo of June 3, 1961, raised the 
issue of the formation of a national dance comp any, stating that “a start can be made as 
soon as budget allocation is known.” The memo  expressed concerns about the growing 
need for accommodation, classes and rehearsa ls in anticipation of the national dance 
company and the national orchestra. It also pointed to a request made to the Ministry of 
Education seeking a maintenance grant for boarding “and lodging at the university for the 
students” (NAG/RG3/7/33). In another letter, dated June 22, 1961, from Carpenter to the 
Ministry of Education, the Council arranged for two residential training courses to be 
held at the University College at Legon. One course was designed for stage lighting, 
stage management, and set design, while the other course was planned for choirmasters. 
The cost of boarding and lodging at Akuafo Hall for approximately twenty-two weeks’ 
duration totaled £G840 (Ibid: 2). 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     161


--- PAGE 178 ---
But Nkrumah’s vision of African Academy of School of Music and Drama did not 
come to fruition until Nketia and others within the University of Ghana started agitating 
for a drama program that would be separate from the English department. Within this 
framework “some of us thought we should have a School of Music and Drama. Nana Dr. 
Kwabena Nketsia was then the Interim Vice-Chancellor.” Thus, “Nana and I thought we 
could have the school. Nana came to me after we had managed to get the Academic 
Board to accept the possibility of an African drama course being set up in the Institute of 
African Studies,” Nketia recalled. Within the arts section, a two-year diploma course in 
African music for people with impressive acad emic training in Western music, had been 
created. The first recruits included Asiama, Annin and Fiagbedzi. The drama and dance 
sections came later. 
Prior to this, the English department had already proposed establishing a drama 
program that was to be independent of the E nglish department. It was to continue with 
the Shakespeare tradition; “but, we in the institute,” Nketia explained, argued for an 
African drama. The idea of recognizing African drama already existing in African society 
was a big problem within the academic community. Research on African drama to satisfy 
the academic board was not available at the time. But Nketia wrote a compelling 
curriculum on drama and theater studies course and presented it to the academic board, It 
had to justify African drama as a valid di scipline, thereby making it possible for the 
proposed drama program for the English department to be a part of the school, On the 
basis of that argument, “the academic board  agreed to create a School of Music and 
Drama with an African component.” Subsequently, “I wrote to Nkrumah saying that we 
are setting up a School of Music and Drama, and he could be the patron. Without delay, 
the letter came back “approved” with Nkrumah’s signature, Nketia proudly recalled. 
Consequently, Nkrumah directed Nketia “to Oko and see what kind of funds could be 
made available; it was not easy,” Nketia agai n recalled. “It was while we were working 
on it that Nana Nketsia was withdrawn from the university as the Interim Vice-
Chancellor and was given another position as the director of the new Institute of Arts and 
Culture,” he disclosed. Through the Institute  of Arts and Culture under Nana Nketsia a 
subvention was devised by the government a nd was made available for the development 
of the School. Therefore, it was through the subvention, and not the initiative of the 
Institute of Arts and Culture that the School came under the former. 
The School of Music and Drama was opened in October 1962 at the University of 
Ghana with three objectives, contained in the Institute of African Studies’ “Regulation 
and Syllabuses for Non-Degree Courses.” First,  it was “intended to serve as school for 
University courses in Music, Dance and Drama.” Second, it was to serve “as a place 
where the results of research in to the arts of Africa undertaken  in the Institute of African 
Studies can be applied, both in regular courses and in special training for the Institute of 
Arts and Culture.” Third, it was to serve as a focus within the University for the 
performing arts. 
Nonetheless, the Institute of Arts and Culture viewed the establishment of the Institute 
of African Studies and School of Music and Drama at the University of Ghana as 
strengthening its provisions. The provisions included the study of music, dance and 
drama in the School with an enrollment of eighty-five stude nts, and the Institute of 
African Studies’ Master of Arts degree in  African Music, Drama and Literature 
(NAG/RG3/733:58). 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     162


--- PAGE 179 ---
In Nketia’s view, the mission of the School of Music and Drama, like the Ghana 
Dance Ensemble, was to influence the direction of the National Theater Movement 
through its training programs. It meant that the School needed to create models for 
theaters in every village and town in order to give the highest expression of African 
personality. And through his speech, “The A frican Genius,” Nkrumah expected the 
School to provide the movement with intellectual, artistic and technical leadership, 
Nketia stated. 
At the time Nkrumah inaugurated the Institute with his speech, “The African Genius,” 
the Institute had already been set up. In part, the speech refl ected the kind of policy that 
had been worked out, and which was in line with the thinking of the International 
Commission members. It was also in line with what Nkrumah envisaged as the role of 
African studies in the university. But there was no model for what Nkrumah envisaged, 
Nketia explained. This, in Nketia’s view, explains the shortcomings of the School of 
Music and Drama. The aftermath of colonialism, he argued, impeded the process of 
translating the people’s experiences into something new. It was not easy for the Institute 
as well as the School to disengage itself totally from everything associated with 
colonialism, he pointed out. 
One must also realize that Nkrumah was operating in an environment in which the 
importance of African culture, especially the place of African music, dance and drama in 
the academy was beginning to be acknowledged by some intellectuals in the country, 
Nketia pointed out. But the question is, did not most intellectuals who had studied 
Shakespearean plays in colleges, and probably listened to Beethoven and Bach’s 
compositions on Radio Ghana around ten o’clock in the evenings, oppose the 
establishment of the School? Did they not resist the thought of African materials in the 
School’s curriculum, which they and their students could not conceive as valid discipline 
in the academy? As Ashby (1964:61) indicates, some of the intellectuals, especially the 
British trained, “were allergic to the proposal s for incorporating African studies into the 
curriculum. They said to disarm us intellectually was to substitute Arab and African 
languages for classics or to regard oral traditions as legitimate materials for scholarship.” 
CONCLUSION 
July (1978:165) writes that “what is far less clear is that there was no intelligence at 
work, that Nkrumah was hopelessly muddled as to objective and the means to achieve it,” 
during his administration. “That the shortfall was not more in the execution than the 
conception,” he continues. “Ghana,” he added, “may have collapsed under the weight of 
inexperience and incompetence.” Perhaps, it would have been helpful to the course of 
African liberation had July directed these st atements at the British colonial government 
that ruthlessly and unintelligently submerged the African personality and viewed 
Africans as ahistorical people. Second, it is clear from the above that there were 
systematic cultural policies in the attempt to combat the atrocities of colonialism in 
Ghana. 
Even if Nkrumah’s cultural policy between 1960 and 1966 was unable to Africanize 
the content of the curricula of the school system at the time, his educational policies gave 
opportunities to millions of children, including this author to excel in the field of 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     163


--- PAGE 180 ---
education. For instance, based on my official duty as a researcher in 1971, I discovered 
that the thirty-nine (39) engineers, who were managing the Akosombo hydroelectric 
plant, were trained at the Kwame University of Science and Technology. In fact, 
Nkrumah’s projects and programs, or policies I uncovered during my research fot this 
book, were based on committees’ reports compos ed of experts. These unfair statements, 
therefore constitute grave insults to the integrity of the many respectable and dignified 
Ghanaians and Africans in the Diaspora, who played key roles in the formulation and 
implementation of Nkruinah’s cultural and socio-economic policies. They include: 
Honorable Kojo Botsio, Dr. Frimpong Ansah, Nana Ayirebe Ackwah, Professor J.H. 
Nketia, Nana Dr. Kwabena Nketsia, Madam Efua Sutherland, Dr. Oku Ampofo, Phillip 
Gbeho, Professor William Abraham, Dr. Leticia Obeng, Justice Akua Ayisi Asabea, Dr. 
M.N.Tetteh, George Padmore, Rev. Dr. J.A. Stphens, Dr. Robert Lee, Honorable 
J.H.Mensah and Dr. W.E.B.Du Bois. 
The establishment of the Institute of African Studies at the University of Ghana was 
the first major indication of intellectual deco lonization process in Ghana. It was also a 
major contribution to the works of the unsung philosophers and keepers of African oral 
traditions like storytellers, musicians, dancers, griots/Jele and akyeame. They include: Dr. 
Kwegyr Aggrey, Ato Ahuma, Dr. J.B. Danquah, Bankole Awoonor-Williams, Okyeame 
Boafo Akufo, Dr. Seth Cudjoe, John Mensah Sarbah, Dr. Oku Ampofo, Madam Efua 
Sutherland, Dr. Ephraim Amu, Professor A.Mawere Opoku and Professor J.C.de Graft, 
all of Ghana. 
According to Nketia, an African-centered perspective “was our goal, discovering 
Africa.” But in the School of Music and Dr ama, “we had problems because performing 
arts institutions existing in Europe did not  only become the models; they became the 
choice.” It was therefore not surprising that European derived theories of drama and texts 
came to serve as universal framework in the play analysis and interpretation courses. 
With the exception of a few music stude nts like Moses Kena, Kojo Brew, Kwasi 
Aduonum, Asante Darkwa and William Komla Amoako, most of the music students were 
more interested in the practice of church hymns, and compositions by Mozart, Beethoven 
and Bach than African-centered compositions by Amu and Nketia. In fact, Amoako and 
Aduonum were the only music students found practicing African percussion instruments. 
But, the lapses in the School’s training program in the context of the National Theater 
Movement as conceived by Nkrumah, primarily resulted from the original conception of 
the university, and the legacy of its first principal, David Balme. It was he who originally 
conceived of the University College as a universal center of higher learning enshrined 
with the social function of a university in medieval Europe. Joe de Graft’s indifference 
towards African drama manifested this legacy. 
However, the shortcomings of the School of Music and Drama, by no means, 
invalidate the virility of Kwame Nkrumah’s cultural policy. The repertoire of the Ghana 
Dance Ensemble and its performances, under the great and Africa’s f irst Artistic Director 
of Dance Theater, Professor Mawere Opoku marked the highest expression of African 
personality that Nkrumah envisioned. The performances of the At enteben Ensemble, 
under the visionary and Africa’s first music scholar, Emeritus Professor J.H.Nketia, also 
marked the highest accomplishment at the time. Both Ensembles performed often 
together. Furthermore, Efua Southland’s experimental, dramatic productions in the Twi 
language, as well as her Afrocentric story- telling theater at Atwia were unprecedented. 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     164


--- PAGE 181 ---
They were great models for the country. Madam Efua Sutherland, undoubtedly, was the 
Mother of the National Theater Movement. 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy also restored the value of African music, dance and drama 
as valid academic disciplines. In fact, the establishment of the School of Music and 
Drama as a unit in the Institute of African Studies at the University of Ghana was a major 
breakthrough. It defied the notion of a university education among some African 
intellectuals as exclusive of the performing arts. The Institute and School were viewed as 
“bastards” and “dondology” on the university  campus as Awoonor recalled. But the 
revolutionary stands of Nana Dr. Kwabena Nketsia, Professor J.H Nketia and Dr. Kwame 
Nkrumah triumphed in making the university one of the leading intellectual and cultural 
centers in the world. I conclude this chapter with the words of Professor Mawere Opoku, 
which best affirms the fulcrum of Nkrumah’s culture of politics. He wrote: 
For a deeper insights to African culture, our labour, material culture, 
aspiration, history, social and economic conditions, religious and 
economic conditions, moments of festiv ity and sadness, life, soul and the 
realities, perceived, conceived or felt, that make us the people, are 
revealed to the serious seeker in our dance. (1967:9) 
Nkrumah’s cultural policy     165


--- PAGE 182 ---
Chapter Eight  
Conclusion 
Today, Ghana, like many other African countries, is beset with complex social, economic 
and political problems. During the Kwame Nkrumah’s era, the magnitude of control of 
the national economy and political decisions, si nce February 24, 1996, by international 
finance capital was not permitted. Since his era, no African leader has had his vision, in 
terms of the struggle against neo-colonialism, cultural basis of socio-economic and 
political transformation, political unification of Africa, and the restoration of African 
personality through the theater. 
Yet, when this frightful situation causes some Ghanaians to reminiscence the socio-
economic advancement and the Pan-African cultural climate in Nkrumah’s Ghana, the 
statement often heard is that “the man has died, and we should forget about his ideas.” 
The irony is that these same people tend to argue for the 1776 Adam Smith’s theory of 
“free market” laisserfaire theories. His seminal book, Wealth of Nations  published in 
1799 with its emphasis on eliminating geographical constraints for economic growth, 
became the driving force behind the coloniza tion of African, and eventual submergence 
of the cultural personality of the African. 
The categories of socio-political, education and theater constitute the ontological 
dimensions of Nkrumah’s politico-cultural t hought and policies. As discussed in the 
anterior chapters, Nkrumah had a holistic po litico-cultural thought that was reflected in 
many of his speeches and major works. Unlike Eurocentric sc holarship, Nkrumah’s 
politico-cultural thought underscored his soci al, political, economic and Pan-African 
agenda. Any attempt to isolate them will, therefore, render Nkrumah’s ideas and works 
incomprehensible. 
As a nationalist leader, Nkrumah possessed a profound idea of the value of culture and 
the intersection of culture and politics in the anti-colonial struggle in Ghana. The primary 
thrust of culture, he understood, is to abo lish oppressive conditions and establish a better 
relation with nature, society and people. He viewed his existence as a product of history, 
thereby keeping the flame of his predece ssors’ proactive response to European 
colonialism. The nationalist movement, the Convention People’s Party he led, came to 
serve as the organized expression of the people’s culture. Thus, his party’s resistance to 
colonialism was an act of culture, since it proceeded from the knowledge of African 
personality and all the values there attached. 
Following Ghana’s national independence, Nkrumah saw an urgent need for the 
resurgence of the intrinsic values in African culture in the context of socio-economic 
liberation of Africa from the Western capitalist mold. The socio-political or philosophical 
aspect of his cultural thought resulted from this cultural resurgence. In Consciencism, 
Nkrumah took cognizance of the differences between the concept of humanity in 
traditional Africa and what he calls Euro-Christian dogma. Primarily, the human being in


--- PAGE 183 ---
traditional Africa, he contends, is regarded as a spiritual being endowed, not with original 
sin as in Christian doctrine, but with a certain inward dignity, integrity and value. 
Nkrumah’s theoretical argument for the construction of scientific socialism based on 
the original value of humanity, communalistic social relations of production in pre-
colonial Africa is thus a natural progression. For, it was this communal and social relation 
of production in traditional Africa that made it impossible for antagonistic classes of a 
Marxian kind to arise. Therefore, the thrust of his Philosophical Consciencism is clearly 
not a Marxist critique of colonialism as concluded by some critics. Rather, his conceptual 
framework concerning scientific socialism is largely informed by the ethical and 
humanist values in traditional Africa, with Marxist social analysis as enrichment. 
Secondly, it also draws from Africa’s experience with Europe, in terms of the impact of 
capitalist exploitation of the Africa as well as Europe’s anti-African personality warfare. 
Philosophical Consciencism thus resulted from centuries of struggles against alien 
cultural and ethical values which Nkrumah found to be an antithesis to those of 
traditional Africa. First, the principles, which inform capitalism, are in conflict with the 
humanist values and egalitarianism of the tr aditional African society. Second, this new 
social thought, Nkrumah maintains, is rooted  in the high ideals underlying the traditional 
African society, in terms of interdependen ce, collective responsibility and concern for all 
as opposed to individual and sectional interest. Third, its intellectual perspective finds its 
weapon in the environment and living conditi ons of the African people. Fourth, the 
Western and Islamic segments must be acco mmodated only as experiences of Africa and 
not an African experience. Therefore, Philosophical Consciencism opens up all the 
questions of ethical basis of society, of the relevance of its inherited institutions and of 
the cultural basis of the nation-states. Above all, it courageously tackled the problem of 
ideologies that underscored the differing nati onalist movements on the continent. Lastly, 
it marks the first major attempt at formulating scientific socialism based on Africa’s 
experience with Europe. 
Some critics have argued that Nkrumah’s socio-political thought failed to offer a 
convincing scientific analysis of the social structure and economic foundations for a 
united Africa. In doing so, they fail to offer any alternative model to Nkrumah’s 
insistence on placing Africa’s humanist and ethical values, and egalitarian social relations 
at the center of post-independence social analysis. In fact, Nkrumah’s socio-political and 
cultural panorama fit well with the new African national cultural agenda that Fanon, 
Toure and Cabral so well articulated. Culture, they argued, constitutes an accumulation of 
immaterial and philosophical tool for liberation, mastering of nature and building a better 
society. Nkrumah’s position was that the restitution of African humanist principle of 
society lies in socialism. Thus, under socialism, the study and master of nature has a 
humanist impulse directed not toward profiteering, but the affording of ever-increasing 
satisfaction for the material and spiritual needs of the greater number of the African 
people (Nkrumah, 1970a:76). 
That there was class struggle in Africa after independence is manifested in the attitude 
of the African elites, some paramount “chie fs,” the top echelons of the civil service 
administration, armed forces, police services, trading and mining firms, merchants, 
lawyers and the intelligentsia. The interest of this indigenous bourgeoisie lay in the 
preservation of the capitalist social and economic structures, which they enjoyed during 
colonialism; hence, they found Nkrumah’s politico-cultural philosophy and policies very 
Conclusion     167


--- PAGE 184 ---
repugnant. Though they were numer ically small, and lacked the financial and political 
strength, their close tie-up with the finance capital and business interest in the highly 
industrialized countries gave them an illusi on of being economically  strong. Many of 
these were employed by foreign firms and thus had a stake in the continuance of the 
economic exploitation of Africa. 
As the antecedent discussions show, Nkru mah’s socio-political and cultural thoughts 
are inseparable. The core values in African culture underscore the thrust of his socio-
political philosophy, while the la tter was inextricably linked w ith his cultural agenda in 
Ghana. Furthermore, any discourse on the historical aspects of his politico-cultural 
thought should be understood in the context of his Pan-African political project. 
For Nkrumah, the mere attainment of nati onal independence could not ensure cultural 
emancipation, unless it is rooted in Africa’ s historical and cultural experience with 
Europe. His politico-cultural thought negates the subordinate status to which the African 
phenomena had been reduced by the aggressive ethnocentric and hegemonic ideology of 
Europe. Central to this aspect of his politic o-cultural thought is his conceptualization of 
African personality. He took cognizance of the im pact of Eurocentric denial of African 
humanity on the African. Nkrumah decried as a malicious myth the Eurocentric 
scholarship that had distorted and omitted Africa from world history. Of particular 
concern is Hegel’s denial of African humanity in his Philosophy of History, which, in the 
words of Ngugi (1986:31), “gives historical , philosophical and rational legitimacy to 
every conceivable European racist myth about Africa.” 
This brings us to the institutional aspect  of his politico-cultural thought, which gives 
scope to intellectual strategy for social and economic development. Combined with his 
social philosophy, the instituti onal aspect of Nkrumah’s cultural thought stimulated and 
created intellectual atmosphere for the establishment of the Arts Council of Ghana and 
Institute of Arts and Culture in  the society. Second, it also le d to the establishment of the 
Institute of African Studies and its School of Music and Drama at the University of 
Ghana in 1962. As the study has shown, his speech, “The African Genius,” offered a new 
aggressive and an African-centered approach to intellectual and artistic pursuits. His 
emphasis on the re-interpretation and new assessment of Africa’s past glories and 
achievements was meant to inspire the new generation of Africa to make strides in all 
human endeavors. Also, the rescue and rec onstruction of African past and achievements 
was to serve as a reminder of the potency of  African agency. Deifying Blyden’s African 
personality concept with a political will, Nkrumah pushed forward its restoration as a 
driving force in the African cultural rena scence as well as a force with which the 
international community must reckon. The effective forum for this task, in his vision, was 
the theater. 
The third aspect of Nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought is th e relevancy of theater in 
the rekindling of African humanist values and resurrection of African personality. The 
rebirth of African culture, for him, meant the abrogation of the European association of 
African arts with primitivism, paganism and barbarism. He stressed not only the 
importance of African arts in post-independence Africa, but also viewed them as offering 
the key to understanding African institutions , values and the bond that unites African 
people. The fact that African culture and traditions survived the onslaught of European 
cultural nationalism, Nkrumah noted, meant that they possessed an in-born power.  
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     168


--- PAGE 185 ---
Hence, theater, from Nkrumah’s perspective, is an intellectual forum, artistic stimulus 
and a driving force behind the African cultural revolution. It was to this end that 
Nkrumah urged the School of Music and Drama, as the nucleus of the National Theater 
Movement, to develop new African-centered art forms that closely relate to the African 
traditions. His “The African Genius” speech offered clear principles for an African-
centered university education. 
The ontological aspect of Kwame Nkrumah’s anti-colonial struggle was new in the 
country, and perhaps in Africa. Ghana’s independence thus resulted from his African-
centered vision, Positive Action, articulation of national grievances, nationalist agenda 
and uncompromising demand for “Self-Government now.” Hitherto, past political 
activists in the Gold Coast had pursued the quest for freedom as a hobby. The UGCC, for 
instance, believed that the British were preparing them and their ally, the Provincial 
Council of Chiefs, for self-government. They also thought that through their gradual 
approach, the British would simply abandon th eir colonial ambition in the colony and 
hand over the country to them on a silver platter. This was a delusion, because 
colonialism, like the capture and enslavement of Africans in the Americas, was based on 
economic exploitation and the plundering of A frican human and natural resources for the 
benefit of Europe. The notion that the European colonists would end their colonial rule in 
Africa only when the Africans we re ready to rule themselves, was not only a myth, but it 
was also racist, bigotry and an insult to the humanity of African people. Hence, Nkrumah 
pointed out in his ‘The Motion of Destiny” that Africans were ruling themselves before 
the advent of European adventures in Africa. 
Through Ghana’s elections of 1951, 1954 and 1956, the people repeatedly expressed 
their wish for a unitary form of government and a united country under Nkrumah’s 
leadership; yet, the opposition parties refused to accept the people’s verdict, Having lost 
their case through the ballots, they resorted to acts of terrorism, intimidation, 
undemocratic methods and irrational argum ents to advance their parochial and 
ethnocentric objectives. As Nkrumah noted, “the Opposition sometimes criticized simply 
for the sake of causing disagreement” (1973b: 81). Prior to the 1956 election, different 
members of the Opposition, especially Dr . J.B.Danquah and Dr. K.A. Busia, had 
“associated themselves with the name Ghana and their short-lived parties had included 
this name in the titles,” yet they turned around to attack the name Ghana when Nkrumah 
formally proposed it, after their defeat in the 1956 election (Nkrumah, 1957:266).  
The Preventive Detention Act passed by the Parliament, and affirmed by the British 
Governor-General, to combat terrorism in the newly independence Ghana was a natural 
measure to maintain law and order, and for the consolidation of the authority of the CPP 
government. Alternative to this law would have been a civil war, since the NLM and NPP 
were bent on secessionism. The case of the armed rebellion by a faction of the Northern 
Ewes on the eve of Ghana’s independence is a case in point. If there had been civil wars, 
the enormous and unparalleled social, economic, industrial, the constructions of teaching 
hospitals and health centers would have b een impossible. The construction of several 
secondary schools and teacher training colleges, universities (including the current site of 
the University of Ghana’s campus) all with accommodation for the staff, faculty and 
students, roads, public corporations, cultural institutions and programs, the higher level of 
athleticism in the country, the Akosombo Hydro-Electric Plant and its Dam achieved by 
Nkrumah’s government, would have also gone into oblivion. Certainly, the liberation of 
Conclusion     169


--- PAGE 186 ---
the rest of Africa from colonial rule, settler regimes and African unity in the twentieth 
century, would have been unattainable. This is manifested in Jomo Kenyatta’s statement 
in London that Ghana’s independence ended colonialism in Africa. 
Nkrumah’s foreign policy (outside Afri ca), positive neutrality and non-alignment 
(West and East dichotomy) were centered on Africa’s interest. His policy on foreign 
investment was pursued in the context of Ghana’s development plan. Critical to his 
foreign policy were his theories of “World Without Bomb” and “Hands off Africa,” and 
his policy on Disarmament and World Peace. Bu t, because his African-centered theory 
and policy appeared to th reaten the capitalist objectiv es in Africa, Nkrumah’s 
government became the target of Western a ssault in the media, as well as politico-
economic destabilizati on campaign. His book, Neo-colonialism: The Last Stage of 
Imperialism outraged the US government. 
Nkrumah’s vision and campaign for a political union of Africa was to safeguard and 
pool the resources of African for the benefit of African people. However, due to 
selfishness and a sense of insecurity and inadequacy (without their colonial masters) on 
the part of some of the Africa leaders, their colonial mindset, and their manipulation by 
imperialist forces, Nkrumah’s proposals were rejected. If the failure to achieve a 
continental African government was due to Nkrumah’s pre-mature proposals, his 
offensive statements and capacity to excite envy and distrust, why did it take thirty six 
years for African leaders, th rough the initiative of Muammar Qa thafi of Libya, to return 
to his campaign? Though vindicated by the signing of the African Union government of 
2001 in South Africa, the document suffers from the lack of African-centered objectives 
put forth by Nkrumah in 1960s. 
Nkrumah’s African-centered proposals for an African union government were 
intended to seek African solutions to African needs. Manifestations of this were Ghana’s 
monetary and human resources to sister African countries like Guinea and Congo. 
Another manifestation was the training of African of freedom fighters on Ghana’s soil. 
The open arms of Ghana to the Africans in Diaspora as well as the frequent visits by 
some of them, was the first of its kind in a post-independence African country. Thanks to 
Nkrumah’s Pan-African vision, Dr. W.E.B.Du Bois’ soul continues to reign high from 
the African soil. 
Nkrumah’s politico-cultural policy also resulted from his vision of the National 
Theater Movement, as a powerful medium for restoring African personality. The levels of 
his cultural policies, namely non-statutory and statutory developments, discussed in the 
preceding chapters were unprecedented in the history of Ghana. As noted above, the 
former did not require the setting up of any structures and statutory enactment; it was 
thus less complicated and effective. 
The first level of Nkrumah’s cultural policies encompassed his adept use of African 
symbolism and aesthetic configurations that  he introduced into Ghana body politic, and 
which has since become a legacy in the country. His use of white handkerchief, horsetails 
and walking stick was in keeping with the divine role of the traditional rulers. They were 
also consistent with the authority of the traditional priestesses and priests. Like the Akan 
kings and queens, Nkrumah made very important pronouncements at dawn (known at the 
time as the Dawn Broadcast). He also introduced the state Okyeame and pouring of 
libation during public functions. National unity and the elevation of women into high 
offices, since colonialism were some of th e cherished African cultural values Nkrumah 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     170


--- PAGE 187 ---
re-introduced in Ghana. In keeping with divine kings and queens, Nkrumah established 
his own theater group, “Osagyefo Players,” and made it part of his presidency. 
The second level of Nkrumah’s cultural policies demonstrates a systematic 
institutional development intended to put hi s politico-cultural thought into practice. It 
illustrates in detail systematic cultural policies with the National Theater Movement as 
the guidepost. His vision was to have the statutory bodies resurrect and reconstruct the 
glorious African past, the traditional African cultural values and the restoration of 
African personality through theatrical presentations. 
The Arts Council’s regional offices emphasized the underlying unity of the country. In 
line with the National Theater Movement, they promoted. encouraged and supported 
artistic and other cultural activities in th eir respective regions. It held annual 
competitions, which culminated in the First National Festival of Music and Drama, 
initiated by the Ghana Broadcasting Corporation, in July 1961. 
The National Theater Advisory Committee set up by the government to construct a 
national Theater to accommodate the rapid pro liferation of performing arts groups in the 
country did not come to fruiti on. Meanwhile, Efua Sutherla nd, working through the Arts 
Council of Ghana, instrumented the construction of the Ghana Drama Studio. It was 
during the studios’ opening ceremony that Nkrumah took the opportunity to express his 
regret on the failure of the Arts Council of Ghana. Of particular concern was the 
Council’s inability to impact th e society with respect to his vision on the renewal of 
African past civilization and the African personality through the theater. 
The replacement of the Arts Council of Ghana by the Institute of Arts and Culture on 
October 1, 1962, through Nkrumah’s proposal, was to widen its scope and give it an 
effective direction. The institute encouraged, assisted and promoted research into the arts 
and culture of Ghana and Africa. It also initiated cultural programs for implementation by 
statutory bodies, and served as the clearinghouse for all cultural agreements between 
Ghana and other countries. The National Cultural Center in Kumase was among the many 
cultural programs that came under the umbrella of the Institute of Arts and culture. 
As discussed in Chapter Seven, the School of Music and Drama at the University of 
Ghana resulted from the restructuring of the university and the recommendations from 
the International Commission to establish the Institute of African Studies. In his capacity 
as a research fellow and the deputy director , Nketia developed the School of Music and 
Drama as the performing arts component of th e Institute, based on his previous research 
on African folklore and music at the Sociology Department. In addition to music, he 
cogently argued for the study of African drama with emphasis on theater studies to 
replace the proposed Eurocentric drama compone nt at the English department. The role 
of the school, as Nkrumah enunciated, was to develop manpower for the National Theater 
Movement through its academic instructions. Another critical function of the school was 
not only to create new forms of artistic expr ession through research into the traditional 
forms as models for the entire nation, but also  to recapture African genius and glorious 
past, ethical and human values to bear on the post-independence socio-economic 
transformation. 
Regrettably, the African ethical and humanist values as well as the egalitarianism that 
informed Nkrumah’s socio-economic policies have, since his ouster from office, have 
been replaced by Western ideology of individualism. The eventful outcome is the culture 
of “get rich quick,” which has become the dominant mode of life in today’s Ghana. The 
Conclusion     171


--- PAGE 188 ---
absence of African cultural values in national policies has thus led to several social vices. 
Unprecedented mass misery, high unemployment,  corroded health care for the people, 
and a sense of hopelessness have led to  armed robbery, under-age prostitution and 
narcotic drug abuse and trafficking, which were unknown in Nkrumah’s Ghana. 
According to Mr. Asamoah Mensah of the United Nations Drug Control Programme in 
1999, “Ghanaians and Nigerians drug trafficking continue to dominate the drug scene” 
(ghanaweb.com/NewsArc, 4/14/99). 
This tragic situation has arisen preci sely because successive governments after 
Nkrumah have viewed culture, social, econom ics, politics and education as separate 
entities. They have since “perceived Afri ca’s problems exclusively in the economic 
mold” (Agovi, 1989:6). For instance, Anyidoho noted that with the setting up of the 
cultural commission “one would have thought that Rawlings’ government was genuinely 
interested about culture, but his government and those before [and after] him have not 
been able to make available to culture fiscal and material resources as was the case of 
Nkrumah’s government.” The policies of the National Commission on Culture and the 
socio-economic policies of former Presid ent Rawlings and his successor President 
Kufour have become polar opposites. 
Absence of African cultural values in na tional policies has led to an unprecedented 
proliferation of Hollywood’s violent and sexual oriented films on public televisions. 
There is also an unprecedented proliferation of “born-again”  Christian churches with 
massive followers. These churches and some elected officials find the pouring of libation 
during public functions, especially in the presence of foreign dignitaries, embarrassing, 
and have called for its abrogation. 
In 1998, teachers in the public schools were telling parents to speak English to their 
wards at home. A case in point is Osabarima Nana Adusei Peasah, IV, the king of Akyem 
Tafo, who told this author in August 1998 of his displeasure when one of his children’s 
teachers urged him to speak English to his ch ildren in the palace. On April 10, 1999, one 
Mr. Michael Essandor was quoted as saying “that the frequent use of vernacular language 
at offices is not facilitating effective management.” Accordingly, he “slammed a ban on 
the use of” Twi “at all offices in the Adan si West district in the Asante region” 
(ghanaweb.com/newsArc, 4/10/99). What is  more, President Kufour’s government, on 
June 20, 2002, “signed an agreement with the French government on effective learning 
and teaching the French language in all first cycle institutions in the country” 
(ghanaweb.com/ newsArc, 6/20/2002) at the expense of Ghanaian languages. This policy 
was and still is out of sync with the objective as regards the establishment of Alliance 
Francaisé in the colonies. Explaining its purpose, the French Foreign Minister at the time, 
Eugene Etienne stated that the extension of French language into the colonies was “a 
measure of national defense.” Its founder, Pie rre Foncin, added that “it is necessary to 
attach the colonies to the metropole by a very solid psychological bonds, against the day 
when their progressive emancipation ends in a form of federation as is probable, that they 
be and they remain French in language, thought and spirit” (Rodney, 1982:259). This 
self-imposed foreign cultural imperialism is far marginalizing the vital values in African 
culture in Ghana. Surprisingly, the National Commission on Culture has become 
insensitive to this downward trend. 
The years between 1960 and 1966, Awoonor noted, were Nkrumah’s most productive 
period. It was during this period that the forces of reaction said, “if you allow this man to 
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     172


--- PAGE 189 ---
continue, he will turn things upside down not only in Ghana, but the whole of Africa,” 
Awoonor clarified. Therefore, Nkrumah “had to be overthrown, not because he abused 
white people, jailed Obitsebi Lamptey or there were shortages of sardines,” but, because 
“he was upsetting the imperialist agenda, so far as Africa was concerned,” Botsio and 
Awoonor indicated. 
According to Awoonor, “the first thing the coup makers and the foreign co-
conspirators [CIA] did after the coup of 1966 was to destroy the Atomic Energy.” The 
imperialists, he added, saw that Nkrumah was not only a man of ideas, vision, politics, 
but above all, he was a man of culture. Because he had drawn up the intellectual 
emancipation strategy to liberate the African  people from the shackles of their own self-
perception, inferiority complex as a people, or racial inferiority, in addition to 
constructing the African renaissance, they had to remove him, Awoonor elucidated. 
Furthermore, “since he left the scene, who has appeared on the African scene? Who has 
got that clarity of his time?” he asked.  Awoonor’s further exegesis on the military 
overthrow of Nkrumah’s government, perhaps, affirms the panic of the author of the Nazi 
doctrines, Dr. Goebbels, who reached for his pistol upon hearing the word, culture. 
At the OAU summit in Cairo 1964, Kwame Nkrumah warned his colleagues saying 
that: 
if we do not forge the forces of unity, the structure of our unity may 
sooner than later be destroyed, and a ll of us are going to be taken up one 
by one; consequently, our African unity project could be destroyed. 
Barely two years after Nkrumah’s warning, his government was thrown 
out of office by the military. This was because global imperialism saw 
that if anybody has to be overthrown, it has to be Kwame Nkrumah. He 
was not talking essentially of a communist agenda; he was talking about 
African agenda whereby the African s would decolonize not only their 
minds as a first principle, but their resources as a follow up. (Awoonor, 
interview: January 8, 1997) 
The CIA sponsored military coup on February 24, 1966, was the result of the systematic 
campaign against Nkrumah’s government, especially coming after the formal opening of 
the Akosombo dam. According to Retired Colonel Oteng, the coup makers might not 
have succeeded had his counterpart at the Ghana Broadcasting Station not been pressured 
to surrender. Until the arrival of the Co mmander of the POGR, Colonel Zanleringu, 
Colonel Oteng was the most senior officer on duty at the time of the coup, with his men 
bent on defending Nkrumah’s government. Later, under the command of Colonel 
Zanleringu, the small band of the soldiers fought and defended the Flagstaff House, the 
official residence of President Kwame Nkrumah. But as Colonel Oteng further explained, 
they surrendered at the suggestion of the Commander of the POGR at ten o’clock on the 
morning of February 24, 1966. With the announcement on Ghana’s radio that Nkrumah’s 
government had been overthrown by Ghana Armed forces, no commander of any military 
unit could have successfully mobilized his forces to resist the take over. This has been the 
case with all military coups overthrowing civilian governments in Ghana. 
With the C.I.A. sponsored military action coup of 1966, the great promises of the 
country’s Seven-Year Development Plan that would have totally transformed Ghana’s 
Conclusion     173


--- PAGE 190 ---
social, economic, industrial, agricultural, educational and cultural programs came to a 
sudden halt. Perhaps, had the humiliation of the Asantes by the capture and deportation of 
Prempeh, I, and the subsequent Yaa Asantewa  war, for instance, been presented on the 
stage or turned into a motion picture, Major Afrifa perhaps would have been the first to 
support Nkrumah’s diplomatic action against Britain over Ian Smith’s unilateral 
declaration of independence in Zimbabwe in 1965. 
The current African Union, while it falls short of Nkrumah’s socialist union 
government of Africa, has vindicated Kwame Nkrumah. As Cabral, in his homage to 
Nkrumah, indicates: 
The African peoples and particularly the freedom fighters cannot be 
fooled. Let no one come and tell us that Nkrumah died from the cancer of 
throat or any other sickness. No, Nkrumah died from cancer of betrayal 
which we must tear out by the roots in Africa, if we really want to 
liquidate imperialist domination definitely from this continent…. But we, 
Africans, strongly believe that the dead remains living at our side. We are 
societies of the living and the dead. Nkrumah will rise again each dawn in 
the heart and determination of freedom fighters, in the action of all true 
African patriots. Nkrumah’s immortal spirits preside and will preside at 
the judgment of history on this decisive phase in our people’s lives, in 
lifelong struggle against imperialist domination and for the genuine 
progress of our continent…we are certain, absolutely certain that framed 
by the eternal green of the African forest, flowers of crimson like the 
blood of martyrs and of gold like the harvest of plenty will bloom over 
Kwame Nkrumah, for Africa will triumph. (Cabral, 1980:117–118) 
Cabral gave his homily speech in 1972, and th e last vestiges of colonialism in Africa 
came to a close with the release of Nelson Mandela in 1991. Yet, Africa is still cogged in 
the imperialist and neocolonialism mew. Kwame Nkrumah characterized this exploitative 
socio-economic arrangement, after the attainment of independence, as capitalism at its 
highest stage, with devastating impacts than classical colonialism. 
The politico-cultural philos ophy and policies that Nk rumah formulated and 
operationalized were to serve as an African -centered paradigm for the second phase of 
the African revolution. Critical to safeguarding the political independence was the full 
attainment of political union of Africa. This meant the formation of an African High 
Command, an African Common Market, a Common Currency, an African Central Bank, 
one African Citizenship, and an Inter-Continental Communication. Since Nkrumah’s 
crusade on political unification of Africa has been revisited in the current African Union 
charter, then it will be wise to also revisit his African-centered politico-cultural 
philosophy and policies. Such an  approach will allow for a rea lization of his vision of an 
African union government that embraces the Africans in the Diaspora.  
Kwame nkrumah’s politico-cultural thought and policies     174


--- PAGE 191 ---
Bibliography 
Abraham, E.Williams (1962). The African Mind. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Adamafio, Tawia (1982) By Nkrumah’s Side: The Labour and the Wounds. Accra, Westcoast 
Publishing House in Association with Rex Collins. 
Addo-Fening R. (1975). The Asamankese Dispute 1919–1934. Akyem Abuakwa and the Politics of 
the Interwar Period in Ghana. Basel: Basel African Bibliography. 
Adinku, W.Ofotsu (1994). African Dance Education in Ghana. Accra: Ghana Universities Press. 
Afari-Gyan, K. (1991) Kwame Nkrumah’s Ideology. The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah, 
edited by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 161–175. 
Agovi, E.Kofi (1989). New Directions in the Ghanaian Theater. (unpublished document) Legon: 
Institute of African Studies library, University of Ghana. 
Agovi, Kofi, E. (1990). The Origin of Literary Theatre in Colonial Ghana, 1920–1957. Research 
Review, Institute of African Studies, University of Ghana. Legon: New Series Vol. No. 1, 1–23. 
Agovi, Kofi, E. (1992). Joe de Graft, Twentieth-Century Caribbean and Black African Writers First 
Series: Dictionary of Biography, edited by Berth Lindfors and Reinhard Sander. Detriot, 
London: A Bruccoli Clark Layman Books. Vol. 117, 134–141. 
Agyeman, Opoku (1997). Pan-Africanism and Its Detractors: A Response to Harvard’s Race-
Effacing Universalists. Lewiston, The Edwin Mellen Press. 
Agyeman, Opoku (1992). Nkrumah’s Ghana and East Africa: Pan-Africanism and African 
Interstate Relations. Rutherford: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press; London; Cranbury, 
Associated Press. 
Ani, Marimba (1994). YURUGU: An African-Centered Critique of European Cultural Thought and 
Behavior. Trenton: African World Press. 
Ansah, P.A.V. (1991). Kwame Nkrumah and the Media, The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah, 
edited by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 83–100. 
Anyidoho, Kofi (1992, March 13). Address. 30th Anniversary Celebration of the Institute of African 
Studies and School of Performing Arts, University of Ghana, Legon, 5–7. 
Arhin, Kwame (1991). The Search for Constitutional Chieftancy. The Life and Work of Kwame 
Nkrumah, edited by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 27–51. 
Armah, Kwesi (1965). African Golden Road. London: Heinemann. 
Asante, Molefi Kete (1988). Afrocentricity. Trenton: African World Press. 
Asante, Molefi Kete (1987). The Afrocentric Idea. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Asante, Molefi, Kete (1990). Kemet, Afrocentricity and Knowledge. Trenton: African World Press. 
Asante, Molefi, Kete (1990). Afrocentricity and Culture, African Culture: The Unity of Rhythms, 
edited by Molefi Kete Asante and Kariamu Welsh Asante. Trenton: African World Press, 3–12. 
Asante, Molefi, Kete (1993). Location Theory, The African Aesthetic, Keeper of the Traditions, 
edited by Kariamu Welsh Asante, Westport: Glenwood Press, 53–62. 
Ashby, Eric (1964). African Universities and Western Tradition. London: Oxford University Press. 
Austin, Dennis (1964). Politics in Ghana, 1946–1960. London: Oxford University Press. 
Awoonor, Kofi Nyidevu (1990). GHANA: A Political History From Pre-European to Modern 
Times. Accra, Sedco Publishing Ltd. and Woeli Publishing services. 
Babatier, Peggy R. (1980, Spring) African Culture and Colonial Education: The William Ponty 
School. Journal of African Studies, edited by Obichere, Boniface, Washington D.C.: Heldref 
Publications, Vol., 7 Number 1, 2–10.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Barber, J.William (1967). A History of Economic Thought. New York & Middlesex: Penguin 
Books. 
Biek, Janet (1987). Hausa Theatre in Niger and Contemporary Oral Art. New York: Garland 
Publications Inc. 
Bing, Geoffrey (1968). Reap the Whirlwind. London: Maccgibbon & Kee. 
Birmingham, David (1998). Kwame Nkrumah: The Father of African Nationalism. Athens: Ohio 
University Press. 
Blyden, Wilmont Edward (1965). African Service to the World, Political Awakening of Africa, 
edited by Rupert Emerson and Martin Kilson. Glenwood, Prentice Hall, 26–29. 
Boahen, Adu (1966). Topics in West African History. Londong: Longman. 
Boateng, Charles Adom (1986, Fall). Nkrumah’s Consciencism; Its Relevance to Ghanaian 
Development, Dissertation for the Doctor of Philosophy. Fort Collins: Colorado State 
University. 
Boone, Sylvia Ardyn (1986). Radiance from the Waters Ideals of Feminine Beauty in Mande Art. 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Bottomore, Tom [ed.] (1954). Dictionary of Marxist Thought, Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press. 
Botwe-Asamoah, Kwame (1977). Ewe Nationalism: A Historical Perspective. Thesis for the 
Degree of Master of Arts. New Haven: Southern Connecticut State University. 
Botwe-Asamoah, Kwame (1991). African Origin of Greek Drama and Theater. [Unpublished 
document] Intra-Faculty Lecture, Legon, University of Ghana. 
Busia, K.A. (1951). The Position of the Chief in the Modern Political system of Ashanti. London, 
New York and Toronto: International African Institute by the Oxford University Press. 
Cabral, Amical (1980). Unity and Struggle, London: Heineman. 
Conforth, Maurice (1968). Materialism and The Dialectical Method. New York: International 
Publishers. 
Cudjoe, Seth D. (1950). Aids to African Autonomy: A Review of Education and Politics in the Gold 
Coast. London: College Press. 
Cudjoe, Selwyn R. (1995). Kwame Nkrumah, Great Leaders of Africa, Ancient and Modern, edited 
by Ivan V.Sertima. New Brunswiek: Journal of African Civilization Ltd., 322–345. 
Curry, James [ed.] (1990). General History of Africa II: Ancient Civilization of Africa, UNESCO. 
Berkley: University of California Press. 
Davidson, Basil (1970). Africa in History. New York: Collier Books. 
Davidson, Basil (1973). Black Star. London: Allen Lane. 
Digngne, Pathe (1979). African Renaissance, Introduction to African Culture, Paris: UNESCO, 
125–184. 
Diop, Cheikh Anta (1974). The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality. Westport: 
Lawrence Hill and Company. 
Diop, Cheikh Anta (1991). Civilization or Barbarism. Westport: Lawrence Hill and Company. 
Douglas, Frederick (1999). Frederick Dougals, Assimilation, African-American Social political 
Thought 1850–1920, edited by Howard Brotz. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick and 
London, 215–229. 
Douglas, Robert (1993). The Search for an Afrocentric Visual Aesthetic, The African Aesthetic, 
Keeper of the Traditions, edited by Kariamu Welsh Asante. Westport: Glenwood Press, 159–
173. 
DuBois, W.E.B. (1973). The Education of Black People: Ten Critiques, 1906–1960, edited by 
Herbert Aptheker. New York & London: Monthly Review Press. 
DuBois, W.E.B. (1972). The World and Africa. New York: International Publishers. 
Dumor, Ernest K (1984, Spring). Humanism, Cultural Imperative and African Art. Journal of 
African Studies edited by B.Obichere, African Studies Center, University of California. Los 
Angeles: Heldre Publication, Vol. 11, Number 1, 35–40. 
Bibliography     176


--- PAGE 193 ---
Emerson, Rupert and Kilson, Martin (1965). Introduction/The Awakening Africa, Political 
Awakening of Africa, edited by Rupert Emerson and Martin Kilson Englewood Cliff: Prentice-
Hall inc., 1–17. 
Essandoh, Michael K. (1999, April 15). No Local Languages Here—Departmental Heads Told. 
http://www.ghanaweb.com/NewsArc. 
Esebede, Olisanwuche (1994). P. Pan-Africanism: The Idea and Movement, 1776–1991. 
Washington, D.C., Howard University Press. 
Essein-Udon, E.U. (1962). Black Nationalism. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Fage, J.D. (1959). Ghana; An Historical Interpretation. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Fanon, Frantz. (1996). On National Culture, African Intellectual Heritage. edited by Abu S.Abarry 
and Molefi Kete Asante. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 236–242. 
Fairman, H.W. (1974). The Triumph of Horus: Ancient Sacred Drama of Egypt. Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 
Fitch, Bob & Oppenheimer, Mary (1996). Ghana: End of an Illusion. New York: Monthly Review 
Press. 
Forward Ever: The Life of Kwame Nkrumah (1977). London: Panaf Books Ltd. 
Foster, Philip (1965). Education and Social Change in Ghana. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
Freedman, Robert [ed.] (1968). Marxist Social Thought. New York: Harcourt, Bruce and World 
Inc. 
Freire, Paulo (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Herder and Herder. 
Ghana Dance Ensemble (1972). Legon: Institute of African Studies, University of Ghana. 
Graham, C.K. (1971). The History of Education in Ghana from the Earliest Times to the 
Declaration of Independence. London: Frank Crass & Company. 
Gyekye, Kwame (1994, April 14). Afrocentricity and African Philosophy: Issues and Concerns. 
[Unpublished document] Lecture given at the Department of African American Studies, Temple 
University, Philadelphia. 
Gyekye, Kwame (1997). Tradition and Modernity: Philosophical Reflections and the African 
Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hagan, George (1991a). Nkrumah’s Leadership Style: An Assessment from a Cultural Perspective. 
The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah, edited by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 177–206. 
Hagan, George (1991b). Nkrumah’s Cultural Policy. The life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah, edited 
by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 3–26 
Haizel, E.A. (1991). Education in Ghana, 1951–1966. The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah. 
edited by Kwame Arhin. Accra: SEDCO, 53–81. 
Hammond, Albert (1997). The Moving Drama of the Arts in Ghana, Sankofa Magazine. Accra, 
Vol. 1, No. 2 and 3. 
Hatlen, Theodore W. (1952). Orientation to the Theater. New York: Applenton-Century-Croff. 
Hegel, Goerg W.F. (1956). The Philosophy of History. New York: Dover Publication. 
Herodotus (1954). The Histories, II, translated by Audrey de Selincourt. Baltimore: Penguin Books. 
Holmes, A.B. (1975). What was the Nationalism of the 1930’s in Ghana?. Akyem Abuakwa and the 
Politics of the Interwar Period in Ghana. Basel: Basel African Bibliography. 
Hountondji J.Paulin (1976) African Philosophy: Myth and Reality. Bloomington; Indianapolis. 
Hume, David (1875). Of National Characters, David Hume’s Essays: Moral, Political and Literary, 
edited by T.H.Green and T.Green. London: Longmans, Green and Co. Vol. 1. 
Ife, Zadia (1993). The African Diasporan Ritual Mode, The African Aesthetic, Keeper of the 
Traditions, edited by Kariamu Welsh Asante. Westport: Glenwood Press, 31–51. 
Inaugural Programme (1965). Osagyefo Players. [unpublished document] Accra: Flagstaff House. 
Irele, Abiola and Ogun, Oyinba (1978). Theatre in Africa, Ibadan: Ibadan University Press. 
Jahn, Janheinz (1990) Muntu: African Culture and the Western World. An introduction by Calvin 
C.Hernton. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. 
Bibliography     177


--- PAGE 194 ---
James, C.L.R. (1996). The Rise and Fall of Nkrumah, African Intellectual Heritage, edited by Abu 
S.Abarry and Molefi Kete Asante. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 573–579. 
James, G.M.George (1954). Stolen Legacy: The Greeks were not the Authors of Greek, but the 
People of North Africa Commonly called the Egyptians, Copy Right. 
Jegede, Dele (1993). Art for Life’s Sake: African Art as a reflection of an Afrocentric Cosmology, 
The African Aesthetic, Keeper of the Traditions, edited by Kariamu Welsh Asante. Westport: 
Glenwood Press, 237–247. 
Jones, Trevor (1976). Ghana’s First Republic, 1960–1966: The Pursuit of the Political Kingdom. 
London: Methuen and Company Ltd. 
July, Robert,W. (1987). An African Voice. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Kambon, Kobi Kazembe Kalongi (1992). The African Personality in America: An African-
Centered Framework, Tallahassee: Nubian Nation Publication. 
Kanu, Genoveva (1982). Nkrumah the Man: A Friend’s Testimony, Enugu Delta of Nigeria. 
Karenga, Maulana (1993). Introduction to Black Studies. Los Angeles: The University of Sankofa 
Press. 
Kennedy, Scott (1973). In Search of African Theater. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. 
Kershaw, Terry (1989). The Emerging Paradigm in Black Studies. The Western Journal of Black 
Studies, Pullman: Washington State Press, Vol. 13, No. 1, 45–51. 
Keto, Tsehloane C. (1994). The Africa Centered Perspective of History, An Introduction. London: 
Research Associates School Times Publishing. 
King, Jr. Martin Luther (1967). Where Do We Go From Here: Chaos or Community? Boston: 
Beacon Press. 
Krafona, Kwesi (1986). The Pan-African Movement: Ghana’s Contribution. London: Afroworld 
Publishing Company. 
Legum, Colins (1962). Pan-Africanism: A Short Political Guide. London: Pall Mall Press. 
Maayang, Lazarus D. (1990). Miss Ghana Pageant: A Perilous Venture into History. UHURU. 
Accra: Uhuru Communication Ltd. No.4, 23–29. 
Mahoney, Richard D. (1983). J.F.K.Ordeal in Africa. New York London: Oxford University Press. 
Manning, Marable (1986). W.E.B.DuBois: Black Radical Democrat. Boston: Twayne Publications. 
Manu, Takyiwaa (1991). Women and their Organization during the CPP Period. The Life and Work 
of Kwame Nkrumah, edited by Kwame Arhin, Accra: SEDCO, 103–127. 
Marias, Genoveva (1972). Kwame Nkrumah As I Knew Him. Chichester: Janay Publishing 
Company. 
Marx, Karl (1997). German Socialist Philosophy. New York: Wolfgang Schirmarcher Continuum, 
Mbiti, John S. (1970). African Religions and Philosophy. New York: Anchor books. 
McCracken, Grant (1988). The Long Interview. London: Sage Publications, 
McFarland, Miles Daniel and Owusu-Ansah, David (1995). Historical Dictionary of Ghana. 
Metuchen: Scarecrow Press. 
Mensah, Asamoah Franklin. (1999, April 14). Ghana and Nigeria Dominate Drug Trafficking 
Scene, http:www.Ghanaweb.com/NewsArc. 
Molette, Carlton and Barbara (1986). Black Theatre, Premise and Presentation. Bristol: Wynd Hall 
Press. 
Morriseau, Leroy F. (1968, December)). African National Theatre, Okyeame: Ghana’s Literary 
Magazine, edited by Efua Sutherland. Legon: Institute of African Studies. Vol. 4, Number 1. 
91–94. 
Neal, Larry (1989). Visions of a Liberated Future: Black Arts Movement Writing, edited by 
Michael Schwarts. New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press. 
Nelson, Carlos (1985). Kwame Nkrumah: A Study of his Intellectual Development in the United 
States. Dissertation for the Doctor of Philosophy. Philadelphia: Temple University. 
Neuman, Lawrence, W. (1994). Social Research Methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Ngugi, wa Thiong’o (1993). Moving the Center: the Struggle for Cultural Freedom. London: James 
Currey, Heinemann. 
Bibliography     178


--- PAGE 195 ---
Ngugi, wa Thiong’o (1986). Decolonizing the Mind, The Politics of Language in African 
Literature. London: James Currey. 
Nketia, J.H. “African Cultural Education,” Ghana Cultural Review. Legon, Vol. 2, No. 1, 14–17. 
Nketia, J.H. (1976). Cultural Development and the Arts. [unpublished document] Legon: Institute 
of African Studies Library, University of Ghana, DP/GN 400.N651. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1957). Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah. New York: 
International Publishers. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1962). Towards colonial Freedom. London: The African Publication Society. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1963). Africa Must Unite. London: Panaf. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1965). African History Through African Eyes, Political Awakening of Africa, 
edited by Rupert Emerson and Martin Kilson. Englewood Cliff: Prentice Hall, 22–26. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1968). Dark Days in Ghana. New York: International Publishers. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1970a). Consciencism. New York & London: Modern Reader Paperbacks. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1970b). Class Struggle in Africa. New York: International Publishers. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1973a) Revolutionary Path. New York: International Publishers. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1973b). I Speak of Freedom. London: Panaf. 
Nkrumah, Kwame (1992, March 13). The African Genius, Speech delivered at the opening of the 
Institute of African Studies on 25th October, 1963; cited as appendix in the handbook of the 
30th Anniversary Celebration of the Institute of African Studies and School of performing Arts. 
Legon: University of Ghana, 12–21. 
Nyerere, Julius (1968). Ujamaa, Essays on Socialism. Dar es Salaam: Oxford University Press. 
Opoku, Mawere, A. (1967) Ghana Dance Ensemble. Legon: Institute of African Studies, 
University of Ghana, 15. 
Okyerema: Newsletter (January–August 1995). The Centre for National Culture, Kumase at 
Glance. Kumase: Centre for National Culture, Vol. 1 No 1. 
Osabu-Kle Daniel Tetteh (2002). Democracy And Its Practice: A General Theory Of Democratic 
Relativity. Carlton University. 
Poe, Richard. (1997) Black Spark, White Fire: Did African Explorers Civilize Ancient Europe? 
Rocklin: Prima Publishing. 
Politzer, Georges (1976). Elementary Principles of Philosophy. New York: International 
Publishers. 
Reindorf, Carl C. (1966). The History of the Gold Coast and Asante. Accra: Ghana University 
Press. 
Rodney, Walter (1982). How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Washington D.C.: Howard 
University Press. 
Rooney, David (1988). Kwame Nkrumah: The Political Kingdom in the Third World. New York: 
St. Martins Press. 
Roscoe, Adrian (1971). Mother is Gold, A Study in West African Literature. London: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Sekyi, Kobina. (1974). The Blinkards. London: Heinemann, 1974. 
Shange, Ntozake (July/August 1979). Uncovered Losses/Black Theater Tradition, Black Scholar, 
Journal of Black Studies and Research. San Francisco: Black World Foundation, Vol. 10, 
Number 10. 7–9. 
Sherwood, Mariaka (1996). Kwame Nkrumah: The Years Abroad 1935–1947. Legon: Freedom 
Publications. 
Simensen, Jarle (1975). Commoners, Chiefs and Colonial Government. Trondheim British Policy 
and Local Policies in Akim Abuakwa, Ghana, Under Colonial Rule University of Trondheim. 
Smith, Edwin, W (1930). Aggrey of Africa: A Study in Black and White. New York: Richard 
R.Smith Inc. 
Sow, Alpha I (1979). Prolegomena. Introduction to African Culture. Paris: UNESCO, 9–31. 
Stockwell, John (1978). In Search of Enemies: A CIA Story. New York: W.W.Norton Company. 
Bibliography     179


--- PAGE 196 ---
Sutherland, Efua (1965). The Second Phase: A Review Of The National Theater Movement; Ghana. 
Legon: Institute of African Studies, University of Ghana. 
Sutherland, Efua. (1970). The Story of Bob Johnson: Ghana’s Ace Comedian. Accra: Anowuo 
Educational Publication, in association with the Ghana Drama Studio. 
Talbot, P.A. (1923). Life in Southern Nigeria. London: Macmillan. 
Taylor, Samuel E. (1994). Kwame Nkrumah: A Case Study in Intercultural Leadership. Degree for 
the Doctor of Philosophy. Ann Arbor: United States International University. 
Tembo, Mwizenge S. (1990). The Concept of African Personality: Sociological Implications. 
African Culture: The Rhythms of Unity edited by Molefi Kete Asante and Kariamu Welsh 
Asante. Trenton: African World Press, 194–206. 
Tetteh, M.N. (1999). The Ghana Young Pioneer Movement: A Youth Organization in the Kwame 
Nkrumah Era. Accra: Ghana Publicity Limited. 
Thompson, Robert F. (1974). African Art in Motion; icon and act. Los Angeles: University of 
California Press. 
Timothy, Bankole (1963). Kwame Nkrumah: His Rise to Power. Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press. 
Traore, Bakory (1972). The African Theatre and Social Functions. Ibadan: Ibadan University Press. 
Trotsky, Leon (1932). Leon Trotsky’s In Defence of October. A Speech, Compenhagen, Denmark 
http://www.marxist.org/archive/works/trostky/%20works/1932-oct.htm 
Ture, Seku Ahmed (1976). Revolution, Culture, Pan-Africanism. Conakry: State House 
Publication. 
Walters, Ronald W (1993). Pan-Africanism in the Diaspora, An Analysis of Modern Afrocentric 
Political Movement. Detriot: Wanyne State University Press. 
Welsh Asante, Kariamu (1993). The Aesthetic Conceptualization of Nzuri, The African Aesthetic: 
Keeper of the Traditions, edited by Kariamu Welsh Asante. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1–20. 
Woodson, Carter Godwin (1969). The Mis-Education of the Negro. Washington, D.C.: Associated 
Publishers. 
Wright, Richard (1954). Black Power: A Record of Reactions in a Land of Pathos. New York: 
Haper. 
Yankah, Kwesi (1985, summer). The Making and Breaking of Kwame Nkrumah: The Role of Oral 
Poetry, Journal of African Studies, edited by Boniface Obichere, African Studies Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Heldre Publication, Vol. 12, Number 2, 86–92. 
Yankah, Kwesi (1990/91). Miss Ghana’ 59 with Lucky Baby that brought the Beauty Crown, 
UHURU, Accra: Uhuru communication Ltd. Vol 2 No. 6, 18–19. 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF GHANA DOCUMENTS 
NAG/RG3/7/243 
NAG/RG3/7/246 
NAG/RG3/7/2 
NAG/RG3/7/33 
NAG/RG3/7/126 
NAG/RG3/7/212 
NAG/RG3/7/14 
NAG/GR3/7/34 
Bibliography     180


--- PAGE 197 ---
INTERVIEWS 
Abdallah, Ibn Mohammed, January 10, 1997 
Anyidoho, January 14, 1997 
Arkhurst, Sandy, January 14, 1997 
Awoonor, Kofi, January 8, 1997 
Botsio, Kojo, January 7, 1997 
Nketia J.H., December 26 and 31, 1996 
Opoku, Mawere, A., January 6, 1997 
Retired Colonel Kwasi Oteng, May 16, 2003 
Retired Colonel David Gbon Zaleringu, June 2, 2003 
Bibliography     181


--- PAGE 198 ---
INDEX 
 
A 
Abdallah, Mohammed Ibn, 50, 66, 68, 84 
Aborigines Rights Protection Society (ARPS), 95–96, 101, 118, 150 
Abraham, William, 48, 155, 207 
Accra, 2, 10, 14–15, 27, 92, 98–100, 102, 109, 114, 122–123, 26–167, 132, 136–137, 140, 154–
155, 162–167, 171, 174, 178, 201, 203 
Airport, 103 
New Town, 27 
Sports Stadium, 15, 155, 160, 166, 171 
Achimota, 116 
Teacher Training College, 3, 27, 161, 164–165, 195, 200 
Ackwah, Nana Ayirebi, (King of Winneba) Chairman of Ghana National Education 
Trust, 30, 69, 207 
Acquaye, Saka, founder of Obadzen, 161, 163 
Action troopers, 114–115 
Adamafio, Tawia, 30–31, 114–115, 127, 138, 140 
Adanse, kingdom, 91 
Chief, 111 
Addis Ababa, 147 
Adinku, William, W., 43, 200 
Adjei, Ako, 13, 30, 98–99, 127 
Afari-Gyan, K, 23–24 
Africana Dramatic Society, 163, 169 
African art forms, 152 
arts, 12, 155–156, 168, 170–172, 194, 212 
sculpture, 81–82 
African Common Market, 135–136, 220 
African Diaspora/descent, 10, 43, 77, 86, 118, 123, 144, 148, 173, 207, 215, 220 
African American/Afro-American, 21 
Caribbean, 137, 144 
community, 8, 32, 137, 143, 86 
African Genius, 12, 38–39, 42, 48, 51, 66, 75, 78, 83, 193, 195, 197, 205, 212.  
See also African personality 
African High Command, 135–137, 141, 147–148, 220 
African history, 11–12, 65–66, 69, 71, 80, 178, 182 
and civilization/classical, 25, 38, 47, 64, 70, 72, 74–75, 80, 178, 194, 197 
and oral traditions, 75 
African intellectuals, 54, 66 
Eurocentric, 72, 177 
European trained scholars, 8, 181, 187, 191, 206 
and reactions to Africanization of university curriculum, 184, 187 
Western educated, 61 
African liberation movement/struggle, 10, 17, 20, 49, 128, 131–132, 137–138, 144, 159, 205


--- PAGE 199 ---
African Revolution, 11, 62, 77, 140, 220 
and freedom fighters, 138, 141, 215, 219 
training camps in Ghana, 141 
African Personality, 8, 10–11, 19, 24, 30, 39–41, 48, 53, 46, 54, 64, 75–81, 86–87, 105, 137, 148–
150, 156, 160, 168–169, 176–177, 193, 205–206, 208–210, 212, 216 
and African agency, 177 
African society, traditional, 58–60, 81, 157, 176, 187, 194, 210 
and traditional political structure, 62 
African students, 54, 74 
Students Association of American and Canada, 42  
African Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, 42, 75, 195 
African Union (AU), 214–215, 219, 220 
African Unity, 20 
Continental African Union Government/Union of African States/United States of Africa 16, 21, 
24, 37, 39, 48, 89–90, 128, 131–133, 134–137, 147–148 
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 10, 134–137, 140, 147, 218 
Afrifa, Major Akwasi A, 219 
Afro-Asian Solidarity Committee, 143 
Afrocentric, 157 
and Africa-centered arts, 82, 213 
approach, 212 
education, 66, 137, 148, 182 
objectives, 215 
paradigm, 73, 220 
perspective, 57, 67, 207 
policy 184 
scholars, 200 
theater, 86, 137, 148, 208 
ways, 67, 71, 201 
see also education 
Aggrey, Kwagyir, 3, 22, 27, 153, 183, 207 
Agovi, Kofi, 5, 7, 43, 178, 180, 203 
Agromma Players, 162, 166 
Agyeman, Opoku, 16–17, 132 
Akan, (Akans), 24–25, 37, 105, 114, 171 
culture, 75 
society, 153 
Akosombo Hydroelectric Plant, 207, 214 
Volta Dam Project, 126, 145–146 
Akoto, Osei Bafour (Founder of NLM), 111 
Akuffo, Okyeame Boafo, 153, 207 
Akwamu, kingdom, 91–92 
Akwapim Six, 152 
Akyem (Akim), Akyem Abuakwa kingdom, 25–27, 29, 31, 33–34, 91, 93, 100, 110, 115, 122, 125 
State Council, 102, 106, 108 
states, 28 
and World War II contingent and fund, 106 
Algeria/Algerian, 10, 133, 140–142 
war of independence/liberation, 133, 140–141, 143 
Ali, Mohammed, 143 
All African Peoples’ Conference, 10, 128, 133, 137, 141 
All-African Trade Union Congress, 138  
Index     183


--- PAGE 200 ---
All African Trade Union Federation (AATUF), 16 
Ametewe, Constable Seth, assassination attempt on Nkrumah, 15 
Ampofo, Oku, 150–151, 161, 207 
Amponsah, R.R., 15, 111.  
See also Opposition 
Amu, Ephraim, 75, 150–151, 203, 207 
Angelo, Maya, 143 
Angola, Angolan, 140–141 
Ani, Marimba, 6–7, 64 
Anokye, Okomfo (of Akwamu), 38 
Antor, S.G., 114, 123 
Antuban, Kofi, 75, 159, 161, 204 
Anyidoho, Kofi, 66, 86, 156, 193, 201, 217 
Apaloo, Modesto, 35, 115.  
See also Opposition 
Aristotle, 186 
Armstrong, Mrs. Louis, 143 
Arts Council of Ghana (Gold Coast), 39, 45, 149, 158, 159–165, 167–171, 173–174, 176, 199, 202, 
204, 212, 215–216 
Law, Act, 43 
Asafo, (People’s militia), commoners, 29, 36, 105–107, 160, 168 
Asafu-Adjaye, E.O., 103, 105 
Asante, (Ashanti) etymology, 90 
Golden Stool, 24, 111, 113 
kingdom, 24–25, 31, 34, 70, 93–94, 97, 100–101, 106, 111–114, 116, 119, 122–123, 199, 217, 
219 
military union, 112–113 
Asanteman Council, 158 
Asanteman Cultural Center, 158, 162, 199 
Asante, Molefi Kete, 5, 8, 10, 51, 79, 157, 186 
location, 8 
mental dislocation, 38, 63 
Asantewa, Yaa (Queen of Edweso), War of 1900, 24–25, 92, 219 
Ashanti Confederacy Council, 93, 102–104, 107–108, 112–113, 115 
Ashanti State Council Amendment Ordinance, 116 
Ashanti Youth Association, 99 
Ashby, Sir Eric, Sir, 72, 74, 181, 187–189, 206 
Attah I, Sir Ofori, 28, 31, 93, 95, 106 
Attah II, Nana Ofori, 14, 93, 102, 122, 125, 181  
Attah, Aaron Ofori, also Kofi Asante, of Akyem Tafo, 29, 110, 117 
Attah, William Ofori, 31 
Avoidance of Discrimination Act, 124 
Awhaitey, Major, 15 
Awoonor, Kofi Nyidevu, 10, 11, 12, 16, 50, 66–67, 70, 80, 89, 109, 111, 122–123, 128, 155–156, 
174–175, 187, 218 
Awoonor-Williams, Bankole, 151, 207 
Ayeke, Kojo, 123, 127 
Ayisi, Akua Asabea, 99, 154, 207 
Azkiwe, Nnamdi, 3, 4, 21–23, 76 132 
 
B 
Index     184


--- PAGE 201 ---
Baako, Kofi, 103 
Balme, David Mowbray, (first principal, University College of Gold Coast), and European classics, 
185–186, 188–189, 207 
Barwah, General C.M., 141 
Bekwai, 106–107, 112 
Bekwaihene, 113 
Belgian and Congo, 138–139, 141 
Black (Negro) colleges, universities, 67 
Nationalism, 79 
Black Power Movement. See Nkrumah 
Blyden, Edward, 74, 76, 177, 193, 212 
Bond, Horace M. (President, Lincoln University), 137 
Bond of 1844, 94 
Bonne II, Nii Kwabena (Ga King, Osu Alata), 13, 69, 98, 207 
Botsio, Kojo, 103, 144, 156, 184, 207 
Chairman, International Commission on the University College of Ghana, 190 
Briamah, Kabachewura J.A. 92, 105, 109 
British, Assembly, 31 
and Arts Council, 81, 158, 169 
and colonial governor, 32, 108 
colonist, 92 
and cultural nationalism, 169, 182, 192 
education, 181 
Empire Day, 69, 81 
and England, 3, 8, 9, 65 
government, 13–14, 29–31, 35, 93, 98, 101, 103–105, 109, 112, 114–115, 118–119, 121, 128, 
189, 206, 213–214 
Governors’ Executive Council, 28–29, 31 
and His Majesty government, 180, 189  
imperialism, 102 
Land Bill, 95 
Legislative Council, method, 40 
nationals/expatriates, 128 
troops in Ghana, 103 
Volunteer Royal Force, 106 
Brong (Bono), first Akan Empire, 25, 90–91 
Kyempem, 114 
Bunche, Ralph, 20, 143 
Bureau of African Affairs, 138 
Burns, Sir Frederick, 115 
Busia, K.A., 15, 17, 30, 94, 105, 110, 112–115, 117–119, 121, 126–127, 146, 181, 198, 200, 213 
 
C 
Cabral, Amilcar, 19, 24, 47, 49, 52, 137, 211, 219–220 
Cadbury and Fry, 112 
Cape Coast, 103, 161, 163, 167, 168, 178, 181 
Capitalism, 53, 85, 131, 220 
and capitalist countries, 59 
economic system, 129 
exploitation, 23 
industrial, 57 
Index     185


--- PAGE 202 ---
international, 61 
philosophy, 51 
society, 60 
Caribbean. See Africans in the Diaspora 
Carpenter, W.P., 159–160, 204 
Casablanca Block, 133–134, 141 
Casely-Hayford A, 159, 195 
Casely-Hayford J.E., 24–25, 74, 89–90, 95, 150, 153, 180, 183–184, 198, 207 
and Ethiopia Unbound, 150, 180 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 16, 46, 62, 104, 125–126, 143, 148, 218–219 
Chapman, Daniel, Vice-Chairman, International Commission on the University College of Ghana, 
190 
Chief, Chiefs (Kings), Chieftaincy, 33–34, 95, 97, 100, 102, 107, 111, 113, 128, 180, 211 
and destoolment of, 115 
China, 125, 142 
Christianity, Christian, 26, 153, 163 
and African converts and influence, 182–183  
and African fathers and writers of primitive church, 12 
born-again churches, 217 
Christian missionaries and churches, 5–7, 6, 81, 178, 183 
church hymns, 207 
and civilization, 64 
era of, 64–65 
Euro-Christian tradition, 53–54, 85, 188, 210 
European missionaries, 69 
and the idea of original sin, 53 
and Methodist church, 178 
Presbyterian church, 151 
worship, 151 
Clarke, John Henry, 24–29, 143 
Class, African elite, 211 
African national bourgeoisie, 57, 60–61 
and class struggle in Africa. See Nkrumah 
indigenous bourgeoisie, 59, 211 
Marxist-Leninist class struggle, 57 
proletariat, 57, 61, 130 
working 59 
Cocoa, 113, 130 
duty, 34, 110 
export trade, 107 
farmers, 26, 26, 107, 112, 119 
Marketing Board, 107–108, 110 
policy, 113 
price, 112 
revenue, 35, 106 
Cold War, politics, 126, 132, 134, 137, 140, 142, 147 
Colonialism, (European) 3, 4–5, 8, 20, 23–24, 31, 38–40, 50–51, 53, 58, 60, 64–67, 76–78, 80, 83, 
121, 129, 134, 140, 149, 152, 154, 158, 206, 210, 213, 215, 220 
and African colonization, 27, 209, 214 
and colonial elite, 80 
and education and Christianity, 184 
exploitation, 11, 51 
Index     186


--- PAGE 203 ---
government, 26, 51, 106–107, 124, 178 
ideologies, 11 
legacies, 42, 44, 81, 86, 104, 131, 149, 154, 158, 177 
Columbus, Christopher, 183 
Communalism/Communal Spirit, 20, 23, 53, 59, 85  
and African humanist values and egalitarian society, 11, 42, 52, 54, 58, 60–61, 85 211–212, 216 
communalistic, 39, 52, 210 
See also African personality 
Communism, 62, 134 
agenda, 219 
and Communist, 29, 35, 111, 17 
Congo, 16, 138–140, 141, 215.  
See also Belgian Congo 
Consciencism, Philosophical, 11, 20, 42, 48, 51–52, 54–56, 58–59, 61–62, 64, 66, 85, 210 
Convention People’s Party (CPP), 9, 15–16, 26, 28–37, 69, 92–94, 98, 100–105, 107–108, 110–
111, 119, 121–123, 125, 127–129, 132, 154, 175, 187–188, 210 
as communist, 111 
government, 33, 35–36, 110, 115, 118, 121, 123–125, 128, 130, 141, 144 
and national unity, 215 
unitary government, 90, 93, 108, 110, 123, 213 
unitary nation-state, 33 
Coup plots, Awhiatey-Amponsah-Apoloo Conspiracy, 35 
the CIA orchestrated coup of 1966, 16, 46, 62, 143, 146, 148, 219 
Michel, Brigadier General Joseph’s col-lapsed plot, 125 
Coussey’s, Sir Henry Committee/Constitution, 31, 33, 98, 101, 104 
Cudjoe, Selwyn R., 19, 52, 59 
Cudjoe, Seth, 159, 199, 207 
Culture, African, 5, 8, 12, 19, 47, 49–55, 58, 63–64, 68, 75, 77, 81, 85, 87, 149–150, 156, 172, 
178–179, 181, 195–196, 206, 208–209, 211–212, 218 
and cultural development, 132 
freedom 134 
Ghana of, 159, 170 
heritage, 5, 6, 11, 36 
and libation, 27, 153, 175, 217 
and national culture, 65, 211, 215 
nationalism, 203 
personality, 5, 8, 49. 
See also African personality  
revolution, 213 
state Okyeame, 215 
system, 129 
traditional African priest, 36, 38, 152 
values, 215 
 
D 
Daigne, Pathe, 11, 63, 76 
Dance, 172 
African, 41, 80–82, 176, 193–194, 199, 208 
Danquah, J.B., 14, 25–27, 29, 31, 33, 35–36, 69, 75, 90, 93, 95, 97, 99–100, 102–104, 107, 110, 
117–118, 122–123, 127, 132, 150, 159, 161, 200, 207, 213 
and CIA connection, 104 
Index     187


--- PAGE 204 ---
on CIA payroll, 125 
Danquah, Mabel Dove (Wife of J.B.Danquah), with Nkrumah on Evening News, 28, 99, 154 
Darko (Darku), Nana Sir Tsibu, 14, 103 
Chairman of Cocoa Marketing Board, 30, 69 
Davidson, Basil, 2, 4, 178 
De Graft, Joe, 155, 159, 170, 202–203, 207–208 
his indifference toward the theater movement, 203 
and his obsession with Shakespeare, 203 
Western forms of plays: Sons and Daughters and Through a Film Darkly, 202 
Democracy, 122, 129–130 
bourgeois, 62 
and democratic nations, 142 
multi-party, 62–63, 69, 129–130, 147 
one-party system, 37, 62–63, 147 
Parliamentary, 62 
and Western 37 
Department of Social Welfare and Development, 154, 165 
Development plans: 
Second Five-Year, 145 
Seven-Year, 143, 145–146, 182, 219 
Diadorus, 185–186 
Diop, Cheikh Anta, 5, 67–68 
District Commissioner, 113 
Court, 106 
Drama Studio, Ghana, 41, 43, 70, 84, 155, 168, 201, 203, 216  
University of Ghana, 169 
Drake, St. Claire, 143, 173 
Drumming and dancing (African music and dance), 27, 41, 43, 80–81, 193, 109, 155, 160, 163–
165, 171–172, 179, 181, 197, 199–200 
Du Bois, Mrs. Shirley Graham (Director of Ghana’s Television), 32, 137, 143 
Du Bois, William Edward Burghardt, 3, 9, 72–73, 131, 136–138, 143, 147, 207, 215 
and as Director of Encyclopedia Africana, 32, 42, 173 
 
E 
Economic, 177 
exploitation, 5, 211, 213, 220 
transformation, 12 
policy, See Nkrumah 
Education, 5, 44, 72, 86, 209 
and African-centered, 66, 182, 191 
and Africanization of, 180–182 
and Christian missions, 44 
cultural disorientation, 39–40 
decolonization, 38 
and Eurocentric, 5, 29, 42, 128, 181 
and Ghana Education Trust/Accelerated Development Plan, 44–45, 182 
intellectual decolonization, 64 
Nkrumah’s edict on English and School Certificate, 184 
and non-formal 45 
paradigm, 17, 193–194 
policy, 39, 195 
Index     188


--- PAGE 205 ---
scholarship, 209 
system of, 5, 79 
Edusei, Krobo, 114 
Egypt (Kemet), 67–68, 186, 195 
Osirian Drama/theater and Miracle plays, 197 
temples to God, 186, 195 
world systems, philosophies and religions, 195 
and impact on Western world, 195 
and Cairo, 218 
modern, 131, 142 
Eisenhower, Dwight, (US President), 16  
Eliot, C.W., (President of Harvard University), 73 
Elmina, Castle, 25, 140 
Engels, Friedrich, 20, 41, 56 
Esebede, Olisanwuche, 10, 38, 134 
Essien-Udom, Essien Udosem, 79–80 
Ethiopia, 131 
ancient, 195 
Ettokrom, 27, 119, 122 
Europe, 53, 59, 65, 72, 79–80, 103, 172, 180; 180, 186, 193, 210–211, 213 
and colonialism, 10 
conditioning, 137 
cultural and aesthetic values, 40, 53 
cultural ideology, 12 
cultural nationalism, 178 
cultural values, 72 
culture, 149, 181 
classics/classical, 74, 186, 188 
civilization, 74, 163, 185 
denial of African humanity, 212 
Eastern and darkest, 186 
education, 53, 71, 180, 183, 201 
and Euro-American ethnocentric hegemony, 10 
and Eurocentric concepts, 201 
and European ancient scholars in classical Africa, 185 
feral man, cannibalism and incestuous rites, 185–186 
history 11, 54, 67, 188, 194 
ideology, 63 
imperialism, 7, 63 
influence in the colonies, 177 
intellectuals, 72 
languages and literature, 188 
manners, 53 
nationalism, 212 
paradigm, 17 
philosophy, 188 
political imperialism, 64 
scholars, 186, 194 
settler regimes, 132 
studies of Africa, 71 
theater definition, 157 
theories, 207 
Index     189


--- PAGE 206 ---
traditions, 73, 184 
universities, 73 
and Western culture, 68, 71 
European Slave Trade, 11, 25, 38, 77, 183, 213;  
and holocaust of enslavement, 7 
Evening News, 28, 99, 103, 110, 154 
Ewe, 92–93, 123 
Unification Movement, 122, 127 
Ex-Servicemen’s March, 98 
 
F 
Fanon, Frantz, 50, 65–66, 76, 80, 137, 141, 211 
Fante, (Fanti), 24, 123, 150 
Fante Confederacy, 94–95, 118 
First General Conference of Africans in American and Canada, 4 
Fisher, Reverend Father George, Nkrumah’s elementary school headmaster, 2–3 
Flagstaff House, 12–15, 155, 203 
Flowers, Nkrumah’s professor, University of Pennsylvania, 21 
France/French, 142, 174 
the Gauls, 186  
and community, 135, 138 
and Alliance Francaise?, 218; 
language in Ghana schools, 217 
Freedman, Robert, 56 
Freire, Palo, 149 
 
G 
Ga (Ga-Adagme), 69, 92–93, 100, 122–123, 127, 163 
and Ga-Shifimo Kpee, 35, 114, 123, 127 
Native Authority, 103  
State Council, 14, 102 
Gandhi, Mohandas (Mahatma), 101–102, 140 
Garvey, Marcus, 3, 16, 20–21, 41, 131, 135, 41, 147 
Gbedemah, Komla, 103 
connection with State Department and conspiracy, 125–126 
contacts with the CIA, 16 
and loan agreement with World Bank, 145 
Gbeho, Phillip, 41, 158–160, 199, 207 
composer of Ghana’s national anthem, 172 
Ghana Academy of Science, 45 
Ghana Broadcasting System, 161, 165–167, 202, 216 
Ghana Bureau of Languages, 161, 184 
Ghana-Congo accord, 139  
Ghana Congress Party, 109 
Ghana Dance Ensemble (national dance company), 43, 197, 199, 205, 208 
Ghana Drama Studio. See Drama Studio 
Ghana Empire, Timbuktu, Bamako, 65 
Ghana Experimental Theater, 43, 162–163, 201 
Ghana Farmers Council, 162 
Ghana Film Corporation, 175, 202 
Index     190


--- PAGE 207 ---
Ghana (Gold Coast), Ghanaian, 4–5, 9–14, 17, 19–21, 23–25, 27, 29, 31–32, 37, 40, 42–44, 46, 48, 
63–65, 67–69, 81, 83, 86, 89–91, 94–95, 98–101, 103, 109, 110 117–119, 121–128, 130–132, 134, 
137–152, 154, 157–160, 162, 169–171, 174–176, 178–179, 181–184, 188, 195, 205–207, 209, 211, 
213–215, 217, 217–218 
and African policy, 139, 146 
and classical, 196 
and education, 178 
educational policy, 181 
Eurocentric educational system, 181 
and foreign policy, 142 
history of; 215 
and Independence Day, 41, 143, 147, 154–155, 160, 199 
and independence of, 10, 25–26, 35, 64–65, 80, 110, 122, 131–132, 146–147, 189, 214 
post-colonial, 17 
post-independence socio-economic development of, 149 
Republic Day Celebration, 172 
Republic of, 9, 128 
Ghana-Guinea Union, 133 
Ghana-Guinea-Mali Union, 133 
Ghanaian Times, 192 
Ghana Library Board, 171 
Ghana Music Society, 162 
Ghana National Archives, 171 
Ghana National Cultural Center, 159, 163, 171, 216 
Ghana National Museum and Monument Board, 159, 171 
Ghana Society of Architects, 162 
Ghana Society of Writers, 162, 200–201 
Ghana Television Station, 174 
Ghana Young Pioneers Movement, 14–15, 127, 162, 169, 175 
Goebbels, author of Nazi doctrine, 47, 218 
Gold Coast Arts Society, 152 
Gold Coast colony, 94, 110, 146 
Gold Coast Legislative Council, 101, 180 
Golden Gate Quartette of Philadelphia, 174 
Greek, civilization, 186 
and the African origin, 21, 196–197 
Greco-Latin culture, 67 
scholars in classical Africa 185–186 
students in classical Africa, 21 
Guggisburg, Gordon, founder of Achimota College 95, 179 
Guinea, 132–133, 135, 138–139, 215 
Gyekye, Kwame, 48, 58–59 
 
H 
Hagan, George, 36–38, 66, 152, 169 
Haizel, E.A. 45–46, 182 
Half-Asini, 1–2, 141 
Ham, of the Christian Bible, 6 
Hansberry, Leo, 143 
Hansberry, Lorraine, A Raisin in the Sun, 155 
Hayford, Betty, 160 
Index     191


--- PAGE 208 ---
Hegel, Georg, 7, 20, 42, 64, 69, 74, 131 
Philosophy of History, 212 
Herodotus, 185–186, 197 
Highlife Music, 81 
Ho, 161 
Hodgkin, Thomas, 27, 191, 194, 197 
Hountondji, Paulin J., 55, 61–62 
Howard University, 21 
Hume, David, 7 
 
I 
Ideology, ideological, 50, 52–54, 62, 157, 211 
African, 37 
Christian, 7 
colonial, 71 
ethnocentric, 63 
European cultural, 12 
political, 23, 42 
and the recovery of African personality, 12 
socialist, 24 
Western, 217 
Imperialism, imperialist, 4, 10, 51–52, 60–61, 79, 102, 121, 123, 133, 148, 192 
cultural, 218 
domination, 220 
forces, 214 
global, 219 
Independence. See Nationalism 
Independent African Heads of States summit, 10, 78, 80, 131–132 
India, 101–102, 142 
Indirect Rule, 28, 31, 71, 92, 95, 105–107, 118, 129 
Institute of African Languages and Culture, University of Pennsylvania, 4 
Institute of African Studies, 11–12, 41, 43, 48, 66, 72–74, 80–81, 84, 173–175, 179, 192, 194–195, 
197, 198, 200, 203–205, 208, 212, 216 
and Masters degree in African Music, Drama and Literature, 205 
Institute of Arts and Culture, 39, 149, 162, 167, 169, 171, 173, 176, 205, 212, 216 
Institute of Foreign Languages, 184 
Institute for Research in Herbal Medicine, 152 
Islam, Islamic, 54, 85, 210 
 
J 
Jahn, Janheinz, 172, 177 
James, CLR, 19, 29–32, 130, 143 
James, George, on Egyptian origin of Greek philosophy, 186 
Jantuah, J.E., now Kwame Opoku Sanaa Jantuah, 142 
Jasikan, JASICO Dramatic Society, 164–165 
Johnson, Ishmael (Bob), 167 
Johnson, Wallace, 3 
Labor Organizer, Youth League, 21–23 
Joint Provincial Council of Chiefs of 1925, 95–96, 102–104, 118, 312 
Juaben (Dwaben), 25, 106, 112 
July, Robert, 40–43, 68, 191, 205 
Index     192


--- PAGE 209 ---
K 
Kano, Aminu, 132 
Kanu, Genoveva, 12–13, 15–16, 31.  
See also Marias Genoveva 
Karenga, Maulana, 63, 84–85 
Kaunda, Kenneth, 141 
Kena II, Nana (King of Kukurantumi), Ghana’s High Commissioner to India, 69 
Kennedy, J.F. (US president), 125–127, 139  
Kennedy, Scott, 43–44, 174, 196  
Kenya, 86 
Kenyatta, Jomo of, 10, 76 
Keto, Tsehloane, 57  
Keynes, John, 145  
King, Martin Luther Jr., 6, 143  
Koforidua, 115, 141, 161, 167  
Community Center, 174 
Drama Club, 164 
Kole, Nene Azu Mate, 33, 103  
Korsah, Sir Arku (Chief Justice), 30–31, 159  
Kotoka, Colonel Emmanuel, 141 
Krafona, Kwesi, 139 
Kufour, President John A., 217  
Kukurantumi, 29, 91 
Kulungugu Bomb Explosion, 13–14, 30, 127.  
See also Nkrumah 
Kumase (Kumasi), 107, 112–113, 115, 132, 161, 163, 165–167, 171, 174, 199–200, 203, 216  
Kumase Brewery, sponsor of High Life competition, 163 
Kumawu, 106–107, 112 
Kushi, Ayi, founder of Ga kingdom, 92 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, 191, 202–203  
Kumase College of Technology, 188, 190–197  
Kwapong, Alex, 161 
Kyebi (Kibi) Dynasty, 28, 91, 106 
Kyeremateng, Dr. Yaw, 158 
 
L 
Lamptey, Obetsebi, 15, 30, 100, 114, 218 
Language, 74–75, 77 
African, 12, 38, 67, 150, 195, 206 
Arabic, 75, 174, 183, 206 
Ewe, 175, 17  
Fanti/Fante, 153, 179 
and French in Ghanaian schools, 217 
Ga, 175 
and Ghanaian, 161, 175, 218 
Hausa, 75, 174–175 
and Hausa as West African regional language, 184 
and literature in Nigeria, 181 
Nzema, 175 
Swahili, 174 
Index     193


--- PAGE 210 ---
theater, 201 
Twi, 175, 179, 183, 201, 217 
Lee, Robert and Sarah, 143  
Robert, 155, 161, 207 
Lenin, Vladimir, Leninist, 20, 22–23, 41, 90 
Liberia, 16, 131, 133 
Fourah Bay College, 132, 134 
College, 177 
Lincoln University, 3, 8, 19, 23–24, 27, 153 
Local Government Ordinance of 1951, 28, 33, 35, 107–108 
Lome, 16–17, 127 
London, 8, 10, 16, 40–41, 95, 103, 117, 119 
Lumumba, Patrice, 16, 137–140 
 
M 
Ma’at, Seven Cardinal Principles, 71 
Macauly, British Governor in India, 72, 192 
Mahoney, Richard D., 16, 118, 125–126 
Malawi, 141 
Malcolm, X, 144, 174 
Mali/Madingo, 133–135, 186, 193 196 
civilization, ritual drama and theater, 196–197 
Mampong, Asante, 112 
Mandela, Nelson, 137, 220 
Manley, Norman, 143 
Manu, Takyiwaa, 154 
Marais, Genoviva, 10, 155–156.  
See also Kanu 
Market women (petty traders), 101, 192 
Marshall, Thurgood, 143 
Marx, Karl, Marxism, 41, 52, 54–57 
conception of class structure, 54 
critique, 210 
and dialectical materialism, 55, 131 
Marxist, 11, 20, 22, 130 
and Marxist-Leninist class struggle 57 
philosophy, 54 
social thought, 11, 56 
thought, 58 
Mayfield, Julian, 32 
Mazrui, Ali, 127 
Mbiti, Rev. John, 57 
Mboya, Tom, 137 
Mensah, Charles, Tachie (Chairman of Civil Services Commission), 30 
Mensah, J.H., 146, 207 
Ministry of Education, 38, 156, 158, 167–170, 173, 191, 204 
Mobutu, Colonel Joseph, 139 
Molette, Barbara and Carlton, 200 
Monrovia Block, 133–134 
Morisseau-Leroy, Felix, 160, 166, 169, 173  
Morocco, 132 
Index     194


--- PAGE 211 ---
Morrow, Nkrumah’s dissertation advisor at the University of Pennsylvania, 4, 21–22 
Moslem (Muslim) Association Party, 109, 116 
Motion of Destiny, 9, 51, 108, 132, 169, 213 
Mugabe, Robert, 137, 141 
Music, 15, 37, 41, 80–82, 151, 168, 171–172, 194 
African/traditional, 41, 80–82, 151, 176, 193 
 
N 
Nationalism, African, 74; 22, 25, 48, 70, 132, 138, 142, 146–147, 180, 187 
anti-colonial movement, struggle 60, 67, 85, 209 
anti-imperialism, 67 
colonial freedom, 40 
decolonization, 41, 51, 54, 121, 131, 146, 150, 152, 154, 219 
political independence, 181, 211 
National Arts Gallery, 159 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 89 
National Commission on Culture, 218 
National Congress of British West Africa, 21, 24–25, 89, 95, 118, 150, 189 
National Festival of Music and Drama, 163–167, 216 
Brass Band competition, 166 
Choral Music competition, 165 
Dance Band competition, 167 
Drama in English competition, 165 
Guitar Band Music, 166 
Traditional Music for Dancing and Entertainment competition, 166 
National High-life Competition, 163 
Nationality and Citizenship Act, 124 
National Liberation Movement (NLM), 27, 34–35, 110–117, 119, 121–125, 130, 132, 214 
on federalism, 33 
for federal form of Government, 28, 114–115 
National Orchestra and Academy of Music, 204 
National Theater, 159, 173,  
Advisory Committee, 172, 216  
National Theater Movement of Ghana, 12, 43, 46, 80, 84–85, 87, 149, 156–162, 169–170, 173–
175, 179, 184, 194, 202–203, 205, 207 
Native Authorities, 101 
Native Court Ordinance of 1935, 113 
Neocolonialism, neocolonialist, 10, 24, 48, 51–53, 60–61, 63, 77, 129–130, 133, 148, 192, 220 
Negritude, 78–79 
Nelson, Carlos, 19–20, 55, 154 
New Ghana Orchestra, 172 
New York City, 8, 21 
Harlem, 143 
Ngolomah, Kofi (Father of Nkrumah), 1 
Ngugi, Prof. wa Thiong’o, 5, 49, 74, 86, 212 
and Kamiriithu Community and Education and Cultural Center, 86 
Nigeria, 5, 66, 167, 197 
language and literature, 181 
modern theater in, 178 
Ninsin, Kwame, 33–36, 108, 119, 123, 128, 129 
Index     195


--- PAGE 212 ---
Nketia, J.H., Director, Ghana Dance Ensemble, Institute of African Studies and School of Music 
and Dance, 40, 48, 64, 66, 70–71, 74, 84, 159–160, 194, 197–208, 216 
and Funeral Dirges of the Akan People, Drumming in Akan Communities, African Music in 
Ghana and Folk Songs in Ghana, 198 
Nketsia, Nana, Kwabena, (King of Esikado), 69, 159 
and as Director, Institute of Arts and Culture, 171, 205 
as Interim Vice-Chancellor, University of Ghana, 191, 189, 204–205, 207–208 
Nkroful, Nkrumah’s birthplace and hometown 1, 5, 69 
Nkrumah, Kwame, (1909–1972); 
birth and early childhood, 1–2 
and Across the Parapet, 89, 175 
African-centered ways 12 
“The African Genius.” See African Genius 
African liberation struggle, 137–144 
anti-colonial struggle, 213  
and assassination attempts (Bomb Explosions), 14–15 
Black power movement, 143–144 
and Class Struggle in Africa, 59–62 
Consciencism, 51, 54–55, 61–62, 64, 85, 210 
and Creative Aspects of Cultural Thought; 81–85 
and cultural policy, 153, 208, 215 
Disarmament and World Without Bomb doctrine, 142, 214 
as divisional king at Nkroful, 69 
and economic policy, 144–146 
education, 2–3 
educational policy, 38, 44–45, 153, 206 
and foreign policy, 214 
and as General Secretary of the Working Committee of the Pan-African Movement, 9 
as General Secretary of UGCC, 96, 98, 118 
and government, 41, 109 
Handbook of Revolutionary Warfare, 154, 154 
Ideological Institute; 37 
and ideology, 38 
Institutional Aspects of Cultural Thought, 63–81, 212 
involvement in UN resolutions on the colonial question, 9 
I Speak of Freedom, 78 
as Leader of Government Business; 9, 32, 104–105, 181 
life style and yoga workouts, 12–13 
mother, 16 
“The Motion of Destiny.” See Motion of Destiny 
national security and consolidation of power, 121–128 
Neo-colonialism: The Last Stage of Imperialism, 134, 214 
Non-Alignment, 132, 142 
non-statutory cultural Policies, 152–156 
one-party system, 63–63, 102, 128, 129–131 
Pan-African policy, 38, 131–139 
political ideology, 27, 38 
as political prisoner, 104 
political union of Africa, 214 
pre-independence government’s reserves and savings in British securities, 144  
as President, 9, 128 
as Prime Minister, 9, 108, 128, 181, 187 
Index     196


--- PAGE 213 ---
Prizes, 17, 20 
project, 89, 143, 209 
racial affinity of African people, 153 
republican government, 128–129  
self-government now, 37, 40, 65, 103, 213 
as Secretary of WANS, 9 
and socialist orientation, 108 
socialist union government of Africa, 219 
Socio-Political Philosophy, 11, 50–63, 211–212 
Towards Colonial Freedom, 51, 96 
vision, 213. 
See also Pan-Africanism 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 16 
Northern People’s Party (NPP), 28, 92, 109, 110, 116, 214 
Northern Territories, 31 (British Protectorate), 90, 92, 96, 100–101 
Nyame, E.K. and the Akan Trio, 167 
Nyerere, Julius, 8, 76, 137 
Nzima (Nzema), 2, 141 
constituency, 27 
kingdom, 91 
Literature and Cultural Association, 2 
 
O 
Obeng, Dr. Leticia, 155, 207 
O’Brien, Conor Cruise, Vice-Chancellor, University of Ghana, 191 
Ofori Panin, leader of Abuakwa migrants from Adanse, 91 
Okru Banin (founder of Akyem kingdom), Tafo Awansa, 91 
Ollenu, Nii Armah, (Judge), 30, 102–103 
One-Party System, 63–63, 102, 129 
Opoku, Mawere, 41, 43, 70, 80–81, 155, 160, 179, 197–200, 207–208 
Opposition, 15, 29, 33, 35–36–37, 107, 109, 110, 115–117, 119, 122, 124–128, 146, 213 
and Asante Rich Cocoa Farmers, 26, 34 
See also UGCC, NLM, United Party, NPP 
Organization of African Unity. See African Union (OAU) 
Osabu, Daniel Tetteh, 129 
Osagyefo Players, 82–83, 86, 155–156, 215  
Osei Tutu, King (founder of Asante Kingdom), 25 
Osiem, 29, 91, 122 
Oteng, Colonel Kwasi, (Retired), 89, 141–142, 219 
 
P 
Padmore, George, 8, 65, 137, 143, 173, 207 
Pan-African Bureau, 32 
Pan-Africanism, 16, 32, 86, 96, 123, 136, 137, 144, 146 
Back-to-African movement, 16 
Congress (filth), 9, 101, 132, 147 
crusade, 16, 140, 146 
cultural project, 175 
mission, 132 
movement, 22, 89, 143, 147 
and Pan-African agency news, 174 
Index     197


--- PAGE 214 ---
Pan-Africanists, 108 
perspective, 8 
political agenda, 19 
project, 10, 46, 89, 124, 133–134, 89 132 
scholars, 173 
surge, 175 
unity, 132, 136, 191 
vision, 75 
Peasah, Adusie IV, Osabarima (King) Akyem Tafo, 29, 106, 217 
Philadelphia, 8, 20–21, 42, 86, 174 
Phillip’s Commission, Sir, 34 
Philosophy, 52, 55 
African; 8, 57, 84 
African-centered socio-political, 11 
of capitalism, 51 
cultural, 5 
political thought, 11, 52 
universalistic, 54 
Western thought, 11, 19, 52, 74, 194 
worldview, 5, 56, 200 
Plato, 76 
as a learner in classical Africa, 21 
and Platonic society, 42 
Portuguese/Portugal, 176, 25 
travelers in East Africa, 185–186 
Positive Action, 9, 13–14, 26, 30–31, 101–104, 118, 213 
Post-independence/colonial Africa, 56, 58, 60, 63, 67, 70, 82, 85, 131, 175, 177, 188, 193, 195, 
212, 215 
analysis, 211 
cultural renascence, 149  
political independence, 52  
politics and policies, 90  
Powell, Congressman Adam Clayton, 143  
Pre-colonial Africa, 60, 196–197 
cultural and historical experience, 68 
ethics, 85, 210 
political institutions, 150 
political system, 129 
Prempeh I (King of Asante), 24–25, 219 
Prempeh II, Agyemang Nana (Asantehene), 93, 102, 111–113 
Palace Fund, 111 
Preventive Detention Act (PDA), 124, 127, 214 
Pythagoras, as a learner in classical Africa, 21 
 
Q 
Qathafi, Colonel Muammar, 214 
 
R 
Racism, 24 
institutional, 11 
Jim Crow law, 8 
Index     198


--- PAGE 215 ---
racist, 42 
racist doctrine, 7 
Randolph, Asa Philip, 143 
Rawlings,’ President Jerry, government, 217 
Republican Government, 128–129 
Robert, Selwyn, Nkrumah’s professor, Department of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 20 
Robeson, Paul, 174 
Rodney, Walter, 5 
Roman Catholic Elementary School, 2 
Seminary at Amissano, 23 
Ruck, Dean (US Secretary of States), 125 
 
S 
Sackey, Alex Quasin, 142 
Sam and His Party, 167 
Sanniquelle Conference, 133 
Sarbah, Mensah, John, 95, 183–184, 207 
Satchimo, Louis Armstrong, 174 
Schomburgh Library, 22 
School of Languages for teachers at Ajumako, 184 
School of Music and Drama, 12, 39, 41, 80, 84, 86–87, 174, 176, 179, 184, 192, 194, 197, 201, 
203–208, 212–213, 216 
and the National Theater Movement, 194 
Sekondi, 178 
Adenkum group, 166 
Minstrel Choir, 163 
Optimism Club, 167 
Sekyi, Kobina, 21–22, 150, 180 
The Blinkards, 150, 180 
Self-government, 94 
now, 97 
Sey John (first President of APRS), 95 
Sherwood, Marika, 4, 20–23 
Smith, Adams, free enterprise/free-market economy, laissez-faire, 27, 60, 145, 209 
Smith, Ian, Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI), 141, 219 
Socialism, 21, 53, 57, 62, 86, 129–130, 140 
African, 58, 61 
and economic development, 20, 64 
Ghana, 63 
government/state, 59, 63; 78 
Marxist, 22 
revolution, 61 
scientific, 58, 61, 85, 129, 211 
socialist conception of society, 78 
template, 131 
Strabo, 185–186 
Sudan, 132, 141 
Sunyani, 161 
Amateur Dramatic Society, 165 
Sutherland, Efua, 41, 43, 84, 155, 159–160, 163, 168–169, 204, 207–208, 216 
on African theater and drama, 200–202 
Index     199


--- PAGE 216 ---
on Concert Party and the Akan and Ghanaian languages, 202 
as mother of the National Theater Movement, 208 
The Second Phase, 202 
 
T 
Tafo/New Tafo (Akyem), 29, 115 
Awansa State, 106, 164 
K.O’s Band, 166 
Takoradi, 161, 174 
Workers Strike, 125 
Takyimanhene, 114 
Tamale, 161 
Baamaya, 166  
Drama Club, 164 
Taylor, Kurankyi, 111 
Taylor, Samuel E., 3–4, 57 
Tema, 15 
Harbor, 112, 144 
Tembo, Mwizenge, 76 
Tetteh, M.N., 15, 207 
The African Academy, 21, 151 
Theater/Drama, 11, 44, 80, 82, 157, 171–172, 194, 212, 213 
African, 157, 193, 196–197, 200, 203–205, 208–209, 216 
Eurocentric, 216 
popular, 83 
The Two Bobs, 167 
Timothy, Bankole, 1, 3–4, 143 
Togoland Congress, 109, 114 
Tokyo Joes, 123 
Touré (Ture), Sekou, 49–50, 63–64, 76, 79, 133, 138, 156, 178, 184, 211 
Trans-Volta Togoland (United Nations’ Trusteeship Territory), 31, 35, 90, 96–97, 100–101 
Togoland Disturbance, 35 
UN Plebiscite 93 
Volta Region, 93, 122 
Traoré, Bakory, 179, 196 
Trotsky, Leon, Trotskyites, 32, 130 
Tsombe, Moise, 139 
Tubman, William, 133–134 
 
U 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, (USSR), Soviet Union, 125, 130, 134, 140 
United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC), (a merger of Gold Coast League and Gold Coast National 
Party) 9, 14, 27, 29–31, 69, 96–102, 104, 107, 109, 118–132, 213 
Working Committee, 14, 97–98 
United Nations (UNO), 8 
Declaration of Human Rights, 9, 42 
of Ghana’s Kente cloth at, 152 
General Assembly, 142 
Security Council, 142 
Troops in Congo, 139 
United Party, 35, 124 
Index     200


--- PAGE 217 ---
United States (US), 3–4, 8, 16, 19–21, 23, 41, 51–52, 62, 66, 89, 96, 111, 125, 130, 133 
Agency, 134, 137, 139, 143–144, 174, 195  
Agency for International Development, 134 
government, 134, 144, 146 
information services, 134 
State Department, 137 
Universal Negro Improvement Association, (UNIA) 22, 89 
University of Ghana/College, 44, 45 48, 66, 144, 84, 128, 174, 179, 184–190, 199, 204, 208, 212 
and academic freedom, 190 
and Departments of Classics, English and Modern Languages, 192 
Department of Sociology, 198, 200 
English Department and Shakespeare’stradition, 204 
and Euro-Christian churches, 192 
and European medieval social character, 190–192 
and International Commission of its development, 190, 192, 194, 206, 216 
its recommendations, 192 
and relating academic research to African culture, 192 
University of Ibadan, 72 
faculty of Nigerian Languages, 181 
University of Pennsylvania, 3–4, 20–21, 42, 55, 75 
University/Universities, African 72, 74, 187, 195 
and academic freedom 188 
and African-centered university education, 213 
Euro-American, 11 
French, 73 
London of, 189–190 
and medieval social function of British Universities, 189 
Oxford and Cambridge, 66, 72 
Spanish, 71 
Western, 71 
Upper Volta (Burkina Fasso), 14, 165 
Urban League, 89–90 
 
V 
Van Lare Constitution, 109 
Vietnam, 16, 37, 142, 143 
 
W 
Walters, Ron, 32 
Watson’s Committee, 98  
Welsh, Asante, 58, 82–84 
Wenchi (Busia’s hometown), 106, 110, 181 
West Africa 17, 21, 23, 104 
West African geography, 183 
West African National Secretariat, 132 
West African Students’ Union, (WASU) 8 
The Circle, 9, 40 
West Indian National Council of New York, 22 
Western, Civilization, 21 
philosophers, 54 
traditions, 25, 210 
Index     201


--- PAGE 218 ---
Westernman, Diedrich, 179 
William Ponty College, Senegal, 178–179 
Women, elevation of African womanhood, 153–154, 215 
Miss Ghana contest and African aesthetics, 155 
Woodson, Carter, G, 67  
Wood, S.R. (Secretary of NCBWA), 20, 22–23 
Workers Brigade, 162 
Concert Party and Drama Group, 167 
World Bank, 144–145 
World War II, 40, 98, 152, 184 
Fund, 106, 112 
Wright, Richard, 144 
 
Y 
Yankah, Kwesi, 152 
Youth Conference, (founded by J.B.Danquah), 95–96 
 
Z 
Zambia, 141 
Zanleringu, Colonel David Gbon (Retired), Commander of POGR, 140–141, 219 
Zimbabwe, 141, 219 
 
Index     202

